

[QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION]
REGINA v. VISITORS TO LINCOLN'S INN, Ex parte CALDER
SAME v. SAME, Ex parte PERSAUD
1992 Feb. 13, 14;
March 12
Mann L.J.
and Brooke J.
Barrister — Discipline — Disciplinary tribunal — High Court judges sitting as visitors to Inns of Court — Disciplinary hearing resulting in suspension or disbarment — Whether decision of visitors amenable to judicial review — Whether visitors acting in capacity of High Court judges — Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 (36 & 37 Vict. c. 66), s. 16
In the first case the applicant, a barrister of Lincoln's Inn, was found guilty of professional misconduct by a disciplinary tribunal of the Council of the Inns of Court which directed that she be disbarred.
Three High Court judges sitting as Visitors to Lincoln's Inn dismissed her appeal against the tribunal's finding but varied the sentence to one of suspension for five years.
In the second case the applicant, also a barrister of Lincoln's Inn, was found guilty of professional misconduct by a disciplinary tribunal of the Council of the Inns of Court, which directed that he should be disbarred.
His appeal against the tribunal's findings and sentence was dismissed by three High Court judges sitting as Visitors.
Both applicants sought judicial review of the decisions of the Visitors.
On a preliminary issue as to whether the High Court had jurisdiction to hear an application for judicial review of a decision of a visitors to the Inns of Court:—
Held , dismissing the applications, that prior to 1873 judges sitting as visitors to the Inns of Court to hear appeals by barristers who had been ordered to be suspended or disbarred were acting as judges and performing judicial duties which were an essential part of the administration of justice in their courts; that the disciplinary jurisdiction of the visitors in respect of fitness of persons to become or remain barristers, was a jurisdiction which was transferred to the High Court by section 16 of the Judicature Act 1873 and retained there by section 18 of the Judicature Act 1925 and section 10(3) (b ) of the Supreme Court Act 1981; and that, accordingly, there was no jurisdiction to hear the applications for judicial review (post, pp. 1007D–E, G — 1008A, 1010B).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Abse v. Smith [1986]Q.B.
536;[1986]2 W.L.R. 322;[1986]1 All E.R.
350, C.A.
Attorney-General of the Gambia v. N'Jie [1961]A.C. 617;[1961]2 W.L.R. 854;[1961]2 All E.R.
504, P.C.
Booreman's Case (1642) March N.C. 177
Hughes v. Science (1741) 2 Atk. 173
Inner Temple v. Ince (1677) 3 Keble 835
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Antigua, In re (1830) 1 Knapp.
267, P.C.
Levinz v. Randolph (1700) 1 Ld.Raym. 594
Lincoln v. Daniels [1962]1 Q.B.
237;[1961]3 W.L.R. 866;[1961]3 All E.R.
740, C.A.
Manisty v. Kenealy (1876) 24 W.R. 918
Neate v. Denman (1874) L.R. 18 Eq.
127
Racal Communications Ltd., In re [1981]A.C. 374;[1980]3 W.L.R. 181;[1980]2 All E.R.
634, H.L. (E.)
Rakestraw v. Brewer (1728) 2 P.Wms. 511
Reg. v. Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of Great Britain and the Commonwealth, Ex parte Wachmann [1992]1 W.L.R. 1036
Reg. v. General Council of the Bar, Ex parte Percival [1991]1 Q.B.
212;[1990]3 W.L.R. 323;[1990]3 All E.R.
137, D.C.
Reg. v. General Medical Council, Ex parte Gee [1987]1 W.L.R. 564;[1987]2 All E.R.
193, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Hull University Visitor, Ex parte Page [1991]1 W.L.R. 1277;[1991]4 All E.R.
747, C.A.
Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. [1987]Q.B.
815;[1987]2 W.L.R. 699;[1987]1 All E.R.
564, C.A.
Rex v. Barnard's Inn (1836) 5 A. and E. 17
Rex v. Benchers of Gray's Inn (1780) 1 Doug.
353
Rex v. The Benchers of Lincoln's Inn (1825) 4 B. & C. 855
S. (A Barrister), In re [1970]1 Q.B.
160;[1969]2 W.L.R. 708;[1969]1 All E.R.
949
S. (A Barrister), In re [1981]Q.B.
683;[1981]3 W.L.R. 129;[1981]2 All E.R.
952
Smalley, In re [1985]A.C. 622;[1985]2 W.L.R. 538;[1985]1 All E.R.
769, H.L. (E.)
Thomas v. University of Bradford [1987]A.C. 795;[1987]2 W.L.R. 677;[1987]1 All E.R.
834, H.L. (E.)
X (A Student), In re (unreported), 11 November 1991, Brooke J.
No additional cases were cited in argument.
APPLICATIONS for judicial review.
Regina v. Visitors to Lincoln's Inn,Ex parte Calder 
On an application for judicial review made pursuant to leave granted by Auld J. on 7 June 1991, the applicant in the first case, Renee Joyce Calder, a barrister, sought an order of certiorari to quash the finding by the Visitors to Lincoln's Inn on 6 March 1991, upholding a decision of a disciplinary tribunal of the Council of the Inns of Court that the applicant was guilty of professional misconduct but varying the sentence from disbarment to one of five years' suspension.
The grounds of relief were, inter alia, that there was a breach of natural justice and irrationality as there was no evidence on which there could have been a finding that the applicant had committed a breach of professional misconduct.
Regina v. Visitors to Lincoln's Inn,Ex parte Persaud On an application for judicial review made pursuant to leave granted by Rose J. on 17 September 1991, the applicant in the second case, Norman Persaud, a barrister, sought inter alia, an order of certiorari to quash an order made by the Visitors to Lincoln's Inn on 31 July 1991 whereby it was held that the applicants' petition of appeal, dated 28 September 1990, from the findings and the sentence of the disciplinary tribunal of the Council of the Inns of Court be dismissed.
The grounds of appeal were, inter alia, that the judgment was perverse and contrary to law and the rules of natural justice.
On 17 September 1991 Rose J., directed that a preliminary issue be determined as to whether the High Court has any jurisdiction to hear an application for judicial review of a decision of the Visitors to the Inns of Court.
The parties to the first application agreed that the same preliminary issue should be determined in that case at the same time.
The facts are stated in the judgment of the court:
Michael Beloff Q.C.
and Joanne Wicks for the applicant Calder.
Norman Persaud in person.
Stephen Sedley Q.C.
and Anthony Bradley for the Bar Council.
Stephen Richards as amicus curiae.
12 March.
MANN L.J.
read the following judgment of the court, prepared by Brooke J. In these two cases we have been invited to determine, as preliminary issues, the capacity in which judges of the High Court are acting when they sit as visitors to the Inns of Court to determine appeals against orders by which barristers are to be disbarred or suspended from practice by their Inns.
This is the first time this question has arisen for decision by any court since the enactment of the Judicature Act 1873.
By the end of the hearing before us it was agreed between the parties that our interpretation of the language of the Act of 1873 in the particular context of the disciplinary jurisdiction of the visitors would be determinative of the matter.
But first it is necessary to describe how the question has arisen.
The first applicant, Miss Calder, was called to the Bar by Lincoln's Inn, in November 1978.
On 8 October 1990 she was found guilty of professional misconduct by a disciplinary tribunal of the Inns of Court Council which directed that she be disbarred.
On 6 March 1991 her appeal against the tribunal's findings was dismissed by three High Court judges sitting as Visitors to Lincoln's Inn but they altered her sentence to one of five years' suspension.
On 7 June 1991 Auld J. granted her leave to apply for judicial review and directed that the suspension be stayed pending the determination of the judicial review proceedings.
The second applicant, Mr. Persaud, was called to the Bar by Lincoln's Inn in November 1980.
On 22 May 1990 he was found guilty of professional misconduct by a disciplinary tribunal of the Inns of Court Council which directed that he, too, should be disbarred.
On 31 July 1991 his appeal against the tribunal's findings and sentence was dismissed by three High Court judges sitting as Visitors to Lincoln's Inn.
On 17 September 1991 Rose J. granted him leave to apply for judicial review and directed that a preliminary issue be determined whether the High Court has any jurisdiction to hear an application for judicial review of a decision of visitors to the Inns of Court.
The parties to Miss Calder's application agreed that this issue should be decided as a preliminary issue in her case as well and that we should decide the two issues at the same time.
It is unnecessary to say anything about the reason why leave to apply for judicial review was granted except to say that the whole or part of the reasons in each case went to a complaint that the particular composition of the disciplinary tribunal gave rise to an appearance of bias.
Mr. Beloff, who appeared for Miss Calder, submitted that when the courts are concerned today to determine the reach of judicial review, the absence of precedent is not a compelling argument.
The jurisdiction of the High Court is an expanding one: in recent years, for example, it has embraced the supervision of the Take-over Panel;Reg. v. Panel on Take-overs and Mergers, Ex parte Datafin Plc. [1987]Q.B.
815; the visitors of universities,Thomas v. University of Bradford [1987]A.C. 795;Reg. v. Hull University Visitor, Ex parte Page [1991]1 W.L.R. 1277, and the internal decisions of committees of professional associations exercising statutory powers,Reg. v. General Medical Council, Ex parte Gee [1987]1 W.L.R. 564.
He submitted that in determining whether judicial review will lie the courts today will examine the function which is being performed by the body which is to be reviewed rather than its identity or the source of its powers.
He cited in this context the judgment of Sir John Donaldson M.R. in the Datafin case [1987]Q.B.
815, 834–839, as illustrative of the modern approach.
He reminded us that this court had recently held that decisions of the Professional Conduct Committee of the Bar Council were susceptible to judicial review (Reg. v. General Council of the Bar, Ex parte Percival [1991]1 Q.B.
212), and submitted that when High Court judges sit as visitors to the Inns of Court on disciplinary appeals they were merely acting as the final tier in the same disciplinary process.
The ‘public’ aspect of the functions they perform is, he submitted, self-evident.
The status of barrister provides a qualification for various public appointments: see Halsbury's Laws of England , 4th ed., vol. 3(1) (1989), pp. 342–347, paras.
435–440, subject now to the provisions of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, section 71 and Schedule 10;Lincoln v. Daniels [1962]1 Q.B.
237, 255;In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, 174E.
Mr. Beloff submitted that since the visitors of charitable or academic foundations were amenable to judicial review on all ordinary grounds (see the Thomas case [1987]A.C. 795, 825 and the Page case [1991]1 W.L.R. 1277, 1283–1284), in principle the position of High Court judges qua visitors to the Inns of Court should be no different.
He referred us to a dictum of Simon Brown J. in Reg. v. Chief Rabbi of the United Congregations of Great Britain and the Commonwealth, Ex parte Wachmann [1992]1 W.L.R. 1036, 1040, which is to the following effect:
‘I prefer Mr. Carus's submission that an Orthodox rabbi is pursuing a vocation and has no choice but to accept the Chief Rabbi's disciplinary decisions.
I can see no distinction in this regard between rabbis and, for instance, members of the Bar or members of a university.
So far as the Bar and universities are concerned, once the exclusive visitorial jurisdiction has been invoked and exhausted, the court can review the visitor's decision…
Simon Brown J. cited no authority for this dictum, so far as it related to the possibility of supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court over the visitors to the Inns of Court, but it was cited to us as an example of a suggested parallel with the supervisory jurisdiction which the High Court undoubtedly exercises in other contexts which in some respects may be thought to be comparable.
Apart from the correctness of the analogy drawn by Simon Brown J. in Wachmann's case [1992]1 W.L.R. 1036, and the suggestion that the visitors to the Inns of Court may be amenable to judicial review, there was no dispute about the correctness of any of these submissions.
Nor was there any dispute that in certain circumstances the High Court may have a supervisory jurisdiction over decisions of the judges of the High Court (see In re Smalley [1985]A.C. 622, 641–642), or indeed Law Lords: see the Page case [1991]1 W.L.R. 1277, 1284.
In the latter case Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. referred to the ‘wholly mistaken notion that it is somehow demeaning for the most senior judges to have their decisions examined and passed upon by those who are judicially their juniors.’
He added:
‘This is to ignore the fact that in the administration of justice in this country, the authority of any judicial pronouncement depends not upon the personal authority of the judge concerned, but upon the capacity in which he gives a decision or expresses an opinion.
All parties called in their aid in this context a dictum of Lord Diplock in In re Racal Communications Ltd. [1981]A.C. 374, when he said, at p. 384:
‘There is in my view, however, also an obvious distinction between jurisdiction conferred by a statute on a court of law of limited jurisdiction to decide a defined question finally and conclusively or unappealably, and a similar jurisdiction conferred on the High Court or a judge of the High Court acting in his judicial capacity.
…Mistakes of law made by judges of the High Court acting in their capacity as such can be corrected only by means of appeal to an appellate court; and if, as in the instant case, the statute provides that the judge's decision shall not be appealable, they cannot be corrected at all.
It was because the parties had all analysed the nature of the problem we had to decide in the same way that it was agreed at the outset of the hearing before us that the central question we had to answer was this: in what capacity are High Court judges sitting when they sit as visitors to the Inns of Court in disciplinary cases?
If they are sitting in their capacity as judges of the High Court, performing functions as such, it was common ground that judicial review of their decisions would not lie.
If on the other hand they are not sitting in that capacity, it was agreed that they are performing functions in the public domain, and judicial review would in principle be available.
Two subordinate questions also arose.
The first was the extent, if at all, to which the provisions of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 had altered the position, so far as the visitorial functions relating to disbarment were concerned.
The second was whether, on the proper construction of the Judicature Acts 1873 and 1925 and the Supreme Court Act 1981, a hitherto undetected right of appeal against decisions of visitors to the Inns of Court lies to the Court of Appeal.
It was common ground that when High Court judges sit as visitors to the Inns of Court they are not sitting as a court of law:In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, 166;In re S. (A Barrister)[1981]Q.B.
683, 685.
In Rex v. Benchers of Gray's Inn (1780) 1 Doug.
353, 355, Lord Mansfield said:
‘From the first traces of their existence to this day, no example can be found of an interposition by the courts of Westminster Hall proceeding according to the general law of the land; but the judges have acted as in a domestic forum.
At the end of his judgment he said, at p. 356, that mandamus would not lie to direct the benchers of Gray's Inn to compel them to call the applicant, who was a student member of the Inn, to the degree of a barrister-at-law and added that, if there was a ground for mandamus, the party must take the ancient course of applying to the 12 judges.
By this he was referring to the chief justices and three judges of the Court of Common Pleas and the Court of King's Bench and the chief baron and three barons of the Court of Exchequer, being the three courts of common law.
When the modern High Court of Justice was constituted as a superior court of record by the Judicature Act 1873, by section 16 of that Act the jurisdiction of a large number of existing courts, which are listed by name, was transferred to and vested in the new High Court.
The section continues:
‘The jurisdiction by this Act transferred to the High Court of Justice shall include (subject to the exceptions hereinafter contained) the jurisdiction which, at the commencement of this Act, was vested in, or capable of being exercised by, all or any one or more of the judges of the said courts, respectively, sitting in court or chambers, or elsewhere, when acting as judges or a judge, in pursuance of any statute, law, or custom, and all powers given to any such court, or to any such judges or judge, by any statute; and also all ministerial powers, duties and authorities, incident to any and every part of the jurisdictions so transferred.
It was common ground that if the pre-1873 jurisdiction of the judges as visitors to the Inns of Court in disciplinary appeals was a jurisdiction exercised by them sitting elsewhere than in court or chambers, when acting as judges in pursuance of any statute, law or custom, then the jurisdiction was vested in the High Court and exercised by judges of that court sitting as such and was not amenable to judicial review.
If, on the other hand, this jurisdiction was not so transferred and vested in the High Court, then it was equally common ground that it would have been preserved by section 12 of the Act of 1873, which provides, so far as is relevant:
‘If, in any case not expressly provided for by this Act, a liability to any duty, or any authority or power, not incident to the administration of justice in any court, whose jurisdiction is transferred by this Act to the High Court of Justice, shall have been imposed or conferred by any statute, law, or custom upon the judges or any judge of any of such courts, save as hereinafter mentioned, every judge of the said High Court shall be capable of performing and exercising, and shall be liable to perform and empowered to exercise every such duty, authority, and power, in the same manner as if this Act had not passed, and as if he had been duly appointed the successor of a judge liable to such duty, or possessing such authority or power, before the passing of this Act.…
If this was the source of the visitors' continuing jurisdiction in disciplinary appeals, then it was accepted that they would be amenable to judicial review, their situation being in certain respects comparable to that of a visitor to a university or college who holds that position by virtue of his office, cp the Queen as visitor of the University of Hull: see the Page case [1991]1 W.L.R. 1277, 1279.
We should add by way of completeness that the provisions of sections 16 and 12 of the Act of 1873 have been carried forward to the modern day in more or less identical language, mutatis mutandis, to sections 18(3) and 34(1) of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act 1925 and then, in more cursory language, to sections 10(3) (b ) and 44(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
What, then, was the nature of the visitors' jurisdiction in disciplinary appeals before 1873?
The judgments of the visitors in In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160 and of Sir John Donaldson M.R. in Abse v. Smith [1986]Q.B.
536 throw valuable light on the processes by which the authority of the judges evolved in questions relating to rights of audience and the fitness of advocates to plead before them in their courts.
The serjeants at law, who had the exclusive privilege of practising, pleading and audience in the Court of Common Pleas from time immemorial until their exclusive privileges were abolished by the Practitioners in Common Pleas Act 1846 (9 & 10 Vict. c. 54), had always fallen into a special category and before the events of 1292 to which reference is made in the 1970 judgment, Parliament had introduced an elementary form of disciplinary control over serjeants and pleaders in the Statute of Westminster 1275 (3 Edw. 1 c. 29) which provided, in the event of attainder for deceit or collusion in the King's Court, for a term of imprisonment and for disqualification for life from ‘pleading in that court for any man.’
This procedure, which was known as silencing, was referred to in a case in 1741,Hughes v. Science (1741) 2 Atk. 173, and was not finally repealed as spent or unnecessary till 1948: Statute Law Revision Act 1948, section 1, Schedule 1.
In 1292 King Edward 1:
‘did especially appoint John de Metingham (then Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas) and the rest of his fellow justices…that they, according to their discretions, should provide and ordain, from every county, certain attorneys and lawyers, of the best and most apt for their learning and skill, who might do service to his court and people; and that those so chosen only and no other, should follow his court and transact the affairs therein; the said King and his council then deeming the number of seven score to be sufficient for that employment; but it was left to the discretion of the said justices, to add to that number, or diminish, as they should see fit:’
Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales , 2nd ed. (1671), ch. 55, p. 141.
In an article entitled ‘Two Problems in Legal History’(1908) 24 L.Q.R. 392, W. C. Bolland has pointed out that this was not only an order of the Sovereign but an Act by the Parliament, since it is in the Parliament Rolls and under the authority of Parliament.
He has also observed that an immediate cause of the creation of this new duty of the judges was the royal mandate which ordered the Court of Common Pleas to remain stationary at Westminster instead of perambulating the country in attendance on the King, and the subsequent disinclination of the serjeants, even if they had been sufficient in number, to absent themselves from the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster in order to attend the King's Court during its perambulatory travels.
Be that as it may, the judges assumed this duty in 1292 and there are dicta from time to time in the succeeding centuries that it is one they have no power to give up.
Of course, if and in so far as the power was derived from the Crown as the fountain of justice: see, in a different context,Lincoln v. Daniels [1962]1 Q.B.
237, 254,per Devlin L.J.
the Crown itself cannot now deprive them of that power: see In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, 171 and Abse v. Smith [1986]Q.B.
536, 549.
This right is vested now in Parliament alone.
The way in which the judges exercised their duty varied.
Sir John Donaldson M.R. has described in Abse v. Smith how the judges of every court had inherent power to regulate the practices of their court, which included the identification of those they were willing to hear plead before them, and it was not in dispute before us that these powers, until they were removed by section 27 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, were exercised by High Court judges sitting as such.
However, when one comes to the duty to provide and ordain suitable trained attorneys and lawyers to equip the courts, the judges' performance of that duty, in so far as it related to the provision of trained advocates, was executed through the relationship they developed with the Inns of Court.
These were private voluntary societies subject to the jurisdiction of the judges.
This jurisdiction took a number of different forms and was exercised in different ways.
In our judgment it is this feature of the later history that has led to understandable confusion.
The jurisdiction existed as an appellate jurisdiction if an uncalled member of an Inn, who used to be called an ‘inner barrister’ from the position he occupied on the forms or barrae in the halls of his Inn: see ‘Two Problems in Legal History’by Bolland, 24 L.Q.R. 392, 399, was aggrieved when his Inn refused to permit him to be called to the ‘utter bar:’Rex v. Benchers of Gray's Inn , 1 Doug.
353; or when a barrister member of the Inn wished to appeal against his expulsion from the Inn and consequent disbarment:Booreman's Case (1642) March N.C. 177;Manisty v. Kenealy (1876) 24 W.R. 918.
Their appellate jurisdiction was also extended, presumably by agreement between the Inns and the judges, to issues relating to disputes over property within the Inns:Rakestraw v. Brewer (1728) 2 P.Wms. 511, or over elections in the Inns:Inner Temple v. Ince (1677) 3 Keble 835, or over debts due to the Inns:Levinz v. Randolph (1700) 1 Ld.Raym. 594, which could not by any stretch of the imagination relate to the duties of judges in relation to the administration of justice in their courts.
The judges also exercised an original jurisdiction to give orders to the Inns of the type that are described in the judgment of the visitors in In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, 169, 175.
In 1559 their relationship with the Inns is illustrated by an order which is recorded in the Middle Temple Records, Minutes of Parliament, 3 November 1559:A Calendar of The Middle Temple Records , edited by C. H. Hopwood (1903), p. 15:
‘Ordered by mandate of the justices that ‘Masters of ‘Le Utter Barre’ practising or hereafter desiring to practise, shall not plead at any bar before they are of 12 years continuance, without leave of the Master of the Bench, on pain of expulsion.’
They may, however, ‘advise their client and go to the bar for them for matters begun.’
We have been shown a large number of the judges' orders which are reproduced in Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales , 3rd ed. (1680), ch. 70–72.
These orders relate partly to training, partly to rights of audience in different courts, and partly to matters peculiar to the internal regulation of the Inns and the dress, appearance and deportment of their members.
On occasion, as Bolland observes in ‘Two Problems in Legal History,’ 24 L.Q.R. 392, 396–397, the benchers rebelled because they felt the judges were exceeding their jurisdiction: an example is given in 1559 when the benchers of Lincoln's Inn considered that the judges had no power to dictate the length of beards worn by members of the Inn.
It is quite clear that in the 17th and 18th centuries and, indeed, up to the enactment of the Judicature Act 1873 the courts, and in particular the Court of King's Bench, consistently declined to exercise any jurisdiction over any matters in which a right of appeal lay from the benchers of an Inn to the judges sitting as a domestic tribunal.
In Rex v. Benchers of Gray's Inn , 1 Doug.
353, 355, Lord Mansfield explained that the true ground why no mandamus will lie to the Inns of Court is ‘that they are voluntary societies submitting to government, and the ancient and usual way of redress is by appeal to the judges.’
Nearly a hundred years later in Neate v. Denman (1874) L.R. 18 Eq.
127, Sir Charles Hall V.-C. referred to the jurisdiction over the Inns of the judges of the superior courts of England as a peculiar jurisdiction which has always been recognised.
He added, at p. 136:
‘They have the power of deciding such questions as the present.
If the plaintiff had no remedy by an appeal to the judges, he might, and probably would have, a right to apply to the Court of Queen's Bench for a mandamus.
That, however, would be because he had no other remedy.
We do not accept the submission by Mr. Sedley, who appeared for the Bar Council, that there was any conscious distinction made between the occasions when this jurisdiction of the judges, however it was exercised, went to matters related to the administration of justice, such as the equipping of the courts with advocates who were fit to appear before them there, and the occasions when it went simply to matters relating to the administration of the Inns and their property.
Everyone accepted that the jurisdiction existed in both cases, and there was never any necessity until the present day to distinguish between the two types of jurisdiction.
However, now that it is necessary to identify the functions the judges are performing when they sit as visitors in cases which are concerned with the question whether people are fit and proper persons to become or remain barristers, we must for the first time examine their function in that context alone.
The case which is called In re Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Antigua (1830) 1 Knapp.
267, which came to the Privy Council just before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council was created, provides a valuable illustration of the fact that in the absence of such arrangements as were made between the Inns of Court and the judges in this country, the power to judges to determine who were fit and proper persons to practise before them, where it existed, was regarded as essential for the due administration of justice.
Lord Wynford said, at p. 268:
‘In England the courts of justice are relieved from the unpleasant duty of dis-barring advocates in consequence of the power of calling to the Bar and dis-barring having been in very remote times delegated to the Inns of Court.
In the colonies there are no Inns of Court, but it is essential for the due administration of justice that some persons should have authority to determine, who are fit persons to practise as advocates and attornies there.
Now advocates and attornies have always been admitted in the colonial courts by the judges, and the judges only.
The power of suspending from practice must, we think, be incidental to that of admitting to practise, as is the case in England with regard to attornies.
In Attorney-General of the Gambia v. N'Jie [1961]A.C. 617, 630, Lord Denning said:
‘By the common law of England the judges have the right to determine who shall be admitted to practise as barristers and solicitors: and, as incidental thereto, the judges have the right to suspend or prohibit from practice.
In England this power has for a very long time been delegated, so far as barristers are concerned, to the Inns of Court: and, for a much shorter time, so far as solicitors are concerned, to the Law Society.
In the colonies the judges have retained the power in their own hands, at any rate in those colonies where the profession is ‘fused.’
In In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, the visitors observed that Lord Denning was not using the word ‘delegate’ in the narrow sense in which it is sometimes used today any more than Lord Mansfield had when he used the same word in a similar context in Rex v. Benchers of Gray's Inn , 1 Doug.
353, 354.
Paull J. said [1970]1 Q.B.
160, 170:
‘Both were using it in the sense that, in regard to the Inns, the judges over a long period, from time to time, had concurred in the Inns performing the duty of selecting those persons who were fit and proper persons to be called to the Bar and to be entitled to a right of audience in the courts and the duty of suspending or prohibiting such persons from practice.
The exercise of these duties has been at all times, and remains, subject to the visitorial jurisdiction of the judges.
Further, the judges in relation to their judicial duties as to who should have the rights of audience have never divested themselves of those duties, nor could they ever do so.
Both Mr. Beloff and Mr. Richards, who appeared as amicus curiae, sought to extract from this passage, and from a comparable passage at p. 175B–C of that judgment, a proposition that the judicial duty to ensure that only fit and proper persons appear before them as barristers, which they perform through the machinery of the arrangements they have made, at their direction, with the Inns of Court, is somehow different in kind from the judicial duty, which existed until it was taken away by Parliament in 1990, of determining who had the right of audience in different courts: see Abse v. Smith [1986]Q.B.
536, passim.
We do not accept this contention.
In each case it was a duty which was imposed on the judges in their capacity as judges of the superior courts and related to the administration of justice in those courts.
It was only the machinery by which they performed their duties which was different.
Sir John Campbell A.-G. set out the true position correctly, in our judgment, in his oral submissions to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Manning's Serjeant's Case (1840).
He said, at pp. 139–140:
‘The judges of the Common Pleas are supposed to join with the other judges, in calling students to the Bar.
The benchers of the Inns of Court are only the agents of the judges in calling to the Bar.
It is a power committed to them by the judges, a power which the judges may resume.
There is an appeal from the opinion of the benchers to the judges.
Upon that appeal, the judges of the Common Pleas sit, just as well as the judges of the Exchequer and King's Bench; and they sit there, because they are supposed to have called the party to the Bar.
…The Inns of Court are mere voluntary societies.
…The judges deputed to the benchers of the societies the task of giving lectures, and examining into the sufficiency of the candidates, and of calling them to the Bar, but they are still mere voluntary societies; and they act by the authority which the judges have delegated to them.
When there is an appeal from the decision of the benchers, the judges of the Common Pleas join in sitting upon that appeal; and if the candidate be called to the Bar, I say, he is called to the Bar — by the judges of the Common Pleas.
When a person was called to the Bar…he was not allowed to practise in the Court of Common Pleas in banco, but he was allowed to practise in the other courts in Westminster Hall…
This passage illustrates in a vivid way the fact that the arrangements the judges have made with the Inns are merely the machinery through which the judges perform what remains a judicial duty, and also how decisions on rights of audience are different from decisions on call to the Bar.
Before the judgment of the visitors in In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, had clarified the meaning of the word ‘delegate’ in the present context this was the concept which Sellers L.J.
had in mind in Lincoln v. Daniels [1962]1 Q.B.
237, 250:
‘If the Inns of Court had not controlled the professional conduct of the Bar, the judges themselves would have had to do so.
The judges themselves, deriving their authority from the Crown, were minded in the distant past to delegate, and the undisputed view in Lord Mansfield's time was that the judges had delegated their disciplinary power over the Bar to the Inns of Court.
In his judgment in the same case Devlin L.J.
explained, at p. 253, how the jurisdiction of the benchers of an Inn is derived from the judges and exercised under their superintendence.
Without hearing the depth of argument which was available to the visitors in In re S. (A Barrister)[1970]1 Q.B.
160, and to us in this court, he imagined that the judges must have assumed jurisdiction by virtue of their inherent power to determine who may and who may not plead at the Bar before them.
At p. 254 he explained how the judges were using a power derived from the Crown as the fountain of justice when they conferred authority on the benchers of the Inns of Court to act as their delegates in maintaining the discipline of the Bar.
In her closing submissions on behalf of Miss Calder, Miss Wicks placed reliance on the fact that the power of an Inn to call a person to the Bar is the power of the Inn alone.
She also suggested that Mr. Sedley, in his argument on behalf of the Bar Council, had failed to explain how the Inns could discipline someone, for example by reprimand or fine, without disbarring them.
The first part of this submission is answered by the arguments of Sir John Campbell A.-G. to which we have referred.
Although the call to the Bar is an exercise of power by the individual Inn it is an exercise of power permitted by the judges and exercised under their supervision.
The second part of the submission is conclusively answered by clause 15 of the constitution of the Council of the Inns of Court, which Brooke J. cited in his judgment as a visitor to Lincoln's Inn in In re X (A Student)(unreported), 11 November 1991.
This shows that in 1986 the judges, with the concurrence of the Inns, resolved and confirmed that from 1987 disciplinary powers over barristers should be exercised in accordance with the provisions of that constitution and that no alteration might be made to the power or composition of disciplinary tribunals without the consent of the Lord Chief Justice.
It is through the implementation of this agreed machinery that disciplinary tribunals and the Inns themselves, with the consent of the Lord Chief Justice, are now able to exercise extended powers of control over the professional conduct of barristers, with a wider range of penalties, but subject always, in the case of decisions by tribunals, to a right of appeal to the visitors: see Disciplinary Tribunal Regulations 1990, regulations 22 and 30.
Finally, on this part of the case, Miss Wicks drew our attention to the fact that in In re S. (A Barrister)[1981]Q.B.
683, 688E–F, 690C, the visitors expressed doubts whether they had power to hold the findings of a disciplinary tribunal to be invalid.
The context in which these comments were made was an unusual one.
They related to the constitutional arrangements which existed between 1974 and the end of 1986 whereby the General Council of the Bar had become part of the new Senate of the Inns of Court of the Bar and had ceased to exist as a separate entity, although the constitution of the Senate contained provisions designed to ensure that the Bar Council would remain an autonomous body for the purpose of its separate powers and functions.
The judges, with the concurrence of the Inns of Court, resolved when these arrangements were created that  disciplinary powers over barristers should be exercised in accordance with the regulations governing the new Senate, and by those regulations a committee of the Senate, known as the disciplinary tribunal, exercised those powers.
The points which concerned the visitors in In re S. (A Barrister)[1981]Q.B.
683 were whether (a) the fact that the Bar Council, which was the accusatorial body, formed part of the Senate, which was the judicial body, meant that fair-minded people would regard the proceedings of the Senate's disciplinary tribunal as tainted with the appearance of bias and (b) the fact that members of the same profession were both the accusers and the majority of the disciplinary tribunal could give rise to the same objection.
In the event the visitors explained why they considered that both points were without merit.
There was therefore no need for them to decide whether and by what powers they could have handled the matter if they had thought that there was any merit in either of them.
They said that the question had not been argued before them and they expressed no opinion on it.
It appears to us that the point is a thoroughly esoteric one because it postulates that the judges had consented to arrangements for the Inns to exercise disciplinary powers over barristers, subject to their supervision, which infringed some fairly elementary rules of natural justice.
However, given the history of the relationship between the Inns and the judges which we have recited in this judgment we can see nothing conceptually difficult about the judges, as visitors, telling the Inns that they now perceived that their particular disciplinary procedures were unfair and needed rectification, even though they had concurred, in principle, in the creation of those procedures.
The judges would, in effect, be saying that they were not willing to sanction the disbarment of a barrister pursuant to unfair procedures, and would be insisting that the matter should be handled again more appropriately.
Brooke J. had to deal with a similar point in a different context in the recent case of In re X (A Student), 11 November 1991, to which we have referred.
In that case there could have been no just criticism of Lincoln's Inn in the way it had adjudicated on the application of a student applying for admission to the Inn who had had serious criminal convictions between 1956 and 1974.
Brooke J. was not satisfied, however, as to the appropriateness of the relevant regulation of the Consolidated Regulations of the Inns of Court in modern times and he remitted the case to the Inn for reconsideration in the light of his judgment.
Since then the language of that regulation is in the course of being changed.
We can see no merit in repeating here the reasons he gave for that decision since he pronounced his findings in that case in public, pursuant to rule 11(2) of the Hearings before the Visitors Rules 1991, and the reasons were complex.
Suffice it to say that, after referring to the ‘extraordinary, and perhaps unique, jurisdiction of the Visitors to the Inns of Court,’ he found that the judges possessed a residual jurisdiction by which, in an exceptional case, they might remit a matter to an Inn and direct it to reconsider, with the Inns' Council and the Bar Council, what ought to be the criteria by which they should judge the question before it determined the application afresh.
Brooke J. observed that if such a residual jurisdiction did not exist, then the judges would be left with a duty to perform but without the power to perform it in a way which they considered in all cases to be just.
We should add, as a caveat, that if the point which Brooke J. decided in In re X (A Student), 11 November 1991 ever arose again in the same context, it would be necessary to consider the effect of the judgment of this court in Rex v. Benchers of Lincoln's Inn (1825) 4 B. & C. 855, which was followed in Rex v. Barnard's Inn (1836) 5 A. & E. 17.
These cases show that the courts in the early 19th century were willing to hold that the Inns, as private voluntary societies, had a power to refuse entry to would-be members which was not subject to the jurisdiction of the courts or the visitors, even though barristers of the Inns possessed certain monopoly rights in the courts.
In the event, the four Inns agreed in 1837, following the Sixth Report of Commissioners on Courts of Common Law, Parlt.
Papers (1834) xxvi 9, that they would in future allow a person refused admission to appeal to the judges and that they would be bound by their decision: see Holdsworth's History of English Law , vol.
XII (1938), p. 32.
It is obvious that if the point in In re X (A Student), 11 November 1991, arose again, a more sophisticated analysis of what happened in 1837 would be required although we are far from convinced that the result would be very different and the history of that case has shown that it is a useful residual power for the judges to possess in exceptional circumstances.
Most of the submissions which were addressed to us by Mr. Persaud took matters no further.
However, he did call in his aid the fact that the Disciplinary Tribunal Regulations of the Inns' Council permit evidence to be adduced which would not ordinarily be admissible in a court of law.
This is undoubtedly correct but in our judgment it does not assist us in what we have to decide.
There are plenty of occasions when the High Court exercises a supervisory jurisdiction over tribunals or bodies whose procedures allow for a more relaxed approach to the rules of evidence, but this does not detract from the fact that the High Court is performing the functions of the High Court when it exercises this jurisdiction.
We should add that after the hearing was completed we received a letter from Mr. Persaud inviting us to reopen the hearing to allow him to address additional points to us which he had not mentioned at all in his opening submissions to us or in his reply.
We considered that he ought to have taken these points during the hearing itself and, in so far as they were of a technical procedural nature, he had waived his right to advance them because he was content to allow the full two-day hearing to take place without complaining at the outset that he had been prejudiced by short notice of the hearing or by any procedural irregularity in the way the preliminary issue had been brought before the court.
This analysis of the history of the visitors' jurisdiction before 1873 makes it quite clear, in our judgment, that when the judges were sitting as visitors to the Inns of Court to hear appeals by barristers who had been ordered to be suspended or disbarred they were acting as judges and performing judicial duties which were an essential part of the administration of justice in their courts.
By custom they sat in private and not in court, and they were referred to as a domestic tribunal whatever part of their visitorial functions they were performing.
But their role in this capacity was totally different from the role of visitors to universities and colleges.
In the absence of a written constitution the power and duty of the judges to control the quality of the administration of justice in the courts of this country were derived largely from ancient custom subject to express mandates from time to time by the Crown, as in 1292, and the way in which they superintended the disciplinary processes of the Inns of Court was an important feature of the way in which they performed that duty and exercised that power.
It therefore follows, in our judgment, that although this has gone unnoticed for 119 years, the jurisdiction of the judges as visitors, in so far as it relates to questions as to the fitness of persons to become or remain barristers, is a jurisdiction which in 1873 was vested in the judges of the three common law courts, sitting elsewhere than in court or chambers, when acting as judges, in pursuance of custom.
Since it is a jurisdiction which is central to the administration of justice in the courts of this country, it was accordingly not ‘a liability to any duty, or any authority or power, not incident to the administration of justice in any court,’ which was preserved under the new arrangements in 1873 by section 12 of the Act of 1873 without forming part of the new jurisdiction of the High Court.
We find the reference in section 12 to duties, etc., ‘not incident to the administration of justice in any court’ particularly compelling as a pointer to the conclusion that the disciplinary jurisdiction of the visitors was transferred to the High Court pursuant to section 16.
Accordingly, the  jurisdiction of the visitors in these matters was a jurisdiction which was transferred to the High Court in 1873 and retained there by section 18(3) of the Act of 1925 and section 10(3) (b ) of the Act of 1981.
Since the argument ended, Mr. Beloff has been good enough to send us, by agreement with the other parties to Miss Calder's application, extracts from the works of two legal historians who venture to express opinions on the legal position after 1873.
Both were written before 1981.
Sir William Holdsworth his History of English Law , vol.
XII, p. 30, footnote 4, perplexingly says that the judges still possessed the jurisdiction referred to by the Vice-Chancellor in Neate v. Denman , L.R. 18 Eq.
127 by virtue of section 12 of the Act of 1873, replaced by section 18(3) of the Act of 1925.
Professor J. H. Baker The Legal Profession and the Common Law — Historical Essays (1986), opts for section 34 of the Act of 1925, which is the lineal successor of section 12 of the Act of 1873.
It is probable that this is the section of the Act of 1925 to which Sir William meant to refer since in each case the later section is the mirror image of the earlier section.
We are very willing to accept that those parts of the judges' visitorial jurisdiction which were not incident to the administration of justice in the courts passed down through the routes suggested by Sir William and Professor Baker, but in the context of the present case, where the court has for the first time to inquire into the particular function which is being performed, we are not satisfied that the whole of the visitorial jurisdiction passed by this route.
The editor of Halsbury's Statutes , 4th ed., vol. 11 (1991), p. 1011, appears also to have expressed the position too widely when he ascribed the survival of the whole of this jurisdiction to what is now section 44(1) (b ) of the Act of 1981.
We return to In re Racal Communications Ltd. [1981]A.C. 374.
Since we are satisfied that by the operation of the Judicature Act 1873 and its successor statutes High Court judges are sitting as the High Court when they exercise their jurisdiction as visitors to the Inns of Court in disciplinary matters, there is nothing in Lord Diplock's speech in that case which derogates from the proposition that they are not susceptible to judicial review, which is available, as Lord Diplock said, at p. 384, as a remedy for mistakes of law made by inferior courts and tribunals only, and not for mistakes of law made by the High Court itself.
We turn now to the question whether there is anything in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 which has altered the position.
In In re X (A Student), 11 November 1991, Brooke J. explained why that Act had had no effect on the jurisdiction of the Inns, subject to the supervision of the judges, to decide who were fit and proper persons to be admitted to the Inns for training.
He expressed his reasons in this way:
‘although in the Act of 1990 Parliament introduced a new statutory machinery for supervising and regulating the rules for education and conduct for those who are to have rights of audience in the courts it decided not to interfere expressly with the jurisdiction of the Inns, under the supervision of the judges, to decide who were fit and proper persons to be admitted to the Inns for training or their liberty to decide the criteria which should dictate their admissions policy.
By section 27(9) of the Act the ‘qualification regulations’ of an ‘authorised body,’which the Advisory Committee has the duty to approve, mean only the regulations (however they may be described) as to the education and training which members of that body must receive in order to be entitled to any right of audience granted by it; and in the same way ‘rules of conduct,’which it has a duty to approve, mean only the rules (however they may be described) as to the conduct required of members of that body in exercising any such right of audience.
The Act is silent about the criteria for admission to membership.
For much the same reasons we are quite satisfied that there is nothing in the Act which affects in any way the processes by which decisions as to suspension and disbarment, and so on are to be taken and promulgated through the machinery created by the Inns in 1986 with the concurrence of the judges, subject always to the visitorial jurisdiction of the judges.
The Act distinguished clearly between ‘rules of conduct,’ which are to be scrutinised and approved within the new statutory machinery, in which the ‘designated judges:’see section 119(1), each have a crucially important role to play: see Schedule 4, paragraphs 5(10), 11(10) and 16(4), and ‘mechanism for enforcing the rules of conduct:’see section 17(3) (b ).
So far as the mechanisms for enforcing the rules of conduct are concerned, section 18(2) of the Act requires that any person who is exercising any of the functions conferred by Part II of the Act with respect to any of the matters described in section 18(1), the granting of rights or audience etc., must act in accordance with the general principle mentioned in section 17(3).
This principle includes the need to see whether the professional or other body under scrutiny not only has rules of conduct, which will be thoroughly scrutinised within the statutory machinery, but also has an effective mechanism for enforcing the rules of conduct and is likely to enforce them.
However, provided that the enforcement mechanism is there, Parliament has made no requirement that changes in the disciplinary regulations should be scrutinised by the statutory machinery or that existing disciplinary regulations, including any appellate jurisdiction, shall be so scrutinised.
This is evident not only from the fact that the jurisdiction of the Legal Services Ombudsman under sections 21 to 26 of the Act stops at the moment when a complaint enters into the jurisdiction of a disciplinary tribunal: section 22(7), but also from the fact that in section 27(3) Parliament refers to the process by which a barrister may be disbarred or temporarily suspended from practice by order of an Inn of Court without any hint that it disapproves or wishes to alter in any way the manner in which for centuries the Inns have made orders for disbarment subject to the visitorial jurisdiction of the judges.
For these reasons we are satisfied that the Act of 1990 does not affect the situation in any way.
Finally, although this is not one of the matters which we have to decide, an appeal lies to the Court of Appeal from a judgment or order of the High Court pursuant to section 16(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
Miss Calder and Mr. Persaud will therefore not be without remedy if they wish to pursue the avenue of appeal to the Court of Appeal and if they can persuade that court to grant them leave to appeal out of time against the relevant decision of the Visitors.
It is obvious that if the present decision is undisturbed attention must be paid to the quite new arrangements prescribed by section 19(3) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 which provides, so far as is relevant, that any jurisdiction of the High Court shall be exercised only by a single judge of that court, except in so far as it is, by or by virtue of rules of court or any other statutory provision, required to be exercised by a divisional court.
But that again, is not a matter for this court.
For all these reasons, therefore, we would hold that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain an application for judicial review in either of the cases which are before it.
Applications dismissed.
No order for costs.
Stay of Calder's suspension pending an application to the Court of Appeal.
Solicitors: B. C. Mascarenhas, London; Allison & Humphreys; Treasury Solicitor.
[Reported by MRS.
GURINDER GOSAL, Barrister]