

[CHANCERY DIVISION]In re A DEBTOR (No. 88 of 1991) 1992 June 18; 25
Sir Donald Nicholls V. -C.
Solicitor — Costs — Action to recover — Solicitors serving statutory demand within one month of delivering bill of costs — Whether service of statutory demand constituting ‘action…brought’— Whether statutory demand and bankruptcy petition founded thereon to be set aside — Solicitors Act 1974 (c. 47), s. 69(1)
The debtor received legal advice from a firm of solicitors who rendered their bill on 31 July 1991.
Having received no response they served a statutory demand on the debtor on 21 August 1991 and issued a bankruptcy petition based on the demand on 20 September.
The debtor obtained an order from the county court that the statutory demand and bankruptcy petition be set aside on the ground that the service of the statutory demand had contravened the provision in section 69(1) of the Solicitors Act 1974 that ‘no action shall be brought’ to recover any costs due to a solicitor within one month of the bill having been delivered.
On the solicitors' appeal:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that although ‘action’ in section 69 of the Solicitors Act 1974 was to be construed liberally it could extend only to forms of legal process and did not embrace a statutory demand, the service of which was merely part of the statutorily prescribed procedure for obtaining remedies afforded to creditors by a bankruptcy order and did not of itself initiate legal proceedings; that a solicitor was therefore not debarred by section 69(1) from serving a statutory demand for payment of his costs before the expiration of one month from the date of delivery of his bill of costs; and that, accordingly, since the statutory demand and petition were valid, they would be remitted to the district judge for hearing (post, pp. 1029E–F, G — 1030A, 1031E).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Debtor (No. 1 of 1987), In re A [1989]1 W.L.R. 271;[1989]2 All E.R.
46, C.A.
Debtor (No. 490–SD–1991), In re A [1992]1 W.L.R. 507;[1992]2 All E.R.
664
Gilmartin (A Bankrupt), In re [1989]1 W.L.R. 513;[1989]2 All E.R.
835
Laceward Ltd., In re [1981]1 W.L.R. 133;[1981]1 All E.R.
254
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Boston (Martin) & Co. v. Levy [1982]1 W.L.R. 1434;[1982]3 All E.R.
193
Brockman, In re [1909]2 Ch. 170, C.A.
Gedye, In re (1851) 14 Beav. 56
Ray v. Newton [1913]1 K.B.
249, C.A.
Appeal
On 28 January 1992 District Judge Harris sitting in the Liverpool County Court granted the debtor's application to set aside a statutory demand dated 15 August 1991 which had been served on the debtor on 21 August 1991 by the creditors, Marshalls, a firm of solicitors, in respect of their unpaid bill of 31 July 1991, and dismissed the bankruptcy petition founded on that demand, which had been issued on 20 September 1991, on the basis that the service of the statutory demand had contravened section 69(1) of the Solicitors Act 1974.
By a notice of appeal dated 25 February 1992 the creditors appealed on the ground, inter alia, that the service of a statutory demand was not the bringing of an action and therefore did not contravene section 69 of the Solicitors Act 1974.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Marc Brittain for the creditors.
Angharad Start for the debtor.
25 June.
The following judgment was handed down.
SIR DONALD NICHOLLS V.-C.
This appeal raises a short point not without interest to solicitors generally.
The appeal is by a firm of solicitors, Marshalls, against a decision by District Judge Harris sitting in the Liverpool County Court on 28 January 1992.
The judge set aside a statutory demand Marshalls had served on the debtor and, in consequence, dismissed a bankruptcy petition founded on that demand.
The history
The debtor was a director of a company.
On 30 April 1991 he sought legal advice from Marshalls concerning an order that he attend before the court in Manchester for examination by the liquidator of the company.
The affidavit evidence of Mr. O'Connell, a partner in Marshalls, is that the debtor was told that the firm did not undertake legal aid work any longer.
The financial limits for legal aid were outlined to him.
Mr. O'Connell indicated that, on what the debtor told him, he would not be eligible for legal aid.
Mr. O'Connell explained Marshalls' terms of business.
On 17 May Marshalls wrote to the debtor confirming these terms, and mentioning that he might be entitled to legal aid with regard to litigation.
The debtor's affidavit evidence is in sharp conflict: he was given no advice on whether he might be eligible for legal aid, Mr. O'Connell was aware of his dire financial circumstances, the costs implications of the course recommended were not discussed, and he did not receive the letter.
On the debtor's instructions a summons was issued in Manchester by Coleman & Co., as agents for Marshalls, seeking disclosure of the liquidator's report on the basis of which the court had made the order for the examination of the debtor.
On 8 July the debtor attended the High Court in Manchester pursuant to the order.
Coleman & Co. successfully applied for an adjournment of his examination to enable evidence to be filed in support of his summons.
At the end of July the debtor instructed other solicitors.
Marshalls rendered two bills to the debtor.
The first bill, dated 8 July, was for an interim payment of £187 plus VAT.
The other bill, dated 31 July, was for £400, plus disbursements of £530, of which the largest item was £500 for Coleman & Co. 's charges.
The second bill, inclusive of VAT, totalled £1,090-odd.
No payments were received.
A statutory demand dated 15 August was served on the debtor on 21 August.
The demand was for £1,456-odd, comprising the amount of the two bills plus £146 in respect of the preparation and service of the statutory demand.
No response was forthcoming.
A bankruptcy petition based on that demand was issued on 20 September.
The district judge's reasons
An initial difficulty on this appeal is that there is no note, approved or unapproved, of the judge's reasons.
This is particularly unfortunate because in deciding to set aside the demand the judge exercised a discretion, and on this appeal I am discharging an appellate jurisdiction and not hearing the matter afresh and exercising my own discretion: see In re Gilmartin (A Bankrupt)[1989]1 W.L.R. 513.
Thus the judge's exercise of the discretion entrusted to him stands unless he exercised his discretion on some erroneous principle or he misunderstood the evidence or he was plainly wrong.
The absence of a note of the judge's reasons makes this a difficult exercise.
Counsel for the debtor was conscious of the problem and uneasy that the absence of reasons might be prejudicial to her client's case.
However, she did not seek an adjournment to enable the matter to be pursued with the judge.
This was understandable, because it is unlikely that an adjournment would have achieved much.
In the end it seemed to be more or less common ground that the judge did not formally state his reasons when he made his order, although in the course of argument he had indicated that he had sympathy for the debtor's argument based on section 69 of the Solicitors Act 1974.
Setting aside a statutory demand
Under rule 6.5(4) of the Insolvency Rules 1986 (S.I.
1986 No. 1925) the court has a wide discretion to set aside a statutory demand on an application by the debtor.
The material parts of the rule read:
‘The court may grant the application if —(a ) the debtor appears to have a counterclaim, set-off or cross demand which equals or exceeds the amount of the debt or debts specified in the statutory demand; or (b ) the debt is disputed on grounds which appear to the court to be substantial; or…(d ) the court is satisfied, on other grounds, that the demand ought to be set aside.
The principles on which the court should exercise this discretion have been considered in two recent decisions, one of the Court of Appeal in In re A Debtor (No. 1 of 1987)[1989]1 W.L.R. 271 and the other of Hoffmann J. in In re A Debtor (No. 490–SD–1991)[1992]1 W.L.R. 507.
The consequence to which a statutory demand leads if not complied with is a presumption that the debtor is unable to pay the debt in question.
This, in turn, enables the creditor to present a bankruptcy petition.
In general the court should exercise its discretion to set aside a statutory demand if, but only if, it would not be just for those consequences to apply in the circumstances.
This approach is to be followed where the demand is for an excessive sum.
Such a demand will not necessarily be set aside.
The Solicitors Act 1974
Counsel for the debtor relied on section 69(1) of the Solicitors Act 1974:
‘Subject to the provisions of this Act, no action shall be brought to recover any costs due to a solicitor before the expiration of one month from the date on which a bill of those costs is delivered in accordance with the requirements mentioned in subsection (2); but if there is probable cause for believing that the party chargeable with the costs —(a ) is about to quit England and Wales, to become bankrupt or to compound with his creditors, or (b ) is about to do any other act which would tend to prevent or delay the solicitor obtaining payment, the High Court may, notwithstanding that one month has not expired from the delivery of the bill, order that the solicitor be at liberty to commence an action to recover his costs and may order that those costs be taxed.
Counsel contended that the demand should be set aside because it falls foul of this provision.
The demand was premature, because it was made and served before the expiration of a month from the 31 July bill.
Under section 70(1) the client has an absolute right, if he applies within one month from delivery of the bill, to obtain an order that the bill be taxed and that no action be commenced on the bill until the taxation is completed.
Parliament intended that the client should have that month as a clear breathing space.
If a statutory demand is served, the debtor has only a limited period within which to apply to set it aside.
So service of a demand may force the client to make an application to the court before the expiration of the intended one month breathing space.
Counsel submitted that service of a statutory demand constitutes the bringing of an action within the meaning of section 69.
I cannot accept this latter submission.
The phrase ‘no action shall be brought’ is referring to a legal process and uses lawyers' language.
Traditionally an ‘action’ is the name given to the legal process initiated by issue of a writ of summons.
In the context of this section, ‘action’ is not to be construed so narrowly.
It will include other forms of civil proceedings: for example, an originating summons.
In In re Laceward Ltd. [1981]1 W.L.R. 133 Slade J. went further and held the expression ‘proceedings to recover costs’ in the Solicitors' Remuneration Order 1972 (S.I.
1972 No. 1139 (L.14)) includes a winding up petition even though such a petition does not lead to an order for payment of the sum in question.
It may well be, and I incline to the view, that his conclusion is equally applicable to section 69.
If this is correct, by parity of reasoning the same conclusion would apply to a bankruptcy petition.
(In passing, I observe that this gives rise to no difficulty in the instant case.
The bankruptcy petition was not presented here until seven weeks had elapsed after delivery of the 31 July bill.)
However, although ‘action’ is to be construed liberally I cannot accept that it is wide enough to embrace a non-legal process such as a statutory demand.
A statutory demand is one of the statutorily prescribed prerequisites to obtaining remedies afforded to creditors by a bankruptcy order.
The demand is not issued by a court.
It does have legal consequences for a debtor, and it is for this reason that the legislation provides a court process which debtors can invoke in order to have the demand set aside.
Despite this framework, Parliament cannot be taken to have intended that making a demand was within the scope of the prohibition on commencing actions.
The phrase ‘no action shall be brought’ is too specific a reference to legal process for that to be a tenable construction.
Further, in the context of statutory demands I see no compelling need to give a more extended meaning to the word ‘action.’
The court has a wide discretion to set aside a statutory demand.
When exercising its discretion the court will have regard to all the circumstances.
In the case of a demand for payment of solicitors' costs, one of the circumstances will be the date when the bill was served and the client's attitude towards taxation of the bill.
The court is able to give adequate protection to solicitors' clients without straining the language of section 69.
In the present case the debtor did not apply for a taxation of Marshalls' bills within one month.
Even now he has not done so, although the judge set aside the statutory demand nearly five months ago.
I was told that his legal advisers were concerned that if he applied for a taxation this would amount to an adoption of the bills and prejudice his other objections to the bill.
This is unconvincing.
A taxation of the bills would not prejudice the debtor's claims that he was given negligent advice.
In my view section 69 does not assist the debtor.
Other grounds
In the course of the argument I was told that the debtor will now seek to have the bills taxed.
I am not impressed by this as a reason for setting aside this demand served last August.
It is over 10 months since the bills were delivered.
Nothing at all has been paid.
There has been no payment on account.
The impression the debtor seeks to give in his affidavit evidence is that he is not well placed financially.
The case has the hallmarks of a debtor who is unable or unwilling to make a payment, not of a debtor who genuinely thinks or is advised that the amount charged by the solicitors was unreasonable.
It is significant that in his affidavit evidence the debtor criticises the quality of the advice he received, but he does not otherwise query the reasonableness of the charges.
The possibility that the amount of the bills might be reduced on a taxation which has still not been initiated is not a sufficient reason in this case for setting aside the demand.
Counsel further contended that on the affidavit evidence the debtor has an arguable claim that the solicitors were negligent in two respects.
First, it was not sensible to launch an application for inspection of the liquidator's report or to seek for that purpose an adjournment of the examination being conducted under section 236 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
It is said that this course was wholly unnecessary.
This is a hopeless point.
On this the debtor's evidence is brief in the extreme.
It does not lay an adequate foundation for a claim that, even if the solicitors did so advise, that was not advice which a competent solicitor could reasonably have given.
Second, as already mentioned the debtor's evidence is that he was never advised on whether legal aid might be available to him.
On this I cannot resolve the conflict between the various affidavits.
Even so, it is straining credulity too far to conclude that the debtor has an arguable case.
The debtor was an experienced businessman.
He went for advice to a firm of solicitors.
Legal aid was mentioned.
He was told that Marshalls did not undertake legal aid work.
So he knew that if he instructed Marshalls to act for him they would charge him their normal fees for their work.
He did instruct them.
I can detect nothing in the evidence, even on the debtor's version, to suggest that Marshalls misled or took advantage of him in any way.
Further, there is no evidence that at the time the debtor would have qualified financially for legal aid.
All in all, there is not enough here to found a conclusion that the debtor has an arguable counterclaim for damages for negligence.
Further points were raised.
The statutory demand was admittedly excessive in that it ought not to have included the sum of £146-odd mentioned above.
Nothing turns on this.
It would be different if the rest of the sum demanded had been paid.
The balance is still above the bankruptcy level of £750.
Some reliance was also placed on the fact that the 31 July bill did not comply with the requirements of section 67 of the Solicitors Act 1974.
The bill included as a disbursement the sum of £500 plus VAT payable by Marshalls to Coleman & Co.
When the bill was delivered that disbursement had still to be paid by Marshalls.
In accordance with section 67 the item was properly included in the bill but the bill should have stated that this item had not yet been paid.
The bill omitted to state this.
This disbursement was paid by Marshalls some time ago but not until after the statutory demand had been served.
Again, nothing turns on this point.
The failure to comply with section 67 in this regard does not have the consequence that a debt otherwise due and payable ceases to be due and payable.
The breach of section 67 (a ) does not afford the debtor a defence in respect of the sum of £587.
Conclusion
On the material before me I think I should infer that the district judge attached at least some weight to the debtor's arguments based on section 69.
He fell into error in this respect.
It is therefore for me to exercise the court's discretion.
Doing so, my overall conclusion is that for the reasons set out above there do not exist here sufficient grounds for setting aside the demand.
I shall therefore allow the appeal, set aside the district judge's order, restore the statutory demand and the bankruptcy petition, and remit the petition to the district judge for hearing by him.
When he hears the petition the judge will have regard to the up-to-date situation concerning any payment on account and taxation of the bills.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors: Marshalls, Godalming; Brown Turner Compton Carr & Co., Southport.