

Herbs past and present
Without plants man could not survive.
Cereals (sophisticated grasses), fruits, vegetables, seeds and nuts are essential constituents of human diet — some may say the only suitable ones — and even the meat we eat comes from animals which themselves feed on vegetation in the shape of grasses and herbaceous plants.
Herbs and food
The plants lumped together under the umbrella name of herbs do not appear at first glance to be essential to maintain life, but it is now becoming apparent that this concept could be wrong, and that herbs are as necessary as oxygen, though the ingredients they contribute, such as minerals and vitamins, may only be found in minute quantities.
The so-called culinary herbs, parsley, mint, basil and so on, all have characteristic flavours which enable them to be used in recipes of their own, or added to dishes to give a tantalizing piquancy.
It is not always realized that often a herb will help with digestion generally,— or with the digestion of the particular food with which it is associated.
Peppermint is a classic aid to food absorption; basil contains a substance which helps with stomach cramps, and parsley is a diuretic.
The strong flavours of culinary herbs ensure that they should be used in small quantities, but there is no need to go to the other extreme and be timid with them.
The Greeks strew their common thyme liberally all over roasted or  kebabbed lamb, to its great enhancement, and it is worth applying this principle to all the cooking herbs.
The leaves are nearly always the part of the plant used, newly picked and freshly chopped at once, or used dried, provided they are no older than six months.
Aromatic herbs are the ones most used in cooking; no two are alike and some are so difficult to describe that even to say they are clove-like gives the wrong idea.
The fact is that many have an aroma and flavour which is unique — for instance, basil can only be described as tasting like basil.
Some are so strongly aromatic as to be spicy, and tarragon in particular is one of the few that has such a strong taste it does need adding in minuscule amounts to meat or fish dishes.
Bay is another; one leaf is quite powerful enough for the average family casserole.
Quite why food and diet have become of such interest in recent years is for the social historian to discuss, but there is no doubt about the present popularity of culinary herbs.
The history of the use of herbs in food is naturally bound up with the history of food itself.
It is commonly thought that herbs were used chiefly to disguise the flavour of bad meat during the winter when there was no recently slaughtered beef or lamb to be had, or when food in general had started to go off.
But there were perfectly good ways of preserving food without refrigeration, which were followed even more diligently than we do nowadays in the time of the deep freeze.
However, herbs have always been used to pep up the more blandly-flavoured foods such as fish, vegetables and cereals.
Interestingly, religion had a considerable influence on herbal use in cookery, since the church authorities decreed the times when meat should be eaten, when fish only was the rule, and when there were fast days or fasting weeks.
Lenten food was especially plain, and herbs, and spices as well, were used a great deal in such food.
Looked at from the other side, it should be realized that blandly-flavoured foods reduced the strong and exotic taste of many herbs, and this is where the secret of using herbs in cooking lies — to use herbs in such quantities that the strength of their flavours balances the strength and flavour of the food to which they are added.
They need to blend as well; it is no good using a herb whose taste contradicts that of the dish to which it is being added.
Herbs and Health
The rise in the popularity of herbs as medicinal remedies is less obvious but it seems to have come partly from a general dissatisfaction with synthesized drugs, as well as plastics, artificials and chemicals — "manufactured" articles of all kinds, which are being rejected in favour of substances naturally grown and formed by hand into the artifact required.
Herbally-based remedies of old, using parts of plants fresh or dried in simple infusions, poultices or decoctions, have been found to have great health benefits but, though their method of application is simple, their prescribing is not, since they have to be tailored not only to a given malady, but to the person concerned.
The combinations which can be obtained for this are infinite.
Further complications have to be added; for instance, various parts of a herb have different effects because the times of the year for collection affect the content of the herb; the quantity used is also of major importance, and there are at least 700 medicinal herbs used by European races.
So, while herbs undoubtedly have marvellous potential for curing illness, home cures should only be undertaken for minor ailments.
The medicinal application of herbs can be traced as far back as a Chinese herbal written nearly 5,000 years ago, and there are Egyptian papyri from 2,800 B.C. listing such herbs as mint, marjoram and juniper for medicinal use.
Much of the learning and practice of the Egyptians was absorbed by Greek physicians, one of the best known of whom is Dioscorides, an army doctor who lived during the time of Nero in the first century AD.
His list of 400 healing plants, described and detailed in four books, is probably the most famous materia medica of all, and continued to be a standard reference for European medicine for the next 1,500 years.
Plants were the only source of help for health improvement for hundreds of years, and doctors were almost entirely reliant on them though some, notably Hippocrates, did stress that hygiene and diet were of major importance.
Medical men had perforce to be botanists, and often gardeners as well, and in time medical knowledge came to be the perquisite of the European religious orders, as it had been that of the priests in the time of the Egyptian pharaohs.
For many centuries it remained in the hands mainly of the monastic houses, where there was always a physic garden containing the herbs required by the prevailing medical  incumbent .
Most of the herbs now grown in Britain, culinary and domestic, as well as medicinal, resulted from the Roman invasion.
In the same way, herbs were introduced in the sixteenth century from Europe to North America, to be grafted on to the use already in existence of the herbs of the North American Indians who had a considerable and long-standing tradition of herbal cures from the plants native to their own continent.
Medicine, while still based on plants, became more and more sophisticated as knowledge accumulated, especially with the introduction of printing, which meant that information could be passed on exactly, instead of inaccurately, by hearsay, and thus provided a bigger and bigger base from which to work.
The Doctrine of Signatures became fashionable, the theory of which was that plants which looked like the symptoms of an illness would cure it — lungwort or pulmonaria is a case in point, since it was used for lung conditions, because its white-spotted leaves were thought to bear some resemblance to diseased lungs.
As the science of the nineteenth century advanced in analytical skills, it became increasingly possible to tie down results to specific plants and the chemicals therein, until a pure chemical could be prescribed for a particular symptom.
The use of a whole leaf, flower or the entire plant itself, fell into disuse, and with this a whole galaxy of other chemicals which, it has now been found, were equally necessary to a cure.
There seems no good reason why herbs should not be used at home to cure many minor ills, in the same way that aspirin are useful for headaches, toothache, etc., and the day may not be far away when a book of standard prescriptions using herbs is universally available.
One will need to grow the plants and prepare the drink or poultice oneself but neither is time-consuming, and certainly likely to be less expensive and just as, if not more, efficacious than the manufactured kind available from the chemist.
Herbs for the household
In the same way that there are now few modem savoury recipes that do not have herbs in them, and that more and more people are trying herbal remedies for aches and pains, so the uses to which herbs can be put for cosmetic and domestic purposes are being more widely explored.
Lavender bags were not merely intended for perfuming household linen and blankets in the days of Elizabeth I — they acted as a deterrent to moths, fleas and other unwanted pests; and the stems were once burnt as a fumigant in sick-rooms.
Oil of lavender rubbed into the skin will ward off mosquitoes and flies.
Herbs for beauty
Dyes for hair colouring could only be obtained from plants and one of the oldest of these is the red dye henna, obtained from the powdered dried leaves of the plant Lawsonia inermis.
Traces have been found on the mummified bodies entombed in the pyramids of Egypt, and the plant's red colouring has been used ever since by various races and civilizations not only for hair, but also for nails and skin.
Another plant much used for hair colouring is chamomile, the flower-heads of which provide a solution which lightens light-brown and fair hair appreciably; saffron will have the same effect.
The cosmetic uses of herbs are legion: skin cleansers, face-masks, shampoos, bath oils and salts, herbal soaps, talcum powders, and oils and creams.
Women, and men for that matter, had no sources to call upon for improvement of their looks other than plants, and the vast cosmetic industry that we know today has replaced what was probably just as complicated a business two or three thousand years ago, given the great number of plants that have cosmetic application.
Chinese ladies used perfume from plants for their hair, the Romans used herbs of all kinds, especially lavender, for bathing — even the ancient Britons used a plant for colouring their skins, the infamous woad, Isatis tinctoria, whose leaves, made into a paste, supplied a blue dye.
According to legend, the ancient Britons painted themselves with woad to frighten their enemies but, almost certainly, this was not the only reason for so doing, since it is a styptic, i.e. it has the power to stop bleeding.
Herbs and dyeing
Man's increasing domestication meant he became more interested in the appearance of his home, and in the materials he wore to keep out the cold and wet.
Edible plants that stained the skin while being prepared for eating, or being eaten, such as blackberries, would have been amongst the first to be tried for dyeing; gradually the range of colours available from plants increased by using combinations of dyes to take in every shade possible.
The Chinese had dyeing down to a fine art as much as 5,000 years ago, and there are herbs grown today whose names record their colouring ability, such as dyer's-greenweed and dyer's-bugloss.
Dye plants often have the word tinctoria as their specific epithet, from the Latin word tinctorius, meaning "of the dyers" .
Elder, Sambucus Nigra, will produce dull blue, lavender and purples; marigold petals were once used for colouring butter and cheese, and the common dandelion supplies pink.
The Industrial Revolution saw the development of chemical dyes, as derivatives from side-products of coal-tar.
The cheapness of the method, combined with the ease in ensuring that a particular colour would be identical in shade to the one used earlier, meant that plant dyes soon fell into disuse except in remote country areas.
But although no two dyes obtained from plants will be exactly alike, the colours are soft and subtle, and the mixtures can be blended to give sophisticated hues and tints equal to any of the manufactured colourings.
Dyes in all the colours of the rainbow can be extracted from herbs, mainly by boiling or soaking the plant tissue.
Standard quantities of plant and water are used in whichever method is adopted, for times of up to six hours, to take in the various stages required.
In order to fix the dye in the material, a mordant, i.e. a chemical of some kind such as iron, tin, chrome or alum, must he used.
These can be obtained from chemists.
The material to be dyed is first thoroughly moistened and then placed in a solution of the mordant, simmered for a given period of time, about an hour, and then put, still wet, into the dyeing solution.
Mordants will alter the shade or strength of a colour; for example, onion will produce yellow with alum, and dark brown with chrome.
The most easily dyed materials are wool and silk; cotton and linen are difficult as they are made primarily of cellulose, being obtained from plants, rather than animal protein, and are better reserved for the time when experience has been obtained with dyeing wool.
Herbs and Perfumery
Of course, one of the outstanding characteristics of herbs is what might be termed their nasal quality.
The perfumes and aromas exuded by their leaves and flowers on a warm sunny day give any garden a fourth dimension, and one of the charms of the Greek and Italian hillsides is the pungently aromatic fragrance given off by the herbs and shrubs.
Some herbs have scented flowers which can be smelt before the plant is seen; the apothecary's rose, Rosa gallica officinalis, is an example.
Others such as rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) have leaves with a strong, sneeze-inducing odour; yet others have flowers or leaves which need to be rubbed in the fingers before the aroma can be enjoyed, such as lavender (Lavandula angustifolia), or ginger mint (Mentha x gentilis "Variegata" ).
Perfumery is perhaps an even more ancient art than dyeing; it is a more obvious constituent of a plant, so would have been experimented with earlier, to disguise bad smells if nothing else, such as those of rotting meat and decaying vegetation.
Fresh flowers are fine for scenting the air but their life is finite, and to preserve their perfume, it was found that a mixture of flower petals, collected when they were at exactly the right stage in their development, then carefully dried or part-dried, and mixed with an ingredient which "fixed" the perfume, such as orris root (Iris gennanica florentina) would continue to give off fragrance for months and even years.
Such a mixture we now know as potpourri, from the French pourrir, to rot, not a very accurate name, since the ingredients are preserved rather than allowed to decay.
Eventually there came the discovery that a scented oil could be extracted from those flowers or leaves which were perfumed.
Enfleurage is one method of doing this, by making a kind of sandwich with purified fat forming the "bread" , and the flower petals the contents of the sandwich.
Distillation is another, in which flowers are boiled in water, and the essential oil given off in the steam is collected and condensed by cooling.
Extraction with alcohol is a third method, when the solvent trickles over the plant material, is collected and then distilled to leave the oil as a solid material.
Fragrant herbs play a great part in what has come to be called aromatherapy, in which essential fragrant oils from herbs are rubbed on to the skin.
The different fragrances are thought to have an improving effect on a variety of physical and emotional problems.
Now that herbs have invaded many parts of our lives, and not least our gardens, how much of this is just a fashionable"phase, and how much will remain as a permanent and essential ingredient of everyday living?
Since herbs do so much for the flavour of food and its digestion, have such profound use in medicine, both for humans and animals, and have so much utilitarian value domestically in the home, and in the garden, it seems most unlikely that they will ever fall into such disuse again.
The countries of the Third World in particular need them desperately for medical purposes, as the synthesized drugs are so expensive.
Another pointer to their continued and increasing use is the recent interest in holistic medicine, the philosophy of which can have such far-reaching effects that the entire way of life of modem civilization may be completely altered by the time the twenty-first century is well under way.
Cultivating herbs
Since no self-respecting modern cookbook leaves herbs out of its recipes, since courses in herbal medicine are springing up all over the place, and since cosmetics which rely on plants are taking the place of the synthetic beauty treatments what, one might ask, is a herb?
What is a herb?
Until recently, the word has always conjured up pictures of food, which imposed an artificial limit on the range of plants.
Now that herbal usage has been revived so much in other disciplines, the definition has expanded to include plants usually grown nowadays for garden ornament, such as the Christmas rose (Helleborus niger), marigold (Calendula) and the Florentine iris; plants which were regarded as weeds, such as tansy, comfrey, yarrow and herb robert, but are being treated with respect as their usefulness for all sorts of reasons is realized again; and plants which supply dyes, cosmetics, insect repellents and fragrances.
Strictly speaking, a herb is any perennial plant whose soft or succulent stems die down to ground level every year, but many herbs are shrubs and trees, such as hyssop, the sweet bay and rosemary.
A modern definition of a herb could be any plant, generally aromatic or fragrant, whose parts, whether leaf, flower, seed or root, are of use in food flavouring, medicine, household and cosmetics.
Herbs were, first and foremost, grown primarily for healing and flavouring and, as such, were grown in a place reserved for them, whether it was part of a monastery garden, or part of the vegetable patch of peasant or yeoman farmer.
As times passed, inevitably, people began to arrange their herbs in patterns when they planted them, until eventually the herb patch became ornamental, and was a garden in its own right.
The physic gardens of the monasteries were mostly formal, with rectangular or square beds, but the gardens attached to private homes were developed from these simple plans into intricate designs of curved beds edged with dwarf hedges of box, southernwood or lavender.
Propagation of herbs
Since "herb" is an umbrella word covering all types of plant, it follows that they can be propagated by most of the methods used for plant increase, but there are two commonly used: seed and division.
A third sometimes used is cuttings, mainly for the shrubs or trees.
Most of the herbs which can be grown from seed are hardy and can be sown outdoors in temperate climates; some examples are dill, coriander, savory, purslane and lovage.
Spring is generally the season in which to sow, but some germinate better if sown in late summer or early autumn, that is, as soon as the parent plants have flowered and set seed, and the seed has ripened.
The seed of such plants loses its viability — ability to germinate — more quickly, so that a spring sowing is likely to result in fewer seedlings.
Some seed should not be covered with soil because it needs light to germinate, some needs an acid-reacting soil, and some needs a period of cold between harvest and sowing.
But most herb seeds germinate like weeds, not surprisingly.
Division is a second method which is probably more certain, provided the separated sections each have some root and some buds or potential shoots.
It can"be done in spring or autumn when the soil is moist, but not waterlogged or dry, and if it is still warm from summer, or beginning to warm up as the spring sun appears.
Divided plants will take hold of the soil and grow new roots more quickly if they are replanted so quickly that the plant hardly knows it has been out of the ground.
By doing this its vitality is not completely stopped, it somehow goes on flowing, and the plant, as it were, simply gulps a little , and gets on with expanding.
Nurseries and garden centres
Division is all very well, but you must first catch your plant, and in order to do this, it means applying to nurseries or garden centres.
Local outlets of this Kind will have a choice of all sorts of garden plants, and nowadays, a separate area is often reserved specially for herbs.
Some garden centres make a point of having a particularly good collection of  herbs, and if they do, it will have well-grown plants, considerable variety, and correct naming.
If there is such an outlet in the neighbourhood, it will be a more satisfactory source than a mail-order nursery, because you can see what you are buying, you can check that it is the plant as named on the label, and you can make sure of getting a strong healthy specimen free from pest or disease.
Moreover, the herb can be planted without disturbance to the roots, almost immediately after buying, whereas those sent through the post may spend many days travelling in inadequate packaging, having been dug up or removed from a container.
Even plants which were well grown, and vigorous to start with, are unlikely to do well after such treatment, and unfortunately the mail-order nurseries have no control over postal treatment or delays.
As far as cost is concerned, there is little difference between the two sources, since the cost of postage is offset by the extra cost of the container plants from a garden centre.
But it must be said that, even with the best garden centres, the range of herbs is not great, and consists mostly of the culinary type.
For the widest selection, it is better to apply to a specialist herb nursery, of which there are now a good many.
If there is a local one, then that is far and away the best place to go, otherwise there is no avoiding a postal order.
A specialist nursery has the advantage that it can advise on the growing conditions in which the herb does best and advice may be available on the various ways of using it.
Some nurseries run short courses on cultivation, cooking with herbs, perfumery and other uses.
As with any plant, when buying it, look for a specimen which is undamaged and healthy, and with plenty of potential growth in the form of small new shoots and buds.
Avoid those with broken or hanging stems, wilting leaves, dry compost, any pest or leaf discolouration at all, and preferably buy a plant not yet flowering, though the buds may already be visible.
Tall lanky plants in small pots are not likely to be a good buy.
Be very careful if the herb has flowered and started to set seed, because if it is an annual, or a biennial, it will shortly die in the natural course of events.
This is why it is worth finding out in advance what type of herb it is.
The correct naming of herbs is a third aspect which unfortunately is not yet as good as it should be.
Mail-order plants that turn out not to be the ones ordered are tiresome enough, but when they are labelled as the plant ordered, and are not that plant, it is particularly irritating.
Herbs to keep an eye on are the marjorams, of which there are at least three different kinds, tarragon (two), dill and fennel, which hybridize very easily, garden mint which is often a cross with horse-mint, or may even be that species, lovage which can look like ground-elder while young, and French sorrel which is invariably confused with the inferior-tasting English sorrel.
Besides mail-order herb nurseries there are also seed firms supplying nothing but herbs and wild plants.
These will be much less expensive on postage charges, and are more likely to be true to name.
For success in growing from seed, there is a book entitled, Seed Growers Guide to Herbs and Wild Flowers by Helen McEwan (available from Seed Bank, 44 Albion Road, Sutton, Surrey, England) which has detailed instructions on seed germination and seedling cultivation for herbs, together with information on their uses.
Herbs in the garden
The use of herbs during the twentieth century had dwindled so much before their present popularity that it had been reduced to the culinary few, such as parsley and mint, with adventurous cooks experimenting with chives, sage and thyme.
Consequently herbs were simply not part of the garden scene, being tucked away in an odd corner of the vegetable garden, or grown half-heartedly in pots or window-boxes, where they became aphid-ridden and dusty.
Now that herb nursery and seed lists name hundreds of species, the problem is not so much what to grow, as where to grow — how to fit as many as possible of these delightful plants into the general garden scene.
If the garden is small it will be a case of growing the monkey puzzle in the swimming pool, so many demands will be made on it, but most herbs are sufficiently ornamental to be fitted into the aesthetic need that a garden fulfils.
They can be planted anywhere in the general scheme, mixed with herbaceous perennials, annuals, bulbs, shrubs or roses, provided the site chosen for them supplies their requirements, as with any garden plant.
It is surprising how many herbs can thus be fitted in before that agonizing search for a space for yet another indispensable plant proves that the only vacancy is the concrete path surrounding the dustbins.
Sage, rosemary and lavender need no visual description, though it is not always realized that sage has spikes of vividly blue-mauve flowers which last a long time and are highly magnetic to bees.
The thymes develop into nicely rounded dark evergreen bushes, also with the bonus of light purple, bee flowers; parsley leaves are perfectly acceptable as a foliage edging, chives supply a formal leaf silhouette, together with very desirable, long-lasting pinks mauve flower-heads, and so the list goes on.
Planting at random Herbs distributed about the garden mixed in with the general plantings will often supply that "surprise" quality that the old garden-landscape designers insisted on, as an aroma wafts through the air on a hot sunny day, or when a plant is brushed accidentally so that a spicy smell comes apparently out of nowhere.
Not only that, it also seems to be true that certain herbs are good company for other plants, discouraging pests and diseases; for instance, chives and garlic have some ability to prevent roses being infected with black spot, and chamomile is said to improve the health of young plants if they are weak and slow to grow.
Growing herbs at random throughout a garden is in some ways the best arrangement — it is, after all, the way in which they would grow naturally — and species and varieties will be found that are happy on the rock garden, by the water, in bedding schemes, or as underplantings to tall perennials, shrubs and trees.
Herbs for mixed borders
Gardens which have been carefully designed and closely planted may appear to be unsuitable for additional plantings of herbs, but a herbaceous border, for instance, which needs to be re-dug every few years, with some of its  incumbents divided or discarded, can well take some herbal plants, to supply flowers and/or architectural quality.
Lovage and angelica are two tall, statuesque species with handsome leaves and flowerheads, needing the space provided by such a border.
Bergamot (Monarda didyma) is a well-known border flower, which has all sorts of herbal attributes; the clove pink or gillyflower (Dianthus caryophyllus) is the highly scented forerunner of the modern garden pinks and border carnations, and its single-petalled, rosy purple or white flowers grow in clusters late in the summer.
One can go on with example after example, whether the herb is grown for floral or foliage effect, and nearly all will enhance the appeal of the border, with their evocative fragrances and aromas.
One thing to watch for when buying herbs for the border; there are now garden forms of many herbs, or garden species grown in preference to the true herb.
These are a different species, which do not contain as much of the herbal  essence, or may indeed not contain any.
Catnip is an example; Nepeta cataria is the true herb and is the catnip that has a hard life if a cat is part of the household, but Nepeta x faassenii, also sometimes called catnip, is the usual species grown in gardens, with little if any attraction for cats, though it is always alive with bees when in flower.
Another is goldenrod, Solidago canadensis and its derivatives being the garden forms, though the true herb is S. virgaurea, the native species, and much less tall-growing.
Some garden herbs are variants of a species and are quite acceptable because they retain their herbal qualities.
Examples are Salvia officinalis purpurascens, purple-leaved sage, ginger mint (Mentha x gentilis "Variegata" ) with yellow-variegated leaves and blue rue (Ruta graveolens "Jackmans Blue" ).
Herb borders
Herbaceous borders or mixed borders, or even the island beds of herbaceous perennials which make an interesting alternative, are a standard feature in many gardens, but few garden-owners take the word "herbaceous" literally and grow nothing but herbs in their beds or borders.
Such a border can be at least as ornamental as the conventional one, given the range of plants which are now considered to be herbs, and it is much more likely to be the haunt of bees and butterflies, as well as being more aromatic and fragrant.
A good many herbs have coloured leaves, and such plants can be distributed in the border to blend with the colours of flowering herbs and to provide a display when they are not in bloom.
Golden-leaved marjoram, yellow-variegated lemon balm, white-variegated pineapple mint, purple-leaved sage, blue rue, the filmy leaves of bronze fennel, and the pink, purple and blue, leaf-like bracts of clary are a few herbs of this kind.
It is also worth exploring the shapes of herbal leaves, such as those of lovage and angelica; chives, parsley, cotton lavender and rue are some more with contrasting and arresting foliage outlines.
Carefully planted with adequate space and grown really well, it is possible to design a herb border which makes its point entirely with its foliage.
If flowers are preferred, it is a case of what to leave out, rather than hunting far and wide for attractive herb species.
The reason for the rather dull image herbs have previously had is that most were grown to provide leaves for culinary use, and the flowers were of secondary importance; thyme and mint are typical.
But herbs are also such plants as borage, honeysuckle, hyssop, marshmallow, yellow gentian, and evening primrose, all plants with beautifully coloured showy flowers, some for shade and some for sun.
The herb border can be designed to follow the same principles as those used for the herbaceous or mixed border; small plants will not thank you for planting them next to towering or buxom plants — they will be smothered in no time.
In fact small plants really are better as edgings, at the front or round the perimeter of the bed.
A pleasant cottage-garden effect can be obtained by random planting without regard to colour, or plants can be placed so that the colours of the flowers blend and combine.
The trouble with this is that, although the plants are meant to bloom at the same time, invariably some flower later or earlier, and ruin the whole carefully thought-out scheme.
Beds or borders of a width such that the centre is at arms "length from any point on the edge will be easier to maintain, but if this makes them too narrow for your choice, stepping-stones in the border make life a lot easier and incidentally add to the border" s appearance.
Enthusiasm can spur one on to cram the border full of as  many herbs as possible, but some of them are likely to die as a result, and others will be tall and weedy; it is far better to plant with spaces between them to start with, allowing them room to grow to their full size so that their growth habit and leaf value can be made the most of in the context of the overall design.
As with any border, plants with evergreen or evergrey leaves make it more interesting in winter, so consider this backbone first, and include such plants as sweet bay, southernwood and rosemary.
Herbs for walls, pavings and patios
When space is at a premium, don"t forget that paving and free-standing dry stone walls or double low brick walls will provide niches for all sorts of the smaller herbs, especially those native to areas where there are long hot summers following comparatively mild rainy winters such as the Mediterranean.
In fact, such sites can be made a feature in the garden, and it could be worth building a wall on purpose, which would form a barrier to cold wind and contain warmth on its sunny side.
Patios lend themselves in particular to herb cultivation because they are so often sited next to the house and facing the sun.
The house walls store heat and provide a shelter from the winds that can be even more damaging than frost, so that double walls can be planted to thyme, rosemary, tarragon, sage and lemon verbena.
Plants which have very aromatic leaves are delightful to plant in such areas, as the hot sun helps release the aromatic oils, and the fragrant air which results adds another dimension to the pleasure of eating or sitting outdoors.
Cistus (rock rose), scented-leaved pelargoniums (geraniums) and the curry plant (Helichrysum angustifolium) are a few that can be combined to provide the mixture of aromas reminiscent of holidays in southern Europe.
When preparing double walls for permanent plantings of this kind, a height of about 45 cm (18 in) and an internal width of at least 15 cm (6 in) will provide internal space for sufficient compost to grow the small herbal shrubs and perennial plants, and allow good drainage in the base.
The hard core footing alone will automatically take care of most of this aspect, but it is advisable to put a finer layer over it of shingle and then gravel about 5 cm (2 in) deep, and then fill the remaining space with a soil-containing compost of the John Innes No 2 type (see pages 33–39).
This will need topdressing each year in spring, together with the addition of a little slow-acting organic fertilizer — herbs are much more aromatic when grown "hard" with little nutrient.
Walls built to support terraces, used as boundaries, forming part of a flight of steps, containing raised beds and so on, whether brick or stone, lend themselves to planting actually in their fabric.
Feverfew, soapwort, chamomile, wallflower and clove pinks are some to plant in crevices and holes in the wall itself first putting in a little compost for the plant's roots to get a grip on.
If the space extends to soil at the back of the wall, so much the better, as the plant can then root through into it, and the choice widens to include any small perennial herb.
Formal paved areas in the garden provide a nice contrast to the freely curving growth of the plants but, however well laid the paving stones, tiles or bricks, sooner or later weeds sprout through the cracks, and it is either a case of weedkiller, not popular with organic gardeners, or constant weeding, which scrapes fingertips and breaks nails.
Some of this can be prevented by deliberately planting the joins with herbs like creeping thyme (Thymus x serpyllum) and  pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) which have matted stems lying flat on the ground.
They smell delicious when walked on.
Chives will grow in such a situation, and their narrow, tall shape does not take up much room even if it is vertical.
Feverfew, nasturtiums and chamomile will also seed themselves between the cracks but at this point one can be back to the weeding situation and the paving loses its character of precision and smoothness.
Herbs in containers
The paved surfaces of patios and terraces can in fact be rather daunting in their bareness, and a little relief is easily supplied in the shape of plant containers.
Something will be found for every style of house and garden, and every kind of planting.
Many, many herbs are first-class in containers like these, and one can have the pleasure of a spring display, to be replaced by summer-flowering fragrant herbs, all with a permanent backbone of evergreens such as lavender, sweet bay, cotton lavender, or rosemary.
Where the climate has frosty winters, containers enable the tender herbs to be grown through the summer so that they may be dried and preserved for use in winter, or kept growing in the greenhouse or home.
Some will survive winter outdoors with plenty of lagging round the container so that the roots do not get frozen, and protective mulches, or plastic sheet round the top growth.
Ornamental herbs for the terrace could consist of mixtures of catmint, old-fashioned marigolds (calendula species), the Florentine iris, jasmine, wallflowers, basil — the purple-leaved kind — Rosa gallica officinalis, blue-leaved rue, and the ever-greens referred to above.
Resides their decorative qualities, all these can be used for either cooking, medicine, as perfumery, or domestically.
Containers also come into their own for convenience, of for would-be gardeners without a garden, but with an area, balcony or roof-garden.
In particular, the Kitchen herbs are liable not to be used unless they are very close to hand for the cook; in the rush of making up food amongst all the other demands being made at the same time, a trough or window-box of herbs on the Kitchen windowsill or just outside the backdoor will ensure that culinary herbs are used daily.
Some of them will be permanent, such as sage, thyme, the mints, chives, bay and rosemary; parsley will need sowing annually, so will sweet marjoram and basil, neither of the last two being hardy.
For more exotic kitchen herbs, choices are amongst dill, coriander, chervil, and the savories, winter and summer.
Whatever container is used, always provide good compost, and try to give the plant plenty of root-room.
The plants from countries with hot dry summers tend to put their roots down very deeply into the soil, especially if they are growing in rocky soil on exposed"hillsides, so containers with as much depth as possible are advisable.
Vigorous plants such as the mints, horseradish (grown for its roots), and sweet cicely need plenty of root room.
Parsley needs far more root-room than it is usually given; the main or tap root is rather like a small carrot, and this should be allowed for.
The alternative name for a close relation, Hamburg parsley, is turnip-rooted, the root being the part for which it is grown, and ordinary parsley tends to follow the same root pattern.
One point worth remembering about the management of plants in containers; they need watering, and in summer usually very frequently — daily if they are in pots and the weather is hot — so it pays to have as large a container as possible.
Plants will use proportionately less water and save time, with the bonuses that plants do better with company, and damage to the roots from frost in winter is less likely.
Designing your herb garden
From a herb border to a complete herb garden is not a very long step, and once the initial interest has been started with the planting of single plants here and there in the garden, it is not long before friends are giving one new species, other varieties are discovered at garden centres, and catalogues are found to list even more.
Lists from specialist herb nurseries arrive, many of which give names of herb gardens in their neighbourhood open to public viewing, and so the idea of one's own herb garden begins to take shape.
It can be as large or as small as you want it — a stately-home herb garden with grand borders, "knotted" beds, paving, pergolas and a pool with goldfish (or carp, to be in keeping with the true tradition of the old monastery herb garden).
Or it can be a modest affair of three or four small beds with a sundial in the centre, chamomile paths and parsley edgings.
Traditional knot garden
Whatever the size, formal and repetitive patterns are typical of, and necessary to, herb gardens.
They provide unity, and help to give the planting coherence and shape, without which herbs tend to get out of hand, and look wild and woolly, especially towards the end of the season.
The original monastery physic gardens were fairly plain, with rectangular or square beds in lines, but as time went on, and private households began to grow their own medicinal cures, food flavourings and fragrances, the sites devoted to herbs became more elaborate, until they were often laid out in the "knot" style, an intricate arrangement of beds said to have taken its name originally from the lover's knot.
But the knot pattern had to be precise to get its maximum effect, so the beds were all outlined with small neat hedges —in other words edgings, such as clipped dwarf box, southernwood or hyssop — and the paths between, if not chamomile, were raked gravel or small coloured pebbles.
This style is, of course, ideal for containing herbs and formalizing them; to be truly knot-like, however, all the plants should be low-growing, so that they can be looked down upon, and the intertwined pattern clearly seen.
Such designs should repeat within the confines of the herb garden, and the plants in the beds should be the same in corresponding sites in other beds.
These also help to tie the whole arrangement together, but in a small herb garden it is too restrictive of plant species, and one can still get a good result if individual beds are planted with different collections.
Knot-garden patterns were highly advanced, somewhat geometrical, and needed a great deal of care in laying out on the site, and then planting.
Considerable skill in getting plants established was also required — it is only too easy for gaps to appear, or for an odd man out in flower colour to pop up, as anyone who has ever tried to grow a complete row of vegetables or lay out a bedding plan, will know.
Indeed, the knot gardens must have been the forerunners of the Victorian bedding schemes which have equally elaborate designs, the differences being that they relied on colour for their main effect, and also often reproduced an object or spelt out words.
Points to consider before designing your herb garden
In designing and planting your own herb garden, it should take account of various factors such as:
Your purpose in having a herb garden
Do you want it to be attractive to look at, a place to sit and be peaceful?
Is it to provide herbs for use, such as flavouring herbs, medicinal herbs, or household and insecticidal herbs?
Must it provide fragrance and a haven for butterflies, and a happy hunting-ground for bees?
Are you going to concentrate on collections of herbs each with a theme?
The soil and site
It is no good trying to grow plants unsuited to the soil and aspect.
They will be a continual disappointment as they fail to leaf, flower or set seed, become pest-ridden, and need constant attention.
Decide on your herbs, and then find out  what kind of soil they need — moist, heavy and deep, or dry, well-drained and short of plant food; also whether they do best in sun or a little shade, with shelter, or exposed to some wind, and whether they are immune to cold, or need cosseting and protection.
The amount of money you have to spare
If money is tight, you can get plants as gifts from generous friends; even just cuttings will turn into plants, or collect wayside seeds or seedheads, but not plants (remember there are Wildlife Preservation Orders in force in most countries).
You can acquire some most unusual species for a song at village jumble sales, country fetes, and street markets.
Many herbs grow easily from seed, fortunately still reasonably inexpensive, and you can save seed and take your own cuttings from year to year.
The amount of time you have to spare
The time spent on the herb garden is probably less than on any other part of the whole garden (unless it has been deliberately planted to be labour-saving), but shortage of time is less of a problem than money, since the herb-garden is a hobby, undertaken for enjoyment and relaxation.
In any case most of the time required will be taken up at the beginning, in the planning and drawing out of the plan on paper, in choosing the plants, and in soil preparation and planting.
Paths with whatever surface is chosen can be laid at the start when the beds are being dug or later at a more convenient time, but it does make life easier if they can be finished before planting the beds.
What herbs to grow
Next to the difficult decision as to which of many enchanting patterns or knots to draw on the soil with herbs, is the even more difficult but absorbing one of which species to grow.
Since there are hundreds, it is a job for those long winter evenings of which, in theory, there should be so many.
You can plant a random collection without any motif, simply growing herbs which particularly appeal to you, or you can assemble collections which have a theme, rather like stamp collectors who concentrate on stamps of the Caribbean or the early triangular stamps of the African countries.
The utility aspect is an obvious one, both for interest and for practical help in itself — cook's herbs, cosmetic herbs, medicinal herbs, dye herbs, household herbs — any of these groups could include at least ten different species.
The collection could consist entirely of culinary kinds; the health-giving species can lead to a very large collection, as four, five or six different plants may be needed to make up a prescription.
Dye-producing herbs include some unexpected plants, such as elder (blue from the fruit) and stinging nettle, which produces a warm brown.
The dye garden may look as though it is full of weeds, but most of them are only wild plants under another name.
If you accept the definition of a weed as "a plant growing where it is not wanted" , once it has a use and is being grown for a purpose, it is no longer a weed.
On the other hand, although a herb garden grown entirely for its fragrances and aromas does little to conserve the environment, it will contain such plants as the scented roses (the more strongly perfumed they are, the better)— the damask rose (Rosa damascena), and the cabbage rose (R. centifolia); also lavender; lily-of-the-valley; jasmine (Jasminum officinale); and border pink (Dianthus caryophyllus).
Surprisingly, scented lilies are not used to supply perfume  because it cannot be extracted from them successfully.
The aromatic herbs such as basil, lemon verbena, myrtle and pelargonium can also contribute a lot to the garden's beauty.
But collections of herbs can be grown purely for interest's sake.
For instance, collecting botanical families of herbs, one to a border, will reveal that the Lablatae, Umbelliferae and Compositae are the ones containing the most herbal plants at present in use in Europe and North America.
The rose family (Rosaceae) comes a close second and the Scrophulariaceae, of which mullein and eyebright are members, is another.
Herbs mentioned in the Bible make another interesting collection, so do those which Shakespeare brings into his plays, particularly as they give an authentic picture of plants used by the Elizabethans — poor, mad Ophelia's flowers included rue, fennel, rosemary, violets, a daisy and some pansies, all good herbs, even the daisy, which was once called "bruisewort" .
If you are not a bee-keeper, you may easily become one by amassing herbs beloved by bees and/or butterflies; many herbs are bee plants such as goldenrod, mullein, honeysuckle, thyme, catmint and bergamot.
Or you can collect herbs into beds of different colours: yellow, with woad, evening primrose, dandelion, tansy and golden marjoram; blues, to include sage, borage, hyssop, alkanet, clary and rosemary; and white flowers — Jasmine, sweet cicely, the Florentine iris, myrtle and lily-of-the-valley.
Planning and planting a herb-garden
Every good garden design book advises the would-be designer-gardener to "first take your squared paper" and, in fact, it is a good idea to draw the plan to scale.
The size of the beds is much more easily appreciated, the spaces between them can be better compared to the dimensions of the beds, and the proportions of the various plants can be correctly assessed, so that mistakes in juxtaposition can be adjusted.
Better still, if you are anything of an artist, is then to transpose your scale plan to a three-dimensional drawing, preferably coloured, showing it as it will be in three or four years"time when the perennial plants are mature.
Steps in designing
1 Assess your soil:
Is it well-drained (sandy, shingly, gravelly, chalky)?
Does it hold water and feel sticky when wet, cracking badly when dry (predominantly clay or silt)?
Is it dark-coloured, spongy when wet and dusty when dry (peat)?
How does it react to a pH test (acid or alkaline)?
Does it contain organic matter (material floating on the surface of a solution of soil)?
2 Assess your site:
Which parts are sunny/shady?
Does it get wind, if so, where from (north, south, east or west)?
Is it likely to retain frost and collect snow in winter?
Is it sheltered by walls/fences/hedges?
Is the garden close to the sea?
What is average winter and summer rainfall?
Where does the water lie the longest?
3 In the light of answers to these questions, choose your herbs.
Whatever choice of herb you settle on, before you start to mark the places for them on your paper plan, make sure you know what their final size will be when they are mature.
The adult height and width are important facts, armed with which you can plant without crowding or spacing; if the soil is a well-worked heavy one, allow for extra growth.
The converse is seldom true, since many herbs grow naturally in poor dry soils.
4 Make a rough diagram of your design and determine whether it is appropriate to the size of the site, e.g. a herb border on the grand scale will not be successful in an area 3 x 3 metres (10 x 10 ft); in other words the proportions of the design should be such that there is room to make the most of them in the area concerned.
5 Choose your plants according to your needs and the dictates of the soil and site as determined from your assessment.
6 Enter their name on the diagram in your preferred arrangement, taking into account height as well as spread, whether they are evergreen, perennial, annual, flowering or non-flowering.
At this stage, it can help to trace the design on the site in outline with the help of chalk, rope, string, or the garden hose, and to use canes stuck in the soil to give an indication of the final height of plants.
7 Measure the area exactly and scale it down for transfer to squared paper — a large scale would be 1.2 cm (½ in) per 30 cm (12 in), but if you want to mark in all the plants in all the beds, it would have to be of the order of 5 cm/30 cm (2 in/12 in).
8 Mark in the beds and borders on it to the dimensions required, in the required positions.
9 Write in the names of the plants where they fit in to the pattern and draw a circle round them to indicate the extent of their final spread.
10 Decide on the numbers of plants and the seeds required, and order accordingly, unless you are planning to plant up from various sources.
The diagram above is a herb garden containing a collection of herbs grown in Britain and on the Continent in medieval times; they have a variety of uses, and some of them fulfil several functions.
Care of herbs
The plants grown in gardens are all indigenous to one country or another, whether it is Britain, Italy, China, or in North America or South America.
Some of them have been got at by the plant-breeders and bear no resemblance to the species or variety originally discovered; some remain the same, being already sufficiently beautiful or useful.
Some are difficult to grow under cultivation because of their natural habitat's different climatic, soil or aspect requirements, but some grow like the weeds they often are in their native land.
The plants grown as herbs in many countries have been used by the inhabitants because it was, and is, natural to use the materials found in the world around one for food, shelter, health and warmth.
Once sown or planted, herbs will grow strongly and healthily to maturity in the majority of cases without help, except while seedlings or young plants, but even so the help needed will be minimal.
You can, of course, spend time on their care; working amongst herbs in a herb garden is a particular pleasure to which fragrance, nostalgia, usefulness and the anticipatory satisfaction of one's stomach all contribute.
On a warm, sunny day, when the bees and butterflies are working amongst the flowers, and your fingers are releasing the aromatic oils into the atmosphere, tranquillity and contentment unavoidably seep into one's outlook.
Site and soil
However, it does pay to provide some care and attention when growing herbs in the mass, to ensure their greater decorativeness and well-being, or even simply to curtail the activity of the lustier wild plants.
It is frequently said that most herbs do best if they are growing in well-drained soil, somewhat short of plant food, and in a position which is sunny and sheltered.
However, this is a generalization which really does.
not apply, any more than it does to all garden plants, There are certainly some, the Mediterranean group for example, which includes oregano, lavender, rosemary and thyme, that grow in this sort of environment, but there are many more which need such conditions as shade, moisture, plenty of food, or deep soil, or they may want varying combinations of these, or any of them combined with their opposites.
Parsley does best in deep moist soil and sun; the mints prefer the same soil, and are impervious to shade or sun, but pineapple mint will survive in drought much better than ginger mint.
Really, to give each herb the best possible chance, the site and soil chosen for it should conform to its specific needs, as with any garden plant.
Having said that, it is possible to plant some in groups, and it is true to say that some thrive in soil which would normally be considered unsatisfactory.
A position which provides shelter from wind is almost more important than one which receives all the sun available; wind is excessively drying and moisture is transpired from plants much more quickly than is realized, along with the essential oils, relatively "heavy" though they are.
Frost pockets, i.e. places where frost remains during the day when other parts of the garden have thawed, should be avoided, also soil where water stands in winter, but these are all qualifications applicable to general planting.
Preparing the soil
Provided the soil is workable, a spit (spade's length) deep and not violently acid or alkaline, it will need little preparatory treatment.
Complete removal of weeds, including all the roots, is important, preferably by hand or while digging; incidentally, do remember that some of them may be the very plants you are intending to grow, though if the area contains horsetail it is better not to try growing perennial plants in it until you have been clearing out this weed for some years.
Dig the soil to the depth of a spade or fork, and clear out the rubbish as you go large stones, glass, china, bottle tops, sticks, wire, plastic and so on— at the same time mixing in a thin layer of rotted garden compost, especially if the soil is shallow and only a few cm (in) deep on top of chalk subsoil.
There are not many herbs which prefer acid soil, so if your soil is acid use chalk (calcium carbonate) or ground limestone (the same substance but less quick-acting) to alter it to a depth suitable for adequate root growth.
Quantities should be of the order ½-1 kg per sq m(1–2 lb per sq yd ) where the pH is 6.0, and double this if it is 5.0, giving less for sandy soil and more for clay.
The pH of a soil, though it sounds mysterious and scientific, is simply the name for the scale which determines the quantities of chemical particles (hydrogen ions) contained in the soil solution, more or less of which make the soil acid or alkaline.
Soil tests to discover the pH are easily done, and the kits for doing them are provided with instructions by several garden product companies, and stocked at garden shops.
Do this initial cultivation in early spring, and be ready to hoe or fork out weeds again once or twice more before planting or sowing in mid-spring, as weed seeds will germinate more readily when the soil is disturbed, and with the start of warmer weather.
At the same time, if the soil is one of those obviously dry, gritty or chalky ones, from which the minerals plants need as part of their food — potassium, magnesium, nitrogen, etc. — have been washed out by rain, mix in slow-release fertilizers.
Bonemeal is a good base which lasts several years, and can be spread at the rate of about 180–240 g per sq m(6–8 oz per sq yd ), and garden compost into which wood ashes have been mixed is particularly helpful on such soils.
Sowing and germination
For successful seed germination, it is absolutely essential that the soil surface is of a fine consistency.
All the best books advise that the texture should be like fine breadcrumbs, and this is literally the state it should be in.
Sowing seed amongst lumps of soil, even if they are only 6 mm (¼ in) in diameter, will not result in seedlings — the seed simply does not germinate, however much you water the soil and protect it from cold.
Once the soil has been dug, it should be broken up with a fork, hoe, back of a rake, by hand, with a hand fork, or whatever you find most convenient, until it reaches the stage at which raking it backwards and forwards, and then crossways, reduces it to the fine tilth described.
If you have the time to do it, tread the soil after the breaking-up stage but before raking it.
This will help the seedlings to get a better hold, and will make it evenly firm — this in turn results in even germination, without gaps.
Whether you then sow the seeds in rows, or in patches, or in "stations" — groups spaced several cm (in) apart — is up to you; in any case, some herbs do better sown in boxes or a seedbed, and then transplanted; others are better sown where they are to grow and then thinned.
Whatever you do, try to sow into moist soil, when rain is expected, and the temperature rising; put a thin covering over the seed, between 3 and 6 mm deep (again there are exceptions to this, noted in the descriptive list), firm it, and water every evening with a fine spray of water if there is no rain.
Get rid of weed seedlings before they become young plants, and thin the herb seedlings when they are large enough to handle to about 6 rum (t/4 in) spacing, and when they have filled this, to their final spacing.
A row about 100 cm (3 ft) long is ample for one family's needs for most herbs.
Some herb seeds germinate best soon after they ripen in summer, and should be sown towards the end of summer, though with packet seed this is not always possible.
However, a spring sowing of such seed will produce some plants, though the number will be fewer than from a summer sowing.
Herbs can be started from small plants; planting in spring is again the most convenient time.
If they came from a garden centre, take the container off each root-ball, cut any long, coiled-round roots off level with the soil-ball, and plant without otherwise disturbing in a hole sufficiently deep to ensure that the surface of the soil-ball is level with or a little below that of the surrounding soil.
If the plants are barerooted, spread the roots out in the hole, with the same proviso regarding the long ones, and then crumble soil in over them to fill the hole.
Make them firm in their place, and water them unless the soil is really wet, or heavy rain is imminent.
Space all of them appropriately for their final size, and put in stakes wherever support may be needed.
Routine maintenance
Once herbs are in place, and you have ensured a good start to their lives with properly prepared soil and the right planting technique, there is little more to do.
Weeds may get in the way early on and should be dealt with before they swamp your seedlings and small plants — the smaller they are when hoed off, the quicker and easier it is to do it.
Tie tall plants to their supports as they grow, and break off the tips of the main shoot of plants you want to be bushy, just above a leaf or pair of leaves, when they are a few cm (in) tall; basil, rosemary, hyssop, marjoram, mint, sage and savory are some of these.
Sideshoots can thus be treated as well.
Some shrubby herbs may need further pruning during the summer.
In very dry weather, and light soil, some of them will want watering, not just a watering-canful, but a prolonged sprinkling with a spray attachment from a hose for about half an hour.
Moisture loss can be prevented with a covering of compost on the soil surface (mulch), and by mixing compost in during the initial digging each spring.
Good garden compost will prevent the appearance of weeds in the first place, though badly-made material which has not heated up well will still have live weed seeds in it.
Pest and disease control is virtually unnecessary.
If plants have anything wrong with them it may have already been there when they were obtained, or it is a sign that they are not being grown in the right conditions.
Some plants are prone to a particular disease or pest:.
rust infects mint, greenfly infests parsley during drought, and slugs and snails will eat many seedlings.
Preparation for winter
In autumn when the plants have begun to die down naturally the perennials should have their flowered stems cut off at ground level, if not already done, and annuals should be dug up and put for compost.
The herb beds should be lightly dug over with a fork, weeded if necessary, and the invasive plants chopped back at the roots.
Old perennial herbs should also be dug up, and only the youngest parts, at the edge of the crown, replanted.
This dividing technique is a useful method of increase, and works well, provided each piece has some root and some dormant buds or young shoots.
Some herbs which are tender can be dug up and planted in containers during early-mid autumn, first cutting off their no-longer-wanted top growth.
New shoots will already be appearing at the base of many herbs, and marjoram and mints respond well to this treatment.
In particularly cold winters, when frost is prolonged or there are bitter north-east winds, some herbs will be killed; thyme, sage, rosemary, marjoram, tarragon and pineapple mint are examples.
Soil which is waterlogged for weeks at a time will make matters worse, and can even kill plants without their first being weakened by cold.
You can take cuttings in summer of this kind of herb and keep them protected through the winter, or shield the parent plants in some way, so that they are sheltered from the worst of the cold and wind.
Cloches, straw, plastic sheet, pads of wire netting with straw or bracken between them, sacking or conifer branches all provide shelter and will keep off the worst of the weather.
Herbs in containers
Herbs are one of the best groups of plants to grow in containers on the whole, as they mostly take very kindly to this form of cultivation.
Some are annuals or biennials, many are compact perennials or subshrubs; even the sweet bay, a tree, can be grown satisfactorily in a tub.
Some are even better for it the mints, horseradish and lemon balm are examples — otherwise they invade their neighbours and strangle them.
Container growing is convenient, too, in that herbs can be protected in winter, the containers can be put where most convenient or most suitable for the herbs, and they can be used for decorating otherwise austere sites such as paving, basement areas and concrete yards.
Container herbs outdoors
Troughs outside the kitchen can be filled with chives, marjoram, thyme and sage in one trough, and parsley, mints, borage, French sorrel and lemon balm in another, depending on space available.
The first one is a "hot" box, the second a moist, deep one, good in partial shade.
Formally clipped bay-trees trimmed into shapes as balls, pyramids or cones look superb outside front-doors or as eye-catchers on a terrace or patio; rosemary can serve the same purpose, and in a smaller way, so can rue, lavender, sage and cotton lavender.
Tubs suit the bigger specimens best; terracotta Provence pots and urns, the ones that are shatter-proof in frost, have a gorgeously warm look, and seem to be the natural home of this kind of shabby aromatic herb.
Corners of the garden which are awkward and difficult to plant decoratively because of their size and soil state, could be successfully filled with a container-grown herb or herbs, even changing the display as the seasons alter.
Marigolds, tansy, feverfew, golden marjoram and dill would all combine, in cultivation as well as colour; another mixture could be pinks, cotton lavender, blue rue, clary and borage.
For a cool shady corner which gets sun at some time during the day, comfrey, sorrel, costmary, alkanet and chervil would do well, and for perfume, the container could include Rosa damascena, pinks, mignonette, honeysuckle or jasmine, and wallflowers, herbs which release their fragrance into the air.
For those who live in flats or apartments and have no gardens, containers will be the only possible way to grow herbs, but concrete or paved basement areas, flat roofs, window-sills and balconies can be oases of green all year with containers full of herbs, whether they are pots, boxes, tubs, gro-bags, urns, hanging baskets or sinks.
The climbing plants are particularly effective and useful as they cover the vertical surfaces and make use of a third dimension.
Privacy can be ensured, and warmth collected, in the shelter they provide.
Types of containers
The display can be even more eye-catching if use is made of the wide choice of containers now available.
Anything goes, from redwood timber boxes and troughs, to highly sophisticated and decorated lead urns, cisterns and tanks.
Bowl-like concrete planters enhance such herbs as wallflowers, followed by chamomile, mignonette, cotton lavender, and dill or fennel for height.
Lead urns are elegant with trailing jasmine, catmint, rue and lavender; clay parsley pots could alternatively have small plants of feverfew pushed into all the openings, to flower all summer.
Expanded polystyrene pots and window-boxes, copper containers, space-age cylinders, stone urns and stone or wooden tubs, half barrels, sculptured terracotta clay from Italy and Provence, plastic and fibre-glass troughs — there is no end to the variety of size, shape, colour and texture for containers.
The formality of the container itself gives herbs the precision they need to make the most of their subtle colourings and aromas, and to display their foliage shapes at their best.
Container herbs indoors
Herbs can be grown indoors in the house, on suitable  window-sills, but they should receive as much light as possible, even those that like a little shade in the garden.
The reason for this is that a window provides light only on one side; the other three sides and the top consist of the walls of the room and its ceiling, and the loss of available light is considerable.
Only if the window is a sunny south-facing one should they be shaded a little during the middle of the day in summer when the sun is shining.
Space to grow plants will be in short supply indoors, but satisfactory quantities of culinary herbs can be grown; fragrance is possible, from mignonette, pinks and jasmine, and household or medicinal herbs of the smaller species could find a place, too: chamomile, hyssop, rue and vervain are examples.
Such herbs can be grown in containers right from the start, or they can be dug up from the garden.
If the latter, this should be done in late summer or early autumn, when the main summer growth has flowered and is beginning to wither, but new shoots are just appearing at the base of the plant.
The old growth should be cut right off, to ground level, and the plant dug up with the main mass of roots as intact as possible.
The long ones can be shortened to bring them into line, and broken ends tidied up by clean cutting.
Then put the whole root-ball into a container which will take it without cramping, and which already has compost in the base, then fill in with compost at the sides.
It should be watered well and allowed to drain, and then put into its place in the home, out of the sun for a day or two.
The new growth already appearing will lengthen quickly, and fresh leaves and shoots should be available for most of the winter.
Even if the plants die down in mid winter, they will sprout again in spring earlier than if they were planted outdoors.
One or two need to be kept on the cool side, otherwise they grow too fast and weaken themselves so badly that they die.
Composts and fertilizers for container herbs
Composts for herbs in containers do not have to be elaborate mixtures, and the prepacked soilless kinds whose bulk is peat and sand, or those containing loam such as the John Innes mixes, are excellent.
For those herbs which have an especial liking for dry, quick-draining root environments, extra coarse grit or even small shingle can be added, e. g., add I potful of grit to 8 similarly-sized potfuls of soil compost.
Soilless composts will do very well as they are, keeping them slightly on the dry side, but be very careful, as such composts take a long time to dry out but then do so completely with alarming rapidity, and are exceedingly difficult to wet through to the centre of the root-ball.
John Innes compost can be made at home, according to the following formula:
This provides John Innes potting compost No.1.
For successively larger and stronger-growing plants, use J.I. No. 2 or 3, which contains twice and three times as much respectively of chalk and fertilizer.
If the mix is to confirm to the J.I. formula, the loam should be sterilized.
Soilless composts can also be put together at home, as in general they consist of 75 per cent granulated peat and 25 per cent fine sand; the amount of plant food and chalk in the proprietary kinds varies from brand to brand, and you can add your own as required, though a good general mixture can be obtained by adding about 28 g (1 oz) general fertilizer and 28 g (1 oz) chalk to 1 bushel ⅛ gallons (36⅓ litres)(by bulk) of compost, mixing all the ingredients thoroughly.
Cultivation and care of container herbs
Planting in pots and other containers calls for simple though necessary techniques to get good results, and these vary a little depending on whether the container is clay (or stone), or plastic of some kind, and on which type of compost is being used.
For clay and similar materials (but not plastic containers), cover the drainage hole with a broken piece of clay pot, convex side upwards — broken brick, rubble or expanded polystyrene pieces will also do — and fill in a little compost over it.
Position the plant in the centre of the pot so that its crown is about 2 cm (1 in) below the pot rim (1 cm/½ in if the compost is soilless), spread the roots out if they do not already form a compact ball with the soil and, holding the plant with one hand, fill in compost with the other all round the roots until the pot is full.
Firm it down with the fingers well, if it is John Innes compost, but compress it only lightly if soilless.
Add a little more if necessary and tap the container on the working surface to shake the compost level, or use your hand lightly.
Water the plant well and keep warm and shaded for a day or two while it settles down.
If containers do not have any drainage outlets, cover the base with at least 1 cm (½ in) depth of drainage crocks, shingle, etc.
Plants that do not need repotting can be topdressed, that is, the top 2 or 3 cm (inch or so) of compost removed, to avoid injury to the roots, and replaced with new compost.
Plants being potted on — removed into larger containers — can be taken out of pots, by up-ending them, and knocking the rim on the working surface, at the same time putting the other hand under the plant across the compost surface so that the root-ball falls out on to the palm of the hand.
Large plants and containers make this impractical, and it is then a case of loosening the soil-ball at the sides with a stick pushed down against the inside wall of the container.
A well-watered plant is easier to shift, and will suffer less.
Water requirements
Gauging water requirements is less difficult now that moisture meters are available, but in the absence of one, water to fill the space at the top of the container between  compost surface and rim, let it soak through, repeat and allow the surplus to drain off, then leave the plant until the compost surface appears dry.
Be careful with soilless composts they have a nasty tendency to become bone-dry in the middle, while the surface remains moist and apparently well watered.
Their weight is a good guide to the water content, and if the plant seems to be demanding water constantly and wilting frequently, then a thorough soaking is probably necessary, in a bucket of water or with a sprinkler left on.
Dealing with pests
There is little to do to container-grown herbs during their growth any more than there is to their open-ground counterparts.
The removal of yellowing, withering or otherwise discoloured leaves keeps them looking their best; likewise faded flowers and flower stems.
Tying to supports and some pruning will be needed by the climbers, to keep them in the space provided, and occasional spraying for the odd pest might be necessary.
Greenfly and leafhopper are the most likely, usually when plants are not being watered enough, or are being starved, or grown in containers which are too small.
Caterpillars can be handpicked; whitefly dealt with by using bioresmethrin.
Red spider mite infestation is a bad sign, of poor cultivation and wrong conditions.
It is difficult to deal with, so start again with new plants and different care in a different site.
Scale insects can be handpicked, if found before they become an epidemic; follow hand removal with thorough washing down, and spraying with a soap solution.
Container herbs from soft cuttings
Apart from the method of division, herbs can be grown from cuttings, rooted in pots or boxes, and from seeds, usually sown in pans (shallow pots), or small seed-boxes.
Tip or soft cuttings taken in early midsummer are the easiest to root; they consist of the tip of new shoots which are still lengthening, and are 5–10 cm (2–4 in) long.
Each should be cut cleanly just below a leaf joint, and the lowest leaf or leaves removed completely, including the leaf stem if any.
Put the cutting into a plastic bag at once, to retain as much moisture as possible in the leaves, unless you can pot it immediately.
Use a proprietary cuttings compost, and fill a 9 cm (3½ in) pot to within 6 mm (½ in) of the rim, using drainage material, then put three or four cuttings spaced evenly round the side of the pot and, if there is room, one in the middle.
Put the cuttings in to half their length, and make sure they are fairly firm, and the base of the stem is in contact with the compost, and water them in lightly.
Put them in a propagator, or cover the pot with a plastic bag supported by split canes, and secured with a rubber band round the pot run, and keep warm, 18–27°C (65–80°F), and shaded.
Rooting will occur within one–three weeks in most cases.
Taking semi-hardwood and hardwood cuttings
Semi-hardwood cuttings are taken in mid to late summer, when the new season's shoots have begun to harden and turn woody and slightly brown on the outside.
Such cuttings should be between 5 and 15 cm (2–6 in) long, and can be the end of a main shoot or part of a sideshoot, the tip in each case being still green and soft.
They are prepared and potted in the same way as soft cuttings, but occasionally a variant is used if the plant is less easy to root.
In such a case, a sideshoot is always used and is literally torn off the parent stem so that a sliver or "heel" of bark and inner tissue is still attached to the cutting.
There is then more surface area from which roots can be produced.
When tip, semi-hardwood or heel cuttings have produced roots, they should be transferred to individual pots, about 5–9 cm (2–3½ in) diameter, depending on the amount of root growth, and potted in the normal way to grow into small plants.
They can then be planted outdoors or in containers, depending on the herb and its hardiness.
Hardwood cuttings are taken in autumn when the new shoots have become mostly hard and woody all along their length, except for the tip.
They should be between 23 and 30 cm (9–12 in) long, with the lower leaves removed, and then buried for up to between half and two-thirds their length in a sheltered bed or border, spaced about 15 cm (6in) apart.
Soil for rooting should be reasonably friable and well-drained, and free of weeds; a little coarse sand in the base of the hole will help in rooting.
Leave the rooted cuttings where they are until the following autumn and, if well-rooted, transplant to their permanent positions, otherwise leave until the following mid spring.
Container herbs from seeds
Seeds are similarly sown in a special seed compost; the John Innes seed compost consists of:
2 parts loam (by volume) preferably sterilized
1 part granular fed peat
1 part coarse sand to 1 bushel ⅛ gallons (36 ⅓ litres) of which mixture is added 21 g (¾ oz) chalk and 42 g (1½ oz) superphosphate.
The mixture should be put through a 6 mm (¼ in) mesh sieve.
Containers should be filled to within 1 cm (½ in) of the rim and firmed down evenly — this is important to ensure even germination.
Compost should be moist throughout.
Seed is sown thinly and regularly on the surface, and covered with a thin layer of fine compost, unless otherwise noted in the descriptive list of herbs (pages 44–113).
The container itself is then covered with black plastic sheet, or glass and brown paper, and put in a warm place, as with the cuttings.
The compost should be moistened if it begins to become dry and, when germination occurs, the covering should be removed at once, and the seedlings kept in good light, but out of scorching sunlight.
Thin them as they grow, and then transplant them (prick out) 5 cm (2 in) apart each way into boxes of potting compost, and finally plant them where they are to grow when they have filled the space available.
Tender herbs should be gradually accustomed to lower temperatures before planting outdoors, and in any case should not be subjected to frost.
Identifying herbs
Angelica
This is one of the most ancient of herbs.
Its modern use, in the form of candied stems as a cake decoration, is a pathetic remnant of its former important role in everyday life, when all parts had their uses.
Native to Northern Europe including Britain, it was used in association with pagan festivals and was considered a protection against the evils of witchcraft.
After Christianity was introduced, it acquired its name because it was likely to flower on or around May 8 in the old calendar, the feastday of Michael the Archangel.
In Scandinavia the root used to be eaten as bread, and the strongly flavoured seeds had all sorts of applications especially to alcoholic drinks.
It grows in temperate regions of North America.
The root is best dug for use in the first autumn after permanent planting.
Cultivation: Grow from fresh seeds newly ripe, sown thinly in late summer-autumn in moist, deep, fertile soil and sun or shade.
Transplant in spring or thin to 45cm (18in) apart, and plant in permanent site in autumn 90cm (3ft) apart.
Flowering may occur first in summer, but is more likely in the second one; if flowers removed before seed set, plant will continue to live.
Seed will self-sow.
Can also be sown in spring, but germination rate low, or increased from offsets.
USES
Culinary
candied stems for cakes and confectionery; seeds for flavouring a variety of drinks including vermouth, gin, Chartreuse and some white wines; leaves in stewed fruits and for flavouring cheese and cheese dishes, including cheesecake; should not be eaten by diabetics 
Medicinal
fresh leaf stems, seeds, of use in respiratory conditions such as colds, bronchitis and coughs; a stimulator of appetite and a digestive, not much used at present; dried root anti-flatulent 
Cosmetic
virtually none 
Domestic
virtually none 
Fragrance and Aroma
whole plant, particularly root, pleasantly aromatic; seeds strongly flavoured and oil of angelica extracted from them, sometimes used in perfumery and potpourri.
RECIPE
Candied angelica stems
Use young stems or leaf stalks; cut up into short lengths, simmer them little water until tender, then remove the tough outer skin, and simmer again until bright green.
Dry and weigh, use an equal weight of sugar, sprinkle this on to the stems in a shallow dish and leave for two days.
Then boil the mixture, drain, make more syrup in the same way and re-boil the stems for about 10 minutes.
Remove and spread out to dry on a rack in an airy place; if not thoroughly dry, it becomes mouldy later — then store in airtight containers between greaseproof paper.
Balm, Lemon
Balm used to be one of the most important herbs in the garden, as it is a strongly bee-orientated plant.
In fact, it was said that a plant of balm In the garden would ensure that the bees never left their hive to set up home elsewhere, and since sugar was highly priced in medieval days, honey carried a considerable premium.
A Middle-Eastern plant, balm is now naturalized in many cool temperate countries especially Europe and North America.
It grows into a bushy plant, with soft leaves which smell strongly of lemon when bruised, delightful if planted at the side of a path.
There is a yellow-leaved form, and a third with yellow-flecked leaves.
Melissa tea has calming and soothing effects, relieves tiredness and helps headaches.
Cultivation: Once in the garden balm will always be present unless determined efforts are made to eradicate it.
It will seed readily and spread, but established plants are not difficult to uproot.
The rounded leafy plants do best in fertile, moist soil with some sun and shade; in poor dry soil they become small and straggling.
Sow seed outdoors In spring, or divide the plants In spring, and allow 60cm (2ft) between plants.
The stems die down in autumn and the crown may need protection in hard winters.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves for summer and fruit cups, as tea and tisane, in jam, milk puddings, salad dressings, or as a substitute for grated lemon peel in a recipe 
Medicinal
fresh leaves, for headaches, calming nerves, inducing sleep, and easing insect bites 
Cosmetic
leaves to perfume soap.
and as an astringent for the skin 
Domestic
in furniture polishes, for strewing and in water for laundry 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves lemon scented, used in Potpourri
RECIPE
Mushroom salad
Mix apples, mushrooms and salt with celery and onion.
Place on a bed of lettuce, sprinkle cheese and a little chopped sweet red pepper over the top, and garnish with lemon balm leaves.
Basil, Sweet
India is the home of this strongly aromatic plant where it is perennial, and where its history of use stretches back many thousands of years, It is regarded as sacred by the Hindus and was much used for disinfecting where malaria was present In the house.
From there it spread through Asia Minor to Greece and Rome, and thence to northern Europe and North America.
A leafy bushy plant, much branched, Culpeper in the 17th century wrote of it as the "herb which all authors are together by the ears about, and rail at one another like lawyers" .
The strong and distinctive flavour of the leaves is certainly one which either makes enemies or gains lovers — there is no in-between.
Basil does not transplant well, so seed is sown one or two to a small pot, and then planted out complete, without disturbing the root-hall.
Sow seed in gentle heat early May and plant out early June.
Plenty of sun and well-drained soil are essential; water well at midday in dry weather, pinch out tips of shoots regularly to prevent flowering.
In containers sow in warmth In March and grow on in 15cm (6in) pots.
Seed should only just be covered, and will turn blue after sowing.
Cultivation
Besides the plain green form, there is a purple-leaved kind, "Dark Opal" , decorative for a patio, and others smelling of fennel, lemon, or tarragon.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves with tomatoes, mushrooms, egg dishes, sausages, stuffings, sauces, chicken, French dressing and many meat dishes 
Medicinal
fresh leaf mildly sedative, and of use for stomach-ache and sickness; antiseptic 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
repels flies; once used for strewing, so probably repels fleas as well 
Fragrance and Aroma
pungently aromatic, somewhat of cloves, still used in perfumery
RECIPES
Pesto
This classic Genovese sauce, made with fresh basil, is served with pasta and soups.
In southern France, where it is known as pistou , it is often an accompaniment to roast lamb.
Pound together the basil, garlic and pine kernels in a mortar or blender until you have a fine paste.
Add the grated cheese (which should be Parmesan alone or mixed with sardo or pecorino) and blend well.
Gradually add the oil stirring steadily until it is amalgamated and the sauce has the consistency of a creamed butter.
Made in larger  quantities pesto can be preserved in jars if it is tightly packed (no air pockets should remain) and covered with a layer of olive oil.
Seal and store in a cool place.
Bay, Sweet
The sweet bay is an evergreen shrub or shrubby tree from southern Europe and Asia Minor, whose leathery leaves are pungently aromatic and form the basis for much classic French cooking; bouquet garni has many variations, but a bay leaf is essential.
Venerated by the Greeks and Romans, educated to Apollo and formed into leafy crowns for poets and triumphant generals, sweet bay is the source of the term "bachelor" for academic honours, from the Roman bacca laureus, laurel berry.
The French term baccalaureate for examinations is an even more direct derivation.
Bay's chief scented; leaves used in potpourri use is in cooking, but it has some medical value also.
Bay trees are planted in spring, in a sunny, sheltered place, and average, preferably well-drained, soil.
Growth rate is slow, about 23cm (9in) a year; no particular care is needed, though any broken or dead shoots and branches should be removed at the end of winter; young plants will need protection in severe winters until well established.
They do well in tubs, and can be clipped formally into various shapes, such as ball, pyramid, cone and so on, doing this training in late summer.
Increase is by heel cuttings in early-midsummer under cover with a little bottom heat.
Cultivation
USES
Culinary
leaves used, fresh or dried, for many savoury dishes, especially meat, in marinades for flavouring and tenderizing, in stock, rice dishes, with blandly flavoured vegetables; half a leaf is sufficient for one dish 
Medicinal
leaves, berries and oil; for flatulence; burning leaves antiseptic; oil for sprains and bruises 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
for strewing and as a household insecticide; wood used for marquetry 
Fragrance and Aroma
whole plant strongly aromatic, and wood sweet-scented; leaves used in potpourri
RECIPES
Soused herrings
Clean the fish and remove any roes and the backbone from each.
Season each half with salt and freshly-ground black pepper, put a quarter of a bay leaf on each and roll up tightly.
Pack into a shallow ovenproof dish, and cover with vinegar and water.
Cover with kitchen foil.
Bake at 350°F/180°C/Gas Mark 4 for ¾–1 hour.
Serve cold with the remaining liquid.
Serve with wedges of lemon and thin brown bread and butter.
Bergamot
American herbs such as this one have a history associated with the original Indian inhabitants of the North American continent including Canada, and it was Oswego Indians in particular who used the leaves as the beverage which gives it one of its common names.
Flavour is reminiscent of fragrant China tea, making it a most acceptable afternoon drink, but it also has some medicinal use.
The whole plant smells pleasantly of the bergamot orange, Citrus bergamia, from Spain, whose essential oil is part of the recipe for Eau de Cologne.
Bergamot is a highly decorative garden plant, and a favourite with bees; besides the species, there are varieties with rose-pink, purple, or salmon-pink flowers.
A handsome perennial for the herbaceous border, bergamot can be planted in autumn or spring, preferably in sun and a well-drained but moist soil — a sandy one with plenty of rotted organic matter added just before planting and in spring annually is ideal.
Allow 45cm (18in) between plants, and expect them to be slow to establish.
 "Croftway Pink" and "Cambridge Scarlet" are two good varieties.
Increase is by division in spring, and seed sown at the same time can be used for the species.
Bergamot is a good cut flower, and will supply stems all summer.
Cultivation
Borage
Its chief virtue lies in its medicinal qualities which were thought considerable; even now it has some use in the treatment of ailments.
Borage has star-shaped flowers of an intense blue rarely seen in other plants and these, together with its long-flowering tendency, ease of cultivation, and hardiness, make it one of the best garden plants.
Popular with bees, it is native of Europe including Britain and grows in temperate and warm regions of North America.
Pliny named the plant Euphorosinum because it was thought to bring happiness and joy, and the Greeks and Romans both regarded it as not only a comforting plant, but also a supplier of courage.
This belief persisted down the centuries so that by Gerard's time, he was still able to quote the tag: "Ego Borage gaudia semper ago" (I Borage, bring always courage).
It was even said to be the Nepenthe described by Homer which, when taken with wine, brought absolute forgetfulness.
Cultivation
Cultivation is easy; sow the seeds thinly outdoors in spring, preferably in a sandy soil and a sunny position; it will however, grow in shade and moist soil.
Allow 23–30 cm (9–12 in) between plants.
It will self-sow during the season, and such plants may still be flowering in November in mild autumns and sheltered gardens.
BURNET, SALAD
There are two burnets grown for herbal use: great burnet, Sanguisorba officinalis, and this one, formerly called S. minor, or lessor burnet.
Both have the same medicinal properties, but salad burnet has been much used in salads, from the days of the Elizabethans.
Salad burnet is a European plant, native to Britain where it grows on chalky soil amongst grass, such as the downlands of the south.
It can be grown in all parts of the United States.
The graceful ferny leaves make it an attractive, low-growing plant for edgings to borders in herb-gardens or beds in mixed plantings; it is virtually evergreen.
The cucumber flavour of the leaves is similar to borage, but with a slightly nutty overtone.
As salad burnet is a wild European plant it us easily grown there, or in any temperate climate where the soil is chalky and well-drained.
A sheltered sunny position suits it best, and it can be down or planted outdoors in spring, and spaced 15–23cm (6–9in) apart.
Remove the flowerheads for better leaf production unless seed is wanted.
However, it can also be easily increased by division in autumn.
The leaves will linger well into the winter, and sprout very early in spring.
Cultivation
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves in salads, sauces, summer wine punches, fruit cups, soups added as a garnish at the last minute.
Medicinal
fresh leaf, whole plant fresh or dried, dried root; fresh leaves help digestion, decoction of the roots to stop bleeding.
Cosmetic
use infusion the leaves for cooling sunburn 
Domestic
none Fragrance and aroma none
PRESCRIPTION
Burnet compress (for the relief of sunburn)
Slightly bruise the leaves, add the boiling water, cover the bowl and allow to stand for about 10 minutes.
Strain and cool.
To use, soak gauze dressing in the infusion and apply to the affected parts as often as required until relief is felt.
CARAWAY
Caraway seed cake was one of the staples of the Victorian teatable; you either adored or hated the taste of the little black seeds.
Nowadays caraway has a much more extensive use in cooking, being mixed with savoury as well as sweet dishes, and the strong and distinctive flavour can almost be considered a spice.
The plant is not particularly decorative; it is native of southern Europe, and Asia to India and grows in temperate to warm regions in North America.
Caraway is one of the most ancient of herbs, and it was valued by the Arabs and Egyptians of 5,000 years ago, who called it Karawya.
It is still an everyday ingredient of Middle Eastern cookery, and also finds favour in Continental dishes.
It is frequently added to sauerkraut and Kummel, the German liqueur, contains its oil, along with cumin; in Britain, during the Middle Ages and Tudor times, baked fruit was flavoured with the ubiquitous seeds.
Cultivation
Easily grown, caraway should be sown outdoors in early autumn when ripe, in sun or a little shade, and any reasonable soil.
Thin to about 20cm (8in), and keep free of weeds.
Harvest the seeds in July-August by cutting the seedheads just before the first seeds start to fall, and hanging them over a tray in a dry airy place.
USES
Culinary
seeds in bread, cheeses, stewed fruits, cakes, biscuits, with pork, goulash and other fatty meats, fresh leaves in salads, soups and with mild cheeses, roots boiled as vegetable 
Medicinal
fresh leaves, roots, seeds have digestive properties 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
none 
Fragrance and Aroma
seeds and leaves when bruised
RECIPE
Cheese and caraway potatoes
Scrub but do not peel the potatoes and cut them in half lengthwise.
Wrap in a boat of greased foil and sprinkle each half with some grated cheese and a little caraway.
Preheat the oven to 180 C/350 F/Gas Mark 4 and cook for 30–45 minutes or until the potatoes are soft.
CATMINT
The blue-flowered garden species of this genus (N. x faassenii), also called catmint, is highly decorative, with its grey leaves and long-lasting flower spikes, but N. cataria is the true herb, of little known but considerable medical use, for which it has a long history, back to Gerard's day and earlier, though it is not so used nowadays.
There is good reason for its common name; the bruised foliage, whose odour has mint-like associations, induces cats to roll all over the plant, eventually ruining it, but it is said that plants grown from seed will be safe until dying down, or withering for some reason.
Plants grown from divisions or cuttings have little chance of survival after planting, unless rigorously defended from the local feline population.
Catmint is native to Asia, Europe including Britain, mainly the south, and is grown in cool, temperate regions in North America.
Seed can be sown in late summer or spring, in dryish soil tending to alkaline, though it must be potentially fertile, and sun or a little shade; division in spring is also possible.
Distance apart is about 40cm (20in).
The grey leaves and white flowers combine to produce a pretty, easily grown border plant, beloved by bees.
The garden hybrid N. x faassenii, has long spikes of light lavender-coloured flowers, with a second flowering in autumn, if the faded spikes are removed immediately after flowering.
Cultivation
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves in moderation to flavour sauce 
Medicinal
flowering tops fresh or dried for colds, catarrh, bronchitis; as a soothing drink for sleeplessness, stress and irritability 
Cosmetic
for hair care, helps it to grow 
Domestic
repellent for rats 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly aromatic when bruised, considered unpleasantly so by some people
HOUSEHOLD USE
Stuffing for toy mice
Dry the leaves first, and break them up into small pieces.
Stuff toy mice made out of rabbit fur, for kittens and for elderly cats in need of exercise.
Use as a strewing herb if rats are suspected anywhere, grow in the garden for a similar reason, and put bunches into hen and duck houses to discourage rats from there also.
CHAMOMILE
The true or Roman chamomile is pleasantly aromatic, with a distinct odour of applies, and this explains its common name — it is derived from the Greeks who named it "ground-apple" from kamai, on the ground, and melon, apple.
The name of the Spanish sherry Manzinilla means "little apple" , and it is flavoured with this plant.
Low-growing, almost mat-like, with white daisy flowers in summer, chamomile dates back to at least the time of the ancient Egyptians who are said to have used it for curing ague.
It is illustrated in an English manuscript of the 13th century, was used in the time of Gerard, and later by Culpeper, and altogether was so well-known and commonly used medicinally, that it was thought "but lost time and labour to describe it" .
It is a native of southern Europe and grows in temperate to warm regions in North America.
The wild chamomile, which is sometimes confused with it, is Matricaria recutita, or scented mayweed, an annual native to Europe including Britain.
Both chamomiles are cultivated mainly for their medicinal properties, and Roman chamomile has a further use as a grass substitute for lawns.
Cultivation
The double-flowered form is the one generally cultivated because it is preferred for medical use, and is grown from division of runners, taken and planted in early spring; seedlings produce a large number of single-flowered forms.
Fertile, moist soil and sun are necessary, and spacing should be 23cm (9in) each way, unless it is to be used for lawns, when spacing should be 15cm (6in).
For such use, the non-flowering variety "Treneague" is to be preferred, and can be grown in a little shade.
Young plants should be kept free of weeds.
Chamomile makes a good lawn, provided it does not have too much traffic on it, but should be used for small areas, as it needs constant attention to keep weeds at bay, but it will have the advantage of remaining green in dry conditions.
USES
Culinary
none 
Medicinal
dried flowers as tisane for flatulence, dyspepsia and other stomach troubles; as a mild sedative; powerful antiseptic, tonic for poor appetite 
Cosmetic
dried flowers for lightening blonde hair; skin cleanser; softening rough skin 
Domestic
as a dye, orange or green-brown (Anthemis tinctoria, dyer's chamomile), to prevent fungus diseases on plants, activator for compost heaps 
Fragrance and Aroma
whole plant apple-scented
PRESCRIPTION
Chamomile tea
Chamomile's highly scented dried flowerheads contain up to one per cent of an aromatic oil which possesses powerfully antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties of the herb.
Taken as tea (25g/1oz/ ¾ cup to 600ml/1 pint/2½ cups boiling water) it promotes gastric secretions and improves the appetite, while an infusion of the same strength can be used as an internal antiseptic douche, a gargle for mouth ulcers, or an external compress for skin rashes or allergies.
Chamomile oil (for allergic skin rashes)
A chamomile oil can be made by tightly packing the flowerheads into a preserving jar, covering with olive oil, and leaving in the sun for 3 weeks.
After decanting, the oil can be employed in skin preparations by those prone to allergic rashes.
CHERVIL
Chervil is an easily grown herb which has a short life-cycle of one season.
Although a native of such areas as the Middle East and the Caucasus, it is largely used only in French cooking.
This is a pity as its delicate, lacy leaves have an unusual flavour, which helps to lift recipes out of the everyday routine.
Almost certainly brought to Britain by the Romans, it is now occasionally found growing wild, and can easily be confused with cow parsley when the latter is young.
However, cow parsley is perennial and eventually grows much taller and stouter, with large leaves lacking the sweet distinctive aroma of chervil.
Cultivation
Chervil grows quickly, provided it has moist soil ad a slightly shady place.
It does not like a hot dry position and in such a place, seeds will not germinate until heavy rain occurs.
Basically, chervil requires moist, cloudy weather, so that a typical English summer suits it well.
Sow the seed in early to mid-spring, or late summer, preferably the latter as viability falls rapidly, outdoors where they are to grow — chervil does not do well if transplanted.
Thin the seedlings to 23cm (9in) apart, and thereafter keep free of weeks, and water well in dry weather.
Leaves can be collected from six weeks after germination, and thereafter continuously, provided the flowering stems are removed.
The late summer sowings will provide leaves through the winter, as it very hardy.
It does well in a container, preferably a window-box, in which it is the only herb, sowing half in spring and half in late summer to provide a succession of leaves.
USES
Culinary
chopped leaves best added fresh, in large quantities just before serving, as the light flavour is quickly lost, add to soups, particularly sorrel or spinach; all egg dishes salads; Bechamel sauce; ingredient in fines herbes; sprinkle over roast meats, or make herb butter to rub over poultry 
Medicinal
little use; fresh leaf may be applied to aching joints in a warm poultice 
Cosmetic
fresh leaves can be infused to make a skin cleanser 
Domestic
virtually no use 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves aromatic, mixture of aniseed and liquorice, fleeting after cutting; root similar aroma
RECIPE
Glazed baby carrots with chervil
Remove the green tops from the carrots and scrape them.
Put them in a saucepan of salted boiling water and cook for about 8 minutes (they should still be slightly firm.)
Drain and set aside.
In a clean saucepan, melt the butter and sugar over a gentle heat.
Add the carrots and turn them frequently to coat them with the pale glaze.
Cook gently for a further 10 minutes, turning the carrots all the time.
Add the salt and pepper and sprinkle with the chervil.
CHIVES
Chives are amongst the most well-known of culinary herbs, and their delicate onion flavour has been added to food where the stronger onion would overwhelm everything else, for hundreds of years.
The grass-like leaves grow in clumps, and can be picked outdoors fresh from February to November, longer if given protection.
Although rarely found in the wild now, this native of Europe including Britain, was sometimes also known in the Middle Ages as "rush-leek" from the Greek schoinos, rush and prason, leek.
It thrives in temperate and warm to hot regions of North America.
Cultivation
Chives need a light, but moist well-drained soil and sun, or a little shade.
Clumps can be divided and sown in April or late August, and thinned.
Removal of the flower-stems before flowering increases leaf production, but the flowers are pretty, and leaves are always present, even if fewer.
The plants provide surprisingly ornamental edgings to beds and borders, and also grow well in pots which enable them to be protected, and thereby extend the season both early and late.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves, chopped in salads, sandwiches, sprinkled on soups, savoury toasts, omelettes and other egg dishes, with cheeses 
Medicinal
little, but leaves are mildly antiseptic, have some tonic effect and can relieve rheumatism 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
said to prevent scab infection on apples 
Fragrance and Aroma
aromatic of onions
RECIPE
Chive butter
Can be used in scrambled eggs and omelettes, on cooked vegetables and with grilled lamb, beef or fish.
Cream the chives and soften butter together until they are well mixed.
Beat in the lemon juice and add salt and pepper to taste.
Cover and cool the butter in the refrigerator until ready to use.
It will keep for several days in the refrigerator.
CLARY
The genus Salvia is a large one, containing a variety of plant types and including species from temperate and subtropical parts of the world.
Sage is one of the species, and there are blue and red-flowered varieties of salvia which are grown purely for garden ornament.
Clary was once thought to have great medicinal value, especially for the eyes — clary is a derivation of clear-eye — but now is mainly grown for decoration.
The clary listed in seed catalogues is S. horminum, an annual with large bracts, petal-like, purple, rose-pink, white or blue.
In the 16th century it was used in the brewing of beer and ale, which resulted in their being more potent.
William Turner, a botanist of the time remarked that "it restores natural heat, and comforts the vital spirits, and helps the memory, and quickens the senses" .
Clary leaves were used to make fritters, mixing lemon-peel, nutmeg and brandy into the batter!
Cultivation
Clary is easily grown from seed sown in spring, and thinned to about 23cm (9in) apart each way.
Most soils and sites will suit it, and it should be kept free of weeds while establishing.
Flowering stems will be produced in the second year, and thereafter it will self-sow.
The leaves are at their best in spring.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves used in fritters, home-made wine and beer, omelettes, soup, salads 
Medicinal
seed to make eye lotion, infused leaves as gargle, antiseptic skin wash, and to treat vomiting 
Cosmetic
not generally used 
Domestic
not generally used 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly aromatic reminiscent of balsam, slightly bitter-tasting, essential oil (clary oil, muscatel sage), used as a perfume fixative, for which it is mainly commercially grown nowadays.
PRESCRIPTION
Clary eye lotion (to remove grit from the eyes)
Soak about 6 clary seeds in clean warm water, previously boiled.
Leave the seeds to swell until they are mucilaginous.
Then carefully introduce these into the corner of the eye on a cotton bud.
Particles of grit will adhere to the mucilage and make grit easy to remove
Clary compress (for boils)
Steep 50g/2oz of dried clary leaves in 600ml/1 pint/2½ cups of vinegar for 2 weeks.
Apply as a compress for the treatment of boils.
COMFREY
Comfrey is one of the herbs that seem to have been a remedy for all ills, and one that the mediaeval and Elizabethan physicians and herbalists would never be without.
Its common name points to its apparently miraculous healing powers and, though it does not literally cause the ends of broken bones to weld together again, it will certainly hold them securely together and in contact, if the pounded root is bound round a break — the mixture will set when dry.
Moreover, the roots or leaves used as fomentations are of considerable use when applied to sprains, swellings, and bruises, and as a poultice to cuts, boils and abscesses.
Comfrey is a native of Europe including Britain, and Asia, preferring damp situations.
It also grows in temperate to warm regions of North America.
S. x uplandicum is the Russian comfrey, a hybrid between S. officinale and S. asperum, with rose-pink to blue flowers, and the garden variety of this, Bocking No. 14, is the most useful for garden plants, as it is a good mulch and supplier of liquid plant food and contains a high proportion of potash.
It contains considerable protein also, about 35 per cent, but only for animal consumption.
Cultivation
Comfrey should be grown from divisions taken in spring or autumn or from pieces of root with a bud attached.
Spacing is 60cm (2ft) each way, and sun or shade are acceptable.
Soil should be deep and moist.
Site should be chosen carefully, as it is difficult to get all the deeply penetrating root out, should this be necessary, and any left will produce fresh plants.
Comfrey will live at least 20 years, and is decorative enough to grow in the garden, as well as being extremely useful in plant nutrition.
RECIPE
Comfrey cleansing oil (for dry skins)
As well as cleansing the skin, comfrey oil also reduces puffiness, and softens and conditions the skin.
Add as many comfrey leaves as possible to 300ml/½ pint/1¼ cups of almond oil in a jar.
Seal the jar and leave to steep in a warm place for 2–3 weeks, shaking the jar regularly.
Finally, strain the oil discarding the leaves and apply to the face on cotton wool pads.
USES
Culinary
young leaves as alternative to spinach; blanched stems one used like celery 
Medicinal
considerable, as described left 
Cosmetic
leaves and roots for healing and soothing in skin care 
Domestic
as dye, use fresh leaves, stalks and flowers to provide yellow or orange depending on mordant 
Fragrance and Aroma
none 
CORIANDER
A culinary herb, whose seed and leaves are the main parts used, coriander is one of the ingredients of curry powder and hence found in many Indian recipes.
The seeds are distinctively spicy, profusely produced by the plant, and combine well with cumin and other spices to produce the flavours in much Middle-Eastern and South-east Asian food; curiously, when fresh the seeds smell of bed-bugs, but as they mature, smell very pleasantly of oranges.
Coriander is indigenous to southern Europe and is naturalized in southern Britain, but it is a widely-used herb, being part of the cooking of Egypt, India, North Africa, North America, Peru (along with chillis), China and Northern Europe.
It was much used in mediaeval times in Britain and, indeed, its use can be traced back for 3,000 years.
Cultivation
Coriander seed is sown outdoors in sun and a light, well-drained soil in April-May, and thinned to about 20cm (8in) apart.
It grows quickly to about 60cm (2ft) tall, flowers profusely, and sets seed without any difficulty.
Watch the seed carefully, as it ripens suddenly and will fall without warning; alternatively cut the flower stems just as the smell of the seeds start to change and become pleasant, and hang to finish ripening in paper bags.
USES
Culinary
seeds for flavouring a variety of dishes where spicy flavour is required, used whole or as a freshly-made powder, fresh leaves used in the same way, especially with Indian recipes, with salads, marinades, rice, and with bread 
Medicinal
as digestive for colic, griping and flatulence 
Cosmetic
not generally used 
Domestic
not generally used 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly and unpleasantly aromatic, seeds used in potpourris
RECIPE
Thai coriander and garlic marinade
This marinade adds an exotic flavour to pork chops or steak.
A whole piece of loin of pork or beef fillet can be seasoned in the same way and roasted in the oven.
Pound the garlic, coriander seeds and black pepper in a mortar so that they form a paste.
Add the soy and fish sauce (if fish sauce is not available, use another tablespoon of soy sauce) and mix well.
Spoon over the meat and leave to marinate for at least two hours, preferably overnight.
Grill or roast the meat in the usual way, basting it with the marinade.
COSTMARY
Only a hundred years ago, costmary could be found in almost any cottage garden, in fact in most gardens throughout Britain.
Now it is rarely seen, though the present herb revival is ensuring that it is once more being propagated and distributed.
It had considerable domestic use, and its alternative common name gives the clue to its culinary use.
A native of southern Europe and western Asia, costmary is now naturalized in Europe and North America, being introduced when it was detailed as an ingredient in cookery books of the time.
Culpeper wrote of it"it is so frequently known to be an inhabitant in almost every garden that it is needless to write a description thereof.
In colonial times in North America, the leaf was often used as a bookmark in bibles and prayerbooks and so acquires the nickname "Bible leaf." 
It grows into a tall plant, with a large rosette of basal leaves, and is pleasantly aromatic, with a balsam-like odour.
Cultivation
Allow plenty of space for costmary as its roots spread widely, and it will grow at least 90cm (3ft) tall.
Sun is necessary for flowers, and most soils will suit; it does well in dry conditions.
Plant in spring or autumn from divisions, 60cm (2ft) apart; the stems will probably need some support.
USES
Culinary
once used in preparation of beer and ale in place of hops, can be used now in salads, sauces and soups, but in small quantities 
Medicinal
not so used 
Cosmetic
use infused leaves in water for washing or bathing, ad for hairwashing 
Domestic
as insect repellent, use dried leaves, alone or mixed with other herbs 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves strongly aromatic, used dried in potpourri
HOUSEHOLD USE
Costmary rinsing water (to perfume household linen)
Put the costmary leaves in a bowl, add the boiling water, cover and leave to infuse for at least 2 hours.
Strain and add to the rinsing water when laundering sheets and other household linen.
COTTON LAVENDER
A strongly aromatic, somewhat bitter-tasting plant, cotton lavender is not a lavender at all, but a member of the daisy family.
Its main use was in medicine, but it also had some domestic application, and was a regular part of mediaeval life in Britain.
The southern Mediterranean region is its home, and it was used for many centuries by the Arabs.
It grows well in warm to hot regions of North America.
Cotton lavender is a decorative garden plant for the silver or grey border and traditionally was one of the plants chosen for edging the geometrical beds of the Elizabethan knot gardens.
Cultivation
Cotton lavender needs a dry sunny situation in light soil to ensure that it ripens fully and is thus better able to withstand cold.
Moist heavy soil is not suitable, and likely to cause its death, especially in severe cold.
Plant in late spring, and clip in mid-spring if required to be grown formally as edging, or to keep it within the space available.
Remove flowering stems to maintain dense leafy growth.
Increase is from short, semi-hardwood cuttings with a heel, early to midsummer, put into a sandy compost and covered.
USES
Culinary
none 
Medicinal
occasionally as a vermifuge, its traditional use 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
to repel household insects, as a strewing herb beneath carpets, and in linen and clothing 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves and stems strongly aromatic; oil for perfumery is extracted from it
HOUSEHOLD USE
Cotton lavender sweetbag (against moths)
Use crushed cotton lavender leaves, dried, as part of a mixture to prevent moths invading clothes and linen.
Mix them with equal parts crushed dried rosemary leaves and rue, together with ½ part powdered cloves or 1 part dried lavender flower spikes.
Make up into sachets with ribbon to hang amongst clothes or slip between blankets, sheets and so on.
DANDELION
If the dandelion was a rare plant, it would be thought a highly desirable garden species, since the flowers are large and brilliantly yellow.
But it is depressingly abandoned in its ability to increase, and difficult to uproot, so finds no favour with gardeners.
However, it has considerable medicinal applications, and various culinary uses which are becoming more and more popular.
Dandelions are natives of Europe and Asia, and botanically they form a difficult and much varied group with many microspecies, but for the herbalist's purposes, these are of no moment.
Its common name is derived from the French dent de lion, lion's-tooth, possibly from the shape of the leaves of the plant.
In Culpeper's time, it was apparently "vulgarly called" Piss-a-beds", a reference no doubt to its diuretic qualities, and preserved in its French name pissenlit.
Cultivation
Details on how to grow dandelions are generally superfluous; the real need is usually to know how to eradicate them.
The root is least tenacious in early spring and easiest to dig up completely, and if removed at this time, will prevent the further problem of spreading by seed later in the season.
Sections of the root can be used for increase, and any piece of the taproot left behind will sprout again.
USES
Culinary
root dried, roasted and ground as coffee substitute, young leaves in salads, sandwiches, or chopped up for mixing with soups and vegetables, blanching the leaves will result in a sweeter flavour, leaves and flowers to make wine; the leaves for dandelion stout 
Medicinal
all parts of considerable use in liver troubles, a good diuretic and tonic, also mild laxative; juice said to be effective in treating warts 
Cosmetic
not for general use 
Domestic
a dye from the root, magenta with alum, yellow to brown with iron; domestic rabbits can be fed with fresh leaves 
Fragrance and Aroma
somewhat unpleasantly bitter aroma when injured
RECIPE
Dandelion and bacon salad
Wash and dry the leaves and tear them into a salad bowl.
Make a vinaigrette using olive oil and vinegar, and season to taste, adding a little sugar if desired.
Fry the bacon, crushed garlic and bread in oil until golden brown.
Pour the contents of the pan over the leaves and turn the leaves so they are thoroughly coated.
Add the vinaigrette, toss again and serve soon after making.
DILL
Although this herb has its origin in Southern Europe and western Asia, its common name is said to derive either from the Anglo-Saxon dylle or the old Norse dilla which meant to soothe or lull, in reference to its use in calming infants who had hiccups — in fact Culpeper said "it stayeth the hiccough." 
Dill-water or gripe-water is, at any rate, several hundred years old in usage, and is still called upon today.
It was found amongst the names of herbs used by Egyptian doctors 5,000 years ago and remains of the plant have been found in the ruins of Roman buildings in Britain.
Use was widespread in northern Europe in the Middle Ages, and the seeds and leaves are especially popular today in Norwegian and Swedish recipes.
The feathery leaves and bright yellow flowers are worth growing for their decorativeness alone and, being an annual, they soon pay for their place.
Cultivation
Dill is grown from the flat oval seeds sown outdoors from April–early June, in well-drained, poor soil and full sun.
It should be sown where it is to grow, as it transplants badly, and thinned to 23cm (9in) each way.
If grown close to fennel, they will cross-pollinate freely, and the resultant seeds will be hybrids between the two.
In good hot summers, dill will grow rampantly and strongly, but may need support if there is much wind.
Self-sowing is likely; seeds should be collected on their stems just before they are ripe enough to drop, and placed in paper bags hung in a warm dry airy place.
Watch for greenfly in crowded conditions.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves, chopped and used for garnish, and sauces, in fish dishes, yoghurt, cream; seeds for vinegars, with pickles, cucumbers, cakes and pastry.
Medicinal
oil of dill to make dill water for infantile flatulence; seeds have sedative effect and stave off hunger 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
none 
Fragrance and Aroma
reminiscent of caraway, with an additional odour, whole plant, particularly the seeds, used in perfumery
RECIPE
Pickled salmon
This traditional Scandinavian dish, known as gravad lax, can be made with either fresh or frozen salmon.
Mix all the pickling ingredients and put some of the mixture into a flat dish.
Put one piece of salmon skinside down and spread more of the mixture over the cut side.
Now put the second piece of salmon cutside down and spread the remaining mixture on top, rubbing it well into the skin.
Cover the salmon with kitchen foil and press the salmon down with a weighted board or a couple of heavy cans.
Leave in a cool place for at least 12 hours or up to 5 days.
When ready to serve slice the salmon thinly an serve with buttered rye bread.
A mustard and dill mayonnaise is usually served with this dish.
ELDER
The elder or elderberry is a very old herbal plant indeed, with hundreds of uses.
It is a native of Europe, western Asia and North Africa, and its wide distribution throughout the hedgerows of Europe and general usefulness have resulted in its gathering a vast quantity of legends, magical beliefs and superstitions.
Planting it outside the backdoor was a sure way of keeping witches out of the house, and it was thought never to be struck by lightning; cutting it brought bad luck, and traditionally it was the wood the Cross of Calvary.
Pipes can be made from the branches for music, possibly the origin of the Pan-pipes, and throughout Europe it was an important and much used plant until the present day.
American elder (Sambucus canadensis) is a closely related species and was widely used by American Indians as a folk medicine.
Cultivation
The elder grows very rapidly indeed, and self-sows freely, to produce new shoots 120cm (4ft) long in one season; it will flower within three years from seed and often sooner.
Hardwood cuttings put outdoors in autumn are another method of increase.
Sun or shade and most soils are suitable, though it will flower best in sun, and has a preference for moist soil.
It is not a particularly decorative plant, even in flower, but there is a golden-leaved garden form, S. n.
 "Aurea" , which makes a good splash through spring and summer.
USES
Culinary
flowers, for tea or tisane, fritters, added to jam, jellies, milk puddings and tart fruits, used for elderflower wine and champagne; fruit for wine, elderberry wine, jam, jelly, substitute for capers, for chutney and the juice to flavour vinegar 
Medicinal
flowers,(fresh and dried), fruit, leaves (fresh and dried), bark and root, for emetics; a tea made with equal parts of peppermint leaf, yarrow and elder flowers plus boiling water is one of the finest cures available for colds, coughs and catarrh; of value for rheumatism, sciatica, and cystitis 
Cosmetic
elderflower water for whitening and softening the skin; to remove freckles, for tonic facepacks, and eye lotions 
Domestic
a fly repellent; gives a lavender or violet-dye with alum 
Fragrance and Aroma
flowers fragrant, leaves strongly aromatic when bruised
PRESCRIPTION
Elderberry conserve (for neuralgias and migraine)
To make the conserve, boil the elder fruit (the berries) with the least quantity of water to produce a pulp.
Pass through a sieve and simmer the juice gently to remove most of the water.
Add the white sugar, and stir constantly until the consistency of a conserve is produced.
Pour into a suitable clean glass container.
Take 2 teaspoons as required.
FENNEL
A full-grown plant of fennel makes a delightfully feathery green addition to a herbaceous border, lightening other, heavier and denser blocks of foliage; there is a form with bronze leaves to provide an agreeable addition to a red border or amongst silvery-leaved plants.
It is a native of the Mediterranean region, especially near the sea.
As with most herbs, it was used by canny and resourceful Romans and Greeks for medicinal and culinary purposes.
It was illustrated in a 15th century manuscript, and Gerard referred to it as being useful for preserving the eyesight; Culpeper advised its use for those "that are bit with serpents or have eat…mushrooms" .
It was thought in mediaeval times to have magic associations and was hung over doors on Midsummer's Eve to ward off evil spirits.
Through all the beliefs and countries which used it runs the thread of its curative effect on the eyes, and ability to strengthen the sight.
The seeds chewed prevent a feeling of hunger, so would appear to be an excellent weight-reducer.
Cultivation
Fennel can be grown from seed sown in spring where it is to remain.
Seedlings should be thinned to 45cm (18in) spacing.
If need be, established plants can be divided, and the divisions planted, also in spring.
It should not be grown near to dill, otherwise the two will cross-fertilize, to produce seed which is neither one nor the other.
Well-drained soil and a sunny sheltered place are important.
Florence fennel (finocchio) is the vegetable fennel with a bulbous base to the main stem.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaf with fish dishes, salad, and salad dressings, yoghurt and fat meats; seeds may also be used; root and stems eaten as a vegetable 
Medicinal
dried seeds and fresh or dried leaf, used for flatulence, in gripe waters, has some diuretic effect 
Cosmetic
a decoction of the leaves for eye strain; infusion of the leaves for inflamed eyelids, as part of a facepack to smooth and soften skin 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
all parts strongly aromatic, especially the leaves and seeds, a mixture of aniseed and a distinctive aroma of its own
RECIPE
Grilled trout with fennel
Fennel leaves add distinction to any fish dish and salmon, mackerel or red mullet can be substituted for trout in this recipe.
Clean the fish if this has not already been done, and open them out flat.
Sprinkle the inside with chopped fennel, close them up and brush them with melted butter.
Lay sprigs of fresh fennel on foil on the grill rack, and put the trout on top, sprinkle them with chopped fennel.
Grill each side for about 4–5 minutes, and serve with a green salad, dry white wine and French bread.
FENUGREEK
One of the oldest fodder herbs know, fenugreek has been used to feed cattle round the countries bordering the Mediterranean for thousands of years.
In fact, the specific name is the Latin for Greek hay, and as the flavour is popular with livestock, it is often added to encourage the eating of unfamiliar foods.
It is not unlike lucerne, also a fodder crop, and used similarly, mainly in veterinary medicine rather than human medicine.
However, it is still used in cooking, as a spice and a flavouring, especially the seeds, by the Indians and Egyptians.
It has also been found to be a source of one of the major ingredients of the contraceptive pill.
Cultivation
Fenugreek is a native of southern Europe and Asia, so is grown commercially in Morocco, India, Egypt and elsewhere in Africa.
It is quite hardy and must be sown under cover, with warmth, in March in Britain and North America or sown outdoors in May with protection.
Spacing should be about 23cm (9in), and it needs plenty of sun and well-drained but fertile soil.
In favourable summers a good crop of seed is set.
USES
Culinary
as one of the many kinds of sprouting seeds, eaten when germinated seeds are a few cm tall; lightly roasted ground seeds used in curry; also used in Middle Eastern sweets such as halva; fresh leaves used in curry dishes 
Medicinal
seed can be used for flatulence, or as a poultice for skin inflammations 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
seed provides a yellow dye 
Fragrance and Aroma
bitterly aromatic, ground-seeds have odour of coumarin, similar to newly mown hay
PRESCRIPTION
Fenugreek water (for dyspepsia or diarrhoea)
The celery-flavoured seeds form the part of the herb of medicinal importance.
Almost one-third of these consist of a mucilaginous substance which is of great benefit to inflamed conditions of the digestive tract associated with dyspepsia ad diarrhoea.
To make Fenugreek water simmer 35g/1oz of seeds with 600ml/ 1 pint/2½ cups of water in a covered pan for 15 minutes.
Allow to cool and drink a wineglassful.
FEVERFEW
The common name is a corruption of the word febrifuge, from the Latin  febris , fever, and fugo, put to flight, but it does not seem in the past to have been used or considered a specific remedy for high temperatures.
Gerard advised use of the dried plant for those"that are giddie in the head or which have the turning called Vertigo.
Also it is good for such as be melancholike and pensive…".
Culpeper advised it as being "very effectual for all pains in the head coming of a cold cause" , and modern research seems to indicate fairly conclusively that chewing the fresh leaves daily has considerable help in curing migraine.
It is a pretty flowering plant, rather bushy in habit, native of south-eastern Europe, and ow naturalized widely in the rest of Europe and North America, growing anywhere which is well-drained.
The whole plant is strongly aromatic, rather bitter; it is not a bee plant, but in spite of that seed sets well.
Cultivation
Feverfew will seed itself readily once there is a plant in the garden, in particular where the drainage is good and the sun plentiful; it will root in walls and between cracks in paving.
It remains green and leafy through the winter.
A garden form is called "White Bonnets" in which there is doubling of the white petals, with a greenish yellow centre, and hybrids are often found, intermediate between the two, with yellow centres and more, or less, white petals.
The yellow-leaved form, C. p.
 "Aurea" is low-growing and good for edgings, particularly conspicuous in winter.
Increase may also be by division of the plant.
USES
Culinary
not so used 
Medicinal
fresh or dried leaves, whole plant fresh or dried, flowers fresh or dried; for headaches and migraine, as a tonic, and to ward off biting insects 
Cosmetic
as an ingredient of creams for the skin 
Domestic
as a moth repellent 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly and bitterly aromatic
PRESCRIPTION
Feverfew salad (for migraine)
This common weed of the daisy family has recently received close scientific attention which has proved the claim of its effectiveness in the treatment of migraine conditions.
One fresh leaf per day eaten in a sandwich or salad is all that should be taken.
A few individuals may experience a body and arm rash when taking this herb, particularly if other chemical drugs have also been prescribed.
In such cases consult your doctor.
GARLIC
Garlic's popularity in Britain has increased tenfold in recent years, but it has always been an ingredient of Continental cooking, and is now also becoming an essential part of many North American dishes.
The flavour of the cloves is pungent, highly individual and long-lasting — its presence in food is unmistakable, and its action on the stomach and intestine is considerable, since it has powerful antiseptic properties.
Any tendency towards constipation is rapidly cured.
Garlic was probably originally indigenous to Asia, but it now grows widely wherever there is a warm climate, and it is perfectly hardy in northern Europe and North America though the flavour is less good in cooler latitudes.
Its use is so long-standing as to be recorded at least 5,000 years ago — in Sumeria.
It was certainly grown by the Anglo-Saxons, as the name is derived from gar, a lance, and leac, a leek, both Anglo-Saxon words, referring (depending on your authority) to the shape of the leaves, the tips of the cloves or the stem.
In mediaeval Britain it was eaten in very large quantities, often raw, and a few centuries later William Shakespeare commented unfavourably on its smell.
However, cooked garlic eaten in discreet quantities is quite acceptable.
As a flavouring garlic has no equal, and it is an integral part of all the top cuisines of the world.
Cultivation
Garlic can quite well be grown in cool temperature climates and is hardy, but the flavour may not be as good as that grown in warmer, drier countries.
The site chosen for it should be as sunny, well-drained and as warm as possible, preferably hot.
Cloves can be planted in October, go get head with the growth, or in early April; plant them 15–20cm (6–8in) apart and about 2.5cm (1in) deep, i.e. with 2.5cm (1in) of soil above the tip of the clove.
Grow in fertile soil, and if need be, mix in a little really well-rotted garden compost, sometime before planting, together with a scattering of a general organic fertilizer.
Give a light nitrogenous feed in spring and finish the plants with potash dressing in early summer.
They will be mature in July–August when the top growth starts to change colour and keel over.
Plants rarely flower in cool climates; tying the stems in a knot is said to increase the size of the cloves.
USES
Culinary
ripe cloves have innumerable uses, preferably crushed, in all kinds of savoury cooking, but especially with meat, fish and vegetables; fondues, omelettes, salads, flans, sauces; if frying, do so lightly — too hot oil or fat destroys the good flavour 
Medicinal
cloves have antiseptic properties; of help in catarrh, bronchitis, colds, for wounds, infectious diseases such as typhoid, as a diuretic, and an expectorant 
Cosmetic
can control dandruff 
Domestic
said to control garden aphids and ward off black spot from roses 
Fragrance and Aroma
pungently aromatic, unpleasantly so in quantity or if grown in cool conditions
RECIPE
Aioli (garlic mayonnaise)
This classic Provençal sauce is traditionally served with poached or boiled fish although in some parts of Provence it makes an unusual but excellent accompaniment to roast or grilled lamb.
Pound the cloves with the salt and pepper until smooth, then add the egg yolks, blending in well with a wooden spoon.
Add the oil very carefully, drop by drop, beating in between each drop to avoid curdling until about a quarter has been added, then mix in the rest, pouring it in slowly and beating at the same time.
Finally, add lemon juice.
Once thick enough, use as a dip, or to accompany salad, fish, fish soup, vegetables or eggs.
GERANIUM
Scented-leaved
The scented-leaved geranium constitute a different group of plants to the hardy kinds grown outdoors as border perennials, which are species of the genus Geranium.
They are related to the greenhouse "geraniums" or pelargoniums and, like them, need protection against cold.
Nearly all the species come from the Cape, South Africa, and amongst the first to be discovered and brought to England was P. triste, one of the very few whose flowers rather than leaves are scented.
It was Charles I's gardener Tradescant who found it, and there followed a steady steam of pelargoniums renowned for their fragrant or aromatic foliage.
What is extraordinary about this group is the tremendous variation in perfumes and aromas: P. tomentosum is strongly peppermint-scented, its soft leaves covered with fine, silky hairs; P. "lorinda" , eucalyptus-scented; "Attar of Roses" , P. graveolens and P. radens rose-scented; P. abrotanifolium, southernwood; P. odoratissimum, apple-scented; P. crispum minor, lemon-scented; oak-leaf P. quercifolium, incense and P. fragrans, nutmeg-scented.
Not surprisingly, the main use of these geraniums is in perfumery.
Cultivation
The scented-leaved pelargoniums need well-drained potting compost or soil, and plenty of sun and warmth.
They can be grown outdoors in cool temperate climates from June-September, but will need protection the remainder of the time.
Under cover they will flower from May-November.
In winter they should be encouraged to rest by lowering the temperature and keeping the compost almost dry.
In late winter they should be cut back hard to leave a few cm (in) of stem, otherwise they can become rather straggly.
Increase is by tip cuttings taken during spring-summer under cover.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves for milk puddings, custards, jellies, fruit, summer fruit drinks, ice cream, and cakes 
Medicinal
not so used 
Cosmetic
essential oil (geraniol) for washing or bathing 
Domestic
amongst household linen and clothing for perfumery and insect repellent 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves of varying odours as above used in potpourri, sachets, and tussie-mussies; essential oils in perfumery
RECIPE
Rose geranium punch
Boil the apple juice, sugar and geranium leaves for 5 minutes.
Add thinly sliced and crushed limes.
Cool, strain and add colouring.
Pour on to ice in glasses and garnish with geranium petals.
Rose geranium butter
Butter pounded with the leaves makes a delicious spread for cake fillings, on sweet biscuits and spread on bread slices topped with apple jelly.
HONEYSUCKLE
Very much a plant of northern Europe including Britain, honeysuckle can also be found growing wild in North Africa and western Asia.
Although it seems unlikely, it does have a history of herbal use, being listed in Gerard's herbal; "the floures steeped in oil and set in the Sun, are good to anoint the body that is benummed, and growne very cold" .
Culpeper regarded it as "a hot martial plant in the sign of Cancer, the leaves being put into gargarisms for sore throats" , and it was another of Dioscorides"plants for curing the hiccups.
It is, of course, grown above all for its fragrance, and was one of those flowers listed by Francis Bacon in his essay "Of Gardens" whose "breath" is "far sweeter in the air than in the hand" , honeysuckles being included in the list, "so they be somewhat afar off" .
Cultivation
Honeysuckle likes its feet in the shade and head in the sunshine; grown in too sunny or too warm a place, it becomes infested with greenfly, blackfly, caterpillars and red spider mite.
Ordinary soil, reasonably moist and fertile, with an alkaline tendency, will be suitable, and a position against a north or west wall is ideal, or on the shady side of supports such as tree stumps, poles and pergolas.
It will twine round its support, after being directed towards it.
Planting is in autumn-spring, and increase is by hardwood cuttings in autumn, or by layering late summer, autumn.
If pruning is needed, do this in early spring.
USES
Culinary
flowers formerly used as soothing syrup 
Medicinal
flowering plant, for skin infections, berries are poisonous 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
flowers strongly scented, for potpourri, herb pillows and perfumery
PRESCRIPTION
Syrup of honeysuckle (for the relief of a sore throat)
This is a modern version of a recipe in A New Family Herbal by Richard Brooks, 1871.
Lightly crush the honeysuckle leaves before pouring boiling water over them.
Leave to get cool, then strain the liquid into a saucepan.
Add the sugar and bring slowly to the boil.
Leave to simmer gently until the mixture is of a syrupy consistency.
Cool slightly, then pour into a bottle or jar and seal.
HORSERADISH
The prefix "horse" in many plant names does not mean that the plant is a particularly delectable food as far as those animals are concerned; it did in fact evolve from "coarse" , and in this case served to separate the plant from the one which actually supplied a radish root.
Horsechestnut is a similar case.
The hot-tasting fleshy roots have probably been used for at least 3,000 years as a food flavouring and, although it is native to eastern Europe, it grows wild in northern Europe including Britain, and North America.
It was much used in Germany and Denmark as an alternative to mustard during the Middle Ages.
Gerard says that pounded and mixed with vinegar it was used by the Germans as a sauce for fish and with "such like meates as we do mustard" .
It had some medicinal use as well, but was not much eaten in Britain until the 17th century.
Cultivation
The problem in cultivating horseradish is not so much how to make it grow well, as to curb its enthusiasm and stop it taking over the garden.
However, to obtain the juiciest and most succulent roots, use root cuttings about 1.2cm (½in) wide and 20cm (8in) long, and plant in February-March, making sure that each has a bud.
Remove the sideroots, and plant in holes 30cm (12in) deep, 45cm (18in) apart.
Deep moist soils are preferable and any site.
After two seasons the quality will start to deteriorate, and replanting will be necessary a year or two later.
When digging up the plants, remove every piece of root, otherwise it will sprout again.
USES
Culinary
raw or dried root for sauce with meat, especially beef; in vinegar; as an accompaniment grated or powdered (dried) to any meat, sausages, ham, vegetables and fish dishes; adds spice to egg dishes 
Medicinal
fresh root, use with care on boils and for bronchitis, coughs and as a stimulant, but large quantities can be harmful both externally and internally 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
roots pungently aromatic when bruised
RECIPES
Horseradish cream
A traditional sauce for hot and cold roast beef and for all kinds of smoked fish.
In Germany, this is also a popular sauce with asparagus.
Gradually add grated horseradish to the cream until you have the desired hotness.
Add lemon juice, salt, pepper and sugar to taste.
HORSETAIL
Unlike though it seems the horsetails are plants left over from prehistoric times, having survived almost unchanged for hundred of millions of years, judging by the evidence of fossil remains.
They do not flower, but carry spores, as ferns do, to which they are related, and have clusters of frond-like branches on erect stems, the appearance of which has given them their common name; they are sometimes also called mare's-tails.
The fronds have a harsh feel to them and this is because the plants, uniquely, absorb large quantities of silica from the soil.
As a result they were used as pot-scourers, especially the species E. hyemale, called Dutch rush or scouring rush, and used in Britain and North America for cleaning and polishing metal such as pewter, brass and copper, and for scouring wooden containers and milk-pails.
If horsetail is to be introduced to the garden at all, it is best confined to a container or, if planted in the open, in an area of the soil bounded by concrete at sides and bottom, so that the rhizomes cannot penetrate what in effect is a concrete box.
In the open, ground, unconfined, horsetail becomes a permanent inhabitant, only eradicated with great difficulty.
Its "root" system has been found to extend down the face of a cliff 12m (40ft), and breaking the rhizomes stimulates buds on the remainder to sprout and produce more growth and spores.
The top growth dies down completely in winter.
Cultivation
USES
Culinary
young shoots once used in salads; green stems as a vegetable, prepared like asparagus; eaten fried with flour and butter 
Medicinal
dried or fresh barren stems used as poultice for healing wounds, and to stop bleeding; will reduce the swelling of eyelids; a diuretic and effective in incontinence 
Cosmetic
as a strengthener, and to remove the white spots that occur on nails; also for strengthening the hair, and as an astringent and toner for skin.
Domestic
supplies a dye, as the colour grey with alum 
Fragrance and Aroma
none
PRESCRIPTION
Horsetail nail strengthener
Horsetail contains more of the element silicon, available in water soluble forms, than almost any other plant, and is the pre-eminent herb for the promotion of strength and lustre to hair and nails.
A simple method of improving easily-broken nails is to immerse the fingertips in a decoction made by simmering 50g/2oz of the dry herb in 900ml/1½ pints/3¾ cups of water for 20 minutes.
HYSSOP
The somewhat bitter though minty flavour of hyssop leaves has given them a mixed reception amongst cooks and gourmets. so it is not surprising that hyssop's original use was medicinal, as suggested by the specific name — officinalis (from the Latin officina, workshop) indicates that the plant was authorized for use by the medical profession and could be sold in pharmacies.
Native of central and southern Europe, and western Asia, it is also found in temperate regions of North America.
It is an inhabitant of rocky ground.
It occurs naturally in Palestine, but the hyssop of the Bible is thought to be either marjoram or the caper plant (Capparis spinosa).
Gerard said that "all kinds of Hyssope do grow in my Garden" and disdained to describe it, any more than Dioscorides did: "as being a plant so well known that it needed none" (description), and it was illustrated in an Italian Herbal published in 1744, where it was called H. vulgaris.
It was once a country remedy for rheumatism, using the fresh green tops made into a tea, and Culpeper recommended it as an excellent medicine for the "quinsy…to gargle it, when boiled with figs" .
Cultivation
Hyssop is easily grown in as sunny a place as possible, and dry, well-drained soil.
Plant in spring about 30cm (12in) apart, growing it from divisions, seed sown in spring, or tip cuttings taken before it flowers.
Protect in severe winters, and replace every four or five years.
It can be clipped lightly to keep it formal in early spring.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves sparingly in salads, with strongly flavoured meat, in soup, sausages, in fruit recipes; an ingredient of Chartreuse liqueur 
Medicinal
fresh leaves, dried flowering tops, for colds, bronchitis, as a gargle for sore throats, to encourage appetite; to heal bruises, black eyes and swellings.
Cosmetic
no so used 
Domestic
fresh or dried leaves as strewing herb, in moth sachets, as a flea-repellent and in water for washing, whether self or clothing 
Fragrance and Aroma
stems, flowers, leaves strongly aromatic, slightly bitter, hot and mint-like; for aromatic candles, potpourri; oil used in perfumery
PRESCRIPTION
Hyssop gargle (for sore throats)
Hyssop contains almost one per cent of an essential oil whose medicinal action is very similar to that of garden sage.
A strong infusion made with 50g/ 2oz hyssop to 600ml/1 pint/2/½ cups of water makes an excellent home remedy for sore throats when used as a gargle.
The penicillin-producing mold grows naturally on the herb's leaves and also adds to the antibiotic effect of the plant.
Hyssop treatment (for bruising around the eyes)
In addition, hyssop is an excellent treatment for bruising around the eyes; crush a handful of fresh leaves into a clean  handkerchief , dip this quickly into boiling water, and apply locally as hot as it can be tolerated.
Repeat until the swelling subsides.
LAVENDER
It would be difficult to find a more well-known or generally more well-loved fragrance than that of lavender.
It is a native plant of the Mediterranean maquis, that area on the hillsides of dry, rocky soil, exposed to blazing sun, with little rainfall, and that mainly in winter, which is host to herbs, sub-shrubs, bulbs and quickly-seeding annuals.
Lavender's use can be traced back to the Greeks and Romans and it is more than likely that it was used all round the Mediterranean by Egyptians, Arabs, and Sumerians for a variety of domestic, cosmetic and perfumery needs.
It is extremely probable that it was one of the many plants brought over to Britain by the Roman occupationary army to remind the legionaries, while they shivered in the damp foggy cold, of the warmth and dryness they had left behind at home.
 "Who'll buy my lavender?" is a street-cry within living memory, and bunches of lavender are still occasionally sold from door to door in English villages and country districts.
In England, lavender was grown commercially until the last war in Surrey and in Kent; now it is only grown in Norfolk, near Norwich.
In North America, it grows best in warm dry regions.
Cultivation
Lavender is slightly tender, and will be better able to survive if grown in a warm sunny position and dry, well-drained soil so that it ripens and matures thoroughly before winter.
Grow from tip cuttings taken with a heel in spring or late summer, and plant in May.
Space the plants 60cm (2ft) apart each way; as a hedge allow 30–45cm (12–18in).
Harvest the flower spikes for drying just as the flowers begin to unfold.
Any trimming should be done in mid-spring, very lightly so as not to cut into growth older than that produced the previous year.
Remove flower stems in the first year for a stronger bushier plant.
USES
Culinary
not generally used, though could be tried in jellies, crystallized in  confectionery , and with strongly flavoured meats such as venison or pheasant 
Medicinal
dried flowers, oil; as antiseptic, a restorative for faintness, for relieving sprains, or rheumatic pain 
Cosmetic
in water for washing and bathing, as an astringent for the skin 
Domestic
to repel household insects; to relieve insect bites, and to ward off mosquitoes, midges and so on 
Fragrance and Aroma
flowerheads and flowers strongly and sweetly scented; used in potpourri, as perfume, in furniture polish, candles, to perfume rinsing water for hair and in sleep pillows
RECIPE
Lavender oil (for after the bath)
Put oil into a clear glass bottle, then add spikes of lavender flowers, picked just as they are about to open.
Put in as many as the bottle will hold conveniently, and put it in a warm sunny place for 12 hours, and keep warm for the next 12, then remove the spikes.
If the oil is not fragrant enough, repeat the process until it is.
Then stopper firmly and store in a cool dark place when not in use.
The keeping qualities will be improved if one-tenth of the oil is replaced with wheatgerm oil.
LEMON VERBENA
Not to be confused with vervain, also verbena (V. officinalis), lemon verbena is quite different in appearance since it is a shrub and not a herbaceous plant from South America, specifically Chile.
Its lemon fragrance is given off by the leaves without the need to rub them, unlike lemon balm and, even when dried, continue to be pungently scented for years, so that they constitute an excellent ingredient for potpourris.
If lemon verbena was not included to be tender in cool temperate climates, it would be in every herb garden or wherever perfume is valued by the gardener.
Cultivation
Lemon verbena needs protection in most parts of cool temperate climates so that the winter temperature does not fall below 4°C (40°F).
In mild sheltered sites, it will survive outdoors all year.
If outdoors, use a proprietary potting compost and a container at least 30cm (12in) diameter.
Remove dead tips and shoots in early spring, and prune to control the growth at the same time.
Plant outdoors in spring, and take soft cuttings in July under cover in sandy compost.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaves used sparingly for fish, salads, stuffing for chicken, pork, in puddings, with ice cream, mushroom dishes 
Medicinal
fresh or dried leaves for indigestion and flatulence, as a mild sedative 
Cosmetic
to perfume water for bathing or washing, as a freshener for skin in soaps 
Domestic
sachets for bed-linen and clothing 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly lemon-scented leaves, long-lasting; for potpourri, sweet-smelling pillow, or tussy-mussie; the oil is used in perfumery
RECIPE
Vanilla and lemon ice cream
Partially beat the cream.
Make a custard with the milk, sugar and beaten egg yolks, by heating the milk and sugar, then pouring on to the egg yolks, stirring constantly.
Return to the saucepan and heat very slowly, stirring constantly until the mixture becomes thick; too much heat too soon will curdle it.
Strain, and add the vanilla, allow to cool, fold in the verbena and partially whipped cream, pour into icecube tray and freeze.
LOVAGE
One of the attributes of a good witch was to be able to brew love potions on demand, and lovage acquired its name because it was once thought to be an aphrodisiac and was therefore an essential ingredient of such recipes.
It is a handsome plant, one of the tallest of the umbelliferous herbs, with a strong distinctive, celery-like flavour which has earned it the name of the "Maggi" herb in Italy.
From south Europe, especially the Liguria province of Italy, it is now naturalized in eastern North America, south-west Asia, Germany, France and Scandinavia, and is easily grown in Britain.
Lovage is illustrated as a woodcut in a herbal of 1491, and merits inclusion in Culpeper's list of useful plants, circa 1645, where he advised that the bruised leaves, "fried in hog's lard, laid hot to any blotch or boil, will quickly break it" .
All parts have considerable use in all sorts of ways — it contains, for instance, an appreciable quantity of vitamin C — and was used as a herb in Britain from the earliest monastic times.
Cultivation
Lovage needs plenty of room, a deep moist fertile soil and sun or a little shade.
It can be grown from seed sown outdoors in spring in a nursery bed, and transplanted in autumn.
Root cuttings are also possible, each piece having an eye, and being replanted with the bud 5cm (2in) below the surface.
Allow 1.2m (4ft) between the plants and expect them to reach full size in four years.
They will die down completely in winter.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves in meat casseroles, soups, salads, vegetables, marinades, or eat as spinach; seeds eve stronger, all meats, bread, game, cheeses; shredded roots for soups or boiled without skin for a vegetable 
Medicinal
fresh or dried whole plant, seed, dried root, diuretic, for flatulence, antiseptic, for sore throats, a digestive 
Cosmetic
deodorant, use fresh leaves in the bath water, or a decoction of the roots, which are also said to be effective in removing freckles 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
strong, yeast/celery odour, all parts, especially seeds
RECIPE
Lovage soup
Fry the onion gently in the butter until soft, add the lovage and continue for one or two more minutes, them mix in the flour, and add the stock gradually, stirring all the time and bring to the boil.
Adjust the seasoning, add the nutmeg, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes.
For a smoother texture, stir in single cream just before serving, and float croutons on the surface.
MADDER
Madder has chiefly been grown to supply the colour red, and as it is a native of southern Europe and western Asia, it is not surprising that the shade of red so obtained is called Turkey red.
It is one of the most ancient of dye plants, its use being recorded 2,500 years ago, and it is such a strong dye that it will produce a deep pink-brown without a mordant — with alum and tin it supplies red and red-brown.
However, it will yield other colours besides red, depending on the mordant, such as purple, orange, black and lilac.
The chemical which supplies the colouring is dihydroscyanthraquinone, also called alizarin; this was found to be a derivative of the hydrocarbon anthracene, from coal-tar.
The whole of the synthetic dyeing industry arose from this and subsequently completely replaced natural dyes.
The root is the part used, and this is also of importance medicinally.
Cultivation
Madder grows naturally in well-drained, even stony sites, and in light woodland; for the best and most extensive roots a deep soil is the most satisfactory.
Some support will be needed for the rambling stems.
Planting can be done in spring or autumn, and increase is by division, or by seed sown in spring, or early autumn; the wild Madder, R. peregrina, may be a variety of it and also contains a pinkish dye.
USES
Culinary
not so used 
Medicinal
root used as diuretic and of considerable help in kidney troubles; an antiseptic 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
roots to provide mainly red dye, and other colours with a variety of mordants for wool and other materials.
Fragrance and Aroma
not present
HOUSEHOLD USE
To supply reddish dye
Wool is the most suitable fibre for natural dyes, since it takes the colours evenly.
A mordant is necessary to fix the dye and to make it colour fast.
With madder, use an alum and cream of tartar mordant.
Alum and cream of tartar mordant
To 100g/4oz wool add 25g/1oz alum and 6g/¼oz cream of tartar, and use sufficient soft water to cover the wool (approx 4.5 litres/1 gallon).
Dissolve the alum and cream of tartar in a little boiling water, and stir into the remainder.
Put to heat, and when warm slide in the wool, thoroughly wetted.
Take 1 hour to bring the solution slowly to simmering point, simmer gently for a further hour.
Remove the wool and place in the dye bath.
Dye bath
Use 50g/2oz powdered madder root from a dye supplier.
Mix to a paste with hard water (add lime or chalk if tap water is soft) and gradually dilute with sufficient water (about 4.5 litres/1 gallon) to just cover 100g/4oz of mordanted wool.
Heat the liquid without the wool very slowly until lukewarm, then add the wool and take from 1–2 hours to reach simmering point from that stage, then simmer for 10 minutes.
Leave the wool in the dye until it cools, rinse the wool, wash it in soapy water, rinse again and hang to dry.
MARIGOLD
The cottage-garden marigold, not the modern French and African bedding marigolds, was once a culinary and medicinal plant in daily use, as well as a much-loved decorative flower.
By Elizabethan times it was familiar in every garden, and frequently referred to in records of the 13th and 14th centuries, although officially it is not supposed to have been introduced until 1573.
It is a native of southern Europe, but perfectly easy to grow in cool temperate climates, and gets its botanical name from the Latin calends, "the first of every month" , meaning that it can be in bloom throughout the year.
In mediaeval and earlier times it was commonly called "golds" or "ruddes" ; its present name is a corruption of the Anglo-Saxon merso-meagalla, marsh marigold.
Gerard has a long dissertation on it in his Herbal of 1597, and shows four coloured illustrations of different sorts, which do not seem to be known nowadays.
It was obviously very much a part of everyday life, to such an extent that "in some Grocers and Spice-sellers House, are to be found barrels filled with them (dried petals)" for use in soup and medicinal prescriptions.
The petals were also commonly used to colour cheese and butter.
Cultivation
Pot marigolds, as they are often known, are easily grown in a sunny place and light soil, being grown from seed sown outdoors in spring.
They should be thinned to about 25cm (10in) apart, and will thereafter seed themselves.
For the strongest plants and best-sized flowers, grow them in a good loam.
Seed is ripe in late summer.
USES
Culinary
petals, in place of saffron in many recipes, especially rice dishes; soups, eggs, cheese, meat casseroles; custard; puddings, cakes, salads and to make wine, leaves sparingly in salads 
Medicinal
fresh flowerheads or petals, for healing wounds, and to treat conjunctivitis; leaves said to be a good remedy for the pain of a bee or wasp sting 
Cosmetic
flowers and leaves for the skin, as a cream to soothe, heal and nourish, flowers to lighten the hair 
Domestic
petals supply a pale yellow dye with alum 
Fragrance and Aroma
bruised leaves have a bitter aroma
PRESCRIPTION
Marigold cream (for scratches and abrasions)
Make a healing balm by infusing the dried flowers in boiling water for about 1 hour.
Then strain the liquid through clean muslin and squeeze out as much of the moisture as possible.
Mix one part of the strained infusion with four parts of aqueous cream.
Keep refrigerated and use liberally on the arms and legs for gardening scratches and abrasions.
The infusion alone can be taken internally (sweetened with honey) and is good for the complexion, poor circulation and for ulcers.
Externally, it can be used for skin lesions, conjunctivitis and leg ulcers.
RECIPE
Marigold custard
Make a custard in the ordinary way, but add 1 cupful of fresh marigold petals, beaten, to 600ml/1 pint/2½ cups of milk and heat it gently with the remainder of the custard ingredients.
MARJORAM, SWEET
Marjoram grows wild in Britain; it is O. vulgare, the same species found in Europe, and called oregano in Italy.
But the Italian form has a better flavour, and is to be preferred to the British native, though that can still be used for cooking.
The flavour and aroma of sweet marjoram, although characteristically a marjoram, is appreciably different, and a third, pot marjoram (O. onites), also used for cooking, has the advantage that it is a hardy perennial, though its flavour is much less attractive than that of the other two.
Sweet marjoram is perennial in its native habitat of central Europe, but is not frost hardy, though it will survive well into late autumn outdoors in a sheltered place.
It has innumerable culinary uses and has some medicinal use — it contains thymol — though the wild species has greater application to health.
The plant from Crete called dittany is O. dictamnus, a pretty little plant quite unlike the other three in appearance, with white-woolly leaves and pink flowers in hop-like clusters.
The marjorams all have a long history of use since classical times, and were more popular in the Middle Ages in Britain than thyme.
Culpeper said that "the oil is very warm and comforting to the joints that are stiff, to mollify and supple them." 
Oregano is derived from the Greek cros , mountain and ganos , joy, beauty, and in Greece it was woven into the crown worn by bridal couples on their wedding day.
Cultivation Sweet marjoram is easily grown, provided the seed is not sown outdoors until the end of late spring, and rigorously protected against frost.
Alternatively sow in pots and pot on to grow in 10 or 12cm (8in) apart, and keep the seedlings clear of weeds.
Moist, fertile soil and a sunny sheltered position are vital.
Germination is slow and can take a month in cold soil.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaves, in meat casseroles shortly before serving, sausages, stuffings, bouquet garni, with mushrooms, egg dishes, cheeses, to flavour vinegar.
Medicinal
whole flowering plant, fresh or dried, as digestive, or stomachic, as an external antiseptic, once used as ingredient of sneezing powders 
Cosmetic
for making fragrant soap 
Domestic
as an insect repellent 
Fragrance and Aroma
for herb pillows, and tussie mussies
RECIPE
Saucissons Provençal
Slice the aubergine thickly, salt and leave to sweat.
Slice onions, pepper  and courgette, chop tomatoes.
Brown sausages quickly in the oil, remove from pan, and saute the onions without browning.
Add peppers and tomatoes and cook for a few minutes, then add the remainder of the vegetables, the marjoram and wine and simmer gently for 30 minutes.
Put in a casserole with the sausages and cook in oven at 180°C/350°F/Gas Mark 4 for ¾–1 hour.
MARSHMALLOW
Hollyhocks are a member of the same family as marshmallow, which has the same large, open saucer-shaped flowers without stems.
It seems a more unlikely plant than most to be a herb, but the whole of it, leaves, stems etc., consist of about 30 per cent mucilage, and this has a great number of medicinal applications, known for many centuries.
Indeed a mallow was illustrated in a famous herbal of the 6th century A.D., and it may well have been derived from an even earlier Greek herbal of the 2nd century B.C.
Marshmallow has a wide provenance, always found in moist situations, throughout Europe including Britain, Asia, the east of North America and Australia.
The sweets called marshmallows do not now contain any of the substance of the plant, being made up of gum, egg-white, flour, sweetening, colouring and so on.
Cultivation Mallows of all kinds are often seen growing on waste ground and beside fields and footpaths, and the marshmallow is no exception, though it favours wet places, especially salt-marshes.
It can be started from seed sown outdoors in spring, or by dividing in autumn, as the stems die down, and should be allowed 60cm (2ft) of space from its neighbour.
Keep it moist in dry weather.
USES
Culinary
young leaves and shoots in salad; roots fried in butter, leaves in soup 
Medicinal
dried root, two years old, flowers, leaves, for sore throats and mouths, for external and internal ulcers; once used also for sprains, bruises and muscular stiffness 
Cosmetic
leaves or root in face-packs, root for preventing loss of hair 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
not present
PRESCRIPTION
Marshmallow milk (for the relief of hoarse coughing and inflammations of the mouth, pharynx and stomach)
Put the ingredients in a saucepan and bring slowly to the boil.
Then simmer gently for about 30 to 45 minutes.
Take one tablespoon three times a day for hoarse coughs and for the relief of gastric ulcers.
MINT, GARDEN
Mint sauce has long been an ingredient of the English Sunday lunch of lamb with the season's new green peas and new potatoes.
It is made from M. spicata, but there are many other mints with various distinct aromas and flavours —garden mint is the most commonly used and has been so for many centuries.
Interestingly, Pliny said of garden mint that "the smell of Mint does stir up the minde and the taste to a greedy desire of meate" .
Introduced to Britain by the Romans and to North America by its first settlers, it has long been used all round the Mediterranean bowl, and continues to be used there today.
The generic and common names of mint are said to be taken from the Greek myth of the nymph Minthe, who was being pursued by Hades, the god of the Underworld.
His queen, Persephone, became jealous and turned the nymph into the plant mint.
Its pungent and spicy flavour is unmistakable, and the oil obtained from the plant is that used in the manufacture of spearmint chewing-gum.
Although a native of southern Europe, it has become naturalized in the rest of Europe, and is now grown commercially.
When buying plants for garden cultivation, it is necessary to be careful to obtain the true garden mint.
There is another species called horse mint, M. longifolia, which has grey-green leaves, and a very unpleasant smell, quite unlike the true mint, and this often hybridizes with garden mint to produce plants which look like it, but smell completely different.
Unfortunately such hybrids are often available as the true mint.
Cultivation
There are two problems in growing mint: one is to curtail it, the other is the fungus disease, rust.
The plant spreads rapidly by "runners" , the underground root-like stems, and develops shoots at every joint.
Some control is obtained by planting it in a bottomless container; spring or autumn are suitable times, and the runners can be detached
and planted, shallowly, to increase it.
When flowering stems become apparent they should be removed, to maintain a good supply of leaves.
As it dies down in winter, pot-grown plants can be taken under cover in autumn to continue the top growth as long as possible.
Symptoms of rust disease are shown as small, reddish-brown, raised spots on the leaf under-surface, and as control is difficult, it is preferable to destroy such plants including the roots, and to plant new specimens in a different place.
Other mints which have similar uses to garden mint include the following.
Apple Mint, M. suaveolens (syn.
M. rotundifolia), has a definite and pleasant scent of apples as well as the characteristic mint aroma; the leaves are rounded, toothed and woolly.
Eau de Cologne mint is M.x piperita citrata, and has a purple tinge to the stems and dark green leaves, and purple runners.
It is also known as bergamot, lemon or orange mint, but to the writer, the aroma is definitely that of the famous toilet water.
Ginger mint, M. x gentilis "Variegata" , is hotly aromatic, and has yellow variegated, smooth, pointed leaves, the yellow colouring following the veins.
Peppermint, M. x piperita, needs no description as to smell, but the leaves of black peppermint tend to be ovate, 6cm (2½in) long and 4cm (1½in) wide, and are purple tinged — this is grown commercially and is the one used for peppermint tea, so popular in North Africa, Pineapple mint, M. rotundifolia "Variegata" , is a form of the round-leaved mint, which often crosses with M. longifolia.
Consequently pineapple mint plants tend to vary in the shape of the leaves.
However, they always have creamy white variegation at the margins, and sometimes the leaves on one shoot are completely white.
They are much wrinkled, long rather than round, and soft with a dull surface.
This variety is not quite hardy, particularly in heavy wet soil.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaf, in a sauce or jelly to accompany roast meats, and rubbed on to meat before grilling or roasting; with salads, mixed into cheeses, in summer drinks, as part of bouquet garni, and mixed herbs, in chutney 
Medicinal
fresh or dried leaf; stimulant to appetite, an antiseptic, stomachic, for nervous disorders 
Cosmetic
fresh leaves, will help heal skin blemishes and act as an astringent, for complexion, use in baths, an ingredient of Hungary water, to flavour toothpaste 
Domestic
to make aromatic soap and candles 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly aromatic leaves, slightly peppermint, hot, contain oil or menthol
RECIPE
Peppermint tisane
Pour boiling water on to the leaves in a clean container or teapot and leave to stand for 3–10 minutes (no longer, otherwise the flavour changes).
Pour through a strainer and serve hot, or iced.
Mint julep
Put the sugar, mint and a little soda into a tall tumbler.
Mash these together to release mint flavour.
Add the bourbon and then top with soda to taste.
Decorate with a sprig of mint.
MULLEIN
The tall, spire-like stems of this yellow-flowered plant are often seen growing wild in Britain and North America, though it has naturalized itself, and is not indigenous.
It is a native of cool temperate climates in Europe and Asia.
It is not surprising that it was, and still is, grown as a garden plant, since its large, soft, grey-green leaves and brightly coloured flowers are splendidly ornamental.
Perhaps because it has been so popular it has many common names, such as hag taper, Aaron's rod, Adam's flannel and torches.
As well as its medicinal properties, it is associated with magic, and the down on the plant was used by witches to provide wicks for their candles when making incantations and casting spells.
One of the 17th-century gardening writers remarked that "Verbascum is called of the Latines Candela regia…because the elder age used the stalks dipped in suet to burne, whether at funeralls or otherwise." 
Cultivation Mullein will always be found growing naturally in well-drained soil ad a sunny place.
Seed will not germinate in wet heavy soil, and plants that do establish will probably not survive the winter.
Allow 60cm (2ft) between plants.
Although they are so tall, they will not need staking, and are an excellent plant for a dramatic effect in the garden.
USES
Culinary
not so used 
Medicinal
fresh leaves, dried leaves or flowers, contain mucilage and used as emollient, in connection with coughs of all kinds including asthmatic, catarrh and other respiratory conditions, mildly sedative 
Cosmetic
flowers used for lightening hair 
Domestic
for candle-making, using the steps coated in tallow; down used to supply wicks Fragrance and aroma none Note that the hairs are extremely irritating to the mouth, and any remedies involving mullein should be strained through fine muslin before being taken internally.
RECIPE
Mullein hair rinse (to brighten fair hair)
Bring the water to the boil, pour over the flowers and leave to infuse for 30 to 60 minutes.
Strain, stir in the lemon juice and use as a final hair rinse after shampooing.
MUSTARD
Mustard has been used as a flavouring in cooking for thousands of years, and has a worldwide reputation for enhancing a variety of savoury dishes.
There are three different kinds of mustard: black mustard, B. nigra, discussed here; brown mustard, B. juncea and white mustard, N. alba; in each case the common name refers to the colour of the seeds.
Black mustard is the one with the best and most pungent flavour, and has become naturalized in Britain and America, though it probably originated in the Middle East.
There are references to mustard in Shakespeare: it is the name of one of the fairies in A Midsummer Night's Dream, Mustard-seed, and in Henry IV, Part 2, Shakespeare refers to "Tewkesbury mustard" , Tewkesbury then being the centre for making it.
The Romans soaked the pounded seed in wine and the word mustard is thought to come from the Latin mustum ardens meaning "burning must" — grape must is newly-fermented grape juice.
The 16th-century herbalist Gerard recommended that the crushed seed mixed with vinegar was an excellent dish to be eaten with any "grosse meates" .
Brown mustard is the one grown commercially as it is a shorter plant, at 120–150cm (4–5ft) and the seeds do not fall off easily; it is largely used instead of black mustard, and has a slightly less hot flavour.
White mustard seed is mild and is often used as a pickling spice.
English mustard is a yellow powder which is mixed with water and consists of a mixture of black and white mustard seeds.
The so-called French mustard is wet, and there are many variations; yellow Dijon is black seed with wine and spices; Bordeaux is dark brown, as it contains the seed husks.
Cultivation
Mustard, whether black, brown or white, is grown from seed sown outdoors in spring, and does best in a sunny place and fertile moist soil, when the black mustard is likely to reach it maximum height.
Thin the seedlings to 30–45cm (12–18in) apart, and keep free of competing seedlings in the early stages.
Seed will be ripe in late summer, and should be watched carefully in the last week or two, or it will easily be lost.
It is better to remove the pods before they finish maturing, and allow the seeds to ripen in the pods.
USES
Culinary
crushed seed supplies a hot flavour to enhance the taste of any savoury dish, such as roast or cold meats, sausages; used in sauces and dressings, with cooked cheese dishes; seedlings used as salad in mustard and cress, or as part of sprouting seeds 
Medicinal
seed, leaves; add ground seed to hot water as foot-bath; use mustard flour as soothing poultice for chilblains; as an emetic, a tablespoonful of mustard flour in luke-warm water 
Cosmetic
none 
Domestic
none 
Fragrance and Aroma
none
RECIPE
Celery pickle with mustard seeds
Slice the celery and onions, core, seed and dice the peppers.
Cover the vegetables with boiling water in a bowl.
Leave for about 15 minutes before draining.
Put the mustard seeds, sugar, salt, turmeric and vinegar in a saucepan and bring to the boil.
Add the drained vegetables and cook for a further 5 minutes, stirring all the time.
Add the cornflour blended with ½ cup of water and cook for another 5 minutes.
Pour into hot, sterilized preserving jars and seal.
NETTLE
The old story about the Roman legionaries using nettles to keep themselves warm on night duty in the cold northern province that was Britain may be apocryphal, but there is no doubt that the sting resulting from the touch of a nettle leaf causes a burning sensation.
This is because each hair consists of a sharp, hollow spine, the walls of which contain silica, making them glass-like and brittle.
The point of the spine breaks off easily, and the liquid inside, formic acid, is released into the object causing the injury, in most cases the skin of an animal.
In spite of this anti-social habit, nettles are of considerable use in many ways, including culinary; they contain vitamins A and C and, it is said, more iron than spinach, together with a variety of other minerals.
Cultivation
The discouragement of nettles, rather than their encouragement, is usually the object of many gardeners, but for those who need to grow them, loose, fertile soil with plenty of nitrogen in it, and a little shade will produce the tallest plants.
Plants will self-sow, as well as spreading by underground stems.
A variety of insects including butterfly and moth caterpillars feed on them.
USES
Culinary
young fresh leaves and stems, as spinach alternative, added to casseroles, to make cheese, and nettle beer 
Medicinal
fresh or dried leaves for rheumatism, to control internal bleeding, for many skin problems, a good diuretic 
Cosmetic
to prevent dandruff, and to tone the skin and improve the circulation, using leaves in infusion or decoction; use juice to encourage hair growth 
Domestic
roots provide a dye, grey, yellow or orangey depending on mordant; fresh leaves as a liquid fertilizer, compost accelerator, and insecticide; fibre of roots once widely used for making cloth, twine; fresh leaves as fly deterrent 
Fragrance and Aroma
slightly aromatic
PRESCRIPTION
Nettle soup (for anaemia; also mildly laxative)
The common and despised nettle contains a high proportion of vitamins and minerals and other active substances which give it wide therapeutic application.
Its iron content is of great value to those with anaemia, while the powdered leaf is used as a snuff which rapidly halts nose bleeds in those suffering from weakened blood vessels in the nose.
Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the nettles and stew gently for about 10 minutes.
Add the milk, bring to the boil and simmer for a further 10 minutes.
Allow the soup to cool slightly, then purée in a blender.
ORRIS ROOT
The iris is one of the longest-cultivated flowering plants, and one variety, thought to be this one, can be recognized on the wall of an Egyptian temple at Karnak dating from 1500 B.C.
These beautiful and delicate flowers, often heavily scented, include the complete range of colour as we know it, hence the name, which is the Greek word for rainbow, and from which the word "orris" is directly derived.
The violet-scented root or rhizome of the plant is of prime importance in perfumery, though that of other iris species such as germanica itself and pallida are also fragrant.
Its production has become associated with Italy, and in particular the Florence area, where it is represented in the heraldic arms of that city.
It is also said to be fleur-de-lis of French heraldry.
From southern Europe, and naturalized in Iran, northern India and similar areas, orris root was once used medicinally as a purgative.
It is now considered too strong for internal use and can cause vomiting.
It grows well throughout North America except in the warm moist climate of Florida and the Gulf Coast.
Cultivation
As with most irises, the Florentine iris needs plenty of sun, and a dry, well-drained soil.
Planting should be in April, and the best plants will be obtained in soil which is deep and fertile.
The rhizomes can be divided in late spring, to flower the following summer, ad each should have a bud or shoot on it.
The divisions are planted so that half the rhizome is above the soil surface, as they rot if covered with soil.
They need to be divided every few years, so that good flowers will continue to appear.
The rhizomes should be dug up in autumn and dried immediately, but the full violet fragrance will not be apparent until the roots are two years old.
USES
Culinary
not so used 
Medicinal
not now used 
Cosmetic
dried root, powdered, used as part of mixture for dry shampoo; to make bath salts, perfumed talcum powder 
Domestic
in herb pillows, to perfume household linen ad clothing 
Fragrance and Aroma
dried root strongly violet-scented increasing with age; used as fixative in potpourri, in perfumery manufacture, as part of "frangipani" , the Italian perfume named after the tropical tree whose flowers have the same fragrance
RECIPE
Dry Elizabethan potpourri
Blend the spices with the petals, lavender and leaves; add the spices, fixatives and oils, stir regularly everyday for a week, longer if possible, keeping closed, and then transfer to bowls.
PARSLEY
This herb needs no introduction to European and North American readers; indeed it is one of the oldest and longest-used herbs known to man.
It was described in a Greek herbal written in the third century B.C. and is probably a native of the eastern Mediterranean area, though it is now so widespread it is difficult to be certain of its origin.
Pliny described it as being of use, if scattered in a pool, for curing unhealthy fish; it was said to have been grown in the Emperor Charlemagne's herb garden; Ion the Gardener who wrote the first book about gardening in Britain included it as his favourite herb, and it was mentioned in Langland's famous poem Piers Plowman.
So its recorded history progresses without a break to the present time, mainly as a culinary herb, but also having some medicinal value, as well as cosmetic and domestic use.
Cultivation
Parsley is hardy and can be sown outdoors in March, but takes several weeks to germinate if sown at that time in cool temperate regions, hence, it has earnt itself the reputation of needing "to go to the Devil seven times and back" before it will sprout.
However, if sown later in the spring when the soil is warm, it will germinate within two weeks or less.
Sown in early July, it is up in a matter of days.
The traditional short-cut of pouring boiling water into the seed-drill acknowledges its need for warmth.
Parsley should have a deep, moist fertile soil for ideal growth, and sun or a little shade.
Seedlings should be sown where they are to grow and thinned twice to a final spacing of 20cm (8in); good plants occupy a square foot of space.
By the same token, parsley in pots should have a good potting compost, No 2 if John Innes is used (see page 36 for recipe), and at least a 12cm (5in) diameter pot, 15cm (6in) if possible, to provide depth for the tap-root and sufficient food and moisture.
Spring-sown parsley will provide leaves in winter, but a better supply will be provided with early July-sown plants, covering both with cloches or tunnels if snow is likely.
In the second summer, when flowers appear, allow them to self-seed.
USES
Culinary
fresh (preferably) or dried leaf, for sauces, as garnish for salads, vegetables, potatoes, as part of bouquet garni, with egg dishes, for omelette fines herbes , soup, marinades, in casseroles added at start and near end of cooking 
Medicinal
fresh or dried leaf, dried root, dried seed; contains vitamin C; as a tonic and stomachic, for flatulence, a diuretic and of considerable help in many kidney complaints 
Cosmetic
to prevent thread veins in the complexion; said to remove freckles 
Domestic
as a dye, to provide cream or shades of green depending on mordant 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves and stems strongly aromatic, roots less so
RECIPE
Bouquet garni Tie in a bundle and add to casseroles, stews and sauces.
For pork, substitute sage for the bay leaf.
Bouquet garni for fish
Tie in a bundle and add to the cooking liquid
Fines herbes A classic addition to omelettes 
Chop herbs finely and add to omelettes and other egg dishes.
PENNYROYAL
Although this is a species of mint, it is dealt with separately, as it is so unlike other mints in growth habit.
It is flat and mat-like, because the prostrate stems root as they lengthen.
It has a stronger aroma and hotter flavour than its relations, not always to everyone's liking but, provided it is used taking this into account, it is one of the best culinary herbs.
It is a native of Europe, Asia and North Africa, now naturalized in North and South America.
It is certainly amongst the oldest of the European herbs, and it was its very pungency that made it popular with the palates of our tougher ancestors.
There are frequent references to it in Anglo-Saxon writings, and the Greeks and Romans made much use of it; the Greek army doctor Dioscorides listed it amongst medical herbs, and Pliny also describes it.
Its common name derives from "pulioll-royall" , an old French name for a royal thyme.
Pulegium is from pulex, the Latin for flea, as it was much used to deter, if not actually kill, fleas.
Two varieties have been distinguished, M. p decumbens, the one under discussion, and M. p. erecta, whose flower stems are 20–30cm (8–12in) tall.
The North American pennyroyal (Hedeoma pulgeogioides) is a quite different plant but with many of the same characteristics as Mentha pulegium; it has a strong minty smell and an Indian folk medicine was used as an intestinal irritant and an abortion-causing agent, as well as an insect repellent.
Cultivation
English pennyroyal needs a moist soil.
In the wild it is usually found growing beside streams and ponds.
It also needs fertility, but is indifferent to sun or light shade.
Planting can be in autumn or spring, the latter if winters are likely to be severe.
Space the plants 15cm (6in) apart each way, and always keep moist in dry weather.
It will also grow from seed sown in late spring, with protection, planting out about six weeks later.
It is one of the aromatic alternatives to grass for a lawn, being mown twice a year only, and will also grow from cracks in paving.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaves, use sparingly in same way as other mints (see p. 86)
Medicinal
fresh or dried flowering plant, for colds, headaches, nausea, flatulence; should not be used where kidney disease present or in pregnancy; to relieve pain of insect bites and stings and ward off biting insects 
Cosmetic
use in water for washing 
Domestic
for strewing, to repel fleas, ants, and flies, in household linen and clothing
RECIPE
Pennyroyal dumplings
Serve with a well flavoured lamb or beef stew 
Combine the ingredients with enough water to make a doughy but not sticky consistency and form into balls about 2.5cm (1in) diameter.
Add to a moist beef or lamb stew about half-an-hour before the end of the cooking time, making sure there is enough liquid in which the dumplings can cook.
PINK
Also called the clove pink, clove July or carnation in modern times, this species was once widely known as the gillyflower, derived eventually from the Arabic quaranful, a clove, by way of the Greek karyophillon, the Latin caryophyllus, the Italian garofolo and the French giroflee.
Its strong, sweet, clove-like scent has made it popular both for culinary and perfumery purposes for more than 2,000 years.
In the first century A.D. Pliny wrote that it was discovered in Spain in the previous century, where it was used to spice drinks, and in England in mediaeval times it was known as "sops-in-wine" , being mixed with wine and ale as a substitute for the costly cloves from the Far East.
It grows wild in southern Europe and India and has become naturalized elsewhere in Europe, including England, where it has been found growing literally out of castle walls, notably the Norman ones.
Cultivation
The true clove-pink, being wild, needs no special cultivation, provided it has a truly well-drained soil, short of plant nutrient, and a sunny sheltered site.
It can be increased by layering in August, or by division at the same time.
Seed is also possible, in mid to late spring.
It varies considerably in the wild, where doubled flowers and differences in height, colour, habit and shape of petal all occur frequently.
This tendency to vary has been exploited in the breeding of the modern hybrid border carnation, an example of which is shown here.
USES
Culinary
fresh flowers, to flavour jams, syrups, sauces, vinegar, jellies, butter, wine, cordials, decorate salads and soups 
Medicinal
not so used now, though once used to cover up the flavour of unpleasant medicines 
Cosmetic
used in home-made colognes 
Domestic
used as an ingredient for snuff, to perfume clothing and household linen 
Fragrance and Aroma
strongly clove-scented; used as substitute for cloves; in potpourri, tussie-mussies, herb pillows
RECIPE
Syrup of pinks
Put the petals, cloves and water into a heatproof jar and cover tightly with kitchen foil and a lid.
Place the jar in a saucepan of cold water so that the jar is about ¾ covered by water.
Bring slowly to the boil and simmer for 5–6 hours topping up the saucepan with boiling water from time to time.
Drain the contents of the jar into a bowl and squeeze all moisture from the petals before discarding them.
Measure the liquid from the jar and for each 600ml/1 pint/2½ cups, add 400g/1lb of sugar.
Boil again until the sugar melts and the mixture is a syrup.
Leave to cool, then bottle and secure tightly.
ROSE
There are several other species of roses with herbal connotations, such as R. Canina, rubiginosa, rugosa, centifolia, damascena, and indica, but this, the apothecary's rose, sometimes known as the red damask rose, because it was thought to have been introduced from Damascus by a Crusader, had the greatest medicinal use.
In general, roses have played a part in everyday life from the time of the ancient Egyptians and Chinese, and have always been loved and treated with veneration, and repeatedly illustrated in herbals and paintings, they were adopted as the national flower in Britain from the Middle Ages.
The damask rose is extremely fragrant and one of the sources of attar (oil) of roses; others are R. centifolia, the cabbage rose, and R. indica, the tea rose.
The apothecary's rose grows at Provins in France and has the property that it keeps its perfume even when the petals have been dried and powdered, thus making it of great use to add to medicinal compounds and ensuring that they are pleasant and soothing.
Cultivation
The apothecary's rose is hardy and will do well in deep, well-drained but moist soil, in sun or a little shade at some time during the day.
Plant between autumn and spring, and be careful to spread the roots down and out round the plant, so that they are not forced into an unnatural position.
Little pruning is needed, but if necessary do it in early spring, so as to remove dead growth, ad straggling and weak shoots; thin any which are crowded.
Remove the flowers as they fade.
Pests and disease are unlikely to attack.
Mulch in late spring with rotted organic matter, and give a light dressing of bonfire ash in spring, or any fertilizer which contains potassium, if flowering is poor.
USES 
Culinary
fresh or dried petals, for jams, jellies, honey, butter, crystallized, in wine, vinegar, confectionery , cakes, fritters, mousse, custards, pancakes; rosehips valuable source of vitamin C, for sauces, jelly, wine 
Medicinal
dried powdered petals, to give pleasant taste and smell to other medicinal remedies, rose vinegar traditionally used for headaches, also rose honey for sore throat and ulcerated mouth 
Cosmetic
in washing water, and as a tonic for the complexion, in soaps 
Domestic
for refreshing the air, in candle-making 
Fragrance and Aroma
petals strongly and sweetly perfumed, retained over a long period when dried, used in perfumery, potpourris, for perfuming writing paper.
RECIPE
Rose hip tea
Pour boiling water over rose hips and leave to stand, covered for about 5 minutes.
Strain the tea and add sugar or honey if desired.
Rose petal jam
Simmer the petals in a small amount of water until tender.
Add the sugar, honey and lemon juice and cook gently until the mixture is a thick syrup.
Allow to cool a little, then pour into warm, sterilized jars and seal.
ROSEMARY
The nose-tingling aroma of rosemary in itself is enough to banish catarrh and sinus infections as it trickles coolly up into the nasal cavities and spreads behind the cheekbones and forehead.
I know of no herb whose pungency is more refreshing and calming to inhale, yet its medicinal applications give no indication of these properties.
The flavour of the leaves in singularly characteristic, too, but it is subtly altered in each dish; for instance, with apple dishes, it becomes peppermint.
The aromatic strength of the leaves has ensured a good deal of domestic and perfumery use, and it is also decorative, its pale blue flowers lasting many weeks and being much visited by bees.
From the Mediterranean coastlands, it obtained its name from the Latin ros and maris, dew of the sea, and has had associations with the mind and improving the memory since classical times; witness the famous quotation in Hamlet, of poor Ophelia: "There's rosemary, that's for remembrance" .
In Elizabethan days, rosemary shoots were tied with coloured ribbon, tipped with gold and given to guests at weddings to symbolize love and faithfulness, and on New Year's Day it was a gift for guests, together with an orange stuck with cloves.
Cultivation
Rosemary is one of the best small-to medium-sized shrubs for the garden, its only drawback being that it is liable to be damaged or killed by severe cold.
However, a mature plant, well-established in light soil which drains quickly, is more likely to live.
If winter survival is doubtful, tip cuttings of new shoots taken in summer and covered will root easily in sandy compost.
Planting is done in late spring, and the tip of the main shoot should be removed to encourage side growth and greater bushiness.
A sunny place, backed by a wall, is an ideal position.
Pruning is not necessary.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaf, in all kinds of meat (especially lamb) casseroles, marinades, bouquet garni, with baked fish, rice, salads, sparingly with egg dishes; dumplings, apples, summer wine cups and fruit cordials, in vinegar and oil 
Medicinal
leaves, fresh or dried, oil, for antiseptic use, as a tonic and diuretic, good for neuralgia 
Cosmetic
in shampoo for deepening the colour of dark hair, in washing water, for astringent skin lotions 
Domestic
insect repellent, for strewing, and in household linen and clothing, to perfume furniture polish and candles 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaf and flower calyx strongly aromatic, used in potpourri, and tussie-mussies, herb pillows, for burning in the home to replace smells; oil used in perfumery, e.g. Hungary water NB The above is only a selection of the uses of rosemary; there are many, many more and it is, more than most, a herb for everyday use.
RECIPE
Rosemary cleansing cream (for oily skin)
This is a quick way of making a herb cleansing cream.
A strong rosemary infusion (1 tbls) well whipped in, can be substituted for the dried herb.
Melt the cream slightly, add the rosemary and mix well.
Pack into a screwtop jar.
RUE
Rue, although it is strongly flavoured, has a most bitter and acrid taste, which makes it unpopular for culinary use now, except in one or two specialized cases.
It was never greatly used in food, even in mediaeval times, but it had considerable medicinal application, and still has, for certain ailments.
However, it has to be so used with great care, and preferably only by trained and professional medical advisers.
Its native habitat is southern Europe, where it grows on rocky hill and mountainsides, from the most inhospitable soil.
The plant was described by the ancient Greeks to improve eyesight ad this belief continued and travelled to Britain where Gerard recommended: "that the herb a little boiled or skalded and kept in pickle as Sampier (samphire) and eaten, quickens the sight" , or: "applied with honey and the juice of Fennell, is a remedie against dim eies" .
The name is taken from the Greek reuo, to set free, because it was thought to be effective in so many ailments.
Cultivation
The species described is a pretty, small shrub, the leaves of which are the most decorative part.
It can be clipped to formal shapes so that the flowers are prevented from developing, the plant thus being covered in the delicate, lace-like foliage.
There is a cultivar "Jackman's Blue" , whose leaves are distinctly blue, and this is eve more striking.
Rue needs poor, dry soil and plenty of sun and warmth to flourish and ripen its seed.
Planting should be in spring, when seed may also be sown — it germinates easily — semi-hardwood cuttings can be made in summer, and rooted under cover.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaf, sparingly, in salads, sandwiches, with cheeses, and to flavour beer 
Medicinal
leaf, fresh or dried, to treat skin disorders, as an eye lotion, a gargle, for rheumatism, traditionally used for epilepsy, an abortifacient, toxic in large amounts 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
powerful flea repellent, also against other insects, as an air cleanser when burnt 
Fragrance and Aroma
bitterly aromatic, unpleasantly so; oil is used in perfumery
PRESCRIPTION
Rue eyewash
Rue is an example of a common, well-known garden herb, with a long history of use, yet with properties that make it unsuitable for general use by the layman.
Its complicated chemical structure includes bergaptens, which may cause an allergic rash on the hands of those using it, and other substances which strictly prohibit its intake by pregnant women.
The substance rutin strengthens weakened blood vessels, particularly in the eye.
As such it has been used as a very weak tea (6g/¼oz to 600ml/1 pint/2½ cups of water)(one cup per day) by male artists and craftsmen.
Today the herb tea should only be used as an external eye wash.
Prepare the above tea and dilute 1:10 with clean, sterile water and use an eye bath.
Height 45–60cm (18–24in), spread 20–30cm (8–12in) Root tough, fibrous, some fleshy anchoring roots, white Stem green, brow and woody when mature, erect, branching Leaf blue-green, thin, deeply divided, leaf sections oblong with rounded ends, semi-evergreen, alternate to 1.5cm (½in) long Flower yellow, four petals, 1.2cm (½in) wide, in loose clusters, June-September Seed tiny, black 
IDENTIFICATION
SAGE
The use of sage, whether for medicinal or culinary purposes, dated back in Europe at least several centuries B.C. when it was listed in Theophrastus"writings on plants.
The Romans made much use of it also, its generic name being derived from salvere, to be well, and in the Middle Ages, there was a current Arabic saying: "Why should a man die when there is sage in his garden?" 
It was considered particularly helpful in soothing and calming the nervous and hysterical.
Its original home was Spain and western Yugoslavia, but it has spread widely round the Mediterranean coastline, particularly where the soil is well-drained and alkaline, with plenty of sun.
The highly aromatic leaves have many uses, and also make it a decorative garden shrub; there are several varieties with leaves of other colours besides green.
Cultivation
Sage can be grown outdoors in cool, temperate climates in spite of its provenance, and will survive all but the coldest winters, provided the soil is well-drained, and the plant has been well-ripened as a result of growing in a sunny position.
Plant in spring and take tip cuttings in summer, to root under cover; sage can also be layered in spring.
It will need renewing every seven years or so as it is not long-lived.
Prune by cutting off the old flowered growth immediately after flowering, when it will produce good new shoots.
S. o.
 "Purpurascens" has violet-tinted leaves; "Icterina" has leaves variegated with yellow, and "Tricolor" has foliage veined with creamy white and pink, becoming red.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaves, with rich and fatty meats of all kind including game, in stuffings, marinades, with salads, sausages, cheeses, fish particularly oily kinds, bouquet .Medicinal
leaves, fresh or dried, oil; antiseptic ad astringent, for sore throats, to treat skin troubles, ulcerated mouth, of help with quinsy and tonsillitis, as a soothing and calming drink 
Cosmetic
to darken and improve the colour of hair, and to increase its growth, to whiten teeth, and strengthen gums, an astringent and deodorant, for bath and washing water 
Domestic
for strewing, flowers once used to dye food 
Fragrance and Aroma
leaves strongly and penetratingly aromatic.
RECIPE
Sage and onion sauce (for roast pork, goose or duck)
This 17th century recipe is a variation on the now more common sage and onion stuffing 
Gently cook the onion and sage in the butter for about 10 minutes or until the onion is soft (do not allow to brown).
Then add the breadcrumbs and the roast juices or gravy.
Cook for a few minutes more, stirring thoroughly.
Add salt and pepper to taste before serving.
SAVORY
The savories are not as well known as the majority of culinary herbs, but they should be used as often as marjoram or basil are, as they have their own distinctive, spicy, warming flavour to add to many dishes.
Traditionally they are associated with all kinds of bean dishes, and are good digestants in that they prevent flatulence.
Summer savory planted in patches is highly ornamental in flower, being covered with small, light purple flowers for many weeks, and accordingly festooned with bees with which it is very popular.
Savory has a longer history than sage, though not considered to be as useful medicinally.
Its stimulant effect may account for its reputation as an aphrodisiac, its generic name being thought to come from satyr, S. hortensis (summer savory) is the annual; S. montana (winter savory) a perennial shrub, whose leaves have a stronger, but less pleasant flavour.
However, it is a hardy plant.
Cultivation
Summer savory is grown as a half-hardy annual, sowing outdoors in April-May, to thin to 20cm (8in) apart, when the plants will grow into little bushes, but be killed by the first hard frost in autumn.
Winter savory can be grown from seed sown outdoors in August; it should not be covered as it needs light to germinate when it will then sprout in about ten days.
Grow at the same spacing.
It can also be increased by layering, from soft cuttings or division in early spring, and grows for many years.
Both kinds thrive with good drainage, rather poor soil, and plenty of sun.
USES
Culinary
fresh or dried leaves, with beans of all kinds, in stuffings, with any kind of pork meat, with game, in bean or lentil soups, wherever a warm-hot flavour is required 
Medicinal
leaves fresh or dried, dried flowering tops, a tonic, digestive, antiseptic and diuretic, said to relieve pain of wasp and bee stings at once 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
for strewing Fragrances and Aroma leaves hot, slightly peppery in aroma and flavour, winter savory strongest
RECIPE
Broad beans with savory and ham
Melt half the butter in a saucepan, add the beans and cook gently for a couple of minutes, stirring, then add the savory and just enough boiling water to cover the beans.
Boil rapidly for about 5–10 minutes until the beans are tender and the liquid almost evaporated.
Chop up the ham and add to the beans with the remaining butter.
Add salt and pepper to taste and serve.
SORREL
OTHER NAMES: Buckler-leaved sorrel
There are two sorts of sorrel commonly grown as herbs: the English and the French.
The former has large, long, pointed bright green leaves, the latter has rounded, much smaller leaves, with a much better flavour, and it is this which is used by the French for making soup.
Sorrels in general were used by the Greeks and Romans for medicinal purposes, and had some medicinal as well as culinary application in mediaeval Britain, but the English sorrel then used (R. acetosa) was replaced for culinary purposes by the French version and has been so used until the preset day.
It sour but refreshing flavour, due to the presence of oxalic acid, is particularly agreeable in salads for which fresh, young leaves should be used.
It is native to Europe and Asia, growing mainly in well-drained ground on hill and mountainsides, and wasteland; it is naturalized in a few places in Britain and grows well in temperate to warm regions of North America.
Cultivation
French sorrel grows easily from seed sown outdoors in mid-spring, when it may also be planted.
Sun or a little shade and a moist but well-drained soil are preferable, allowing plants 45cm (18in) between them.
To ensure as much foliage as possible, flowering stems should be removed as they appear.
It will grow in alkaline soil, but does better in an acid one.
USES
Culinary
fresh leaves, for soups, salads, with rich or fatty meat dishes, in stuffings for fish dishes, for sauces, in omelettes as a substitute for spinach 
Medicinal
no regular medicinal use, but leaves have diuretic effects 
Cosmetic
not so used 
Domestic
not so used 
Fragrance and Aroma
bruised leaves have strong aroma and taste refreshingly astringent
RECIPE
A variation of the traditional French sorrel soup.
Sorrel and tomato soup
Sauté sorrel in butter briefly until wilted.
Add the tomatoes and cook for about 5 minutes until they are soft but not completely disintegrated.
Heat the stock, add to sorrel and tomatoes with salt, pepper and a little sugar to taste.
Bring to the boil and simmer for about 5 minutes before serving.