

As with drinking, so with love — it's the morning after that counts, often more than the night before.
And on this morning, of all mornings, James phoned at the crack of dawn and asked me to preside over a ridiculous Press party.
Shivering at the landing extension, I heard his brisk boisterous voice rattling on about the!!! historic meeting of a famous comic and a famous bust who were going to make a film together.
"The whole thing's a farce, of course, they've known and loathed each other for years, but the official version of this world-shaking meeting of titans has to take place in public where it can be duly recorded — and one of us must be there, and why should it be me on a Sunday morning when I've got an angelic assistant?
You don't mind, do you, Jane dear, dear Jane?"
I said no, I didn't mind, feeling nothing but numbness and coldness.
Toby stood at my elbow, and when I'd hung up and told him said, with a strange urgency, almost like despair: "No, no, not this Sunday, for Christ's sake, can't you get out of it?" 
And I said no, I simply couldn't, banishing the thought that I probably could, quite easily, just by ringing James back and sounding a bit pathetic.
I got ready with ludicrous haste (why?
I kept thinking.
There's no real hurry, it's not till 11.30) chatting brightly to hide the hollow empty absence of anything at all in the way of feeling, and kept my eyes off Toby's face which had a look on it as if someone were dragging his insides out.
When I was ready I went and stood beside him and touched his shadow-stained tired face and said,"You look dead, Toby.
Go to bed and get some sleep.
Please.
I'll be back before you wake up."
He pushed his face awkwardly into my hand, nuzzling it like a puppy, and then suddenly grabbed it in both his and kissed it.
 "I wish you weren't going out now," he mumbled into the pad
 "I wish not too," I said, not knowing what I wished.
He came down to the front door with me.
There was no one about and he kissed my cheek and looked at me speechlessly.
 "Don't look like that," I said, trying to laugh.
 "I'll be back in a couple of hours!" 
I started off, but he stopped me.
 "You're not sorry?" 
I had so hoped he wouldn't ask that.
But as he had, I could only give him the answer he needed, without knowing for sure whether it was true or not.
 "Of course not, darling!" 
The endearment eased the expression of pain on his face a little, but still he held me and still he searched my eyes for something I knew wasn't there.
 "You haven't said you love me," he said in a low voice.
My heart almost stopped with its own heaviness.
I closed my eyes.
Quite suddenly, he let me go and his voice changed.
 "I'm sorry," he said, sounding as he might have sounded yesterday.
"I am an idiot.
How could you say that yet?"
I looked at him, surprised at his quick recovery, but then I saw he hadn't really recovered, he was just pretending in order not to hurt me.
 "Go on," he said lightly,"quick, or you'll get the sack.
And when you've done your duty, come 'ome, Jim Edwards."
He kissed me again, a different, unanguished sort of kiss which was somehow much more difficult to bear than the other.
Sitting in the train, with a Sunday paper which I'd automatically bought lying unopened on my knee, I felt a sense of relief at being away from him, at being surrounded by a lot of impersonal uncaring strangers who could see nothing different about me because they'd never seen me before last night.
I was sure I must look a different person, that my guilt and radiance must have transfigured me.
I struggled to make some sense of this new and appalling complication.
This time yesterday I would have said that what had happened last night was a laughable impossibility.
I had done nothing to precipitate it; on that score at least my conscience was clear.
Until the very last minute I had had no idea it could happen.
But it had happened, and happened in a way that changed me, changed Toby, changed everything.
Everything except the one thing that needed changing; that alone remained unspeakably the same.
Why, why hadn't I told Toby about it long ago?
Then this would never have happened, or if it had (I couldn't bring myself to unwish an experience which still washed over me with waves of delight when I remembered it) at least Toby would have known what he was doing, his eyes would have been open.
He wouldn't  be suffering now, and he wouldn't have to suffer more, oh, how much more, later, when I told him…
To think of telling him, now, made me feel sick with horror.
I was almost afraid to examine my feelings for him.
It seemed dreadful that I didn't know whether I loved him or not, that I had never even thought of it in those terms.
Everything had happened in the wrong order, and now I had to try to bring my feelings up to counter-balance the overpowering weight of this physical attraction which had sprung up out of nowhere and knocked me sideways.
I closed my eyes and tried to think of Toby — just his face.
What came was a sort of double-image — the boy I had known up to yesterday, young, grubby, entertaining, kind, lively, with his impish, monkey-plainness; and the face I had seen last night for the first time, a face wiped clean of everything but rapture and tenderness and astonishment, a different face, a face to love and find beautiful.
They were the faces of two entirely separate people, and try as I would to superimpose them they wouldn't focus into a single man for whom I had a single, straightforward feeling.
As I came into the hotel I tried to project myself back into a time when I'd have been thinking — Sunday press party, rather fun.
Wonder if old so-and-so will turn up?
Now my mind was so burdened with problems I couldn't even remember what James had said the party was about.
I had to ask the man at the desk which room the reception was in; he mentioned the two famous names, and then I remembered, Oh yes, the phoney meeting.
Several of the photographers and columnists were already drifting in in the hope of an early drink (they'd be unlucky — we couldn't serve drinks before twelve).
I nodded to them, but when they looked at me I turned away quickly, for fear I should see them exchange puzzled glances.
I hurried into my own office, locked the door and stood before the mirror.
Apart from the fact that I'd put my make-up on badly in my haste, I looked fairly normal — a bit flushed, maybe, and my eyes seemed unusually bright, but perhaps they only looked that way to me.
I sat down behind my desk and tried to pull myself together; I was trembling suddenly, and I felt the hollowness inside me growing into a pain.
I remembered I'd had nothing to eat or drink before leaving the house, and thought how awful that I hadn't even made Toby a cup of tea before obeying my impulse to run.
There would be hot coffee in the reception.
That was what I needed — strong hot coffee.
But something kept me sitting at the   desk.
I hated the idea of going in there among all those cheerful, back-slapping journalists with their good-natured vulgarity and genial earthy humour.
I felt naked and horribly vulnerable, like a snail with its shell off; every nerve was close to the surface; I thought if anyone so much as touched me, I'd scream.
Suddenly I wanted Toby, very much; I knew now how he felt when I left him.
In a sense we were still in the aftermath of being one person.
I realized suddenly that that was why lovers always feel the need to sleep together after making love, and to rest and be together the next day.
They've been joined and need time to separate again into two complete people; if they're torn apart too soon there's a spiritual bleeding.
I was beginning to understand a lot I'd never known about before, and for the first time that day Toby's fatal unthinking words came back to me: "One day she'll have a baby without ever having understood what love really means." 
Perhaps that wasn't completely true of me any longer.
Certainly the sting had gone out of the words; I could think of them without being quite so ashamed.
I picked up the phone and gave the switchboard the Fulham number.
Just to talk to him for a few minutes…
I could say some of the things I hadn't been able to say when I left him, because I hadn't shared his feelings then.
But I remembered I'd told him to go to bed; he'd be asleep by now.
Well, it served me right.
He'd had to go through that wrench of premature separation alone; now I had to.
It was only fair.
I clicked the receiver-rest.
 "Don't bother," I said to the girl.
I went into the Juliet Room, where the reception was being held.
The coffee cups were all laid out on long white-napped tables, and waiters hovered over the silver urn, dispensing coffee to a few early arrivals.
I went round commiserating with the ones I knew, pointing out that if the lady with the bosom was as late as she normally was, the reception would undoubtedly extend into licensing hours.
More people came.
They were nearly all men, show-business or gossip columnists, old hands at the game and professional cynics, which well they might be on an occasion like this.
Promptly at 1.30 the little comic arrived.
He was a very nice man and popular with the journalists, who gave him a ragged but friendly cheer for turning up on time.
Then we all settled down to wait for Madam.
Quarter to twelve came — twelve o'clock.
I caught a waiter's  eye and before long the drinks arrived; they were greeted with anything-but-ragged cheers, in which the comic wholeheartedly joined.
I got a drink for him and he grinned gratefully at me.
 "I'm awfully sorry about the delay," I said.
 "Don't you be sorry, lass," he said.
 "She's always" all behind ", in more senses than one." 
He winked good-naturedly over the rim of his glass.
I went from group to group apologizing, and then telephoned up to the lady's room.
Her PRO answered the phone.
He sounded as if he were distracted, but having to control it.
 "We're not quite ready yet," he cooed, if one can coo while grinding one's teeth.
"We want to look our very best — which shouldn't be a real problem as we're so gorgeous — but we've just had to change our clothes a couple of times.
How are you getting on, Angel? "he called sweetly to Madam, and then hissed into the phone in a totally altered voice," She's in the loo, top-heavy cow that she is, I hope she falls in.
What am I saying?— Could I pull the chain on my bread-and-butter?"
He raised his voice and shouted, through the loo door, presumably, "YES DARLING, 0F COURSE I'M WAITING!" — and then to me, in a tormented undertone: "And so are the Press, I know, I know—they must be ready to eat me for lunch.
Stall them another five minutes, Janie, please, I'm trying to hurry her up — it's like pushing a ten-ton truck with its brakes on — YES MY PET, THAT L00KS DIVINE —(dear kind God, wait till you see this)— well! "— brightly —" Looks like we're on our way.
 "Bye for now, Janie!" 
He hung up and I went back to the salon.
The crowd had just started to thin out, and there was a disgruntled note in the talk of those who were sticking it out.
 "One more minute," I told them.
There was another onslaught on the drinks trays.
She came at last, swathed in mink, ushered in by the perspiring PRO.
The photographers reluctantly put their glasses down and picked up their cameras as the PRO, his hands daintily plucking at the collar of the mink, prepared to unveil the famous figure When every camera was in place, he whisked the coat away.
It really was the most extraordinary outfit I've ever seen.
The red hair flowed over bare white shoulders.
The celebrated bust, looking like two dunces' caps applied to her chest, was encased in a puce halter-necked sweater which left all but essentials bare.
Her sizeable bottom and not-too-marvellous legs were thinly  coated with bright yellow silk jeans ending just below the knee; her bare feet were thrust into pink mules with diamond spike-heels.
She also wore a diamond brooch at her waist, the size of a buckler.
For a second there was an unbelieving silence — then a chorus of whistles and concerted pops and tinkles as every flashbulb in the room went off.
 "Eeh, booger me," murmured the little comic, who was standing near me.
"Have I got to 'ave me picture taken alongside of that?
I'll feel like a seaside postcard."
While all the posed pictures were being taken I was edging round among the columnists saying,"Please, give us a break, don't put in that it happened at Drummonds.
This is supposed to be a respectable hotel"This was what I knew James would have done; the boys laughed wryly.
"Don't blame you.
Don't worry.
Thanks for the drinks, Janie."
It was nearly over.
I had a small breather in which to feel pleased that there was this part of me that could take over, like an automatic pilot, and carry on as usual.
I knew that not one person had guessed there was anything wrong.
At this moment, Madam, who knew me, shrieked to me over the heads of the crowd: "You — there — please!
I'm simply dying of thirst.
Do you think you could possibly find me a small drink?"
The waiters were all busy at that moment so I picked up a full glass from the table and fought my way to where she was holding court in the middle of the mass — standing up, of course.
She couldn't sit down; the yellow pants were too tight.
I handed her the drink and she smiled at me with all her splendid teeth and said,"Thank you.
The men are all being so unkind, they're making fun of my relaxing clothes.
Don't you think they're divinely chic?"
At this moment, at this precise moment, a feeling came over me that I hadn't had for nearly a month.
My face went deathly cold and saliva rushed into my mouth.
There'd been no warning.
I clutched my throat and gasped.
Madam's smile froze on her lips.
 "What's the matter?" asked someone.
 "I'm going to be sick," I replied hollowly.
A passage was cleared through the crowd like magic, and although they were all kindly men, a great shout of irrepressible laughter went up as I fled.
As I left the room I heard the little comic bellow, "That's what she thinks of thy relaxing clothes, ducks, and I must say I see what she means!" 
It should have been just one of those stories one dines out on afterwards, only the wretched woman thought I was being deliberately insulting and complained to the Management.
And this time James wasn't around to cushion the blow.
I was sitting in my office smoking one of James's cigarettes — not the best thing, perhaps, for the queasiness I was still feeling, but I hoped it might calm my juddering nerves — when a poked page-boy knocked on my door and said the Old Man wanted to see me in his suite.
I guessed what had happened, and despite a clear conscience began shaking in my boots.
I lit another cigarette from the stub of the first (unheard-of for me)— not because I wanted it but because I felt it might give an illusion of poise to walk into the Presence with a cigarette dangling carelessly from my lips.
The Management was waiting for me in the lounge of his magnificent suite.
He wore a Paisley dressing-gown which was a reminder of his good taste — not that one was necessary; the whole room, in fact the whole hotel, was a monument to it.
I admired this man, though it was unfashionable to say so in conversation with the rest of the staff.
He'd built the hotel himself, on a bombsite, and developed goodwill from scratch in competition with the best and oldest hotels in London by applying a maxim which, according to him, has fallen into disrepute — namely that quality pays.
Every article and member of the staff, from the fire-buckets to the boot-blacks, had to be the best available.
Compromises with his few but firmly held prejudices were only made when to hold out meant risking something irreplaceable.
James, for all his vagaries, was the best PRO in the hotel business, which explained why I, a non-Jew and a woman, had obtained my present job.
I knew he'd fought James on it tooth and nail, and though in all honesty I felt I'd won him round to some extent since, the prejudices remained beneath the surface of benignity, waiting only for some unwary blunder on my part to crack the surface and let them burst through.
Such a blunder I'd now committed.
As I entered the room I wished I'd thought of phoning a desperate SOS to James.
I wasn't sure what he could have done from Purley, where he lived, but I had very great confidence in his championship.
Standing small and shaky before that vast desk, surrounded by all the trappings of success and power, I felt very helpless and the cigarette seemed about as much of a morale-builder as a pocket-handkerchief is a protection against a firing-squad.
He sat at his desk writing, and I almost groaned aloud as I thought: Oh God, no, not another one!
The junctures of my life seemed to be marked off monotonously by men at desks, as if Fate had adopted this as a regulation traffic-signal meaning "Sharp turning" .
He didn't keep me waiting, however; he was not the sort of man who needed gimmicks to make his effects.
Smiling at me politely he said, in his still slightly-accented voice,"Sit down, Miss Graham.
Cigarette?
Oh, you have one.
Well now, I had a complaint about you this morning.
You know who from?"
I sighed to combat the hollowness of nerves.
 "I can guess." 
 "Would you like to tell me your version?" 
I told him simply that I had felt ill at a very unfortunate moment.
 "No offence meant, eh?" 
I shook my head wearily.
"Now Miss Graham, as you know, I think, I am not a fool and I am always on the side of my staff — if it is possible to be so without alienating a client.
I know that she is a silly woman, a vain woman — I speak now in confidence, of course.
I knew that what she told me couldn't be the whole story.
I defended you."
 "Thank you." 
 "In such a way that she felt I was in sympathy with her, of course." 
 "Of course." 
 "What caused you to be ill?" 
"I don't really know.
It could have been a number of things."
"Something you ate, perhaps?
Only not in my hotel."
He smiled, and I smiled back rather pallidly.
 "Have you been to see a doctor?" 
I was confused by all these solicitous questions, and found myself telling more lies than I had to.
 "No, I haven't bothered." 
 "But this is not the first time you have been unwell, is it?" 
I was startled.
It was true what was said of him — he knew everything, but everything that happened in the hotel, even, it seemed, what took place in the ladies' lavatories.
 "I'm sure it'll pass off." 
"One hopes so.
In the meantime."
The lines of his face tilted downwards and he shrugged.
"Episodes like this morning are very unfortunate.
They create such a bad impression, cause so much needless ill-feeling.
A hotel such as this, with a reputation for perfection, cannot afford such incidents.
You understand?"
I sat there silent for a moment while he went on looking at me sympathetically as if I'd been telling him a hard-luck story.
I shifted in my seat and said,"No, I'm afraid I don't quite.
Are you sacking me because I was taken ill?"
He smiled a little, without altering the sad expression.
"No, Miss Graham, that would not be fair.
I am only suggesting that you take a little time off, shall we say, until you are quite well again?"
He had his chin resting on his hand, and one finger was against his long nose in a curious gesture that suggested that he was saying one thing and meaning another.
Something in his eyes, too, gave the impression of a deeper meaning underlying the conversation.
He had a formidable reputation as a hard, cryptic, ruthless man whose god was perfection and whose greatest intolerance was for any weakness or sentiment which undermined it; but there was something in his face as he looked at me which was very like kindness.
I thought I must be wrong, because kindness didn't go with what he was doing.
The moment ended, and he grew sharp and brisk again.
 "I shall speak to Paige about it," he said.
— "In the meantime, you go off home." 
His tone was dismissive, and I got up to go.
At the door he stopped me.
 "You like Paige, don't you?" he asked unexpectedly.
 "Yes, very much." 
"He's a good fellow, and a good friend of yours.
Perhaps you wish he were here now, eh?"
If I hadn't detected the kindness before, I'd have thought he was sneering; now I wasn't sure.
I wanted to hate him for doing this to me, so much earlier than I had thought it would be done, but it was difficult to hate a man I had such respect for.
I smiled, rather ruefully.
"Good, you are smiling.
I hope you do not feel bitterly towards me.
You understand, my hotel comes before everything."
I nodded.
"But about Paige.
It would have made no difference, had he been here.
And to be quite truthful with you, this morning did not make much difference either.
I had heard you were not well; I was going to speak to you anyway.
My staff must be, as you say, one hundred per cent."
He looked at me with his head cocked on one side like a bright-eyed bird.
 "Thank you for the very good work you have done here," he said.
 "I've enjoyed working for you very much." 
"Good.
You know you would not have been engaged if Paige  had not insisted.
I cannot approve of women in key positions.
But Paige is a man of very good judgement, like most Jews."
He knew, and he knew that I knew, that James was no more Jewish than I was.
But it hurt him in some way to admit that one of his key men came from the wrong end of the Bible, so to speak.
I went back to my office and shut myself into it for the last time.
I tried to recapitulate all the rude names James had ever called the Management.
I raged inwardly against his injustice and vindictiveness; I told myself he was a pro-Jewish fanatic, and anti-feminist to the point of misogynism; that he was a bigot, a bully and a nepotist (this last was more than unfair, as the extent of his nepotism was his sister's husband's niece who was a chambermaid).
But in fact all I was doing was putting off the moment of reckoning.
When I had stopped kicking against the pricks I began to ask myself how much longer I could have gone on without somebody noticing the change in my figure.
Had I proposed to keep working until the hotel was a hotbed of gossip, and leave only when I'd made myself the centre of a tasty little scandal?
Wouldn't my dismissal, inevitable eventually, have been a whole lot more unpleasant at that stage?
In a way, without knowing it of course, the Old Man had done me a favour.
But all the same, leaving was hard.
I sorted my few things out slowly, and splashed them with valedictory tears.
It was James I wanted at this moment, more than Toby, who couldn't have been expected to understand this.
But as soon as I had left the building, James and the Old Man and all the ties and affections of my ex-job began to blur.
My life lay away from them now, and the problems I had brought to work with me that morning reclaimed me with redoubled urgency.
A great longing for Toby seized me.
The thought of the complicated journey back by London Transport seemed unbearable.
I called a taxi.
Outside Toby's door, I hesitated.
People asleep are so vulnerable; I didn't want to disturb him too suddenly.
Holding the door handle, I savoured in advance the small luxury of waking him.
I wondered  if he would see at once that something had happened to make my need of him as great as his had been of me when he last saw me.
I turned the handle gently and opened the door.
There was no one in the room.
The sense of disappointment was as sharp as a blow, painful out of all proportion, so much so that for a moment I was almost angry with him for not being there.
I stood in the doorway, feeling quite dazed with loneliness, looking at the bed where he should have been lying.
Then I realized how absurd I was being.
Obviously he'd gone out for cigarettes, or lunch — or perhaps — it was a sudden exciting hope — he was upstairs in John's room, waiting for me there.
For the first time, a thought occurred to me.
We had left John last night at the club, and I wondered with a quailing sensation when he had got home.
It seemed incredible I hadn't thought of that before — normally I was constantly aware of his proximity through the thin dividing wall.
I went upstairs uneasily and knocked on his door.
Instead of opening it, he called out after a moment: "Who there?" and when I answered, there was a long silence which alarmed me.
 "Go away," he said at last.
He seemed to be standing just inside the door.
 "What's the matter?" 
I asked, sharply because of my nervous embarrassment.
Then, as he didn't answer, I said, "I want to ask you something." 
After another pause the door opened.
Any doubts I had had were dispelled by the look of contemptuous hostility on his face.
I felt myself turning hot and cold.
 "What you want?" he growled like a hurt child.
 "What's the matter?" 
He turned his back on me and walked into the room.
I followed, tentatively.
I'd never been in there before; it was dark and stuffy and full of bloody, primitive colours.
John pulled a chair forward with a violent, angry gesture and sat down on it facing away from me with his arms along its back.
I went up behind him and put my hand on his shoulder.
I suppose I must have touched him many times before, but not consciously or deliberately.
It seemed a rather difficult thing to do, somehow, which surprised me, as I hadn't realized I still had some atavistic buried fear of him because he was black.
John twitched his great shoulders as if a wasp had landed on them.
 "Why you don't go away," he muttered without looking round.
His voice was muffled and I thought he was trembling.
Without touching him again, I said, "John, have I done something to offend you?" 
He put his face down on his arms and his voice was muffled.
"Yes, you done somethin' to offend me.
You done somethin' to offend any decent person."
Well, there it was, you couldn't ask for anything plainer than that.
My armpits pricked with embarrassment.
But I couldn't leave it at that.
"John, listen.
What happens between two people only concerns them.
If you hadn't been next door here, you'd never have known."
 "You think that make it all right— if no one know?" 
"But why should it upset you so much?
Toby and I are the same, two people we were yesterday — we're still your friends "" Not the same.
I don't know you from yesterday."
He lifted his head, but still without looking at me; his huge hands were clenched into fists.
 "How you think I feel, lyin" here listenin"?
My friends.
My friends."
He was crying.
"How do you think I feel, knowing you heard?
But John, it's not — a crime or anything.
People…"
I faltered and stopped.
I felt he wasn't listening.
I leaned over him and said in a different tone, "Do you know where Toby is?" 
John shot me a look, and then looked away again.
Without knowing why, I felt the advantage had suddenly shifted.
He shrugged uneasily.
 "I don" know.
Maybe he downstairs in the basement."
A dull presentiment of hurt came over me.
 "What do you mean the basement?" 
He turned to me slowly, and I saw his face, expressionless in its blackness, with his yellow eyes fixed on me coldly, like an animal's.
 "With the other whores," he said distinctly.
I got out quickly.
My own room was no good; it was too close.
I thought I could feel his disgust penetrating the thin wall.
I went downstairs into Toby's room and locked the door.
I was panting and trembling and icy cold.
After a minute or two I was sick again.
I felt no better after it.
I sat numbly by the open window, with my  legs pressed together, my arms hugging my sides and my hands gripping each other, to combat the sensation that I was going to shake myself to pieces.
He said that without knowing, I thought.
If he knew about the baby, what would he call me then?
I must have sat there for about half an hour or more.
My brain was scarcely working at all.
Odd words and phrases came up occasionally into my mind, like obscenities on a blank wall.
Whore was the main one.
Suddenly I got up and went downstairs.
I went out of the front door and down the area steps to the basement entrance.
I don't know what I thought I was doing.
I had some dim idea that I should see what sort of creatures these whores were, so that I might find out what I was.
I knocked on the door.
I had to wait a long time for an answer, and just before the door opened I nearly came sufficiently to my senses to run away, but sanity came too late.
"Yes?
What do you want?"
She wasn't a young woman, by any means.
She didn't look much like my idea of a prostitute either, but that was because she hadn't any make-up on.
She had a longish, plain face with a straight nose and almost no eyebrows; she must have plucked them away in order to repaint them in higher up.
Her hair was in rollers in the front, and had a dull reddish look like old rust.
She was wearing an old woollen dressing-gown and smoking a cigarette.
I stood staring at her.
She was a good twelve years older than me, but allowing for that, I'd seen myself look not much better some mornings in the last few months, my skin blotchy, my eyes shadowed and swollen, my lips pale and dry-looking, my hair lifeless and uncombed.
The woman was frowning at me.
 "I've seen you before," she said.
 "You came to see Doris about bed-bugs." 
 "Yes, that's right," I said.
She smiled.
Her teeth were a better shape than mine, only tobacco-stained.
 "Old Doris!" she said with a snort.
"My God, she was fit to be skinned!
Never seen her in such a state.
Laugh!
I nearly fell out of my chair.
You know, you've got me to thank she didn't chuck you out.
I told her straight, the kid's right, I said.
You should've seen this place when we moved in."
She gestured over her shoulder into the gloomy flat.
 "She's a dirty old faggot, but she's got a good heart when you know where to look for it." 
She took a long draw on her cigarette, looking at me curiously.
"
Want to come in for a minute?"
 "Thank you." 
I followed her in and she closed the door.
There was a smell inside that made all my senses rear up like a horse that smells blood.
It was dirt, and stale perfume, and something else.
I breathed through my mouth, but I still got the feeling of it.
"It's all in a bit of a state, I'm afraid.
We don't get around to much cleaning."
She led me into a bed-sitting-room.
I was very surprised by how cosy it was.
The colours all yelled at each other; most of the furniture was cheap and shabby and it was in a clutter of smelly untidiness, but the general effect was of a room somebody had made the best of according to their taste, and enjoyed living in.
Like mine.
She scooped some underwear off a chair and said,"Sit down, dear.
Sorry it's such a mess.
I don't often have a woman's eye over it; men don't notice these things much."
She spoke quite casually.
"As a matter of fact, you got me up.
Oh, it's all right, I was awake anyway.
I'm not sleeping too well just lately.
Do you ever get that?
Not being able to sleep?
I've tried everything for it nothing's any good.
Call themselves doctors!
Like a cup of tea?"
I said I'd love a cup of tea, which was surprisingly true.
 "But don't go to any trouble," I said.
"No trouble, I'm just going to make some.
Son'll be wanting one when she wakes up — she's the girl I share the flat with.
Nice kid — Hungarian, she is.
Come over with the refugees, right after the revolution.
You hear about that?"
I nodded.
 "Well, you know how it is, things that don't concern you, in the papers and that you don't always read" em, do you?
But with Son being here, talking about it once in a while when she gets a bit down, and don't we all — well, I feel like it all happened last week, and what's more as if I was in the middle of it.
Fair makes your hair stand up, the way she tells it.
Kids making their own bombs and chucking"em into the tanks, getting theirselves blown up…those lousy Russians, sound worse than the Jerries, if you ask me.
Not that I've got anything against them personally.
But Son!
You know, she's sworn to me she wouldn't have a Russian if he offered her a thousand quid.
She says she can smell"em.
I sometimes think she half-hopes one'll come up to her one night, just so she can spit in his eye."
She was wandering about the room, pulling the covers up on the bed and tidying up half-heartedly, waiting for the kettle on the gas-ring to boil.
While she chatted I could feel the hard knots inside me untying themselves, the way tensed muscles relax in a warm bath.
 "I used to tease her about it," she went on.
 "" Meet any Russians today?"
I'd ask her.
But she didn't like it.
Can't blame her, really.
There's some things you just can't see the joke in.
Like, with me, it's — She stopped.
"Gawd, listen to me, going on!
Oh good, there's the kettle."
She got the things out of a cupboard crammed full of everything, and made the tea, rambling on as she did it.
"You probably came about something, and here I never even asked what it is!
It's having someone to talk to, I'm not used to it.
Like Son, she's a good girl, but she doesn't understand English too well, even now.
Speaks it okay, but doesn't understand it.
Hungarian's a funny language — sounds like a mouthful of peanuts.
Listen to this."
She stood with the teapot in her hand and recited carefully: "Ha-yoke-lesteck-cop-toke-chock.
Know what that means?
 "If you're a good boy, I'll give you a kiss." 
Isn't that a scream?
Son taught it to me, in case I ever got a Hungarian.
I never have, though.
Bet it doesn't mean that at all, bet it's something terrible, like calling an Indian a son of a pig.
How do you like yours, weak or strong?"
When she'd poured the tea she said she must go out soon — "It gets dark so early this time of year" — and started to potter about the room getting dressed.
I noticed that she was very modest in front of me, going through mild contortions putting on her undies beneath her dressing-gown, and once when it fell off, revealing her shabbily but quite decently clad in a mauve rayon slip, she snatched it up with a quick "Sorry dear" .
Sitting in front of a small baby-frilled dressing-table to put on her make-up — a fascinating procedure — she remembered again to ask what I'd come for.
As I wasn't very clear about it myself, it was naturally difficult to think what to tell her; but I managed to falter something unconvincing about borrowing something.
She laughed.
 "Don't give me that!" she said kindly.
"You'd have asked at the door if it had been that.
Come on, tell the truth and shame the devil — what are you, one of these writers?
Or an actress, going to play a prossie or something, is that it?
I've met your sort before."
But she didn't seem at all angry, just amused.
 "I'm sorry —" I began awkwardly.
"Chuck it, ducky, I don't mind, why should I?
Just seems a bit silly, that's all.
I mean, how can you really know what it's like without trying it?
Still, it's nothing to me.
What do you want to know?"
 "How did you start?" 
I asked, fiery with  embarrassment , and yet intensely curious at the same time.
"I thought you'd ask that first.
They all do.
Believe me, starting's the easy part — it's keeping going that's hard.
Still — how did I start?
Well, it was in the war.
Younger than you I was then, but no chicken.
Let's see.
First of all there was an American.
I thought a lot of him.
He was killed somewhere or other."
She was applying her eyeshadow, thick and purple on the tip of her little finger, and gave me a quick sideways look in the glass.
"Oh don't get the wrong idea — I wasn't driven on to the streets through grief, or nothing like that.
Tell you the truth, there was two or three others after the first one went overseas, before I knew about him being dead.
I suppose the truth was, in those days anyway, I just plain liked it"Seems funny to think of that now.
 "You don't like it any more?" 
"What, f-ing?
Doesn't mean a thing, ducks, one way or the other.
Lumme, you'd go mad if it did.
Have another cup?"
I had another cup and watched her take the rollers out of her hair and comb it carefully into a high, curly pompadour.
She was turning into a tart before my eyes.
 "Have you never wanted to be married?" 
I asked.
"No-o-o!
Well —"she hesitated.
"Perhaps I did once.
But after a few years of this, you can't really see any attraction in it, except the security, of course.
Fancy promising to love, honour and obey — some man.
That's what'd stick in my throat"She picked up her eyebrow pencil and looked at me shrewdly.
"Now you're going to ask if I hate all men.
Well, I don't.
You can't hate what you don't respect.
I'm sorry for them — I don't suppose you believe that, but it's true.
Even the queer ones, the ones that want a bit off the other side of the cake, well, you can't help but be sorry for 'em.
And some you can only laugh at — only you mustn't let 'em see it, of course.
They expect you to take 'em seriously, no matter how pitiful they are — in fact, the more pitiful they are, the more their wives at home probably laugh at 'em, the more they expect you to behave as if they was some Eastern potentate or something.
That's really what they pay you for, those sort and if  you do your job right, off they go looking six inches taller.
How they can fool themselves you mean it, when you tell 'em they're wonderful, I don't know, but there you are.
Men can always fool themselves, that's what they're best at.
It's a pity they can't make a living at it then they'd all be millionaires and prices'd be better."
Her eyebrows were on now, thin grotesque parodies above the purple lids.
There was a long narrow mirror by the window and she went over to it and examined herself, full-length but in sections.
"You probably think my life's some kind of tragedy, but I'll tell you — one of the hardest parts of it's keeping a straight face.
I mean, if you're not enjoying it yourself, you can't help but think how funny men are when they're doing it.
Puffing and blowing, their bottoms stuck in the air — well, I mean, it's funny — like, undignified."
She started going through her bag, making sure she had everything, like a woman going out for an ordinary evening.
"Girl I knew — Holy Roman she was, Irish — she used to say God thought it up as a joke, and when he found people taking it serious instead of laughing, he was so put out he made it a sin.
Ever so religious she was, though, underneath.
Used to cry her eyes out sometimes when she'd had a few, and say she'd be in purgatory for about a million years.
Can't be worse than this, I'd tell her to cheer her up, but she said oh yes it can.
Fancy believing in a God like that!"
She snapped her bag shut and groped under the bed for her shoes.
They were light beige with high heels.
 "Do you like these?" she asked.
"They're Italian — ever so smart.
Soft, too.
I spend a lot on shoes; it's worth it when you're on your feet so much."
She slipped them on.
I noticed she had slightly knotted veins in her calves.
"That's another nasty thing about this job — all the standing about.
What I'd like is just a few regulars, that'd come by appointment, like, so I could stay at home.
I'd keep the place a bit tidier, too.
Had a nice place once, you know — in the West End.
That was when I just had the one fellow.
He was a real gent.
You should have seen the place I had then — carpets and pictures, lovely it was, I kept it a treat.
I could've had the Queen Mum to tea there and not been ashamed.
Oh well, it was nice while it lasted."
She had a quick look round the room and shoved a few things out of sight in the glory-hole cupboard.
 "Look at the time!" she said.
"I wonder what's happened to Son — still, better not wake her, she worked till all hours last night, she deserves a bit of a lay-in.
You don't mind if  I throw you out now, do you, dear?
I'm ever so sorry, but you know how it is."
I followed the clack of her high heels down the dark corridor to the front door.
The smell wasn't half so bad now, because I was following a newly-laid trail of fresh scent.
I felt quite calm again, as divorced from my own immediate problems as if I were coming out after seeing a particularly absorbing film.
Standing outside in the gloom of the area she said, quite naturally,"You go ahead, dear, and I'll follow you after a minute or two.
You don't want to be seen with me."
And before I could protest, she went on: "I hope you found out all you wanted to know.
I'm apt to chatter on about nothing, and I must say it was nice to have someone to talk to, like I said."
 "I've enjoyed meeting you," I said.
She looked at me for a moment, measuringly, as if wondering whether I meant it.
 "Have you?" she said at last, curiously.
Then, briskly: "What a lousy night!
I hate this bloody mist, it gets into everything and makes your hair straight."
It was the first time she'd sworn, except the one perfectly correct use of a word more generally used in any but its proper context.
My language was considerably worse than hers.
 "Good-bye," I said, and shook hands with her.
I went up the stone steps into the street, and let myself into the house.
I didn't quite close the door, and after a few moments I could hear her footsteps walking briskly past.
Looking after her, I saw her reach up and tuck a strand of hair into place before the dark mist swallowed her up.
I suddenly remembered her name was Jane.
Toby didn't come back that night, or all the next day.
It was a very long twenty-four hours for me, long and full of worry.
With no work to go to and nothing to do except sit in my room and think, I got through a fair number of mental scenarios by the time the next damp grey evening arrived.
In the meantime, James phoned.
At half past nine in the morning, to be exact.
I'd hardly got the receiver to my ear before he launched into a blistering tirade.
"How the hell did it happen?
Why didn't you phone me?
How dare that little bastard do a thing like this without a word of warning?
That slimy, devious little kyke, I'd like to break his scrawny Yiddish neck!
Don't get me wrong, Jane, I've nothing against the Jews, I like them; I haven't got a single Jew for a friend, but they're a fine race.
But that rotten yellow-gutted two-timing little toad"— I let him go on like that a while, to get it out of his system.
I knew perfectly well that he respected the Manager and even liked him though it was against his nature to admit it; the thing that maddened him was that this had happened behind his back, and for a reason which he obviously found as inadequate as I did.
Eventually when he'd exhausted his immediately available epithets and had to pause to think up a few more off-beat ones, I interrupted.
"Listen, James, thanks for the fireworks, but it's not worth it.
I mean, don't get yourself into a state over it, or issue any rash ultimatums or anything."
I couldn't explain that I would have had to leave in a month or so anyway — but I pointed out that in fact I wasn't well, hadn't been for quite a while whatever he chose to think, and that a rest would do me good.
 "If you want to do me any favours," I said,"maybe you could get me reinstated later, when I'm better.
The Old Man said something that suggested it might only be a temporary suspension.
What do you think?
Do you think it was just an excuse to get me out?"
"I don't know what the hell to think.
A more utterly feeble excuse for sacking anyone I've never heard — it's just not like the Old Man,"he said, doing a volte-face.
"He knows when he's on to something good, and he's loyal to his staff, I'll give him that, whatever he may have to say to anyone behind closed doors.
 "Have you seen him?" 
"SEEN him?
Little pieces of him are quivering all over his deep-pile carpet right now, but it didn't seem to make the slightest impression.
He just smiled and wouldn't even fight back.
I just can't understand what the bloody hell's going on in his mind — his crafty crooked little beetle-brain, I mean,"he added to keep his end up.
"Well listen, don't worry about it, James.
I've got two years superannuation to come, and I've saved a bit since I left home.
"Balls to that, we'll see you get another job.
I know everybody in this lousy shyster business — I'll ring "No, look, don't do that just yet.
I rally do need a rest, James.
Honestly."
There was a baffled pause, and then James said, in a worried voice,"Jane dear, you're not really ill, are you?
I mean, it's not anything serious or anything, is it?
I mean, if I'd thought there was something really wrong, I'd have seen that you stayed at home — this makes me feel I've been driving a sick horse or something"
I couldn't help laughing.
"Well, thanks very much, but don't feel like that.
I thought I was perfectly all right, and then it chose yesterday to catch up with me again suddenly…you've been quite right to ignore it; it's helped, truly."
He grunted, obviously unpacified.
"Well, anyway, you'll go home now, won't you — I mean, to your father's?
You can't possibly be ill in digs, you might die and nobody'd know anything about it"
I said I thought it better to stay where I was.
 "I've got friends here," I said, my cheerful voice belying a heavy heart.
"Anyway, I'm not going to retire to bed or anything, I'm just going to laze around.
Please don't worry, James."
 "I think I'll come round and make sure you're all right," he said suddenly.
 "No, don't, don't do that!" 
I said, too urgently.
 "Why not?" he asked suspiciously.
"Is there something wrong with the place?
It's a nice flat, isn't it?
You told me it was."
I was getting in deeper and deeper with my lies.
Never having foreseen James would suddenly develop a sense of extra-office responsibility for me, I had rather let myself go describing the flat of a rich friend which allayed James's earlier mild concern about where I was living.
Now I protested that it wasn't properly decorated yet and that I'd rather he came when I had it looking its best.
So far I'd managed to avoid giving him the exact address, but now he asked for it with a determined note in his voice — "Just in case I'm down that way" and I was forced to invent one, praying that he'd never check up on it.
 "I'll invite you one of these days soon, James, and a thousand thanks for everything." 
 "Keep in touch," he ordered sternly.
 "I shall ring you every few days anyway, to make sure you're okay." 
I knew the chances were he wouldn't remember to do this, and said good-bye with a lightness  which was a piece of very good acting.
In fact, I felt it was pretty sure to be a final good-bye.
I knew I would never have the courage to go and ask for my job back after the baby was born, even if circumstances allowed it; it would soon be filled again, and it's always horrible to go back to a place where you've been happy in your own little niche and find somebody else in it.
I put the phone down, wondering how many people had been listening in on the extensions, and went back into my room.
It was looking a mess because I hadn't had the heart to tidy it; the sky outside had a yellow-grey sameness, without a hint of where the sun might be, and in that light the flowers on the dirty brown wallpaper looked sadder than ever.
It struck me suddenly we were within two weeks of Christmas.
It was a depressing thought.
There's nothing more depressing than facing Christmas without having anyone to buy presents for.
But that was morbid.
Toby would come back — of course.
I went down again to his room to make sure he hadn't returned in the night.
Everything was the same as it had been when he left it to go to the club the night before last.
I picked up a towel off the floor — it was still damp — and his ordinary clothes, the creaseless grey flannels and aged corduroy jacket which he wore day in, day out, were slung across the bed.
Only the table where he worked was orderly, the piles of flimsy and top-copy paper lined up neatly, the newly-typed draft face-down beside the covered machine.
I put my hand on the last page, and hesitated.
Toby had never offered to read me any of his work; but now I had a sudden longing to know whether or not he could really write I turned the page over.
It was not clean and tidy as if the thoughts had flowed easily; it was double-spaced, and the spaces were larded with corrections in type and pencil, crossings-out, insertions, changed words…it was very hard to make it out.
It seemed to be about a young woman, thinking aloud as she went about her home doing her chores.
Her children were both obviously too little to understand more than the tone of her voice, and as she dressed them to go out with her to the shops she was saying"and when Daddy comes home, we'll show him, shall we?
We'll show him we're happy, and comfortable, and safe, and we'll pretend our happiness is enough for all four of us.
Because that's all he's got, his knowledge that we're happy; it's got to make up for hating what he does every day to keep us safe.
And wouldn't it be awful if he ever realized that it's not very important to us, that we'd rather not be safe if only he had the courage to take our safety away…"
I remembered what he'd told Mavis and me about the book and more than ever I thought it sounded like a good idea — the story of a man rationalizing his own lack of self-belief…
Mavis!
I thought suddenly.
She might know…
I ran down the next flight of stairs and knocked on Mavis's door.
I found her bustling about with a feather duster looking as if she'd been up for hours.
 "Hullo, dear, not at the office today?" she said.
 "No," I said.
 "As a matter of fact, I've lost that job." 
I tried to sound as matter-of-fact about it as possible, and she picked up my tone.
 "Oh dear, well you'll have to get another then, won't you?" 
She was tenderly dusting all the objects on the mantelpiece.
 "Clever girl like you, I don't expect you'll have any difficulty," she added comfortably.
I knew it would be wiser to settle down and chat for a while, and drop my question casually into the conversation, but I couldn't wait.
 "Mavis, have you any idea where Toby is?" 
"Toby?
Isn't he in his room?"
 "He hasn't been home all night," I said, trying to keep the anxiety out of my voice.
"Now I come to think of it, I haven't heard him moving about.
Well now, fancy that, I wonder where he could have got to?
Perhaps he's gone to visit one of his friends — he does that sometimes."
 "Does he stay away overnight?" 
"Well, he has done.
Not very often, though.
Still, you're not worried, are you, dear?
He's all right.
He couldn't get into any trouble, he's not the sort that attracts it.
Some sorts do and others don't.
Now, you, for instance, "she said, her vague look suddenly sharpening into pinpointed attention," you, I should think, do.
Draw it like a magnet, your type does.
If you were missing from the house overnight, I would be worried.
Almost anything could happen.
But Toby, no."
She resumed her vague look and her dusting.
I excused myself and went back to my room, not feeling very reassured.
I sat there, restlessly, until late afternoon.
I forgot about lunch.
John was next door.
I was unhappily aware of him all day, moving about his room, occasionally muttering to himself.
When it began to grow dark I noticed through the little connecting window that he didn't put his light on; this alarmed me, somehow.
It didn't seem natural to be sitting there in the dark.
What could he be doing?
Round about four o'clock he did a thing I'd never known him do since I got there — he started to play his guitar.
He beat out ten minutes of pain-filled, throbbing rhythm, sometimes accompanied by low, anguished singing, before Doris came stamping and peg up the stairs and banged on his door and told him to stop it at once.
I expected him to answer her back — there was such a passion in his music, he didn't sound like himself at all, any more than he had looked like himself yesterday — but he just struck the wires of his guitar into a discord and after that there was a beaten silence, and Doris stamped off downstairs again, talking all the way about her poor legs and her poor head.
We sat on the opposite sides of the partition and sensed each other 's misery.
After a long time I heard him get up and come over to the long wall, near to where I was sitting listlessly in the arm-chair.
Then there came a knock, very light and tentative, the sort of knock one might make accidentally, brushing against the wall.
I reached out and knocked back.
We met outside on the landing.
The tears were streaming down his face; I could see them in the light from my room.
For a second something stopped dead in me, as if paralysed by feeling his pain on top of my own; then we groped forward in one mutual movement and fell into each other 's arms.
Even in that very emotional moment, I felt a little twinge of uneasiness at being embraced by this huge, odd-smelling, odd-coloured man.
It was a very strange feeling, and the strangeness didn't come entirely from his being of a different, a "forbidden" race.
It came from there not being even that trace of sexuality which there always is between men and women, even those who are just friends.
I tried to remember when I'd been held like that before, and by whom.
Then I did remember — it was Malcolm, the little queer who had scratched my face all those years ago.
But the contrast was so ludicrous that the thought flashed straight across my mind and was gone.
We went into my room and sat down on the floor together, and dried each other 's tears; then I began to laugh a bit, ruefully, because I suddenly imagined how we must look, a hulking great coloured man and a girl sitting snivelling in front of a gas-fire mopping up the tears with dozens of paper hankies.
John's tears were so enormous it was like trying to stem a leak in the plumbing.
 "Please do stop," I begged at last.
 "We can't go on like this, I'm running out of Kleenex." 
 "I sorry, I very sorry," he kept on saying.
"I know.
It doesn't matter."
 "Please forgive me." 
 "I forgive you." 
He stared at me tragically, the yellow whites of his eyes blood-shot.
 "But I call you a whore!" 
"Yes.
Well, there are worse things you could have called me."
 "Worse name than whore?" he said incredulously.
 "Whores aren't so bad," I said.
 "Anyway, I'm not one, and you know it and I know it, which is all that matters." 
He hadn't quite understood this, and hastened to assure me,"You not a whore!
I was angry when I say that."
"I know.
I know I'm not a whore,"I said.
That at least I knew now.
I might still get called one, but it would never hurt again.
 "And you forgive me?" he repeated, just like a child.
"Yes.
Now let's have something to eat.
I haven't eaten all day."
While I got us some bread and butter and milk he sat on the floor with his great head bent, staring at the carpet and tracing its patterns with his forefinger.
When I brought him the food he pushed it away and suddenly burst into tears all over again.
"John, for heaven's sake!
What's the matter now?
It's all forgotten and over!"
 "Not over!" he blubbered.
 "I haven't told you — you will be angry and this time not forgive me!" 
A sudden fear gripped me.
"Toby
He turned to me, grabbing both my wrists and shaking them beseechingly.
 "Say you forgive me now!" 
 "Tell me what you've done." 
 "Forgive first!" 
"All right, I forgive you.
Now tell me."
He dropped my wrists and began picking at the bread, rolling bits of it into little grey balls.
 "He come to my room when you go," he said.
"He say he don't want to be alone.
Play to me, he say, Doris don't hear nothing, please play.
I don't play for him.
I don't speak, even.
I am sick, sick in my head like you see me yesterday, for what I hear in the night.
He say, like you, what's the matter, what's the matter."
He stopped, squeezing two balls of bread into a pancake between his giant fingers.
 "I tell him you a whore," he whispered.
 "What did he say?" 
"He call me liar.
He say you no whore.
He say because you let him stay with you, that don't make you whore.
He very angry.
 "And then what?" 
"I get angry too, angry he call me liar.
So I tell him."
 "Tell him what?" 
I said, utterly bewildered.
He shook the bread into the broad palm of his hand and closed his fingers over it gently, as if it were alive.
 "Tell him about the baby," he said softly.
I seemed to shrink into myself.
I could hear the gas-fire hissing away in the silence.
John and the rest of the room seemed to be miles away — even my own voice, when I produced it finally, sounded as if it were coming down a long-distance telephone.
 "How did you know — about that?" 
"I know a long time.
Each morning you sick.
I think all the time you going to have a baby.
Then you begin to get big; after that, I know for certain."
I sat stupefied.
I couldn't think of anything to say.
 "At first," John went on, obviously bent on making a clean breast of everything,"at first when I tell him you a whore, he don't believe me, so I got to make him believe.
I say to him, why do you think she come here, a girl like her, to a house like this?
You think she like to live here?
And I see he beginning to believe, and so I go what work do you think she do?
He say, she work in an office.
Funny time she work, I say.
This is Sunday, office not open on a Sunday.
So where she go to?
He say, I stand beside her, hear her talking on the telephone; her boss call her, say come to work.
He say, I listen other times when her boss call her.
I say, how you know that her boss?
Does he talk like a boss?
Then I see, in his eyes, he got a doubt now, a big doubt.
Then, when I see there  is the doubt, that when I tell him about the baby.
And this time, you see, he believe."
 "And then he went away." 
"Yes…
After a long pause, he said pleadingly, "You think he come back?" 
 "I don't know," I said dully.
Why hadn't I told him myself?
Why hadn't I?
 "But you forgive me?" 
 "What?— Oh, yes." 
We sat in heavy silence for a long time.
The gas-fire ran out of money and dropped abruptly into the five little blue blisters; then it died altogether.
The room chilled quickly.
I couldn't seem to be bothered to move.
I sat in the arm-chair, gazing at the bed, wondering drearily why it was that you couldn't crawl away anywhere and hide, why there were always people wherever you went, new people to get involved with and to create new meshes of unhappiness and responsibility.
John was very gradually edging along the floor towards me, and at last he was near enough to put his head down on my knee, like a penitent dog creeping to its angry master when it thinks he's had time to forget its offence.
Poor John.
I knew he loved Toby.
I stroked his big woolly head, and after a while it got very heavy and I suspected he'd dropped off to sleep.
Without another mind ticking away in the room, I was able to think more clearly.
So, Toby knew about the baby.
He'd got it all wrong, thanks to John — he had some mad idea James was my lover.
Could he honestly believe that when I went off to work at nine o'clock each morning I was really heading for some regular-as-clockwork day-long love-nest?
Probably not.
But in a way, even that wouldn't be more difficult to credit, perhaps, than the truth.
For the first time I saw clearly that it would be impossible to go through the rest of my life with a barrier in my mind between the baby and its conception.
The child itself would want to know who its father was, and the fact that I could get no comfort from the circumstances would be no excuse for hiding them from — him, her?
(It was a painful effort to personalize It even to the extent of apportioning sex.)
And however much I hated the idea, sooner or later I would have to tell somebody about it — Toby, perhaps either the truth or a lie I would have to tell, because I couldn't any longer pretend it was nobody's business but mine.
With the weight of John's head slowly reducing one leg to numbness, I decided to try and explain it to myself.
Truthfully, of course; I'd see how it sounded, and if it were too reprehensible, well, I'd just have to think up a good lie, that was all, right now at the outset, and stick to it until perhaps I'd begin to believe it myself.
I'd never been very good at big lies, and the thought of living one terrified me, but it was important that not only I, but the baby, should have some self-respect about its origins.
However, a lie might not be necessary.
After all, something must have made me do it, pointless and unjustified as it seemed now; perhaps if I went over it all again carefully, I could find out that the truth didn't condemn me out of hand.
I might find some excuse for myself, however inadequate.
Where to begin?
In fairness to myself, eight years ago, when I was twenty and in love with the actor, in that repertory up North.
We weren't really in love, but it seemed a very great deal like it at the time, before we spoiled it; we both thought we were, and how can you tell for sure when it's the first time and you've nothing to compare it with?
Anyway it was very strong and we longed and longed to go to bed together.
There was every possible opportunity and we discussed it; he was keen but not importunate, which naturally made me love him more and be more inclined to give him what he was so sweetly not insisting on, but something held me back.
Part of it was my upbringing, of course, but I could easily have had a violent reaction away from that if it hadn't been for the inhibiting atmosphere in the company itself.
Three separate couples were sleeping together in the most overt and sordid way, one pair on a mattress in the theatre itself (we called it "the bed of Sin" ).
Another girl, who looked wretchedly unhappy and as if she might be going to fade away at any moment, practically had a miscarriage on stage one night as a result of some pills she'd been made to take by her awful lout of a lover.
Then there was the complication of Malcolm, and one way and another it wasn't the most ideal setting for the consummation of young love.
Afterwards I was very glad that we hadn't, still being at an age  to believe that there is something intrinsically precious in virginity, and I decided to carry mine intact to the altar.
But I didn't go to the altar; to be honest it wasn't for lack of offers, but because they always seemed to come from people I wouldn't have been caught dead at an altar with.
I wasn't completely heart-free during those years; sometimes I allowed myself to be fooled that I loved someone, but when it came to the point of saying "yes" to anything final there was always the small honest inner voice which jeered"For life?
Are you mad? "or" Bed with him.
Is that the best you can do, after you've waited so long? "— and sometimes to this the voice would add irritatingly —" and after saying No to that darling actor?"
The truth was, I never again experienced that warm, urgent magic I had felt with the actor — I never again saw an ordinary, or even ugly face change and become Apollo-like through the intervention of love.
If they were plain, I might get fond of them and no longer notice, but they stayed inescapably plain and I, despite my best efforts, stayed stubbornly unenchanted.
So the years went by, and such involvements as came along never satisfied me as being quite right enough either for one thing or the other.
And one day, with jarring abruptness, I was twenty-seven, and the little inner voice stopped jeering and sneering at every man I met and began to whimper and bleat.
"Is it going on forever, this lonely-nights policy?
So supposing you never marry, and if you go on being so fussy you probably never will — are there to be no cakes and ale?"
And I began to be conscious of my unnatural state, and cry in the night sometimes for no real reason except that I wanted a man beside me — any man at all, I sometimes thought, and the little voice which had been so snooty before, now held its peace on the subject.
I kept thinking about the actor.
I hadn't seen him for seven years, though I'd heard about him now and then — he had graduated through minor journalism to publishing, and was now (I learned by well-placed casual questions) a leading light in a go-ahead new publishing house specializing in novels by Angry Young Men.
He had married; the marriage had gone wrong.
He lived alone now, in a small house in Highgate which he'd shared with his wife before she left him.
There had been no children.
Once, in an idle afternoon when the feeling of uselessness which had lately beset me was particularly strong, I went out to Highgate and walked past the house.
It was very ordinary, one of a row; the  garden was a mess.
The front door was painted bright yellow.
It was the colour of a skirt I once had that he had specially liked.
I didn't really imagine he'd chosen the paint for the front door on that basis, but I liked the door being that colour, though it hurt stupidly by making me remember a lot of things.
I came home quite convinced that I'd never met anyone since that I had had the same feeling for.
While I was being so damned honest all of a sudden, there was no use pretending any longer that I had chosen the obscure fishing village of Collioure for a holiday for any other reason than because I had heard he usually went there.
Nor was it mere coincidence that I arranged my holiday for a special part of September.
Jane — downstairs had remarked on men's capacity for self-deception; women aren't bad at it either.
At the time I told myself that I would take a train to Perpignan and from there explore the more accessible small seaside places just because they sounded nice and quiet and I hadn't seen them before.
Perpignan, had I expected anything of it, would have been a disappointment.
It was hot and dry and there was a thin layer of grey dust over everything, including the famous plane-trees which languished ungreenly in the heat.
Even the river was only a trickle among the parched white boulders.
I wasn't inclined to linger anyway; the day I arrived I caught a bus in the square which just happened to have Collioure on the front.
At Collioure there was a great castle built right on the sea, and little boats, and placid fat women in black stockings.
There were widely-spreading nets forever in need of mending, and small rough cafe's where you could choose your own dishes in the kitchen, and many painters.
The swimming wasn't very good; the whole place stank of sardines, and the noble castle turned out to be a youth hostel; also there was a forty-mile-an-hour gale blowing much of the time.
But somehow I had no desire to move on.
I drank Banyuls and went for walks round the dusty countryside, and lay in the sun, and waited.
And of course, he came.
He was strolling down the steep narrow street towards the sea, his hands deep in his pockets and his shirt open at the throat, very pale and Londonish, looking about him with the fond, proprietorial air of an Englishman returning to a favourite  spot abroad.
In the purply warm twilight the tiny traces of time didn't show, he looked exactly as always.
I felt my pulses beating with excitement as he came closer.
If I had specially ordered the moment, it couldn't have been more to my liking.
I had had a week in this quiet place in which to relax and order my thoughts — a week of peace to sustain me for this encounter, not to mention a good meal and a half-bottle of wine just consumed.
My skin was brown and my hair streaked with nature's own blond from the salt and sun: my very bones seemed to have absorbed the heat and now gave it back in the form of a glowing sense of confidence and well-being.
He saw me standing there waiting in the warm light from the cafe and hesitated a second, then walked on a few paces, then stopped and looked back.
It was delicious to watch; I could scarcely keep from giggling with delight.
We stood looking at each other for a long moment; then he walked slowly up to me.
 "Well," he said.
 "Well!" 
The pleasure was rich in his voice.
I looked anxiously at him, partly to make sure the pleasure was really genuine (it would have been unbearable if he had thought me an intruder) and partly to see whether any of the magic was left.
It seemed that there was some, because his face, which I knew was not handsome, with its thin nose and high, bony forehead and small mouth, had still some special quality for me which an unbiased analysis of the features couldn't explain.
I saw that he was examining my face during the same silence.
We had discussed this business of how people's appearance literally alters in the eyes of their lovers, and suddenly I blushed, for it seemed to me he must be remembering this too, and that we must be looking for the same thing, as one might take down an old book in a moment of hungry nostalgia and start to re-read, hoping it may provide the same remembered enchantment as before.
He saw my blush and put his hands on my shoulders.
 "Did you know I was going to be here?" he asked.
I had about four separate answers ready for this one, but they all failed me.
I dropped my eyes and nodded sheepishly.
He began to laugh.
It was a laugh of happiness and male conceit, and I was so pleased by the first that I didn't mind the second too much.
"Oh, good, darling!
Good, good, good.
You're just the same!
I could see you getting ready to lie, and then you just couldn't.
You always were the honestest woman I ever knew."
He  lifted my chin up and looked into my eyes with a funny, half-actorish solemnity, and said quietly, "I am so glad to see you again." 
Then he kissed me, and for a moment I remembered a play we were in together, when we'd done the same sort of kiss, starting with his hand under my chin and just our lips lightly together, and then developing into a full clinch; but by the time we were deeply embraced I had forgotten the play and could think only that this was like coming home.
I hadn't come to this place with the conscious intention of divesting myself of my now cumbersome virginity; but from the moment I saw the actor again — certainly from the moment his arms went round me and I felt the sense of fond familiarity, of affection rediscovered — I knew it was inevitable that we should, sooner or later, make love.
But there was no hurry.
I was happy to let the pleasant sunny days go by.
Now I had a companion to share everything with, someone I knew of old and with whom there were no constraints, and seven years' news to keep the conversation flowing.
Life was a slow, blissful progress towards an unnamed but predecided climax which we both realized was there, only waiting for us to reach it.
We took our time.
We went sailing and swimming, and once we went out at night with the fishing-boats; we ate every meal together, and lay prone on the stone piers, reaching shoulder-deep into the water to catch the scarlet starfish, which petrified with fury when we lifted them out.
We talked endlessly — there was so much to catch up on.
And often we would lie together in the sun after a bathe, and kiss and caress each other, and it was a dear, familiar pleasure, associated in my mind and body with safety and mutual delight and no demands made; his hands were wondering and tender, and his face when I opened my eyes to look at it had the extraordinary beauty it used to have when I had given him even this limited sensual happiness.
It pleased me immeasurably to know that he could sense the difference now, the promise of fulfilment, which would be the sweeter, it seemed to me, for having been so long deferred.
I was very happy; and if sometimes the familiarities in our relationship were of an irritating nature (like the way he teased me, as he had always teased me, about my sticking-out ears, for instance) I pushed them aside and refused to acknowledge them — even when they were quite important, the sort of things on which  the nagging small voice was once wont to pounce as reasons against any positive commitment.
The voice was silent now; I was on my own.
 "And about time, too," I thought to myself.
"This is right, at last; I feel it.
I know this man.
I'm taking no chances.
He'll look after me."
I was thinking more of my mental welfare than any physical repercussions.
And so the end of my holiday drew near.
In the last few days, our conversation ran out; we were often silent in each other 's company, and I took this to be a good sign.
It put my mind at rest on one point often in the last weeks we had seemed more like friends than incipient lovers; the silences now seemed to betoken a quiet awareness of the new status that would soon envelop us.
I refused to consider that the silences lacked something — the quality that the silences between lovers have, of being full of unspoken thoughts.
Ours were different; sometimes they seemed almost empty.
It was like waiting for something important to happen which has got to happen before life can go on.
And I grew almost impatient, thinking, when is it going to begin?
I knew the first time was seldom ideal and I wanted to get past it to the second and third times, and all the times after that, when our love could go forward and mature and develop.
Our last evening came.
I was going back to London the next day; the actor was staying on for another week.
It occurred to me this was not an ideal arrangement; I had a funny, cold feeling in the middle of dinner that perhaps we had been wrong to delay matters until this last moment, where there could be no immediate follow-up, when I must leave him the next day.
But there was no going back now.
Without a word having been spoken about it, it was settled between us, I knew; it had been from the beginning.
It had seemed right and touching that verbal arrangements had not been necessary; but now I couldn't help wishing we had spoken about it, and he had said, "Dearest, it shall be the climax of our wonderful holiday, and when I come home…" 
That was really the reassurance I most wanted, the knowledge that what was going to happen was only a beginning and not just an incident.
But he hadn't given it, and I began to wonder why he hadn't.
I began to want to run away.
I could hardly eat.
My throat just wouldn't swallow food, and my mouth was dry with an unexpected onset of acute nervousness.
For once I drank no wine with my meal; it would have helped considerably, if I had but known, but it seemed wrong that one should  need artificial stimulus.
Always before he had only had to touch me for me to be ready for the final act which we'd always denied ourselves; there was no reason to suppose that wouldn't happen again.
But it didn't.
Nothing happened at all.
I lay on his bed later and strove to want him, strove to feel even a faint shadow of the sensations that had always engulfed me before, when I had known they must be frustrated.
He did his best to rouse me; I listened to his tender words and felt his hands on my body, all in a cold agony of indifference.
It was quite unbelievably terrible.
And remembering it now, with the child of that night growing towards a life of its own in my body, I was appalled again by the memory of a frustration worse than any self-denial, which ended at dawn with us lying apart from each other, both pretending to be asleep but both staring with dry wide-awake eyes into a bottomless pit of dismay.
I don't know what he thought about, but what I thought about was how in God's name we were going to be able to face each other in the morning.
Well, we did it somehow, of course.
He tried to be nice about it, but it was fairly obvious he didn't want me any more; and truthfully, I didn't want him any more either, except in so far that I couldn't bear that it should all have been for nothing — worse than nothing.
I felt the most awful failure, and thought that perhaps if we could try again — since the thing was done, the point of no return passed — we might arrange things better, somehow recapture the basis of feeling we had had, which should have been a perfect foundation for a love-affair, but which we had somehow bungled and thrown away.
It was like having jumped up and down on a beautiful springboard, relishing the thrill of the plunge into the deep roaring water, and then diving at last into an empty pool.
He saw me off on the bus.
Up to the day before I had hoped he would come with me at least as far as Perpignan, to see me on my way; now there was no question of that, and indeed I could hardly wait to get away from him.
We didn't look at each other as he kissed me perfunctorily good-bye.
 "I'll give you a ring when I get back," he said distantly.
 "Yes, do," I said.
It was unbelievable; it was as if we were barely acquainted.
The long journey home was a nightmare of hot sticky carriages and not enough to drink (my thirst was terrible all day).
I knew  that soon I would have to come to grips with what had happened, to wring some meaning out of it to make it endurable; but for the moment I simply couldn't bear to think about it.
When I got home I picked up the threads of my ordinary life again very quickly — you might say I snatched them up, and plunged into a round of work and social life deliberately intended to give me as few idle moments as possible.
I grabbed at every invitation, no matter how uninteresting, that would occupy my evenings, and if I had one free I would fill it myself by visiting friends or, in the last resort, going to a movie alone.
I carried a book with me everywhere, and read it desperately, over meals, in buses, even in the street.
I wouldn't think.
I wouldn't.
But at the end of the week, when I knew the actor was due back, I couldn't prevent myself waiting for his call.
Because I hadn't sorted myself out about the whole thing properly, my feelings while waiting were a complete tangle — although I didn't want to see him, I did desperately want him to want to see me.
I didn't see how I was going to live with the memory of him as it was; I thought there must be something we could do, just something; even one friendly lunch together might help.
He didn't phone.
My heart grew sick and I couldn't eat, a phenomenon so strange that even Father noticed and asked what was wrong.
I told him I was on a diet, which he believed.
As the days passed I might have been telling him the truth, for I lost weight far more successfully than on any diet I have ever attempted.
And then his note came.
Dear Jane,
Sorry I haven't rung you, things really have been pretty frantic for me since I got back.
I've got a brand new job in Paris, leaving almost at once.
Marvellous, eh?
It's a step up, too, I'll practically be in charge there.
I wish I could suggest a meeting before I go, but it's all happened so suddenly I just can't see how I could fit it in.
But I'll be back one of these days, and we'll have a slap-up meal together (N0T on the old X's, I promise!)
Cheers, Terry Terry was his name, by the way.
Not that it matters.
I'd never call any child of mine Terry.
It sounds too bloody weak-kneed.
Quite soon after the note, I began to suspect — what I had never even thought about, for some naive reason — that I might be pregnant.
Then it became doubly important not to think back, and so I never had, not until this moment.
I had only known, positively though without details, that there was no help and no comfort forthcoming from the source, and that being so I shied away from any mental flashbacks which could only make me more unhappy and ashamed.
And now that I'd forced myself to take it all out of its cobwebby cupboard and look at it remorselessly from start to finish, I knew I had been instinctively wise not to do it before.
If I had done it before, before my visit to Dr Graham, for instance, I'd now be sixty guineas the poorer and no longer pregnant.
Sitting in my L-shaped room, stone-cold to my very marrow, with John still sleeping as peacefully as a child at my feet, I faced that fact, too, while I was at it; and also a few others.
For instance, that there were quite definitely no mitigating circumstances.
I was not in love with Terry, never had been; I went after him, deliberately, because I was ripe for an affair and I thought with him I could have one and enjoy it and still feel like the nice clean girl-next-door afterwards.
I saw now what I'd known all the time, only I'd hidden it craftily from myself because it didn't fit in with what I wanted to do, that Terry and I had no basis for a love-affair; we were friends who happened to be attracted to each other physically, which was far from enough, and by thinking it was enough we'd gone against the very nature of our relationship.
I also recognized that it was more my fault than his.
That didn't stop me from thinking bitterly that he'd got away scot-free.
I also had a look at the fact that Toby might well be — or have been — the man I'd been waiting for, though God knows I'd never have recognized him in a million years if we hadn't happened, entirely by accident, to stumble into each other 's arms.
The pool that had been so jarringly empty when I took my premeditated dive into it with Terry, I fell into with Toby and found it full of champagne.
But it was too late, that was the terrible thing.
It had happened  at a time when all I had to offer him was absolute misery for both of us.
Now I was thinking clearly and coldly.
The doctor had been right.
Who did I think I was imagining glibly that I could bring up a child all by myself?
I had no money.
I had no home.
I had no job.
And most important, I had no moral courage.
I didn't want the child, I wasn't at all sure I was going to love it, even — certainly I'd had no hints up to now that mother-love hadn't been completely left out of my make-up.
Wasn't it plain, common or garden cowardice, not the sturdy self-righteousness I'd credited myself with, which prevented me from ending the whole business?
If only I'd gone along with the doctor's proposals, it would have been over by now— completely and painlessly over, and any feelings of guilt I might have had as a result I would surely have dealt with ages ago.
After all, as he had said — and now every word of our conversation came back to me as clearly as if played back on a tape — a woman has a right to decide, on the basis of her own capacity to cope with the situation, whether she is justified in going on with it.
Justified — that was the word.
It was the child that had to have first consideration, and what had I got to offer it that justified my bringing it into the world?
Nothing.
And besides, I couldn't face it.
I'd suffered enough for my mistake.
One little mistake!
What horrible injustice, to impose a life-sentence for that!
What moral law can compel anyone to stay in prison if they can get out?
I looked at the time.
It was, to my astonishment, only a quarter to six.
I felt as if I'd been sitting there half the night.
But that was good — not six o'clock yet — Dr Graham might still be at his office And suddenly I had to act quickly.
My pulses were hammering in panic, as if I were really behind bars and spied an escape route that would close forever in a matter of seconds.
I'd heard somewhere that you can't stop it after the end of the third month.
I lifted John's head carefully with both hands and slipped out from beneath it.
He grunted a little as I rested it against the arm of the chair, but didn't wake.
My leg had gone completely to sleep and I couldn't feel it at all, but I managed to hobble to the door, collecting fourpence out of my wallet, and down the stairs to the first landing where the telephone was.
It struck me as I fumblingly dialled the number that it would be better to go out to a kiosk, where I would be more sure of privacy, but having come to this decision  I only wanted to hurry, hurry — every minute's delay seemed dangerous.
It rang a long time before a woman's voice answered — the same woman.
 "This is Miss Graham," I said, surprising myself by the furtive urgency in my own voice.
"I came to see Dr Graham two months ago.
May I — is he there now?
Could I have a word with him?"
The voice was chilly and formal.
"I'm sorry, the doctor's off duty from five-thirty.
Is there anything I could do?"
"I want to make an appointment to come and see him again — tomorrow.
 "Tomorrow?" 
The voice held the same polite incredulity as it had the first time.
"I'm afraid that's quite impossible.
His appointments book is full until -"
 "Please," I said, "please." 
It was exactly like the first time.
Only now I knew all the facts, and I knew what I wanted.
"I can't wait.
It's most urgent.
I'm sure if you tell him, he'll remember me."
"Well…
I could give him a message.
Miss — who, did you say?"
"Graham, Jane Graham.
He'll remember me because our names are the same.
Tell him — tell him I've changed my mind.
Please."
 "Very well." 
"May I come round tomorrow?
I don't mind waiting until he's got a moment free between patients."
"I think it would be better if you gave me your phone number.
I'll telephone you in the morning and tell you if the doctor can see you.
I gave her the number and hung up feeling baulked of my escape, almost as if I'd expected that the thing could be done now, tonight.
But at least I'd taken the first step, and not an easy step, considering what I'd said to the doctor at our last meeting.
It proved to me that I was in earnest, that I was truly resolved.
Three months was not too late — it mustn't be.
I had sixty guineas, I had a hundred if he asked for it.
That was about all I did have, but it wasn't much to pay for peace and a future of freedom.
And it was for Toby, too, and for the baby itself.
I stood by the phone prodding away at my mind with the unanswerable rationalizations, wondering why I didn't feel happier and better now I'd decided.
I climbed the stairs slowly.
On the next landing up, there was a faint suggestion of Chanel No. 9 and a small, tell-tale movement of a door swiftly closing the last two inches.
I remembered now another  give-away sound which at the time I hadn't noticed — a click on the line at the beginning of my conversation with the woman.
So, Mavis at least had been getting a good earful.
Had I said anything revealing?
I thought not.
John was awake.
He'd put some more money in the meter and was warming himself by the newly-lit fire.
He jumped to his feet as I came in.
 "I go to sleep," he said accusingly.
"Why you don't-wake me?
Let the room get cold."
 "It doesn't matter," I said.
I stood by the window staring out into the foggy darkness, taking deep breaths to try and stifle some hollow feeling of new disease.
He stood awkwardly.
 "You forgive me?" he asked.
 "Yes, yes," I said, a little impatiently.
 "You think Toby come back?" 
"I expect so.
I hope so."
Then I thought of something cheering.
 "He'll have to, all his things are still here — his writing" 
John's face broke into a grin; I could see it reflected in the windowpane.
 "That's right!" he exclaimed.
 "Then I tell him — I tell him —" he broke off, the grin fading uncertainly.
 "You can tell him," I said, turning and looking him in the face, "that you were entirely mistaken; that my boss really is my boss, and that I'm not going to have a baby." 
There.
That meant I had to do it.
That meant it was as good as done.
He put his big head on one side and looked at me, piled.
 "Not going to have a baby?" he repeated.
 "No," I said, trying to sound convincing but daunted by the simple bewilderment in his face.
 "You were quite wrong about it." 
He took it in slowly but uncomprehendingly, and shook his head.
"Honestly, Johnny.
Now, please don't worry any more.
Go on off to the club, and don't worry.
He'll come back, and we'll all be friends again.
All right?"
He shook his head again, not in denial, but just in disbelief.
 "I sorry," he said once again, in a hopeless voice that told me I hadn't convinced him.
He went to the door, and then turned round and said simply,"You know, I like you.
Even when I sick in the head, I still like you.
I like to help you, anyway I can."
His face lit up again.
"I'm good carpenter.
Make you wardrobe shelf, remember?
Make you something else — very good cradle, like I see here sometime.
You like that?"
I stared at him helplessly.
I thought of several things to say to him, but nothing sounded right.
At last I said, "Let's talk about it tomorrow," and he nodded happily and went padding off to work.
It was very early, but I was suddenly feeling horribly tired, and I thought bed would be a good idea.
I got undressed and, after my usual battle with the crumbling Ascot in the bathroom, forced it to yield enough hot water for a miserly bath.
On my way back to my room I had another look into Toby's.
It was dark and empty.
I thought then that, much as I longed to see him, it might be as well to start hoping he wouldn't come back until I could truthfully tell him there would be no baby.
I wondered uneasily whether he would be able to see from my face that though it might be the truth, it was not the whole truth.
I got into bed, turned the light off and lay with just the fire lighting the room.
I lay on my back thinking deliberately how lovely it would be when it was over and I didn't have to worry any more.
I wondered where Toby was — he'd been gone for over thirty-six hours now.
I thought of his sweetness in sitting beside me all night, and of the shadows on his face in the morning, and how I had gone off without telling him I loved him.
Did I love him?
I wasn't sure.
It wasn't like anything I'd ever felt before.
All I knew was that I felt married to him.
My hands were folded over my stomach like a sedate effigy, and now, against my will, they started to explore, pressing gently into the flesh.
There was no definable shape to the bulge yet — in fact, I could make the bulge nonexistent by drawing in my muscles.
Surely a being so undeveloped — no, not even a being, an appendage, a little lifeless nubbin of my own flesh — had no claim on me, no claim on life when it couldn't even sustain an existence of its own.
There couldn't be any wrong in disposing of it.
It wasn't a baby yet, just a potential; not much more than a seed.
The chief reason I'd always been against abortion was that it seemed like tearing up a bill instead of paying it.
What a piece of high-flown theorizing that seemed now!
Why should one pay a bill that was out of all proportion to the goods received?
It was absurd.
(Even if you knew in advance what the bill might be?)
Why should I pay it all alone?
Anyway, I paid at the time.
(And since when was living a matter of straightforward cash.
and-carry transactions?
How do you know you're not paying now for something you'll get later?)
So you're back, are you?
I snarled at the inner voice.
A fine time you picked to woke up!
Where were you in my hour of need?
I was still arguing childishly against myself when I heard a little noise at the door.
It wasn't a knock, really — more like a dog scratching to be let in.
I lay frozen for a moment, and then I called out, "Who is it?" 
There was no answer, but after a moment the scratching was repeated.
I got out of bed and put on my dressing-gown with shaky haste.
Could it be Toby?
I ran round the comer to the door and opened it.
It was Mavis.
I was completely taken aback.
She had never come up to my room before, in fact I'd never seen her outside her own.
She had a shawl-thing round her shoulders, and a knitting bag in her hand, which seemed oddly heavy.
She smiled at me shyly, as if uncertain of her welcome.
 "Hallo, dear," she said brightly.
 "I hope you don't mind me coming up — I thought I'd just come and see how you were, and perhaps sit and chat with you for a while" 
I said of course I didn't mind, and stood aside to let her in.
 "Oh, but you've been in bed!" she exclaimed as soon as she went round the angle.
 "I'm disturbing you!" 
But she made no move to leave, so I had to say not at all, I'd gone to bed because it seemed the warmest place.
 "Quite right," she said approvingly.
"Now, you just jump back under the covers, and I'll sit myself here.
I don't want to be a nuisance."
I did as she suggested, keeping my dressing-gown on, and watched her settle herself in the arm-chair and get her knitting out.
She looked very homely and comfortable, but I had a feeling of misgiving.
It was so unusual for her to move out of her own domain.
I wondered suddenly whether her unexpected visit could have anything to do with my phone call.
And almost at once, she confirmed it.
 "Well now, how are you feeling?" she asked.
 "I've been quite worried about you — you haven't been looking well lately, I noticed it this evening particularly when you dropped in." 
She had nothing at all to go on, I thought, except that phone call, and she naturally wouldn't admit to having listened to that.
I decided to bluff it out.
 "I don't know where you got the idea I was ill," I said as heartily  as I could.
 "I'm fine — I just felt a bit sleepy and chilly, that was why I went to bed so early." 
 "Oh come now, dear, you can't fool an old hand like me" She smiled complacently down at her swiftly-flashing knitting needles.
 "What do you mean?" 
I asked, with an edge in my voice.
 "Just that I know, dear — that's all." 
I felt myself turn pale with the sort of impotent fury a goldfish in a bowl might feel.
Was there nobody who didn't know?
Did I look so obviously the sort to get into trouble that I couldn't go about with circles under my eyes, or telephone a doctor, or throw up once in a while, without everyone immediately jumping to a single conclusion?
Tears of futile anger and chagrin stung my eyes.
 "I don't know what you're talking about!" 
I almost shouted.
Mavis laid her knitting aside and came over to the bed, where, to my redoubled annoyance, she sat down and took my hands.
 "Now listen, dear," she said kindly.
"Don't get upset.
I know how you feel because I've seen other girls go through it.
You may think it's none of my business"
 "I do!" 
I interrupted rudely, enraged now more by the tears streaming down my face than by her.
 "And I wouldn't have said a word, ducky, if I hadn't heard you phoning that doctor." 
My nose was starting to run and she released one of my hands and put a Chanel-smelling handkerchief into it.
"Now, Jane, you must be sensible.
Don't go to that awful man and spend all that money."
I stared at her, aghast.
"Yes, dear, I know all about him.
One of the girls in the company, ever such a nice little thing she was, she thought she'd got into trouble; well, I could've told her she would, the way she was going on — actors — you wouldn't believe!
They say the stage is a respectable profession nowadays, well maybe it is, but I can't think it's changed all that much in the five years since I left.
There was one — the same one this little girl was carrying on with — tall handsome brute, not my type I'm glad to say, too florid like, but he was a regular goat.
You couldn't walk into his dressing-room five minutes after the curtain came down for fear of what you might find him doing.
Where he found the energy — Anyway, this poor child, only nineteen she was (he should've been ashamed of himself and him a man of forty)— if she'd only come to me at the start!
But no, she let him tell her what to do — him that was the  cause of it all — and what does he do but fix up for her to go and see this Dr Graham?
Mind you, he paid, I'll say that for him, but it might just as well have been her — the money was thrown down the drain all the same!"
In spite of myself I was forced to ask,"What do you mean?
Didn't the operation — didn't it work?"
 "Work?" she said.
"Work?
There was nothing for it to work on.
When she came round after the anaesthetic the first thing she says to the nurse is, Well, was I or wasn't I?
Because I'd told her it was funny this doctor never even touched her before he sent her in there.
Nothing of the sort, says the nurse, wherever did you get that idea?
It was some little blockage or something, not a baby at all.
All that money!
She could've had the same thing free on the National Health!
And then of course, silly girl, she went and told him — he was so livid he wouldn't have nothing more to do with her."
"But — I struggled to digest all this.
"In my case, it's different.
There's no doubt"
 "Oh, I dare say," she said with a sniff.
"What I'm trying to tell you is, the man's a crook.
He's not to be trusted.
And why should you give him all your money for doing something"
She stopped.
She looked at me slyly.
"How far along are you, dear?
 "Three months," I mumbled.
She sucked in her breath and shook her head.
 "Pity you let it go so long," she said.
"Have you tried anything at all?
No?
Well, you know, you'd be silly to spend all that money, now wouldn't you?
If you didn't have to?"
I was staring at her as if she were turning into a witch in front of my eyes.
I felt faintly hypnotized.
 "What are you suggesting?" 
 "Oh, nothing wrong, dear," she said, giving me a cleared look of total innocence.
"Don't think that.
But you know, there are ways, without any sort of tinkering about.
Now, look here."
She picked up her heavy knitting-bag and took out of it a half-bottle of gin and a small tin of Nescafe — only it wasn't Nescafe, because it rattled.
I had a good idea what was in that.
It was the gin that surprised me.
It was a good brand.
Did Mavis drink?
Where did she get the money?
Again as if she read my thoughts, she said: "After I heard you talking on the phone, I nipped out and bought  this — you can pay me back, if you like, Mother's ruin.
Now you know why they call it that — one reason, anyway.
Of course, you have to drink lots of it — "lots and lots, no tiny tots" , as they say."
She tittered genteelly.
The double meaning, when it struck me, forced a gasp of half-hysterical laughter out of me before I could control myself; I clamped a hand over my mouth.
I felt I must keep a very firm hold on myself if I were not to lose control altogether.
The whole situation was so grotesque, so funny and so preposterous.
 "Nothing wrong, dear!" 
Oh no, nothing at all wrong.
It was all just like being given a new recipe or a knitting pattern.
I put my other hand up to my face too, and put my head down on my knees, trying to keep myself from going to pieces.
Mavis thought I was crying, and indeed I wasn't far from that either.
She patted my shoulder with her dry, spinsterish little hand.
"Now, don't upset yourself, there's a good girl.
I'll stay with you, if you like, and by the morning it'll probably all be over."
I didn't answer.
I was wondering how often she did this ministering angel act, and what she got out of it.
Not money?
Surely not.
Not when she wouldn't take any for making chair-covers.
Perhaps she just did it out of the goodness of her heart — or perhaps (and this thought provoked a fresh spurt of giggles in my throat) half the little souvenirs that littered her room were tokens of gratitude — from Torquay, Margate and Llandrindod Wells — I pulled myself together with a great effort, and took my hands from my face.
I couldn't bring myself to look at Mavis, with her neat grey bun and demure brooch linking the lapels of her Peter Pan collar.
I said,"That's very kind of you, Mavis, and of course I'll pay you for the gin, but if you don't mind I'd rather be alone.
If I need any help, I'll call you."
 "Oh — all right, then," she said, concealing her disappointment"She got up and gathered her knitting together.
"Now, you know what to do?
Just take two of these every two hours, and drink plenty of gin.
If you feel you're going to be sick, just try not to be, and don't drink any more till it passes off, otherwise it'll all be wasted, won't it?
Mind you, "she said quickly," I'm not making any promises.
Three months is rather late."
It was as if she were giving me some hyacinth bulbs and saying December was a bit late to plant them.
I said seriously that I quite understood, and that I wouldn't hold her responsible if nothing happened.
She started to go, and then turned back, saying cheerily, "Just think how nice it will be when it's all finished with," and then she actually added, "Well, I must go and feed my puss-puss now, or she'll be ever so cross." 
She waved to me encouragingly.
"Good luck, ducky.
Don't forget to call if you need anything."
And off she trotted, shawl, knitting-bag and all.
After she'd left the room I sat still in bed for a while, thinking it really wasn't so funny after all.
Then I picked up the Nescafe tin and prised the lid off.
There were about ten pills inside.
I remembered them from when Alice — the wraith-like girl in the rep — had showed me similar ones.
I remembered other things, too, things she'd insisted upon telling me later — all sorts of unlovely details.
I shook out a couple of tablets, rolled them about in my hand, and then put them back, cursing Alice heartily.
I'm afraid I cursed Mavis too.
Why couldn't she mind her own business?
Throwing in this unbalancing element of bizarre comedy just when I'd got everything settled.
I thought about the gin, but that was tarred with the same brush.
 "No tiny tots" .
The wretched woman had well-meaningly reduced the whole thing to the level of bar-room farce.
Damn it all, you couldn't just…
No, I thought, none of that.
That way madness lies.
If I start thinking of It as a person, entitled to a dignified end, the next thing will be of course that I have no right to end It at all.
But all the same— not that way.
And not, by the same token, all on my own.
Was I respecting the life within me, or pandering to my own healthy terror or going through what Alice went through?
I wasn't at all sure.
But anyway, I put the pills and the gin firmly aside, turned out the light again, and tried to go to sleep.
I lay wide-eyed and wakeful.
I didn't have to wonder why.
I was missing Toby.
I discovered it's a very different matter, lying awake thinking it would be nice to have a man beside you, and lying awake longing for one particular man.
In one case it's a feeling of vague discontent.
In the other…you might just as well try to go to sleep when your feet are cold or you want to spend a penny, or you're hungry for a special kind of food you haven't got.
As a matter of fact, all three now applied, I realized, as well as the other.
Almost every part of my infuriating body seemed to be nagging at me for some sort of attention.
I even had a tickle between my shoulder-blades that I couldn't reach
At last, exasperated beyond bearing, I switched on the light again.
It was still only eight o'clock.
This seemed to be the last straw — somebody was really gunning for me: slowing the whole bloody earth down now.
All right, I thought furiously.
I know when I'm beaten.
Grinding my teeth with rage at everything, I got up and dressed in slacks and my old trenchcoat.
A glance outside told me it was still foggy — getting worse, if anything.
Naturally.
I knotted a headscarf round my throat so savagely I nearly choked myself, and crept — I had to creep, because of Mavis — downstairs and out into the fog.
The special food I fancied was of — all things — curry.
As I strode along, glaring at the ground, hating everything, I thought: I'm not dealing with this matter a moment too soon.
Cravings in the middle of the night?
And where am I to find curry, in God's name, in this benighted neighbourhood?
Hammersmith?
Hardly.
Putney?
Loathsome place.
Chelsea?
Yes, at a price.
Oh, God damn and blast, why curry?
Why not fish and chips?
But the vision, complete with mango chutney and mounds of yellow rice, persisted.
I got on a bus and grudgingly paid my fare to the King's Road.
There was an Indian restaurant I'd seen there, near Sloane Square.
It would probably, I reflected bitterly, be shut when I got there — some Hindu feast day, or something.
Probably the only day in the whole year.
Almost certainly there would be no curry to be had in the whole of London.
I was actually weeping with advance self-pity before I got there.
The restaurant was, to my surprise (and, in some perverse way, disappointment) open.
In fact they were quite busy.
Everyone, including the Indians, seemed to be happy and laughing, and in my surly mood I unkindly wished them all in hell — chiefly because no one was in any hurry to serve me and I had to sit and watch a party at the next table consume a feast that looked to me as if it had issued straight from Nirvana, before I was even shown a menu.
I ordered so recklessly that the waiter looked first surprised, then delighted, then alarmed.
 "Are you sure you can eat all that?" he asked solicitously.
I was, quite sure; even when it began to arrive, dish after khaki-coloured dish, covering the whole surface of the table, I was not daunted.
 "Thank you," I said confidently, and glared at the man when he discreetly placed a huge jug of iced water at my elbow.
The first dish was wonderful.
I ladled the curried object, whatever it was, on to a heap of saffron rice, smothered it with sauce, rolled up a chipathi and set to.
I demolished it without difficulty, though it was extremely hot and I had recourse to the water when no one was looking.
Then I tackled the next dish, which had succulent fat prawns nestling in it.
After that the jug of water was empty and I was full, but the waiter was smirking in an enigmatic Eastern way, so I toyed with the final concoction, just to prove I could if I wanted to, and that any I happened to leave was just for manners.
I was rewarded by several admiring looks as I paid my sizeable bill and blundered out, sweating, into the fog.
It had got considerably thicker while I'd been eating.
I was beginning to feel sleepy, and very cold; the temperature seemed to have gone down, and I was shivering even while I sweated from the furnace-like emanations of the curry.
At last I got on a bus, which trundled quite briskly to the far end of the King's Road, but after World's End, where the streets were darker, the fog seemed to close in and the bus was forced to nose its way cautiously along in first gear.
The journey went on and on — before long we were travelling at a walking pace, and I and the few other passengers were anxiously clearing the condensation from the windows and peering into the murk in an effort to see where we were.
Passing a street-light came to seem quite an event; one watched their brave little sulphurous smudges receding with a feeling akin to despair, as if we might never find another.
I asked the conductor to tell me when we came to my stop, and he said,"Lady, you think I got X-ray eyes or something?
I can't see the stops, no better'n what you can."
He sounded irritable, and whenever the bus stopped (which it did frequently) he went round to the front to talk to his mate.
A bus had been rammed in the fog two nights before, when it wasn't nearly as thick as this, and I wondered if he was scared.
At last I judged it time to get off and start walking.
The district was sinister enough at any time; now, with the feeling that any and every form of menace, from a cut-throat to a coal-hole, might be within inches for all I could tell, my small remaining resource of courage were exhausted within minutes.
I felt my way along, a few steps at a time, and every time I heard a voice or a footstep I stopped dead, clinging to whatever bit of masonry was under my hand and almost cowering with fright.
After a while, though, when I'd turned down the side-street  where the house was I hoped), there were no more sounds to frighten me, and as a result of course I grew much more afraid of the stuffed, dripping silence.
Far, far away I could hear the slow, grinding sounds of traffic — but muffled, as if I were wearing earplugs.
The house was right down at the bottom of the street, and I moved like a ghost from lamp to lamp, tiptoeing for some reason, as if I were in a jungle in dread of attracting the attention of wild animals prowling near me.
I couldn't decide whether I felt safer near the lamps, or in the dark stretches between.
The thick patches of light seemed to be focal-points, somehow…
I was beginning not to feel very well.
The mixture of inner heat and outer cold was making my head light.
The lamp-smudges seemed to swim towards me, dipping and swaying off-centre as I approached them My legs were trembling and when I put my hand against my face it was burning, and yet clammy.
The next time I reached a lamp-post I clung to it.
It was wet and cold, but it held steady, which was more than anything else seemed to.
I put my forehead against it and hung on with both hands.
Then I felt the post begin to slide upwards through my hands, as if more of it were coming out of the ground.
It slid up faster and faster, though I tried to hold it down.
Then I felt something hard strike my knees, and I smelt a very strong smell of dog.
…
Come on, dearie, help me a bit— put your head forward — that's it.
Are you feeling better?
Say something, there's a love — come on, you can't sit there all night…
The fog had solidified into a strong pressure on the back of my neck.
When I opened my eyes reluctantly, I was staring at a small piece of pavement miles below, between two sloping hills.
Then I saw that the hills were my legs, and that my head was being pushed between them.
In the process my middle was doubled up and it felt roughly as if somebody were squashing it between two metal plates studded with nails.
 "Oh God —" I gasped, trying to straighten up, trying to relieve the intolerable pressure in my inside.
 "Let me up." 
The weight on my neck instantly lifted, and I straightened my back.
Crouched beside me looking anxiously into my face was Jane, the other Jane.
The fog had made her eye-black run and it lay in ridges in the lines under her eyes; her hair was hanging in strands from under her hat.
I could smell her scent, very sharp and  close, through the fog and dog smells at the foot of the lamp-post where I was sitting on the ground.
 "You must've fainted!" she claimed in awe.
"Lucky I come along when I did!
Whatever happened, then?
Did you have a drop too much to drink?"
I couldn't answer.
Sitting up had done nothing to relieve the cramping agony inside me.
I clasped my forearms over the pain and bit my lips.
 "You look bad!" she said suddenly.
"Come on, you can't stay there.
I'll help you — it's not far.
On your feet, then — there's a good girl."
Coating and hauling, she managed to get me upright.
I clung to her and tried to keep my nails from digging into her arm.
With my other hand I pressed my stomach.
It made the pain worse, but I kept hugging it, holding it.
With the woman urging me, I put one foot ahead of the other and we started to move.
The pain died down for a moment, and I related my hold.
Then it came again like a whiplash.
 "No!" 
I felt like shouting.
 "No I didn't mean it!" 
I wouldn't let her take me beyond the door.
I waited until a break came in the pain, and then pinned a healthy smile on my face and told her I felt perfectly well.
"Are you sure, dear?
Because I could easily take you upstairs…"
"No, really, I'm fine now.
I do thank you for finding me -"
"But whatever do you think made you faint?
Do you do it often?"
I could feel the pain beginning again, and my smile was turning into a grimace.
 "I don't know." 
I said vaguely.
I couldn't think up a lie, despite all my recent practice.
My mind was fastened on this new and fearful thing that was happening.
 "I think I'll just go and lie down for a while." 
I managed to get my key in the door and immediately forgot about my rescuer.
I must have just left her standing on the steps.
I stumbled to the first landing before the recurring cramp forced me to sit down on the floor.
I felt the world beginning to drift into the distance again, but I knew what was happening this time and got my head down quickly.
With my cheek resting on the worn linoleum things came back into focus almost at once.
I was learning.
The pain faded, and I pulled myself up immediately with the help of the banisters and gained the second floor in the lull.
I was probably more afraid than I'd ever been in my life but I  was too busy to notice it.
If I could just get to my room.
I thought of it as a sanctuary, and something more as if there were some magic property in the room itself that would stop this happening, if only I could reach it.
The effort of getting up the third and fourth flights, which I tried to manage in one go, muddled me somehow.
I hadn't bothered with landing lights and I wasn't sure, any longer, where I was I only knew I had to keep climbing and that somewhere at the top was relief and safety.
Then I saw a strip of light.
It was more or less at eye level, because I was on the floor at the time, and I crawled towards it with a muffled sensation of triumph.
Whatever it was I was trying to do, which was now unclear, I'd done — that line of light was the goal.
When I got as far as the door I dragged myself upright again, turned the handle, and lurched in.
Toby was sorting papers at the table; there was an open suitcase on the chair.
Everything became bitingly clear to me as soon as I saw him turn round sharply and stare at me.
 "Oh, you're leaving!" 
I said brightly.
"I wondered when you'd be coming back for your things.
Well, I'll just leave you to pack."
I turned round to go, but things were blurring again and I misjudged the turn and banged my head against the edge of the door.
I closed my eyes tightly because this silly new pain was going to make me cry.
Toby's voice came from somewhere very close.
It was loud and harsh.
"What's the matter with you?
Are you drunk?"
 "Everyone keeps asking that," I said conversationally.
 "No, as a matter of fact I'm having a miscarriage." 
Why had I said that, in God's name?
That was the last thing I had wanted to say, especially in that silly, offhand tone.
Then the words rebounded back to my ears and I heard their sound and their meaning, and the pain came back at that moment, too, and it all made sense, the way a policeman's knock on the door must make sense when you've committed a crime.
I groped for Toby in the dark and found his hands, and they held on to me, and I shouted again to an unknown listener as I had wanted to in the street: "I don't want this!
I didn't mean it, truly!
Stop it, please make it stop!"
Toby picked me up bodily and carried me to his bed.
I wasn't being good about it any more; it was as if the effort of getting upstairs had used up the last of my good behaviour.
I was sobbing and pleading; the tears ran down the side of my face into my hair.
When the pain came I twisted away from it and clutched at anything I could get hold of, and swore.
But I didn't shout any more.
In the back of my mind I recognized the need to avoid attracting a lot of people.
In the first lull I opened my eyes and saw Toby's frightened face hanging over me.
He looked more than ever like a baby blackbird, rakish, half-strangled and very dear to me.
I tried to smile at him through my tears, but I realized it hadn't turned out very well, so I squeezed his hand which I was holding.
 "I'll get a doctor," he said; his voice was breathy and distorted with shock.
"No — I said, shaking my head violently.
But I wanted one.
He saw it in my eyes.
 "Don't be frightened," he said, trying not to sound on the edge of panic himself.
 "It'll be all right." 
He drew his hand with difficulty out of my rigid grip.
 "Don't leave me!" 
I implored him, seeing the pain coming towards me like a shadow.
 "Only to phone -" 
I was torn between wanting him to get a doctor, and wanting him with me.
 "In a minute —" I gasped.
 "After this one" 
It overtook me, but it wasn't quite as bad as before.
I clenched Toby's hand and he clenched back, and I could see his face all the time in the middle of the surrounding blackness.
When it withdrew I licked my salty upper lip and said, "That wasn't so bad…do you think it might not be that?" 
 "Did you make this happen?" 
The tears started coming again.
 "Not on purpose," I sobbed childishly.
He saw my eyes begin to widen and his voice changed immediately to anxious concern.
 "It's all right, darling hold on — I'll get someone to help you." 
 "Dr Maxwell!" 
I got out, feeling alone and rootless now that he had let go of my hand.
By a miracle I remembered his number, which was an easy one, and by another Toby had four pennies.
I, who had protested I didn't want a doctor, now called after him, "Tell him to hurry!" 
I lay alone under the glaring light.
I thought no deep thoughts about the justice of it, or the punishment fitting the crime, or the irony of fate.
I thought how the baby would look if it were born now, just a red dead morsel to be wrapped up quickly and thrown away, something disgusting and of no significance, not even fit to  be buried as a human being.
It didn't have a chance; not even a tiny chance of living.
I hadn't given it houseroom for long enough.
Another pain came.
I sobbed again, not because it hurt, which it did, but because I was so helpless against what was happening, and because the small voice was saying blandly,"Well?
Isn't this what you wanted? "and I was answering," It's not what I want any more!
It's my baby and I want it to live!"
Toby seemed to be gone a long time, but I wasn't measuring time very accurately.
It felt like an hour, but it was probably only a few minutes.
When he came back, his face was so strained with worry that I felt the sting of another guilt, and I smiled properly (having just finished with a not-too-terrible pain) and put out my hand to him to show him I was better.
 "Did you get him?" 
I asked, trying not to sound as if it were a matter of life and death.
He nodded and sat down beside me.
 "How's it going?" 
"Better.
Much."
 "You look a bit better." 
He sounded relieved.
We sat in silence for a while, waiting for the next pain.
It was less bad than the one before, but I couldn't tell if they were dying down for good or if this were the prelude to something else.
 "What did he say?" 
I asked presently.
 "He said he'd be along in ten minutes." 
"You were gone ages.
"I went to the box at the corner.
This was something so endearing I couldn't speak for a moment.
 "In the fog!" 
 "It isn't so bad now." 
 "But you went out…instead of-" 
 "You don't want the whole house knowing." 
I love you, I thought distinctly.
But nothing gave me the right to say it now.
So instead I said, "Mavis knows already." 
"She would.
How?"
 "I don't know," I said wearily.
"It seems people only have to look at me to know.
Everybody seems to have known, all the time."
 "I didn't," Toby said, with despair.
I'd been so preoccupied with the physical results of my condition for the last hour that I'd forgotten its other effects.
Something tightened in my chest as I remembered the two days since I saw Toby last.
 "Where did you go?" 
I asked.
"To Mike's.
He's a friend of mine.
I stay their sometime."
 "Did you tell him?" 
"No.
It's your thing."
"But he doesn't know me.
It would have helped you to tell him."
 "Well…anyway, I didn't." 
"Thank you.
 "Thank you." 
He held on to me through another pain, and wiped my face.
Then he said,"He should be arriving soon — the doctor.
I'll go down and wait for him, so he won't have to ring"
 "Thank you," I said again, inadequately.
At the door I stopped him.
 "Toby." 
 "What?" 
 "The other part isn't true — about James." 
He hesitated and frowned.
 "Oh," he said non-committally.
 "I won't be long." 
I closed my eyes while he was gone.
In the dark it was easier not to think
Quite soon I heard them coming up the stairs.
Toby had evidently asked the doctor to be quiet.
He stayed outside and Dr Maxwell came tramping and booming in alone.
A subdued boom is almost more formidable than a boom that's allowed full bent.
 "Now then, what's all this?" he boomed in a hearty whisper.
 "Please —" I tried to formulate some plea in the middle of a pain, but it came out as a whimper.
He examined me and then straightened up, shaking his head.
 "You naughty girl," he said severely.
 "Doctor, I didn" t!"
I exclaimed, looking, sounding, and in fact feeling as if the idea had never crossed my mind.
 "Come, come," he said sceptically.
"Then what brought this on?
A normal, healthy young woman like you -"
"I ate some hot curry and then got lost in the fog and fell down…
 "And I suppose your conscience is perfectly clear?" he said, good-humouredly.
"There are more ways than one of ending an unwanted pregnancy, you know.
Indigestion, for one.
Or am I meant to believe you didn't realize that?"
 "I didn't think — I wanted -" 
 "Is that young man the father?" he asked unexpectedly.
 "No." 
"No?
Pity.
Well now, look here, I think we'd better pop you into hospital for a few days, where we can keep an eye on you.
 "Am I going to lose the baby?" 
"Possibly.
I don't know.
You've done your best to see that you do — now we'll have to do ours to see that you don't."
 "I don't want to lose it." 
He looked at me for a moment, halted in the act of folding his stethoscope.
 "Well," he said equably,"if that's true, it'll help.
Is there a phone here that I can use to call an ambulance?"
 "Two floors down," I said.
 "You'll need fourpence." 
 "I'll charge it to the National Health," he said.
They kept me in hospital for a week, even though after the first day they were able to tell me that my violent indigestion following my curry debauch had not dislodged — or even seriously inconvenienced my small passenger.
But they decided to keep me under observation until I was safely out of the third month.
I was in a large ward full of ailing women, many of them, so far as I could judge, suffering from senile decay.
I'd never been in hospital before, and after the first day I felt well enough to notice things like the faint smell, which I thought was of death, but which was disinfectant, and to be mildly infuriated by hospital routine.
But it was pleasant to feel safe and looked-after, and another nice thing was that nobody remarked on, or even appeared to notice my absence of rings — except the Matron, who was inclined to toss her head a bit as she passed me, but perhaps she just had a tic.
I didn't know whether it was fair to expect Toby to come and visit me.
When he didn't come, I told myself I'd been foolish even to hope.
Stupidly, I kept on hoping, day after day.
But he didn't come.
In fact, nobody did, which was only to be expected since nobody except Toby (and possibly John) knew where I was.
Nevertheless, visiting hours were an ordeal far more to be dreaded than the occasional unattractive things the doctors or nurses came and did to me.
I longed for company and felt unreasonably deserted.
When the appointed hour approached and we could see the visitors  massing outside the glass doors at the end of the ward, waiting for opening-time, I would bury myself in a book to hide my pink eyes; but they would none the less be drawn irresistibly to watch the passage of each visitor along the aisle while I thought babyishly, "Somebody might think to come." 
I wished I could have screens put round my bed like the really sick people had, so that instead of giving me sidelong glances of pity because I had no visitors, people would drop their voices and whisper sepulchrally to interested outsiders, "Poor little thing — she's dying, you know." 
All in all it was with a feeling of indescribable joy that on the sixth day I saw a familiar figure coming towards me among the prompt arrivals.
It was Dottie, looking very smart in a new scarlet coat and a little matching hat, fairly exuding personality and with a huge bunch of daffodils in one hand and a bulging hold-all in the other.
She was a being apart from the visitors belonging to everybody else, and there were admiring stares and not a few tut-tuts of disapproval from some of the senile-decays for her vivid make-up and briskly clacking high heels, all of which sent my morale sky-rocketing.
 "Well, rat-girl," she greeted me, pulling off her hat and throwing down the flowers on the bed.
 "You've led me a merry dance, I must say." 
She kissed me and then glared into my face.
"How are you?
You look marvellous.
I expected to find a tiny shrunken corpse.
I brought some bits for you that I thought would probably be redundant, but they're obviously not.
What a ghastly place!
Like a morgue.
Here, I brought some American magazines — trash, but gorgeous — and some blissful eau-de-Cologne to bathe your pallid brow and drown out the Dettol — some grapes — corny, I know, but if you turn your nose up at them, I'll eat them, in fact I probably will anyway.
And look!"
From the depths of the hold-all she lifted a heavenly blue bed-jacket, all loops and fronds and frivolity.
She wrapped it round my shoulders at once, ignoring my protests, splashed the nice smell around, propped up a couple of magazines to combat the gloom, and divided the grapes into two bunches.
Then she sat down beside me and said, "Now." 
 "How did you find me?" 
I said, not caring a damn so long as she was here.
 "It wasn't easy," she said grimly.
"First I waited patiently for you to contact me.
Then I waited impatiently, etcetera.
Then I phoned your office, and spoke to that nice James man, and he said you'd  left there too!
But he had an address for you, and he gave it to me…
 "Oh no" I groaned.
"Oh but oh yes.
You may well hang your head.
If you had to give a phoney address, couldn't you at least have picked something that didn't have a remote basis in reality?
There are about fourteen roads, streets, crescents, avenues, walks, and squares all called whatever it was you told James, and I visited number fifteen in all of them before I realized I'd been had.
Then I got on to James again."
 "You didn't tell him" 
"Well, no, I didn't.
I was utterly baffled, but I gave you the benefit of every doubt, which by this time added up to a couple of thousand.
I pretended to be another friend, and asked for your phone number."
 "Clever girl." 
"Yes, I thought so.
Well, you can guess the rest.
I found out the matching address from Directory Inquiry and went round there."
She was silent for a moment and just looked at me."what have you got to say to explain that place, I should like to know?
Well, never mind.
Egalitarianism's never been my strong suit, but I overcame my natural snobbery and banged on the door.
Some fat old hag in a dirty apron came and said so far as she knew you were in hospital.
You can imagine how that brightened my day.
I croaked out, which hospital, but she hadn't a clue and sent me up to ask somebody called Coleman."
She ate a grape and looked at me shrewdly.
"Who is he?
He's interesting.
First of all I thought he was just some little fledgling that had fallen out of its nest, but I very soon realized there was more to him than that."
I wasn't able to hide my eagerness as I asked, "What did he say?" 
She grinned malevolently.
 "Ah ha!" she cackled, witch-like.
"Oh-ho!
I thought as much!
Goings-on!
He had exactly the same expression on his face when I mentioned your name as you've got now.
Then he covered it up quickly with a look of studied indifference (very unconvincing) and mumbled some nonsense about you being in hospital for a few days for a check-up.
Naturally I didn't take much notice of that.
But I couldn't shake him on it, so then I concentrated on finding out which hospital you were in.
He hummed and hawed for quite a while about it, but in the end I asked him if you were getting any visitors, and if not, I said, mustn't you be feeling pretty lonely, and that did it.
He told me — and here I am.
At last, and no thanks to you."
"But many thanks from me, Dottie.
I am glad you came — really — and bless you for the things — I so needed to see you.
I didn't realize how much, or I'd have written to you.
Honestly."
"Great.
Well, now that I've tracked you down, perhaps you wouldn't mind letting me in on the key to all this mystery.
Mind you, I have my own theories, but I think I've earned the right to know if they're correct."
 "I expect they are," I said.
She sat quite still and her eyes were fixed on me with a curious, dark look of sympathy mixed with something else.
Wryness?
Envy?
Could it be envy?
I wasn't sure.
 "A baby?" 
I nodded, and she closed her eyes and I saw her shoulders slump a little.
 "A baby," she repeated softly, to herself.
Then she opened her eyes.
"Well love, that's no joke for you, is it?
Poor honey, has it been awful?"
 "Fairly, at times." 
She held my hand tightly.
 "I wish I'd known — surely I could have helped somehow — you didn't think I'd be shocked or anything, did you?" 
"No, I didn't think that.
I just couldn't seem to tell anyone."
 "But your father knows?" 
 "Oh, yes — that's why —" 
"You can't mean he threw you out!
But that's incredible!
It's like a Victorian melodrama —"
 "He doesn't like me very much," I explained, and it was the first time I'd ever realized that"It was a very sad thing not to be liked by your own father, and obviously it must be just as sad not to like your only daughter.
So I must have failed him in some way, to make him not like me, as well as him failing me.
Dottie couldn't think of anything to say to that.
She pretty well knew how things had stood between Father and me in the last few years.
 "But why move into a dump like that?" 
I tried to explain, and she was more understanding than I had expected.
"Oh, I see!
You felt you weren't good enough to be anywhere nice!
Well, do you know, I've felt just like that.
When I flopped at my first job, I was so fed up with myself I thought I  wasn't worth any decent firm's money, so I went off and got a frightful job working in a dirty old canteen, just to punish myself, sort of.
Then when I'd proved I could do that really well, horrible and moronic as it was, I let myself off and got a better job nearer my heart's desire."
I could have burst into tears when she said that.
It meant I didn't have any kind of mental kink or a leper-complex or anything strange.
I squeezed her hand gratefully.
It was such a tonic to see her.
I'd forgotten what a joy it is to have a girl-friend.
Almost before we'd begun to really talk, visiting time was over and they were ringing the bell for everyone to leave.
 "Don't worry, I'll be hot-footing back tomorrow for the next instalment — that is, if you want me to." 
"Oh, please!
Do come!"
"Is there anything you need?
Anything I can do?"
"No, nothing.
At least"
"What?
Say the word!"
 "Do you think — is there any way of — of letting Toby know that I'm all right?" 
"Is Toby the fledgling?
Because if so, there's no need to tell him.
He knows exactly how you are.
"How?
How could he?"
 "Who's that other old girl, the common-prim one with the cat?" 
 "Mavis?" 
"Well, she waylaid me as I was leaving after seeing your Toby, and asked me to give you a message.
I forgot it till now, to tell you the truth.
She said to tell you she was glad it worked all right, and not to worry about paying her back until you were quite better.
What are you smirking at?"
"Nothing.
Go on, what else did she say?"
"That was all there was to the message, but then she got chatting.
She's quite a chatterer, isn't she?
She told me she takes an interest in everything that goes on in the house, and that the party line was a great help to her.
I rather liked her unabashed frankness.
Anyway, she cited as an example the fact that it warmed her heart to hear the fledgling ringing the hospital every day to find out how you were."
She smiled at the look on my face.
"I needn't ask if that's what you wanted to hear.
Well, I'm off.
Take care of yourself."
Before I could reply, she'd whisked off, running up the aisle after the last leaver, waving her little red hat at me from the doorway like a rallying signal.
What with the fact that so many people seemed to have so many wrong impressions, I slept very soundly that night.
When Dottie came again the next day, bearing chocolates and, of all things, a pomegranate, the first thing she said to me was: "You know it's Christmas in a week, God forbid?
Where are you going to spend it?"
 "At home, if they let me out of here in time," I said.
 "What do you call home?" 
I was calling the L-shaped room home for the first time, and thinking of it as such.
I was longing to get back to it, or perhaps its associations with Toby were what lent it this sudden magnetism."
 "The dump," I answered sheepishly.
 "You can't be serious?" 
 "I think I am -" 
"Christmas — in that place?
Have you thought?"
I hadn't, but it would do no good to think, since everything depended on Toby.
If he were not there, it would be terrible.
But then, so would anywhere else.
 "Because I've been thinking," said Dottie, "what a good idea it would be for you to spend Christmas at my place." 
Dottie had a very nice flat in Earls Court."
 "It's sweet of you to ask me," I said, "but I'd better not" 
"But why?
You'll die of depression in that bug-run…"
That hit home.
I felt an unwanted defensiveness rising.
 "It's not all that bad," I protested.
Dottie stopped short, frowning.
 "Do you love it?" 
"Well, I do in a way.
It's seen me through a lot."
 "You and your places!" she said, mildly exasperated.
"But it'll still be there waiting for you after the Christmas festivities are over.
It's not a time to be on your own, truly…
Please come."
I nearly said, "You don't want a pregnant woman on your hands, even during the season of good will," but something prevented me.
A new set of feelings about the baby had begun to emerge since I had nearly lost it, and I wanted to be sure that they were going to take root before I risked dispersing them with talk.
I got out of it anyway.
Dottie's feelings were seldom bruised by honesty — I simply said I'd rather not and she said that in her opinion I was crazy, and that was that.
We talked about other things, and I told for the first time the story of how I lost the job   at Drummonds, which made us both laugh so much the nurses came running with shocked looks to shut us up.
When time was up Dottie said,"You seem indecently healthy to me — I bet they'll send you home tomorrow.
I'll ring here and check before I come.
And if you do go back there, at least phone me occasionally and ask me over for a meal — I'll bring a bottle of vino.
I'll force a bit of Christmas spirit on you, whether you like it or not.
She didn't ask what my plans were, or press me for details of any other potentially embarrassing subject.
It's odd how wrongly you can judge people's reactions.
She was right about them letting me out.
They came and prodded me and conferred, and then Dr Maxwell said I could go home.
But he was evidently even less happy than Dottie about my going back to what he referred to with thinly veiled distaste as "that place" .
 "Haven't you any family?" he boomed.
I explained the position very briefly and in a pointed undertone.
 "Well, I'd like a word with your father," he shouted, louder than ever.
"Damn it, we're not living in the Middle Ages.
And there are one or two other things, while we're on the subject."
 "Doctor, please don't shout," I importuned vainly.
"What?
Who's shouting?"
 "Couldn't we talk about it another time?" 
He seemed to realize what I was getting at at last, and glanced round the ward at all the aged but fascinated faces turned in our direction.
"Oh, I see what you mean.
Nosy old harpies, eh?
Well, let 'em look.
If a few more of them had had children, legitimate or otherwise, they wouldn't look like a lot of dried-up old lemons.
I'll send you home in an ambulance, and come and see you tomorrow.
You don't have to stay in bed all the time, but take it easy — and, er…watch your diet."
He pulled a fierce face at me.
I was due to leave at five-thirty in the afternoon.
At five o'clock I was dressed and ready.
I'd put on weight while I'd been in bed, and the zip on my slacks wouldn't do up more than half-way.
I felt a tremor that was partly apprehension and partly excitement.
Still in there, safe and growing!
I wrapped my trenchcoat over the bulge and asked if I could telephone.
Doris answered.
 "It's Jane Graham," I said, very uncertain how much she knew and what sort of reception I could expect.
 "Oh, hullo dear," she said without any detectable emotion.
 "I'm coming home today," I said.
"Oh, yes?
That's nice."
I waited for her to say something else, but she didn't, so I asked to speak to Toby.
I heard the buzzer go four times.
My heart was behaving as if I were going before a judge.
He was a long time answering.
 "Hallo?" he said at last.
"Hallo.
It's Jane."
My voice would hardly come out.
There was a pause, and I heard him take a deep breath.
 "Hallo," he said.
His voice was cool, but not cold.
"I'm coming home today, in about half an hour.
I thought I'd ring you up and tell you.
 "Well, thanks." 
There was another long pause.
I was breathing heavily and so was he.
It was awful.
 "Will you be there?" 
I asked at last.
My hand holding the receiver was shaking; I pressed it against the corner of a door to stabilize it.
 "Well, I don't know, I might be going out this evening," he said casually.
Then he said in a slightly different voice, "Are you all right?" 
Before I could reply he took himself up quickly, as if angry with himself for asking.
 "Silly question, of course you must be or they wouldn't have let you out." 
 "Yes, I'm fine," I said.
It occurred to me for the first time that he might not know whether or not I'd lost the baby.
I gathered my courage.
"Toby, please don't go out.
I want you to be there."
There was another long pause and then he said unsteadily, "All right." 
He sounded far away, as if he had partially covered the mouthpiece with his hand.
I couldn't think of anything to say.
I thought this phone call had been going on for hours.
I wondered suddenly how many of the household were listening, and as if he read my thoughts Toby said, "Mavis is out for the evening." 
 "That's good," I said, "How's John?" 
 "He's fine." 
There was another throat-drying pause, and at last I said, "Well — I'll see you." 
 "Yes," he said, and then added carelessly, "How are you getting back?" 
 "Ambulance." 
 "Get you!" he said dryly, and a little hope trickled back.
We said goodbye, and I went and waited in the hall, which was ablaze with the Matisse colours of Christmas decorations.
Two enormous red paper bells hung from the centre of the ceiling, and from these radiated countless paper-chain ellipses dripping with silver icicles.
It was all overdone, like the decorations in the ward, but even while I was having a superior little mental scoff, they were making me feel obscurely uneasy and near to tears.
The hospital and all that went with it had been such an oasis in the alarming wilderness of doing everything for, and chiefly by, myself; now it came to the point of leaving it, I was scared.
I blamed Christmas.
Why, of all times of the year, did it have to be Christmas?
It just wasn't a thing you could ignore, and being alone at it was to combine the worst elements of being alone at any other time, and multiply them by two hundred and fifty.
The ambulance came.
It was the sort you sit up in, and there were two other people being taken home at the same time, so we didn't go straight to Fulham but did a detour through Kensington.
The other two had evidently been in hospital longer than I had, and they were like children let out of school, peering through the unblacked-out part of the window at the bright lights in the shops and rejoicing that they would be home for Christmas.
I sat in a corner and the uneasiness grew.
Why hadn't I taken Dottie at her word?
Christmas in her nice, cheerful flat, with her gay company and no empty hours to fill, no guilty feeling about letting Christmas pass without recognition…
I realized I was getting extremely slushy, and tried firmly to pull myself together.
If a week of being looked after had gone such a fair way to turning me into a drivelling weakling, it was just as well I hadn't let Dottie tempt me to any more of it.
Because there were very serious considerations ahead.
Now that I'd definitely decided to welcome the baby, I'd have to start planning with a bit more efficiency than in the past, when, so far as one could see, I had been working vaguely on the basis that God would provide; and why the hell He should in a case like this was probably more than even the most devout believer could have told me.
Dr Maxwell had assured me that I shouldn't be troubled by any more sickness.
So now I needed a job that I could do for approximately four months — something well-paid, light, congenial, preferably among colleagues with a physical inability to drop their eyes below shoulder level.
The trouble was, I didn't feel like working.
I felt like sitting about with my feet up, knitting.
I astonished myself with this realization.
I must have accepted the prospect of this baby with a vengeance, if I were seriously thinking of knitting as a desirable occupation.
Anyway, it was out of the question.
Work I must, and for money.
A hundred-odd pounds wouldn't take me very far.
We dropped the others off, and now the big shops would be left behind as we waded through the gloomy streets of Fulham.
I looked out.
Not so gloomy; even here, the small shops were gay with holly and fairy-lights, and once we passed the end of a market street which was as bright and rowdy as a fairground.
In the windows of some of the dark, staid villas, usually so depressingly uniform, were the marks of individualism — small trees speckled with colour, or a silver ball with streamers, or a holly wreath, or nothing.
Even the absence of a Christmas token seemed like a personal statement and stirred the imagination to wonder why.
We drew up at the house at last, and the man came round to help me down.
He treated all his passengers with the same cheerful courtesy; if you had VD or had lost an ear in a knife-fight, it would all be the same to him.
He said, just as he had to both his other passengers: "Home for Christmas, eh ducks?
Manage all right?
Bon Noel, as they say in Jamaica."
He saw me up the steps and then bounded down them and drove away.
My last link with the false security of the hospital was broken.
Now I had to start "facing up to things" again.
I grimaced at the phrase.
What a grisly expression, like chins-up and stiff-upper-lips.
But then it was a pretty grisly necessity.
I put my chin up and tried to stiffen my upper lip, but found I didn't seem to have any muscles in it.
So I put my key in the door and went in more or less as I was.
The house was as quiet as a tomb, and twice as dark.
The first thing I was conscious of was the smell; I'd ceased to notice it when I was in and out all the time, but after a week away from it, it hit me in the face.
Then I switched the dim hall light on, and experienced again the initial impact of the tobacco wallpaper and chocolate paint, the threadbare linoleum, the high gloomy ceilings that you were reluctant to look at for fear you should see bats hanging there.
I groaned inwardly as I climbed the narrow stairs and was plunged in darkness when only half-way up.
I thought hungrily of the scarlet-and-white cleanness of Dottie's self-decorated  flat, with all mod cons and an atmosphere of spanking modernity.
I really must have been insane.
Perhaps even now it wasn't too late to change my soiled mind…
Then I came to the fourth floor landing and Toby's door opened and there he was.
I put my small but suddenly very heavy suitcase down for a rest, and we stood looking at each other.
His hair was untidy; his long thin hands hung below the leather-bound sleeves of the green corduroy jacket, dangling awkwardly as if he didn't know what to do with them.
The main light was behind him, but I could still see the shadows on his face; they were more marked than ever, and I had the foolish illusion that I could remove them by stroking them with the tips of my fingers.
At the same time I felt so inordinately tired that all I wanted was to lean my face against that corduroy and shut out the world.
Then the light on the landing went out and he was in silhouette.
I couldn't see his face any more with its closed, guarded expression which had kept me from going towards him; now he was just a figure in a doorway, a symbol of home-coming.
I shut my mind to the facts and thought, idiotically: "I'll put my trust in love." 
Afterwards I thought that that, after all, is what religion is — the pinning-up of faith across the ugly vista of logic and reality, to fulfil a need.
Maybe it works in the case of God; I've always been so afraid it wouldn't that I've never tried it.
But Toby wasn't God, except to me for just that second, and he'd been hurt.
So when I stumbled against him and threw my arms round his neck he just stood there, unmoving except for a slight step backwards to keep his balance — though I thought I felt his hands touch my waist for just an instant as if they had made an automatic move to hold me which he had cancelled.
I drew back immediately and gasped, "I'm sorry —" He said, "I'm sorry, too," in a quiet, dead voice.
I was so hurt it was like a serious wound, it would start being painful soon but in the meantime there was just an apprehensive numbness.
Toby put the light on again, and his face was set.
He picked up my suitcase and carried it up the last flight, putting it down outside my door and turning to me.
I couldn't look at him.
 "John's done some work on the room," he said.
"He got the key from Doris.
He's worked on it every day you've been gone.
He wanted it to be a surprise for you, and I'm only telling you in  advance in case— in case you should think it might have been me."
I wished I could have felt any sort of advance enthusiasm, but I couldn't have cared less if John had spent the week transforming the room into the Crystal Palace, or even if he'd been laying everything waste with a meat-axe.
 "Toby," I said.
 "No," he said.
 "I can't talk about it." 
"Supposing it had been your baby.
Supposing all this had happened three months from now."
We were still standing on the landing.
I had my eyes closed to do this, but I heard him catch his breath.
 "Would you have thought I was a whore then?" 
 "Shut up," he said in a queer, strangled voice.
"You must have known that you weren't the first.
That didn't seem to make any difference to you.
Were you able to pretend to yourself then that it wasn't true, and now you're not?
Is that it?"
 "Why can't we leave it?" 
 "Because I love you," I said.
 "And this isn't fair!" 
Before either of us could react to this confession, unexpected even to me, I ploughed on.
"I'm twenty-seven years old.
Did you think I was a virgin?
If it could happen like that with you, why should you think it couldn't happen with someone else?
And if you accept that, why does a baby make it so much worse?
A baby doesn't have to mean a girl's been whoring — it can come from a single night.
It could have come from what happened with us, even if we'd never seen each other again!"
I stopped, out of breath and out of specious logic.
Toby said quietly,"I can't help it if it's not fair.
I know it isn't.
It's not a matter of fairness, it's a matter of feeling.
You've got another man's child in you.
That's all I can seem to think of.
You say you love me.
Well, I love you too.
How would you feel if I told you there was a girl going to have a child of mine — some other girl, some stranger?
You're probably quite prepared to stomach the fact that I've slept with girls before you, you'd think it odd if I hadn't, but if you can't see that a baby makes a difference to how much other affairs matter, I can't explain it to you."
He tried to walk past me down the stairs, but I stopped him.
 "Toby, please wait!" 
"The hurt was beginning from when he had stood unmoving when I put my arms round him, but I drove  myself through it.
 "If we love each other, surely something can be done!" 
"Like what?
Do you want me to marry you?"
He had been driven to bitterness through pain, but I didn't see that then.
I only died a small death at his words and the way he said them.
I shrank away from him, feeling a coldness run out all over me as if I really had died.
He stood there for a moment and then said, in a gentler voice, "I didn't mean that the way it sounded…" 
 "You did!" 
I cried accusingly, lost in misery.
 "All right," he said quietly,"I did.
But only for a moment.
Forgive me."
 "No!" 
I shouted from the depths of my hurt.
"What's the good of forgiving each other!
If I forgive you for being male and cruel and unreasonable, you must forgive me for being female and for carrying another man's child and wanting you at the same time.
The whole thing's unfair, life's unjust and people are continually hurting and hating each other, and forgiving doesn't help — why should I forgive you anyway, when you'll never forgive me?"
I was crying outright now, and he made a move towards me which I sensed in the darkness, but I lashed out with my hand and knocked his arm down, and cried, "Leave me alone, that's what you want to do!" 
 "I don't," he said painfully.
"I don't want to leave you.
Why do you think I'm still here?"
He reached out slowly, as if with a conscious effort, and took hold of both my arms.
I was stiff and shaking and I had my face in my hands, crying unrestrainedly.
But the touch of his hands released something in me and the crying began to ease.
 "Don't," he kept saying.
"Don't.
It's bad for you to cry like that."
Very gradually he drew me closer until our bodies were touching.
His was trembling too.
My arms ached to go round him, but I kept them rigidly at my sides for a long time, punishing him for what he'd done to me earlier.
But now he was cuddling me and whispering in my ear with helpless pleading, "Hold me — hold me —" Suddenly I was hugging him with all my strength; our bodies were strung tight together and we were kissing each other 's cheeks with little frantic kisses — we couldn't bear to draw apart even enough to find each other 's lips.
We went into my room at last, with our arms round each other , and in the doorway I stopped dead because I'd forgotten what  Toby had said about John and for a second I thought I was in the wrong room.
There was no more ugly brown wallpaper; it had all been stripped off, and the walls were white-washed.
It made the room look bigger and lighter and altogether different.
He'd tidied everything up and put back all my things, even the picture.
Over the picture was a spray of holly.
It made the room bright and welcoming and almost beautiful.
I turned to Toby to exclaim about it, but he was standing there staring round with a look of desolation.
 "What's the matter?" 
I said.
 "Don't you think it looks wonderful?" 
 "Yes, I do," he said.
"I just wish to God I'd had something to do with it.
I heard him working away up here alone, and he kept coming down all eager and excited and asking me to come and look, and I wouldn't…of all the ridiculous, petty…
I could kick myself."
I understood perfectly.
"It doesn't matter.
Truly it doesn't."
He sighed and moved into the room.
He couldn't stop torturing himself by examining the room's new look from every angle.
He even switched on the blue urinal lamp to see how its light looked against the clean walls.
I could see he was going to be unhappy about it for a long time, and that there was nothing I could do about it.
I drew back the curtains and stood looking out.
After a moment Toby came up behind me and rested his chin on my shoulder.
In an upstairs window across the street was a small Christmas tree.
It had no lights of its own, but the lights from the room behind glinted on its bits of tinsel.
I put my hand up and rested it against Toby's cheek.
 "Do you realize it's nearly Christmas?" 
I said.
 "I've been dreading it," he said.
 "Do you still?" 
He turned his head and kissed my wrist quickly, almost shyly.
 "No." 
 "Couldn't we make some concessions to it?" 
 "Do you mean, get a tree?" 
 "Perhaps that'd be going too far," but I must have sounded wistful, because he said,"I don't see why.
We could go out tomorrow and get one in the market."
 "What would we put on it?" 
 "We could pick up some cheap stuff at Woolworth's." 
"Woolworth's!
That's about the most expensive place you can go!"
"Well, or perhaps we could make some.
I've always thought it would be fun — We never celebrated Christmas at home."
I realized I knew almost nothing about his background.
It would be fun to find out all that, slowly and at leisure.
But first there was the other thing, which we seemed to be glossing over and which couldn't be glossed over.
I turned to him and said deliberately, "There are other things I'll have to start making." 
The flinch was only in his eyes, and he didn't turn away.
He just said,"You've faced it, haven't you?
Completely, I mean."
 "Yes, I think so," I said.
 "And I'll have to, too, won't I?" 
 "It would help." 
He walked away to the fireplace and stood with his head bent, thinking.
After a while he said, "There's such a lot I don't know." 
"I'll tell you
"No, I don't think I want you to.
I only want to know one thing; I know it shouldn't be all-important, but deep down it's the thing I've thought about most."
He looked up and his eyes were dark, and we were both embarrassed in a way that we wouldn't have been if we'd been close together, but it was better that we should stand on our own for this.
 "What is it?" 
"You said just now — if it could happen like that with us, why should I think it couldn't happen between you and somebody else?
But I can't — I mean, I don't want to believe it could happen — with anyone else — the way it was with us.
It's the same act — basically — but it's so different each time, and I've never felt with any other woman what I felt with you.
I'm getting tied up in what I'm trying to ask — it's simply this — was it — the same no, that's not the word.
Was it"
 "Oh darling" 
 "as perfect, as" 
"No, Toby, please stop!
There's no comparison, none!
You don't know, it's like asking me how hell compares with heaven, it's just absurd!
If that's all -"
 "Is that really true?" 
"Yes, I promise!
Oh, if only I could tell you"
"Never?
With anybody?"
That stopped me short.
I stood helplessly, staring at him.
 "There's only ever been one other person," I said, stumbling over the words so that they sounded false even to me.
I couldn't add to them.
I just willed him with all my mind to believe me.
He came to me and put his arms round me and said, "I'm terribly glad," and from the simple way he said it I knew that against all the evidence he had believed me, perhaps because he wanted to.
He kissed me; it was intended to be a sealing sort of kiss to show me that he believed me and that things were going to start being all right, but the kiss altered in the middle and suddenly he pulled himself away.
His face was drawn and I could feel the tension in his hands holding my wrists.
 "Oh God," he said harshly.
"I want you.
I've wanted you all the time, that's what's been half the trouble, thinking I was never going to have you again."
 "I want you too," I said — which was the simple truth.
Something flared up in his face, and then was quenched.
 "We can't," he said flatly.
 "Why not?" 
 "But — it might" 
"It won't.
I'm sure it won't.
 "I'd be so gentle" 
"I know.
That's why it's all right."
This time there were no rum punches and no tears to act as aphrodisiacs, and it was not quite as before.
But there are, I was learning, different landscapes in the country of love.
If the one we crossed this time was a steep climb and then a pleasant sweep into a warm green valley, and not the mountains of the moon, I was the better pleased, because although it was different it was also wonderful, and because I felt instinctively that the heights must be earned.
The first words Toby spoke to me afterwards were, "I thought that was never going to happen to me again." 
And then a minute later, he said, "We must get a double bed immediately." 
He was lying with his head in the hollow of my neck and shoulder, breathing quietly; his voice had a languorous, far-away sound, as if he were rocking slowly in a hammock on a hot summer day.
I held him with one arm and the other lay between him and the small bump that was the baby.
I was comfortable and very happy.
I had nearly dropped off to sleep when he said: "Am I too heavy?" 
He started to move, but I drew him back.
"No, stay there.
You're like a rather overstuffed eiderdown."
He relaxed with a happy grunt, and we lay peacefully for a bit longer.
It couldn't last, though.
It was only comfortable with the afterglow of love-making.
He stood up, and I said, "Put something over me." 
"Why, darling?
Are you cold?"
"No, but I feel silly, half-undressed.
If I were completely, it wouldn't matter."
He laughed and said, "We'll soon fix that." 
I'd always thought it would be embarrassing to have a man undress you, especially the suspenders which are so ugly and comic, but I helped, and except for the girdle which must be the most resistant, unromantic garment since the chastity belt, it was all easy and delightful.
When I had nothing on at all he sat on the floor beside the bed with his cheek resting on one arm and watched my face while he caressed me.
Whenever I smiled, he smiled back happily as if I'd given him something.
Once his hand stopped over my stomach and lay there.
I covered it with mine and we looked at each other and he said, "How is he?" 
 "He's not complaining," I said.
It was the first time I'd ever thought of the baby as "he" .
His gentle stroking went on.
In a way it was more exciting than the act itself, and I was so physically enraptured that I said: "We should have done this before." 
 "Before what?" he said lazily.
 "Before making love." 
He smiled into my eyes.
 "I've got news for you," he said.
 "We are." 
The next day, walking hand in hand through the festive market, we saw a sandwich-board man pushing through the crowds.
He had a cheerful red face which he hadn't succeeded in making entirely solemn and gloomy, though he was trying hard.
On the board over his head was written, in white letters on black: "THE  LORD COMETH" .
The one down his front said, "ARE you READY TO MEET YOUR MAKER??" 
 "Frankly, yes," Toby answered it.
"Never more so.
Let's see what it says on the back."
We hurried past the sandwich man and looked over our shoulders.
On the back board was written: THE WAGES OF SIN IS DEATH".
We glanced at each other, and I pulled a long, apprehensive face.
 "doomed," said Toby mournfully.
But we didn't feel doomed.
We felt, or at least I did, intensely happy, and I found myself looking straight into people's faces and smiling at them.
It wasn't just being in love, or having made love — it was the feeling of being two against the world.
Doris stopped us in the hall when we came in, loaded down under a small tree and a carrier-bag full of bits and pieces we'd seen and liked, and, inevitably in our mood of reckless gaiety, bought.
She looked a bit different, somehow, old Doris for one thing, she had a clean apron on, and her hair had been home-permed.
I found out later Sonia had done it for her.
The girls got on better with her than any of the rest of us did.
Still, she was in a very good mood that day.
She greeted us with a cheerful smile, and whereas we had been anxious to avoid her for fear she should forbid us to bring our tree into the house, she astonished us by saying: "Hullo, dearies.
Well!
Bought a tree, have you?
That's nice.
Like a pot to put it in?"
We gazed at her blankly for a moment before recovering and saying we would, please.
She got one out of the cupboard under the stairs.
"This is what we always used to have our tree in, when Fred was alive.
Great one for a bit of Christmas cheer, old Fred was.
Used to tie a bit of red crepe paper round it, make it look more festive.
Put it on the table in front of your window, I should.
No harm in sharing your blessings, I always say."
I felt stunned by this affability, and stammered my thanks.
 "All better now, are you?" she inquired kindly.
 "Yes, oh yes, thank you." 
 "That's right." 
She glanced downwards, just exactly as she had on the day I'd come for the room.
Her eyes literally bulged.
I was happy enough for this to be more funny than embarrassing.
I started to shrink inwardly, and then I thought, well, she had to spot it sometime.
However, she made no comment.
Instead, she said meditatively,"You know, I haven't taken much notice of Christmas, since Fred went.
I mean, you don't really feel like it, do you?
But this year it's a bit different, like."
She didn't say why, but went on: "Seeing you two with that bit of a tree's made me feel like celebrating.
After all, why not?"
She seemed to be convincing herself.
"Who knows where we'll all be this time next year?
Who knows but what them politicians won't have us all blown to kingdom come?
It's a poor heart that never rejoices."
This seemed a bit of a non-sequitur and Toby smothered a giggle in a cough.
"Why don't you come down and have a bit of a drink with me on Christmas Eve, if you've nothing else to do?
I'll invite the lot, that's what I'll do, and the girls too.
You don't mind, do you, dear?"she said to me, glancing downwards again pointedly.
 "It'll be good for a giggle, as Charlie says," she concluded, with a look which on a lesser woman could have been called coy.
 "Who's Charlie?" asked Toby.
He evidently knew all about Fred.
 "You'll see," she said, with a roguish smile.
"Christmas Eve, then.
Bring a bottle,"she added as we mounted the stairs.
We collapsed round the first bend.
 "I knew damn well there was a catch in it," snorted Toby.
"Still, she did give us Fred's pot.
Who is Fred, anyway, or rather who was he?
Her husband?"
"Yes, good old Fred.
They fought like tigers for twenty years; he drank — talk about liking a spot of Christmas cheer, he liked it all the year round — used to come home and beat her"
 "I can't imagine anyone beating Doris!" 
"Well, of course she beat him back.
It was entirely mutual.
Apparently they were black and blue, the pair of them, every Sunday morning.
Mavis has told me about it.
Doris was always coming weeping and shrieking to Mavis in those days, saying he'd be the death of her, and meanwhile Fred would reel down the cellar steps and visit the tarts for consolation.
Then the next morning when he was still sleeping it off, Doris'd go off to the pub herself and have a few, and bring back a quart of mild, and they'd get drunk again together.
Then they'd usually sing.
Yes, things haven't been the same since Fred fell down the cellar steps and broke his neck"
 "He didn't!" 
"Well, no, he didn't actually, that would have been too good a story.
He just quietly died one day — about three years ago.
Poor old Doris was inconsolable.
She'd no one left to fight with, and Fred, on whom she'd always called down curses, turned into a sainted memory.
That's when Doris developed her thing about noise.
She seemed to feel that if it couldn't be her and Fred bashing about and howling and singing, nobody else was bloody well going to.
And the funny thing was, how friendly she got with Jane — the other Jane.
She just had to have someone to talk about Fred to, and Jane, who'd been through exactly the same cycle of experiences with him as Doris had, only one floor below, was the ideal person."
We were trying to make the tree stand erect in Fred's pot and not seeing quite how it was to be done.
 "We'll have to ask John to fix it." 
I hadn't seen John at all since before going to hospital.
I hadn't thanked him for doing the walls.
Now I thought about him, and thought about all the unsolved mysteries of his behaviour.
I asked Toby why he thought John had reacted as violently as he had to the whole business of our falling in love.
Toby seemed oddly uncommunicative on the subject.
 "They're apt to be funny that way," he said vaguely.
"Who are?
Negroes?"
 "No, of course not, not Negroes," he said.
Then he changed the subject rather clumsily.
 "Well, are we going to Doris's do?" 
"Could you resist?
I'm dying to know who Charlie is."
 "I can hazard a guess." 
 "Could anyone replace Fred?" 
 "People are always replacing other people," he said with unlooked-for soberness.
He looked at me searchingly across the horizontal tree, and I said instantly, "I love you." 
 "Let's leave this tree for the moment, I want to talk to you." 
We sat down, I on the arm-chair, he on the floor at my feet: He held one of my hands and played with the fingers.
"Jane, about this baby.
Look, I don't know much about it, but shouldn't you be going to — hell, I don't know, classes or something?"
"What, on child-care, do you mean?
I certainly have plenty to learn on that subject.
I don't know a bottle from a safety-pin."
"No, I meant — this other business, this relaxing thing.
I've read about it, you do exercises and train yourself, and then when the  time comes you pop behind a bush and reappear with the baby slung on your hip, and go on toiling in the paddy-fields as if nothing had happened."
 "There are no bushes in paddy-fields." 
"Well, behind a rice-stook, then — don't quibble.
The point is, it doesn't hurt."
He looked up at me with a little grin operating on half his mouth only.
 "If it's all the same to you, darling, I'd a whole lot rather it didn't hurt." 
 "I'll get a book from the library," I conceded.
The idea of its hurting or not hurting hadn't occurred to me before, but now he mentioned it, it did seem preferable that it shouldn't.
When Dr Maxwell came along a little later, I asked him about it, and although he pooh-poohed it a bit and said it was all a lot of nonsense, I did get him to admit it couldn't do me any actual harm to go to the classes and do exercises.
 "Keep you from getting too fat," he said bluntly.
"And why aren't you in bed?
I thought I told you to go straight to bed when I sent you home last night."
 "I did, doctor," I said demurely, not elaborating on what happened when I got there.
 "Well, I suppose it's a good sign you're not lazy," he said.
"Now take plenty of fruit and milk.
Are you short of money?
Because there's an organization."
"I know about it.
I don't much want to be a charge on charity if I can avoid it."
 "Quite right," he said.
"You want to get a job, something quiet of course.
Put a ring on your finger, call yourself Mrs. Now don't look like that, it just simplifies life, that's all.
What does it matter if it implies something that isn't quite true?
None of their business,"he said vaguely.
 "Where's the father, by the way?" 
 "My father?" 
He'd shot the question at me so unexpectedly I had to have time to recover.
"No, no, not your father.
Don't tell me where he is, or I'll go and tell him what I think of him.
The father."
He prodded my middle to make his meaning unmistakable.
 "He's in Paris." 
 "Done a bunk?" he asked with gruff sympathy.
"Not exactly.
He doesn't know.
He looked exasperated.
 "Well tell him, girl, write to him and tell him" he exclaimed, his moustache bristling.
"Doesn't know, indeed.
He's got some responsibility in the matter, hasn't he?
Not  exclusively your doing, I suppose?
Good God, give the blighter a chance to do the right thing."
 "I'd rather not." 
 "You'd rather not," he mimicked, and shook his head impatiently.
"And what are you going to use for money to begin with, eh?
Tell me that.
Or perhaps you're going to wash your hands of the whole business?
Have it adopted, is that the plan?
Because if that's it, you'll have to warn them at the hospital, you know.
I've booked you in there, by the way — twentieth of June, or thereabouts.
The point is, if you're going to give it away, you have to let 'em know so they don't let you see it.
Once you've seen it, you'll want to change your mind, they always do, and that causes a lot of extra bother."
 "I'm keeping him." 
I wasn't going to call him It any more.
"On what, I ask again?
Forgive an old man's natural curiosity.
On what?"
 "I don't know yet." 
 "Well," said Maxwell wearily,"I've done my best.
Come to see me in a fortnight.
Plenty of fruit and milk.
Oh, I said that before."
And he stumped out.
It was too close to Christmas to bother about embarking on any sort of adult education before it, so I pacified Toby by saying I'd got plenty of time and would look into it after the New Year, and we settled down to wallow in being together and getting into the Christmas spirit.
We were dyeing popcorn, of all things, in two bowls of red and yellow Dolly-dye in my sink the next morning when I heard John moving about.
I'd been fast asleep when he'd come in from work the night before.
I knocked on the wall and then opened the door and waited for him.
He came shambling shyly out of his room, his black face almost coy in the embarrassing anticipation of being thanked.
I kissed him.
 "It's the nicest present I've ever had" I said.
 "I done it all right for you?" 
 "I can't imagine it possibly looking better." 
 "I wasn't sure for the right colour; I think in the end, white is safest." 
"It's perfect.
You must have worked like a black."
It was one of those unspeakable moments.
But to my overwhelming relief, John threw back his head in one of his gargantuan  laughs.
 "Like nothin' else!" he roared.
Then he saw my yellow hands.
 "What you doin' here?" 
 "We're dyeing popcorn," Toby said grandly.
John was fascinated.
He moved between us and looked at the bowls of deep colour, and little puffs of red and yellow dotted about the draining-board to dry.
 "But what you do this for?" 
 "We're going to string them together and hang them on our Christmas tree." 
John looked at the tree, and touched it.
He said nothing.
 "We were going to ask you to fix it in the pot so it'll stand up," I said quickly.
He grinned slowly.
 "I make a bargain," he offered.
 "I make the tree stand up, if you let me make some of them little colour things." 
We had such fun with the tree.
I don't know which of the three of us was the more childishly involved in its decoration.
John sat cross-legged on the floor with a big needle and some coloured wool threading the popcorn in bright strings — not at random but with meticulous counting, to make regular patterns.
He loved it because of the colours and because it needed his nimble fingers.
He looked like a mammoth black Tailor of Gloucester, delicately plying his needle.
Toby was more reserved at first.
I thought he was only joining in to please me, but before long I saw that he was enjoying it too, chiefly I think because to him it was a novelty.
I remembered his words: "We never celebrated Christmas at home." 
No, I thought.
Jewish homes don't.
It was a subject he had never raised.
As for me, I enjoyed it because it was companionable and because Christmas is a sore on the conscience unless you minister to it.
We always had a tree at home, and the family congregated — my two uncles and their wives and their one-son-apiece, and Addy my father's unmarried aunt, darling strict Addy, who had helped to bring me up.
She cooked the turkey and booted the uncles' wives out of her way when they came cluttering into the kitchen trying to help, i.e. interfere, which they did unfailingly each year.
Then they'd come bleating to my father and their husbands and complain that Addy was autocratic and impossible, and the men would say, "Why can't you leave her alone?" 
The aunts would reply indignantly that they only wanted to help, whereupon Addy would shout from the kitchen that if either of them could cook worth a damn perhaps they could be something other than a bloody  nuisance.
The uncles would hide rueful grins, because they knew better than most what sort of cooks the aunts were, and there would follow the inevitable patch of family "atmosphere" before Addy would relent and appoint them to do some menial task like laying the table.
The strained atmosphere never survived beyond the first trickling bouquet from the roasting bird, stuffed pot-bellied with chestnuts.
I found the uncles and their wives, and the cousins, too, who were respectively scruffy and stuffy, trying and used to dread the annual get-together — though now I thought back to it it seemed I'd always enjoyed it in the event.
I had to laugh at myself for thinking rather longingly now that I should miss it this year, and especially I would miss Addy, whom I loved.
Would they all meet at Father's as usual?
Would Father tell them about me, or had he already circulated the news?
Probably they all knew by now; my uncle Michael was a great gossip, and he and my father often met for lunch at week-ends.
I felt a little ashamed that I had never cared enough for any of my father's relatives to give even a thought to their reactions to the prospect of an irregular addition to the family.
I could predict them with reasonable assurance in each case, except Addy.
You could never be sure what she was going to feel, do or say about anything.
The day after we'd decorated the tree and stood it in my window, I left Toby writing and went out alone.
I had a vague idea of sounding the newsagent boards for a job, but it was a fine, bright day and I found myself walking, just walking, enjoying the feeling of not being afraid any more.
I stopped at a stationer's and ordered two reams of Devon Valley Thin, two black ribbons to fit Toby's portable, and a box of the best carbon papers.
I looked at the Christmas cards.
Normally I bought fifty, this year I bought six though basically I only needed one.
But there was Dottie and James and Addy and I'd be sure to think of some others.
I thought, I really must stop spending money.
Anyone would think this was just any Christmas.
But being happy always makes me want to buy things.
I told the stationer I'd be back for my parcel, and wandered on through the cold sunny streets.
When I realized I was walking towards my father's house I quickly changed my direction.
It gave me quite a shock.
It was as if I were a mindless pin, being drawn through a magnetic field.
To distract myself, I went into a draper's  and bought a pair of knitting needles, a large supply of soft yellow wool and some nice simple patterns.
While I was looking through them, the woman, who was a friendly, cosy old body, noticed my bare hand and laughed at herself.
 "I thought for a while it was for a baby of your own," she said.
I wanted to say "It is" , but something stopped me.
When I got out of the shop I felt angry with myself, and a little alarmed.
If I wasn't able to admit it to some old woman I'd never see again and who didn't matter a scrap to me, how was I going to face it out for the rest of my life?
I decided it was just because she hadn't mattered that it hadn't been worth shocking her.
It didn't exactly lend weight to my decision to realize, when I'd finished making it, that I was standing outside a second-hand jeweller's looking at a selection of gold rings.
At a junk-shop a little further along I saw a china snuff-box painted with ribbons in lover's-knots, and an M on the lid, which I bought for Mavis.
It was only 2s.6d. and rather her sort of thing, I thought.
The problem of John remained.
How I wished I could buy him a record-player for all those useless records, but there was no point in thinking along those lines, so in the end I got him a belt, made of different coloured woven leathers, very gay and rather spivvy, only of course it wouldn't look spivvy on him.
Then I picked up my things at the stationer's and walked home, ignoring the distressing tugs of the magnetic field, which made me feel I'd wasted my morning by not doing the thing I'd set out to do.
I couldn't understand why I should want to leave the relative safety of the house in Fulham to walk into a hornets' nest of horrified disapproval and rejection.
The first thing Toby said to me when I got in was, "Somebody's been here to see you." 
My heart froze for a second, as if I had put on an elaborate disguise and suddenly been addressed by name — I didn't feel safe any more.
I'd been discovered.
 "Who?" 
"A man.
Big, tough-looking character.
Wouldn't give his name."
James, I thought dully.
 "Is he coming back?" 
 "Yes, this evening, he said." 
Toby looked at me inquiringly.
"It's my old boss.
You know, the one John said was my lover,"I said.
 "Oh, damn, I never thought he'd look for me." 
 "He seemed in an awful state about something." 
 "The house, probably," I said.
"I didn't exactly describe it accurately.
Also, he may have had quite a job finding it."
I felt very tired suddenly, and Toby saw it.
 "You've overdone it rather, haven't you?" he asked.
"Why don't you pop upstairs and lie down for a bit?
I'll fix you some tea later."
 "No, that's my job," I said.
I looked at the sheet of paper in the typewriter.
 "How have you been getting on?" 
 "Not too well," he said shortly, and then added an odd thing: "I hope being happy isn't going to stop me writing." 
 "Why should it?" 
"I don't know.
I can't seem to concentrate.
I keep floating about in the thought of you, like wallowing in a hot bath and not wanting to get out."
He was sitting at his desk and I went and put my arms round him from behind, and nuzzled his ear.
 "I've got a confession to make," I said.
 "When you went away I came down here and read" 
 "What!" 
He jerked away from me.
 "Only one page," I said soothingly.
 "I thought it was terribly good." 
He stared at me for a moment, and I thought he was going to be angry.
Then he said, "If you thought it was so bloody good, why did you only read one page?" 
We laughed, and then he grew serious again and said,"But don't praise me.
It dries things up somehow."
 "A lot of things seem to dry you up," I teased.
 "It's the truth," he said gloomily.
I went away and made tea and then sent off my Christmas cards, only not James's.
I dreaded seeing him, and thought I'd go out for the evening, but then I realized there was no point in that, it was only putting off the inevitable.
Perhaps he won't come, I thought.
But I knew he would.
Then I began to wonder whether, by wearing a loose jacket and sitting down all the time, I could keep him from noticing.
Men aren't very observant about these things.
What on earth had prompted him to come hunting for me?
I sighed uneasily and began to cast on stitches for the back of a matinee jacket…
Knitting was a painful business for me, but it was absorbing, and I'd lost track of the time when I heard crashing footsteps approaching and a determined bang on the door.
I hid the inch of yellow knitting, which represented two hours' work, under my chair, tipped the lampshade to a more discreet angle, and called, "Come in." 
The door was flung open, and there was a baffled pause, like that of a charging bull who's lost sight of its target.
"Well, where the hell are you?
Oh, here!"he exclaimed, bursting into sight round the corner.
 "Ah, so I've found you at last!" 
He sounded exactly like an outraged father, but the expression on his face was contradictory.
He had the anxious, wary look he always wore around women who were indulging in any essentially feminine pursuit — like crying, being coy, spending money on fripperies, or gossiping.
Or being in some way fragile and in need of protection.
I knew that look too well to mistake or ignore it.
With a sigh of resignation I untipped the lampshade and raked out my knitting from beneath the chair.
 "Sit down, James," I said wearily, and when he had done so, his big hands dangling between his knees, I asked, "How did you find out?" 
 "How did you know I knew?" he mumbled, incoherent with surprise.
 "That look," I said grimly.
"Look?
But I didn't — not at — I mean"
"Never mind James.
How are you?"
 "How are you?" he asked accusingly.
 "As you see me." 
"God, if I'd known!
If only you'd told me!
Living here — in this place
"Now, James, it's quite all right.
Keep calm.
I like it here."
 "I admit this room's like a daffodil in a crap-heap," he conceded.
 "How did you find out?" 
I asked again.
 "Well, you'll never guess," he said.
 "The Old Man told me." 
 "WHAT!" 
"He's known all along.
He knew when he fired you."
I sat with my mouth open.
"Well, you can imagine, I felt the way you look.
The bloody old hawk, talk about X-ray eyes!
Heard about you being sick and put two and two together — though what the other two was, I'm damned if I know.
These old Jews, they've got such a feeling for kids, they can spot 'em almost before they're conceived.
It floored me."
It had floored me too.
I'd dropped three stitches.
But it explained a few things — the kindness I'd thought I'd detected, his seemingly unreasonable act of firing me…
 "So — why on earth did he tell you now?" 
"Got the wind up about you and Christmas and all that.
Those Yids, they set far more stock by this Christmas nonsense than most of us — damn' nuisance — God, I've missed having you to do my shopping for me this year.
What do you think Audrey'd like, indeed if I know — and Joan's getting to the stage where she looks at toys and says politely, "Yes, but what does it do?" 
Anyway, the Old Man — well, he called me into the Sanctum this morning and said, had I heard anything from you, and I said no, and he said silly bitch, or words to that effect — with which I agree — said he'd told you you should keep in touch with me.
Then he said, he'd heard you'd moved away from home.
Is there anything he doesn't hear, I ask myself?
I said, yes you had.
Did I know where you were living now?
Yes, I said, you had a nice place in Chelsea.
Check on it, said he.
Why?
I asked.
Never mind why, he said, just do it.
So I rang here, didn't ask for you, just asked the address.
When we found out you'd pulled a fast one, the Old Man said I was to get round and find out if you were all right.
Why shouldn't she be all right?
I asked him.
I was beginning to think he'd gone off his chump.
He gave me a sort of world-weary look — and then he told me.
Seemed to think I should have known it for myself.
Jesus, Jane, "he finished peevishly," why didn't you tell me, dear?
When I think I kept you working…"
 "Thank God you did, or I'd have cracked up and had even less money saved than I have now." 
James coughed.
 "That's really what the Old Man wanted me to find out — how are you off for money?" 
 "I've got about £pound; 87 10s.," I said.
James ran his fingers through his hair distractedly.
 "Jane — I don't want to interfere — I mean it's none of my business, but" 
 "Who's the father?" 
 "Well — yes — no" 
"He's an ex-actor.
I've known him for seven years.
We went to bed once.
He's in Paris.
He doesn't know anything about the baby, and I never want to see him again.
Okay?"
 "Sorry, dear," James muttered, rigid with embarrassment.
 "I'm sorry, too," I said penitently.
"It's just that it's all very well to talk about his responsibility and all that — nobody thinks how awful it would be for me to go crawling to him wailing, I'm in  tro-uble?
I'm going to have a ba-aby?
I couldn't, James.
I'd rather manage alone.
If I can."
"Ah, but that's the whole point.
Can you?"
 "Well, that remains to be seen." 
James watched me prodding away at the knitting for a while, and I sensed his helplessness.
 "The Old Man said — fifty quid'd help" 
I stopped knitting again and stared.
 "Are you telling me that — he wants to give me" 
"Well, not really give.
A sort of advance on salary."
I took this in.
 "You mean, he'd be willing to take me back, afterwards?" 
"It's fair to say I've never stopped griping since you left.
And you know how I can gripe."
 "Thank you, James," I said, feeling humble.
 "So what about the fifty?" 
I sat and thought about it.
 "I can't get over him doing this for me — a shiksa." 
 "A what?" 
 "A non-Jew." 
"Well, you've worked for him.
That practically gives you a hook-nose in his eyes.
He mentally circumcised me the day be signed my first pay-cheque."
"What do you think?
Ought I to take it?"
James sat back on the bed and shouted,"Take it!
Of course you should take it!
Good God, are you crazy?
You might just as well say to a publisher, should you take his advance royalties!"
 "Yes, but I might not be able to come back — it's all so un" 
He grimaced in exasperation.
"You flaming women, you're so stuffed with bloody honesty it's a wonder you don't choke on it.
So you don't come back.
So the book doesn't sell a single copy.
So what?
You can pay it back sometime"
 "Oh, sure!" 
"Well, or if you don't, he can afford it.
Better you than some club for Jewish juvenile delinquents.
Take it and buy a pram, and if your conscience bothers you, paint "Down with the Arabs" on one side and "I like Kykes" on the other.
That way you'll be doing him a favour."
I laughed and said,"All right.
I could do with it."
He got out a cheque-book and wrote a cheque.
 "I suppose you wouldn't accept an extra bit from me?" he asked.
 "You're damn" right I wouldn't."
 "Never mind, Audrey and I will give you a pile of disposable nappies or something when the time comes." 
He gave me the cheque.
 "I must write and thank him," I said, gloating over it.
 "No," said James quickly,"don't do that.
I'll thank him for you.
Hell, it's chicken-feed to him."
 "Shiksa-feed," I corrected"But I must write, all the same.
It really is darling of him."
 "Well —" he said,"I tell you what, write the letter now and I'll take it in.
Why waste a stamp?"
Then I looked at him and he looked quickly away, James who was incapable of telling the simplest lie without making a hash of it.
Silently, I handed the cheque back.
 "Well tried," was all I said, but very tenderly.
He blustered and turned scarlet as if caught out in a crime, and tried to bluff it out, but I knew him too well.
Then he tried to force me to take the damn' thing, and I had to call attention to my delicate condition.
At last he sat back, tousled and infuriated, crumpled the cheque and hurled it across the room.
 "I won't cash it," I warned him.
 "I know you won't, blast you." 
We sat in stubborn silence for a minute.
Then he said, "In fairness to the Old Man, all the rest of it's true; I mean he did say you could come back to Drummonds later, for you to have fifty out of petty cash — which was where I was going to get it from to pay myself back" 
 "A likely story." 
He sat quiet for another moment, and then began raging.
 "Bloody, stupid, stubborn, neurotic" 
"Yes, James.
I love you."
He stood up, shaking his head, and picked up his coat.
 "I'll be back," he threatened.
"Oh — here.
You can't bloody well refuse this."
He took a half-bottle of Glen Mist out of his pocket.
 "Shut your trap," he said, as I opened it to protest.
He plonked the bottle on the table, and shambled muttering round the corner.
Then he put his head back into sight.
 "And I still think you should write to Paris!" he yelled as a peg shot.
Toby came up when James had gone.
I told him what had happened and we sipped the Glen Mist out of egg-ups.
 "This is one bottle we won't be taking to Doris's come-all-ye," he said.
I said nothing.
I was thinking of all I could have bought for the baby with fifty pounds.
I picked up the crumpled cheque and spread it out, looking at it with the sort of hopeless hunger with which one admires things in the window of Fortnum & Mason.
Toby watched me.
 "I think I'll have a cigarette," I said suddenly.
He looked as if he were going to object, then didn't.
He gave me one, and I folded the cheque carefully into a spill and lit the cigarette with the flame I had obtained from the gas-fire.
 "God," said Toby violently, "I wish to Christ" 
 "What, darling?" 
 "Nothing," he said miserably, staring at the charred remains of the cheque, burning away in the Cinzano ashtray.
We were late getting to Doris's party on Christmas Eve, because Toby and I had a sort of row.
I hadn't been feeling too well all day, but after opening-time when Toby'd gone out to get the wine I started to feel better and began to dress.
But nothing I had looked right on me.
My skirts wouldn't fasten and my loose-fitting dresses weren't loose any more.
I thought it wasn't fair that I should begin to show when I was barely into my fourth month, and I got angry with my clothes, as if it were their fault that I pulled them out of shape.
Also, my hair wouldn't go right.
For no apparent reason it was hanging on my head like lank seaweed; I couldn't make it puff out in a way that hid my ears properly.
It was just that bit too long.
I got hot and sticky trying to fix it, and my arms ached with holding them up.
I thought, I must get it cut — and then I remembered that I had no money to waste on that sort of thing any more; it would just have to grow, or I'd have to cut it myself.
In the end I completely lost my temper with it.
I got a pair of rather blunt scissors out of my sewing-kit and, swearing out loud, began to chop.
Of course, after I'd cut off one bit, my temper cooled down like a hot Poker dipped in a rain barrel.
I stood in front of the mirror, aghast at what I'd done.
There was one raw edge, straight from my left cheek to my ear-lobe, then a drop of about two inches, and all the rest hung down unhappily, like a dropped skirt-hem.
At that moment, Toby knocked.
He was a bit subdued that day anyway; the work wasn't coming right.
He'd got about half-way through the book, and stuck.
He'd added nothing since the night James came.
I knew well enough what the trouble was.
He wanted to be able to give me fifty pounds, and he was suffering from a deep sense of inadequacy because he couldn't have given me five.
As I knew this, there was no excuse for the way I behaved.
I think I'd have been more sensitive, but for my hair, and my clothes not fitting.
When he came in he saw I was on the verge of tears and said, "What's wrong?" 
 "My hair!" 
I wailed.
 "Look at it!" 
I held the curtailed lock out to him.
He looked, and laughed.
 "What's funny?" 
I snapped.
"That is.
You ass what did you want to start hacking at it for?
It looked lovely as it was.
 "Now's a fine time to tell me!" 
I fumed unreasonably.
 "Well, I'd have told you earlier if you'd asked me." 
He walked round me, judiciously.
 "You'll have to cut it all now, I suppose." 
 "I can't," I retorted.
 "You'll have to do it." 
He looked alarmed.
"Hell, darling, what do I know about cutting women's hair?
Can't you do it?"
"No.
Here, Figaro."
I handed him the scissors, put a towel round my shoulders, and sat down on a chair.
He stood, non-plussed, the scissors dangling.
 "How?" 
 "Just cut," I said grimly.
He cut.
He did the only thing he could, which was to chop it straight all the way round.
There was a tense silence as he moved slowly round behind me, breathing heavily.
 "There," he said at last, when he'd travelled in a half-circle.
He got out a handkerchief and wiped his hands.
 "How does it look?" 
I asked tremulously.
He looked at me, glumly.
 "Do you want the truth?" 
 "No," I said.
I stood up and looked at myself in the mirror.
After a short, ugly pause, Toby came up behind me and hung  his handkerchief over the mirror with a mortician's gesture.
I was experiencing something very like despair, which was not altogether relieved when he turned me towards him and said,"I'd love you if you were as bald as a coot.
No, now don't cry, it doesn't look as bad as you think.
You look like a little Dutch girl.
Come on now, we're going to be late, the others are all in there, I could hear the revelry as I came through the hall."
 "I don't want to go," I said childishly, looking at the sad bits of cut-off hair lying like a dead bird's feathers on the floor.
 "Well, I do," he said cheerfully, trying to snap me out of it,"and I've bought the wine and everything.
Come on, Janie, we must go now.
It'll be fun, you'll see."
He took my arm, but I pulled it away.
It was such an odd feeling, as if I'd lost twenty years somewhere.
I didn't seem to have an ounce of grown-up character to draw on.
I felt helpless in the face of my own infantile bad temper and sulkiness; I could remember exactly how I'd felt when I was six, and somebody was trying to cajole me into doing something I didn't want to do…in a minute, I thought in some recess of my mind, I'll be stamping and shouting, "Won't!" 
 "What's the matter, darling?" 
Toby asked gently.
I knew I didn't deserve his patience; I had to think up some justification of my silliness, so I said, "They'll all notice," which was something that hadn't been worrying me up to then.
 "Well, so what if they do?" he said robustly.
There was no answer to that, so I sighed heavily, and said, "Oh, all right," as if he'd bullied me into it.
All might still have been well, if he hadn't, in a desire to make me happier stood away from me and said, "You look lovely." 
 "I know how I look!" 
I barked.
 "I look bloody awful!" 
 "You don't," he said mildly.
 "I do!" 
I retorted, not mildly at all.
 "I look as if I were going to give birth to an elephant at any minute!" 
He looked astonished, as well he might, and glanced downwards instinctively to verify this.
I turned my back on him.
 "Don't look at me!" 
"Darling — honestly — are you mad?
You can hardly see a thing."
 "I can't do my skirts up!" 
 "Well, that was inevitable, eventually." 
 "If I go on blowing out at this rate, I won't have a thing to wear by January!" 
"Janie, you'll have to get maternity clothes sooner or later.
With you it's a bit sooner, that's all."
I turned on him.
 "So you admit I'm enormous?" 
 "Dear God," he said, beginning to get rattled.
"No, of course not!
All I said was — look, darling, let's go to the party.
Please."
Something pleading in his voice reached me through whatever senseless barricade of childish rage I'd thrown up, and I relaxed a bit, and managed to smile and say I was sorry to have been so silly.
He looked relieved, kissed me, and picked up the bottle.
 "Look, I got a nice Beaujolais," he said, showing it to me.
 "How much?" 
I asked.
His normally open, boyish face closed for a moment, and then he said warily, "Why do you ask?" 
 "Because we're going halves, of course." 
 "We're not," he said in a rigid voice that should have warned me.
"But Toby, we are, of course we are!
That's only fair!"
"What's fairness got to do with it?
Please shut up about it.
I'm paying for the lousy thing, and that's the end of that."
 "But you can't afford" 
 "I know I can" t!"he shouted suddenly.
"I can't afford any of the bloody decencies of life!
I can't afford to take you out properly or buy you a proper Christmas present, or be able to tell you not to worry — I'm twenty-eight years old and I'm still living from hand to mouth like a bloody tramp.
Since I was eighteen I've been writing, ten years already, and so what?
I've written two novels and five Plays and God knows how many short stories, and what keeps me alive, even?
A couple of lousy articles a month, stuff I make up and toss off and get no feeling from doing, just a feeling of disgust because it seems to be all I'm fit for!"
He turned away, his shoulders slumping suddenly.
 "Why don't I shut up," he said, the anger gone from his voice and only bitterness left.
Shaken, we stood at opposite sides of the room, in separate silences.
But I couldn't bear to see him standing there so desolately, face to face with his own failure.
I knew how it felt, and it must be worse for a man.
I went over, tentatively, and touched him.
He turned round to me abruptly and his face had a new hard look.
 "Jane," he said, "will you tell me the truth if I ask you something?" 
 "What is it?" 
 "Do you think I'm a failure as a writer?" 
 "Failure's a thing you measure at the end of a life," I said.
 "You haven't failed yet — not till you give it up, or die." 
 "But I've failed up to now?" 
"You haven't succeeded.
It's not the same thing."
He paused, and I thought, what he's going to ask me now is very important.
 "Do you love me in spite of the fact that I haven't succeeded, or because of it?" 
 "In spite of it," I said, fearing that this was not the answer he wanted.
But his face gave me no clue, and he went on: "Would you love me more if I did succeed?" 
 "Yes," I replied promptly, "if by succeeding you mean in your own eyes, not necessarily the world's." 
 "Why would you?" 
I had to think about it to get it clear in my mind.
 "Because," I said slowly,"because success is important; it's as important as self respect — it's part of self-respect.
Without self-respect and a sense of satisfaction in his work, a man's nothing, and if he's nothing, he's not worth loving."
In the pause that followed I had to stifle a feeling of panic.
And wasn't that the completely wrong thing to say?"
I thought.
If he doesn't understand — if he's one of the people who says "lf-you-really-loved-me-you'd-love-my-failure-too" — this could be the finish of us.
He didn't relax suddenly, or smile, or kiss me — it wasn't that simple.
But from the way he reached out slowly to pick up the bottle and said, "In the meantime — my treat?" 
I thought that at least part of what I'd said had satisfied him.
At least he knew I told him the truth.
I nodded, feeling a sense of relief, as if we'd cleared some giant obstacle in a fog.
But still he didn't smile, and later I wondered if perhaps we'd hit it without knowing it.
 "Let's go," he said.
It always seems odd, looking back on a turning-point in life, that bells did not ring and warning hooters go.
The party seemed to be just a party — quite an entertaining one, but nothing world-shaking.
I mean, of course, my world.
Everyone who lived in the house was there, and so were a number of other friends and neighbours of Doris's.
They were a mixed bag, which became a lot more mixed after sampling Doris's noxious  black Punch, to which every liquid contribution, no matter how incompatible, was swiftly added.
There was a lot of dancing to the radio and, later, to John's guitar; a lot of Christmas cards were repeatedly sent toppling; a lot of seasonal goings-on went on under the veritable forest of mistletoe that hung from the centre light.
And Mavis told fortunes.
I hadn't known she did, but apparently she could only be persuaded when she was in her cups, which was a rare occurrence.
The first person so honoured was Charlie, an elderly retired spiv with the face of a well-meaning gorilla who came approximately (and frequently) up to Doris's ear.
Mavis informed him archly that when she looked into his horny palm she could hear wedding-bells.
Charlie, undismayed, threw out his incredibly long arm like a lariat and encircled Doris's ample waist with it.
He winked at Toby and me, standing together in the audience which had gathered round.
 "Cupid ain't fussy," he said.
 "Look what he done to me, at my age!" 
Doris was so overcome with girlishness she actually giggled.
Then it was Toby's turn.
I was surprised at his eagerness.
 "Come on, Mavis, while you're in the vein." 
 "Oh you!" 
Mavis said, giving his hand an almost flirtatious slap.
 "You never believe a word I tell you." 
"On the contrary, I believe every word, specially when it's depressing.
Then it's sure to be true.
Come on, tell me something nice for a change."
She examined his hand.
 "Unsettled," she said peevishly.
"Everything's always muzzy with you.
No clear pattern at all.
A bit of this, a fiddle with that — never really put your whole self into anything, do you?"
I saw Toby's face change.
"And your work-line — look at it.
Little branches wandering off it every which way.
Blurred.
That's what you are, my lad.
Blurred."
 "That's enough, thank you," said Toby, quite sharply for him.
I'd rather not hear any more, if you don't mind."
He stepped back out of the circle and stood frowning into his drink.
I touched his arm, but apart from deepening his frown for a second he didn't pay any attention.
We had some hot bangers and the room got thicker and thicker with smoke and noise and people.
Charlie had his eye on Sonia.
She was a dark, broad-faced girl with Slavic eyes; under her thick  make-up she was probably little more than twenty.
Whenever Doris wasn't looking, Charlie would play peek-a-boo with her and she would stare at him stonily for a minute and then turn her head pointedly away.
Jane had evidently told her they were both off-duty for the evening.
Toby didn't ask me to dance.
He spent most of the evening sitting by himself.
It wasn't hard to see he was unhappy about what Mavis had said.
I felt a stifled anger against her.
I tried to cheer him up but he only grunted and wouldn't respond.
I felt further away from him than I had ever felt, even when I came back from the hospital.
It seemed such a childish thing he'd allowed to upset him; a silly woman telling fortunes…but silly or not, she had brushed the truth, and hit him where it hurt.
I found myself sitting with Jane and Sonia.
John was near by, playing his guitar.
People were getting tired, and everyone was sitting about.
There came one of those breaks in the conversation, and in the middle of it Jane suddenly asked: "Are you all better again now, dear?
I was quite worried about you, after you fainted that time."
Naturally everyone listened.
I couldn't see many people; most of the lights had been turned off, and we happened to be sitting in the patch of light thrown by one small lamp.
All round were people in the gloom — an audience of attentive and potentially malignant strangers.
I thought: These are just the first hundred, for the rest of my life — strangers who'll know, who'll find out, who'll try not to react but who will react.
Their attention was idle, impersonal; Jane's question was rhetorical.
But abruptly it seemed to me that the moment should have meaning, even if it were to my discredit.
I felt a rush of impulsive courage to the head and said pleasantly"Yes, thank you.
Luckily I didn't lose the baby, so of course I'm very happy about that."
I heard Mavis gasp, and Jane looked puzzled and surprised.
I thought, I've misjudged Doris.
She hasn't told anyone
"You having a baby, dear?
I didn't know that."
Mavis found her voice.
 "But dear — I thought" 
I located her in the gloom and shook my head, smiling.
She was obviously very put out.
 "Well I never!" she said crossly.
 "It never dawned on me." 
There was what seemed like an age of silence before the general   hubbub mercifully resumed.
In that age I learned that "confession" doesn't ease the soul, but challenges it.
My rash courage ebbed and I wanted to run.
But instead I sat quite still and thought, if I can say it here I can say it anywhere.
And anyway it's none of their business.
Mavis drew me aside as soon as she saw an opportunity.
 "Jane, you couldn't have done what I told you" 
 "Never mind it now, Mavis." 
 "But I've never known it to fail" 
 "Will you read my hand for me?" 
It was rather a haphazard reading, as Mavis was now well away and the light was almost non-existent.
I wasn't really listening.
I'd only suggested it to distract her.
My attention was fixed on Toby, still sitting by the window.
He'd drawn the curtain back a little and was hunched up over his glass, staring into the street
 "Toby," I called softly.
He looked round.
The frown was still there, out of place on that blackbird's face.
"Come and sit here for a bit.
Mavis is going to read my hand."
I thought if he heard her nonsense directed at someone else he would get back a sense of proportion about it.
He came slowly and sat beside us.
 "I can see a number of roads up ahead for you," Mavis was saying.
"Whichever you take will be rough and rocky.
But there's always a silver lining, isn't there, dear?"
 "To the rocks?" murmured Toby, and I thought it's working.
 "You be quiet," said Mavis.
"She knows what I mean.
It won't all be hard; there'll be, like, compensations.
They do say they're a great comfort,"she added vaguely.
"Often thought I'd like one myself.
Thought I'd call it Violet — or Myrtle, I always liked nice smells"
 "Then why not Eucalyptus?" suggested Toby.
I reached out with my free hand and put it in his.
His fingers closed round it and I felt the emptiness of fear fill solidly with relief.
I stopped listening to Mavis and sat staring at Toby.
He flicked a wry, sheepish little look at me, and I pushed my head against his shoulder and put my other hand tightly over our clasped ones.
 "Oh, now you've spoilt it!" 
Mavis exclaimed.
"Just as I was getting into it, too.
Did you hear what I said about the tall fair man, dear?"
But I wasn't listening.
Toby had come back for the moment.
He put his arm round me and I closed my eyes.
We sat quietly together, our breathing synchronized.
I felt rather sleepy, and very safe and unworried.
I'd told, and Toby hadn't minded, and soon we'd be alone together.
The thing that made the turning point happened just as we were leaving.
The numbers were thinning; there'd been a small brawl when Doris caught Charlie sitting at Sonia's feet; Jane had told Sonia off in no uncertain terms and dragged her off downstairs; one neighbour had passed rather noisily out and been lugged home; somebody had announced an engagement.
In other words, the party was a success; honour was satisfied.
Toby and I went to say thank you to Doris and she shouted jocularly after us as we went up the stairs,"When are you two going to get married?
The double room on the first floor's vacant!"
I could actually feel Toby's hand stiffen in mine as he withdrew himself.
He said nothing as we climbed the stairs, but he didn't switch the lights on as we passed them on the landing.
I felt my breathing quicken with uneasiness.
The frown was back between his eyes as I put on the light in my room.
He sat broodingly beside the fire while I made some coffee.
 "I suppose she thinks I arranged for you to come here," he said at last.
I thought it better to pretend I had forgotten the incident, as if it were of no importance.
 "Who?" 
He glanced at me sharply.
"Doris I suppose that's what they all thought.
No doubt the whole neighbourhood's waiting for me to make an honest woman of you."
 "Does it matter what they think?" 
I asked, forcing a light tone.
 "I guess not." 
We drank our coffee in silence.
My heart was thumping with disquiet.
The atmosphere was unnatural.
We should have been holding hands, post-morteming the party.
 "This coffee's disgusting, I'm sorry," I said at last, to break the silence.
 "It's all right," Toby said absently.
He put his cup down and added,"It's not too terribly late.
I might try and get a bit of work done before I turn in.
He grinned a bit, not looking directly at me.
 "Mavis put the wind up me, talking about my work-line." 
 "There's no such thing as a work-line," I said, irritable through misery that he wanted to go.
"I know.
Still, she was right in principle."
He bent and kissed the top of my head briefly.
"Good night, sweetie.
Sleep well."
I froze inside.
It was the first time he'd ever called me sweetie.
It was a term I hated — it had such a frighteningly casual ring.
As if I were — but I was, I realized suddenly.
I was his mistress.
It was the first time I'd put it to myself like that.
I'd never realized before just how vulnerable a mistress is.
CHRISTMAS DAY started badly.
To begin with, I'd spent part of the night dreaming about Father — one of those long, tangled dreams with occasional moments of such lucid clarity that you can remember them in detail for years afterwards.
We seemed to be running against each other in some complex obstacle race.
It was terribly important that I should beat him, and I struggled desperately against the invisible forces that always prevent one running in dreams.
Every now and then we'd have to climb a huge wall, or jump a ditch, or crawl through a barrel.
As I battled my way over or through each obstacle I'd think I'll be ahead of him after this — he'll never manage this one.
But when we came into the straight again he was always beside me, running, panting, straining to get ahead just as I was.
Then in the end we came to a river so wide I couldn't see the other bank; I felt frightened and thought this must be the end of the race, and I wanted to stop, but Father plunged straight in without looking at me so I had to plunge in too.
The water seemed almost solid, and it was a heart-breaking effort to keep afloat, let alone swim; the heavy dark mass kept closing over my head.
I was so sure I was drowning that I forgot about the race and screamed out,"Father!
Father!"
Each time I stopped to catch my breath I could hear his voice in the distance shouting,"Jane!
Help!
Jane!"— despairingly, getting fainter and fainter.
At the same time I could see Terry standing close by, on firm ground.
He had his back to me.
I longed to call out to him to help me, but his name stuck in my throat.
This part of the dream was like many others I'd had about him.
I always woke up hating him for not turning round of his own accord.
This time John woke me.
I was in tears and my stomach felt painful, as if I'd fallen and twisted a muscle.
 "You don't sleep well," said John gently.
"You best wake up, have some tea.
Happy Christmas."
I held his big black hand gratefully until my heart stopped hammering.
Then we had tea together with me sitting up in bed in my dressing-gown.
I often did this.
It was odd, but I had no feeling of shyness or modesty in front of John; he never seemed to pay the slightest attention to how undressed I was.
Recalling my dream, I thought it strange that, having gone to sleep wretched and fretting about Toby, I'd completely forgotten him as soon as I lost consciousness.
Now I was awake, though, he became all-important again.
I could hardly wait to see him.
Below, I could hear the spasmodic tap-tapping of Minnie, his typewriter.
I listened anxiously.
He would type about a sentence, slowly and painfully; then would come a swift, angry machine-gun rattle of repeated x's, followed by a long, long pause during which I found myself holding my breath, my mind forming wordless prayers.
Then at last, when I was beginning to think he'd left his desk or gone out, the tapping would begin again.
Several times I went to the head of the stairs, my longing to go to him was so strong.
But each time I turned back.
I knew I must leave him alone.
It just didn't feel like Christmas Day.
Trying to awaken my slumbering festive spirit, I invited John to come in and open his present.
As soon as he started to tear the paper off I had a wild desire to snatch it back, rush out and buy him a record-player; it seemed such a ludicrously inadequate present after all he'd done for me.
Instead I had to sit and watch him produce the belt, and although he seemed pleased enough with it the incident left me even more empty of joy than before.
 "I got a present for you, too," John said, grinning mysteriously.
"Not ready yet.
I give you tomorrow."
When he'd gone I went back to bed.
There didn't seem to be much to get up for.
I just sat there, thinking about Christmases past.
When I was little, my two cousins and I used to spend the holidays with each other 's families in rotation.
Before we reached an age at which it was considered improper, the three of us used to sleep in one big bed and keep each other awake most of the night, giggling and speculating on the mysteries and wonders of Christmas morning.
Our stockings were always huge — not real stockings, but big ones made of net stitched with tinsel ribbon.
In the morning when we woke, the first awareness was always of their new and sumptuous heaviness lying across our feet.
One Christmas Eve I woke at the critical moment, and saw, not Santa Claus, but three familiar figures indulging in heavy horse play at the foot of the bed.
There were two more familiar figures (female) hovering in the doorway hissing "Hurry up — don't wake them!" and "Michael, stop breathing gin-flames in the boy's face!" 
I lay as still as death.
Next morning, with ghoulish relish, I shattered the already somewhat shaky illusions of my two cousins.
We told no one what we knew and kept our secret for a year, while we plotted revenge.
The following Christmas Eve, we enlisted the aid of Addy, our friend and ally, and laid an ingenious Santa-trap.
This consisted of a collection of kitchen equipment — saucepans laid in strategic positions on the floor, a roasting tin filled with cutlery balanced on the top of the door, kettles hung at face-level from the ceiling.
The grown ups having gone out for the evening we then kept awake alternately for half-hour shifts by one of the boy's watches until at long last we were rewarded by the sound of creaking and thumps from the stairs, accompanied by slurry avuncular curses and "shushes" from the aunts.
The trap worked like a charm.
The uncles and my father, jolly and unsuspecting after an evening's celebrations, blundered in with their sacks of bounty; the tins and cutlery crashed round their ears as they pushed the door open.
Propelled forward by the shrieking aunts, who were bringing up the rear, they stumbled in, falling over the pots and pans and bumping into the dangling kettles, dropping their sacks and shouting and generally making the most satisfactory uproar imaginable.
The lights went on; we leapt up and pounced on them, adding our howls of ingrate triumph to the general confusion — ending the happy myth not with a whimper but a bang, while Addy, the fellow-conspirator, leant against the wall and laughed herself to helplessness…
I got out of bed suddenly and fumbled for some money.
I went downstairs to the phone in my dressing-gown, pausing only for a second outside Toby's door to listen for the typewriter, which was silent, and for another moment outside Mavis's to leave her snuff-box.
At the phone I rang the operator and asked for Addy's number.
I wondered why I hadn't thought of this before.
Perhaps I had thought of it, but just hadn't wanted to do it.
Now it seemed like  the only thing that would make Christmas tolerable.
I waited happily for them to get through.
There was no need to plan what to say; it would all be easy, as soon as I heard her voice.
 "No reply, caller." 
Slowly I put back the receiver and climbed upstairs.
It was a moment of despair.
Mavis came to her door.
If I could have avoided her, I would, but it was impossible.
She had my present in her hand and was smiling a merry Christmas-morning smile.
To my eyes this made her look like a strip-dancer at a funeral.
 "Who forgot to press button B?" she asked archly.
"Oh…
At any other time I'd have laughed at this innocent self-betrayal; just now it didn't seem funny, only irritating.
"Thank you for the lovely box, dear!
Wherever did you find it?"
 "Do you like it?" 
"Like it?
Of course I like it, I love it!
Now come and see what I've got for you."
Her room was an Aladdin's-cave of coloured balls and jack-frost.
She had more Christmas cards than I'd ever seen for one person; every surface was a forest of them.
 "How pretty," was the best I could manage in my present mood.
 "Yes, isn't it," she agreed complacently.
 "Here you are, then, dear, and a merry Christmas, in spite of everything." 
I couldn't help smiling at that; she still hadn't quite forgiven me for the fact that her remedy hadn't been effective.
I unwrapped her gift.
It was a small book called Baby and You.
Good Old Mavis, I thought, suppressing a giggle; she takes her defeats like a lady.
I said "Thank you" in a choked voice and kissed her.
She sighed.
"Well, dear, I'm only sorry it didn't work.
I really can't understand it.
You did do exactly what I told you, didn't you?"
 "It doesn't matter now, Mavis." 
"But I don't like to feel I let you down, Jane.
"You didn't let me down.
Please don't give it another thought."
She sighed again, but dismissively, a no-good-crying-over-spilt-milk sigh.
 "Well now," she said in a brisk voice,"we must think of the future.
What are you going to do?"
This is the sort of question people in my position come to dread.
I think those under thirty find it difficult to accept the fact that some  actions may have results which are final and inescapable.
When you're young, everything seems reversible, remediable.
Time will put everything right, unkind words, ill-judged behaviour — stupidity, cruelty, it can all be made up for, cancelled out later.
But now I'd done something which was forever.
I still couldn't quite believe that nothing would ever be the same again,
 "I don't know yet," I said.
 "If only Toby had a little money or a proper job — he's a sweet boy, but" 
 "Mavis, if you really want to help me" 
 "Oh, I do, dear!" 
"you'll stop talking as if Toby's the father.
You must know he isn't."
Mavis's eager expression went blank, then turned hurt.
 "I'm sure I've never dreamed of saying" 
 "Mavis, dear, I don't blame you, Just, please, don't talk about me any more." 
Oddly enough, she wasn't offended.
 "Well, I always was a gossip, always will be, it's in my nature, One has to come to terms with one's little weaknesses," she said tolerantly, as if speaking of someone else's.
Then she appeared to think of something else.
She frowned for a moment, then picked up my hand and led me to the window.
 "Yes, I thought so," she said after a moment's scrutiny.
 "This tall fair man I spotted last night" 
 "Oh Mavis, for heaven's sake!" 
 "No, now you're very naughty to scoff." 
She dropped my hand and looked at me.
 "He's overseas, isn't he?" 
It was probably just a lucky guess, but it shook me, and she saw it.
Pressing her advantage, she hurried on: "Why not write to him?
Oh, I know, you don't like to ask him for anything my dear, you don't have to tell me, I've seen it all before.
But you've not only got yourself to think of."
She talked and talked.
It was minutes before I could get a word in.
The word I finally got in was "No" .
She sighed resignedly.
 "Well, we'll just have to think of something else, won't we?" 
 "It's not your worry, Mavis," I said, I hope not rudely.
 "No, but it's so much more interesting than any of mine," she replied.
Cheerful crashes and bangs floated up from Doris's kitchen as I went back upstairs, and I could hear outbursts of raucous male laughter and pinch-induced shrieks.
Charlie had evidently been forgiven, and was about to be fed.
Somebody, at least, was feeling  Christmassy .
Toby's typewriter was still silent.
I stood outside his door listening for a long time; there wasn't a sound.
I was well aware I should wait until he came to me.
I let myself knock.
 "Who is it?" 
I went in.
Toby was lying on his back on the bed, smoking.
My eyes went to the desk.
It was neat and bare.
The typewriter was covered.
A cold feeling ran over me.
It was like seeing a room that's been tidied up after a death.
 "I thought you were working," I said.
"I was.
I had to stop."
There was a curious note of finality in his voice.
I walked slowly to the bed and sat down beside him — the edge felt unfriendly and insufficient under me, and he didn't move to make room.
 "What's wrong?" 
 "I don't know." 
He didn't look at me, but stared at the ceiling, frowning against the smoke.
I felt as if he felt I was a stranger.
After a long time I said, "Do you want me to leave you alone?" 
He shrugged and shook his head helplessly.
My hands and feet were like ice.
 "It's Christmas Day," I said stupidly.
 "Yes," he said, and now his voice sounded desolate.
"I know.
I've nothing to give you."
 "It's not important" 
He jerked with pain and anger as if I'd laid a whip on him, "It is" he shouted.
The shout startled me to my feet.
I felt suddenly afraid of him, afraid to be too close to his pain, knowing I'd caused it.
I walked to the door.
 "Jane." 
I dared not turn and let him see my face.
I stood facing the door and said, "Yes." 
There was a long moment and then he said in a stifled voice, "It's gone." 
My first thought was that he meant his feeling for me.
Trust a  woman to think of that first.
I said nothing.
My skin crawled, and I shivered a bit as I stood there, desolate as a child in a corner.
He went on talking.
"I know why, I think it's because now there's a reason why I must.
It's not just me any more, me doing what I want to do when I feel like it.
Now it's me doing the only thing I can do because I have to make some money."
I turned and we looked at each other.
 "Not for me," I said loudly.
I was very frightened.
This was what one person's needs could do, if inflicted on another person.
"You don't have to make money for me.
I'm not your responsibility — I'm not anybody's but mine.
And you're not anybody's but yours.
I won't take the responsibility for you losing the will to write, or for shackling your motives, or anything else.
We've no right to wish our problems on each other.
That's the difference between being married and single — and we're single."
I went quickly out and up to my room.
I was shaking.
I sat for a while holding the baby under my hands.
Then I got up and took the two rugs by their corners and dragged them outside the door.
After that I swept the pock-marked linoleum, and then washed it, working from the far corner under the bed right round the angle to the door, backing along on my knees.
That took an hour, and made me so tired that I was able to lie down and go to sleep.
I was numb, but it was a numbness that promised to give way to an agonizing pain quite soon.
I woke to knocking.
In my warm, sleepy contentment I expected it to be Toby, the Toby of before.
But it wasn't; it was Addy.
She stood in the angle, shapeless and erect in her aged but once — good suit with the foxhead-and-riding-crop brooch on the lapel; the well-pressed faded blouse; the sensible heels planted apart; the leather gloves softly slapping the palm of the hand — and of course, a new hat.
She always bought new hats.
This time she'd outdone herself.
It was as ultra-fashionable as the suit was dated.
It bestrode her severely-parted hair like a sequined circus girl, riding backwards on the solid rump of a matronly old mare.
 "Merry Christmas," she said with false heartiness.
 "Or does the mere suggestion make you want to heave?" 
I flung myself out of bed and into her arms.
The fox-head pin scratched my cheek.
The hat was so new it gave off a faint, expensive smell.
"Here!
That'll do.
No need to knock me for six.
Let's have a bit of light on the subject"She switched on the blue urinal and looked at it.
"What a curious shape!
It reminds me of a hospital, for some reason…
Well, let's look at you, Yes, you've got quite an interesting shape, too.
Do you like my hat?"
She adjusted it at a still more ludicrous angle in the mirror.
 "I'm crazy about it," I said fervently.
 "Like to try it on?" 
 "Yes, please!" 
I tried it on.
Addy adjusted it fastidiously above my hollow-eyed, pasty face.
My cropped hair stuck out bleakly.
On me, it looked like the fairy on a Christmas tree which has shed all its needles.
 "You need a bit of make-up to set it off properly," Addy said thoughtfully.
She opened her handbag and brought out an astonishing assortment of cosmetics, with which she daubed my face.
They were all the wrong shades for me (for her too) and I looked like a tired clown by the time she'd finished, but on my previous appearance anything would have been an improvement.
She didn't ask what I'd done to my hair.
She sat back and said,"There!
That's more like it, "with a rich air of satisfaction, as if I were her masterwork" No, don't take it off just yet "It brightens the room." 
I sat curled on the bed in my shabby dressing-gown and Addy's spectacular circus hat, while Addy inspected the room.
 "I like it," she said at last.
"The rest of the house is unforgivable, but this room's fine.
The white walls make all the difference."
"John did them.
He's the man next door."
"The black one with all the teeth?
Like a young Robeson, with that tremendously wide face, yes, I saw him as I came up.
Fascinating.
What about some tea?
No, don't move, I'll do it"
While she made tea with her usual haphazard efficiency, she put me into the picture.
In casual, chatty tones, she told me that "my news" hadn't penetrated to her Surrey retreat, and in fact hadn't reached her until an hour ago when she'd arrived, having had nothing to the contrary since last year, to keep the traditional family tryst at my father's house.
There she'd found him alone — pretending to have forgotten it was Christmas — all the rest of the family having tactfully cried off.
"Your father thought one of the others would have blown the gaff to me — presumably they thought he had — the net result, as always when you leave it to George, being that nobody told me a  thing.
Not even you."
she added, with the first hint of reproach she'd used.
I opened my mouth to utter some as yet unthought-up excuse, but she stopped me.
 "Don't bother," she said,"I can imagine — the old hide-your-head urge — well known to me.
Well now, tell me why you're not living at home.
On second thoughts, don't.
I can imagine that, too.
Silly old sod."
Somehow this surprised me — not the word sod (I'd learned most of my swear-words at Addy's knee) but the word silly.
It seemed out of place.
 "Why silly?" 
"Well, the old fool!
Always bleating and moaning because he hasn't got a son — no one to carry on the Great Name of Graham — She gave a short guffaw.
"So now you're going to have what might well prove to be a boy, very likely is from the way you're growing.
Presumably you'll adopt it yourself?"
 "Adopt it?" 
I asked, bewildered.
 "But it'll be mine." 
"Yes, yes, I mean adopt it legally.
Then it becomes sort of quasi-legitimate.
You give it your name, and it's all above-board, or something.
The law then pretends it's a waif or stray and that you're doing it a favour, and all is forgiven.
The child becomes officially your adopted child, instead of irregularly your own."
I opened my mouth to speak, but she silenced me.
"I know, I know.
The law's an ass.
Never mind, what it comes to is that there may well be a sturdy little male to carry the name of Graham proudly into the future.
Which there wouldn't have been, in the normal course of events.
But William can't see that, of course oh, dear me, no.
So he kicks you out and settles down to a nine-months' bender.
Whack-o."
My aunt sat down suddenly, looking very tired and rather ill.
 "He's — drinking?" 
I said with difficulty.
 "Like the proverbial fish." 
She slumped in her chair, her hands limp on her tweed lap, her head lolling as if she were asleep.
It was so unlike her to slump that I felt a new alarm.
 "Are you all right, darling?" 
She straightened sharply, and grinned at me, but her face was pale and there were shadows I hadn't noticed a moment before.
She had always been, in an aggravated way, very fond of my father, who was her nephew, the son of her twin sister who had died.
 "Me!" she said loudly.
"I'm all right!
Good heavens!
Speaking of  drink, though, have you any?
No, don't get up."
I directed her to the Glen Mist.
She poured us both a generous tot, and drank hers rather faster than liqueurs are normally drunk, then gasped and blinked as sudden tears started to her eyes.
 "It's been quite a day," she said.
"Now.
Tell me as much as you can tell to a maiden aunt, and let's see what can be done."
I told her a cut-down (but not a Bowdlerized) version of the story, omitting Toby.
I wouldn't have omitted him three hours before, but now it seemed I must face up to the situation as it was without him.
 "And you're sure you haven't got a hankering for this Terry?" she asked at the end.
"Because if it's just pride, that's silly.
But if you really don't want him"
 "I don't, I truly don't." 
 "Pity, since he's doing so well." 
Addy always had a severely practical streak.
"Still, we can manage.
I'm scarcely rolling in money, but, like the margarine ads say, small amounts can be spread over oodles of bread."
She sat down on the bed and held my hand; all the flippancy was suddenly gone from her face.
 "Will you come and stay with me for a while?" she asked gently.
Addy was one of those rare people who never makes a sacrifice She didn't believe in them.
The Aunts always used to say she was selfish because of this, but her argument was that as she never wanted anyone to do anything for her unless it gave them pleasure, she never did anything for anyone unless it gave her pleasure.
The result was that sometimes members of the family or others who went to her for help came away empty-handed, however great their needs or deserts might be; Addy never used need as a yardstick But on the other side of the medal were the occasions, such as this one, when she volunteered something you'd never have dreamed of asking for, and you were free to accept it because you knew she'd be disappointed, not relieved, if you refused.
I didn't even have to make the conventional protests.
I just squeezed her hand and said,"Yes, darling.
Thank you."