

Introduction
To the student
Mathematics is a very important and interesting subject for study both in and out of school.
This book has been written to provide you, the reader, with the means of gaining a sound, basic understanding of number and its application in life today.
Students like yourself have decided how and why it should be written; the authors have merely put together a series of explanations and answers to the questions that these students have asked.
We hope that you will enjoy and benefit from reading the pages that follow, find the satisfaction that comes as a result of learning mathematics and realise one of the main objects of studying mathematics — development of the power of reason.
To the teacher
This book is the first in a series designed for secondary students in the Caribbean area.
School mathematics has seen considerable change of form and style in the last decade.
This has resulted in an over-reaction against traditional or "old" mathematics.
Often students leave school sadly lacking relevant mathematical knowledge through having spent much of their efforts in grappling with "modern" topics unrelated to real life situations.
This series attempts to combine the best of traditional and modern mathematics, and is based upon many years of experience teaching both approaches to the subject.
Each topic is reinforced by numerous examples which show the necessary methods and thought processes.
By careful study of these examples, the student will be able to learn, or relearn, material at a faster rate than is normally possible in the situation where the teacher is the only source of guidance and instruction.
Much thought has been given to the order of chapters and teachers may find it helpful to follow this order when possible.
In addition to progressive exercises most chapters are followed by review exercises to help further consolidation of the new work in the chapter.
After every third chapter there is a section of short tests which should prove useful to the teacher in evaluating student progress.
The final series of tests covers all the material presented in this book.
The authors would welcome comments — critical or otherwise — from colleagues and collaborators in the task of generating enthusiasm and understanding of mathematics.
Many people helped to produce this book; the authors particularly wish to thank Mr G W Lennox for his enthusiasm and encouragement, and Mr A L McKittrick for the original artwork.
1 Angles
An angle measures an amount of turn.
The beams of light from this lighthouse turn round completely once every few second The time taken for the beam to turn a full circle is different for every lighthouse.
This means that a sailor who is lost at sea can tell which lighthouse he is looking at by simply counting the.
time taken between each flash of light.
He then looks up this time in a reference book to find out which lighthouse flashes in this way.
To help you understand angles better, draw a clockface.
Make a circle about 7cm across and cut out two strips of card about 1 cm wide and 5cm long.
Letter the hands A and B and show the numbers 12,3,6 and 9 on the clock.
Pin the hands together, as shown, using a paper fastener.
EXERCISE A
Now do the following and make a sketch for each question, showing the new position of the hands.
Question 1 is done for you.
1 Start with A and B at 12, then move B clockwise to 6 keeping A still.
What fraction of the whole turn has B moved through?
2 Now move B clockwise from 6 to point to 12 again.
What fraction of a whole turn has B moved through?
3 Point A and B at 3, then move A anti-clockwise to point at 9, keeping B still.
What fraction of a whole turn has A moved through?
4 Now move A anti-clockwise from 9 back to point at 3.
What fraction of a whole turn has A moved through?
5 Point A and B at 3.
Turn A clockwise through, ½ a turn.
Turn B anti-clockwise through ½ a turn.
Where are A and B?
LEARN One full turn is called a revolution.
6 Use your answer to 4 and 5 to complete the following.
One revolution is made up of…half turns.
7 What fraction of a revolution has hand B moved through in the following diagrams?
A and B start together.
8 If a beam of light from the lighthouse, shown on page 1, turns through one revolution every 30 seconds, how many revolutions will it make in 4 minutes?
Right angles
You should have found that the answers to all parts of question 7 were ¼ This is a very important angle as it occurs very often.
The corners of your desk are probably ¼ of a turn each.
The corners of this book are also each ¼ of a turn.
We give a turn the special name, a right angle.
Right angles are often marked with a small step in the corner.
Here are some right angles.
Look around you and see how many right angles you can find in windows, doors and chalk boards.
Make a list of them in your book.
9 a) Use your clock again.
Point A and B at 12 and turn B clockwise through one right angle.
What does B point to now?
b) Turn B clockwise again through another right angle from 3.
What does B point to now?
c) If B is pointing at 12, how many right angles does it have to turn through in turning clockwise to point to 9?
10 Use your answers to question 9 (a) and (b) to complete the following sentence.
Half a revolution is made up of…right angles.
11 How many right angles will make a whole revolution?
12 On your clock, point A and B at 12 and move B anti clockwise through three right angles.
What does B point at now?
RECALL
1 A full turn is called a revolution.
2 A right angle is ¼ of a revolution.
Horizontal and vertical lines
This is the house that Jack built.
Something is wrong with Jack's house.
Can you see what is wrong?
Jack did not realise that vertical lines are always straight up and down even when you are standing on a hillside.
Jack's house will fall over very easily because the walls are not vertical.
Mr Smart's house has vertical walls and will not fall over easily.
Look at the tops and bottoms of the windows on Mr Smart's house.
These lines are flat.
You could put a glass of water on the window edges and it would not spill over.
Such flat lines are called horizontal lines.
The tops and bottoms of Jack's windows are sloping the same amount as the hillside.
Would a full glass of water spill over on Jack's window ledge?
Are Jack's lines horizontal?
Trick room
See if you can list the vertical and horizontal lines.
The lines are lettered to help you make your lists.
Perpendicular lines
Look back to question 7.
The hands of the clock in all four diagrams were at right angles to each other.
When this occurs we can say that "hand A is perpendicular to hand B', or that" hand B is perpendicular to hand A".
Study Jack's house again.
Even though his house is leaning over, the sides of the windows still meet the tops and bottoms of the windows at right angles.
Therefore we can say the "sides of the windows are perpendicular to the tops and bottoms of the windows" .
1 Are the sides of the windows in Mr Smart's house perpendicular to the top of the windows?
2 Are the sides of Jack's house perpendicular to the hillside?
3 Are the sides of Mr Smart's house perpendicular to the hillside?
EXPERIMENT
Draw a horizontal line of any length, then draw any vertical line to cross the horizontal one.
Are the lines you have drawn perpendicular to each other?
Now try this.
Look straight ahead and point your left arm out to your left.
Your arm is now perpendicular to your line of sight.
If you keep your eyes looking straight ahead and turn your body, is your left arm still perpendicular to your line of sight?
Degrees
Over 2000 years ago the Greeks realised that a full turn or even a right angle was far too large an amount of turn for many situations.
They overcame this problem by imagining a full turn, or one revolution, to be split up into 360 equal pieces.
They called each piece a degree and used the sign ° to stand for a degree, e.g. 360° 1 full turn.
We are not sure why the Greeks chose the number 360 but it may have been because 360 can be divided up in a lot of different ways.
For example:
since 1 full turn 360°
½ full turn = 180°
¼ full turn = 90° (right angle)
⅓ full turn = 120°
Another reason why the Greeks may have chosen the number 360 is because they thought the year was made up of 360 days and that the sun went round the earth once a year.
They therefore believed that the distance travelled by the sun in one day was  of its yearly path.
The Greeks may have called the angle the sun moved through in one day 1°, which is  of a full turn…
How far "out" , were the Greeks in believing that there were 360 days in a year?
Do we still believe that the sun goes round the earth?
How many degrees will make a right angle?
How many degrees in ½ and ⅔ of a turn?
Describing directions
The navigator of a ship or plane has to tell his captain what direction to steer to reach his destination.
Here is a compass showing the eight cardinal points.
EXERCISE B
Work out the angle, in degrees, between the following directions.
Draw small diagrams to show your angles.
1 Clockwise from East to South.
2 Clockwise from South to West.
3 Clockwise from North West to North East.
4 Anti-clockwise from East to North West.
Now look at the map of the Caribbean on the book cover.
Imagine you are sailing from Grenada to Dominica.
What direction would you have to tell the captain to steer if you were the navigator?
Can you see that North 10° East is the correct answer?
Try these.
9 What compass direction would the captain of a boat have to steer to reach Barbados from St. Vincent?
10 What would be the compass direction to steer to get back to St. Vincent from Barbados?
11 What direction is Havana from Kingston?
12 Imagine you are in Grenada looking towards Dominica.
What is the smallest angle you would have to turn through to face Tobago?
(Hint: On the map, use your ruler to line up Grenada and Dominica then line up Grenada and Tobago with your pencil.
Now you can see the angle.)
13 With the help of your clock face, draw diagrams to show the following.
In each case A and B start together.
The first one has been done for you.
a) Show B turned through 90° anti-clockwise from 12.
b) Show B turned through 90° clockwise from 12.
c) What name can we call the turns in questions (a) and (b)?
You should be able to see that although the angles in (a) and (b) are in opposite directions they still are the same amount of turn.
d) Show A turned 90° anti-clockwise from 12.
e) Show A turned 180° anti-clockwise from 6.
f) Show A turned 270° clockwise from 12.
g) Show B turned 270° clockwise from 3.
Look carefully at the angles opposite.
14 Which are the largest and smallest angles?
Were you tricked?
Think again.
Imagine c is the angle between the hands of a small wristwatch at 3 o'clock and angle a is the angle between the hands of a large clock at the same time.
Now imagine the small hand on 10 both clocks is held at 3 and the large hand brought round to meet the small hand.
Each hand has to turn ¼ of a turn, which is 90°.
Then both angles are the same.
15 If you look at a tree and turn through 300° as shown, how much more do you have to turn to face the tree again?
16 Your answer to question 15 should have been worked out by subtracting 300° from a full turn of 360° Do the following in a similar way.
17 How many right angles make a turn of 270°?
18 If you are on Antigua facing North, what angle do you have to turn through in a clockwise direction to face Bermuda?
Measuring angles
Study the map on the front cover.
Brian is sailing out of Nassau towards Miami.
What angle must he turn to sail towards Jacksonville?
Part of the map has been drawn again, with lines joining the three places.
To measure the angle between the two lines we use a protractor.
A protractor has been drawn on top of your map to show how it is used.
Two important rules when using a protractor are as follows.
1 The centre cross of your protractor has to be over the corner of the angle.
2 The base line of the protractor has to be on top of the bottom edge of the angle.
The angle shown is 40°
Note: Your protractor may well have another scale of numbers inside those shown in the picture.
Don't worry, just ignore it, for the moment!
EXERCISE C
Use only the outer scale of your protractor to measure these two angles.
To measure these two angles put the base line of your protractor along the thicker edge of the angles.
Using the inside scale of the protractor
We have used the outside scale so far because all the angles left-right have been turns from left to right looking from the base line.
Now we use the inside scale for all angles with turns from right to left looking from the base line.
Meet Mr Osfrt and Mr Isflt.
They are going to help you remember which scale of your protractor you should use.
1 Mr Osfrt is reminding us that we use: Outside Scale For Right Turns.
2 Mr Isflt is reminding us that we use: Inside Scale For Left Turns.
EXERCISE C continued.
Use the inside scale to measure the following angles:
Put the base line of the protractor on the thicker edge of each angle in questions 8 and 9.
10 Compare the answer to question 3 with that of question 8.
Are they the same?
You should find that the answers to questions 4 and 9 are also the same.
How do you explain this since you measured each angle from a different side?
11 Measure the angles above.
It will not matter which side you choose as the base line if you remember the rules Mr Osfrt and Mr Isflt tell us.
12 Look carefully at the edge of your protractor.
Each of the small marks measures 1°.
Now measure the angles above, taking care to read your protractor
13 This shape is called a hexagon because it has six sides.
Measure each of the inside angles with your protractor.
14 Draw a few hexagons, of any size in your books.
The angles should always add up to 720° as they did in question 13.
(Do not draw any inside angle larger than 180°)
15 Measure the three angles of this triangle.
16 See if the angles of another triangle of any size or shape, add up to 180°.
17 Play this game with your friend.
Think of an angle between you, say 47° and draw it by guessing.
Then measure each other 's angle.
The one who is closest to the correct angle is the winner.
Measuring angles greater than 180°
Look back to page 7 and remind yourself how you answered question 16.
We use the same method to measure angles larger than 180°.
Example
1 Measure the shaded angle.
2 Subtract your answer from 360°
3 That is the measurement of the unknown angle.
4 The answer is 280°
If you wish to draw an angle larger than 180° simply draw an angle equal to the angle required, subtracted from 360°.
For example if you want 280° draw an angle equal to 360°280° or 80°  
EXERCISE D
Work out the larger angles by first measuring the smaller angles.
4 Estimate the size of the following angles and list them in ascending order of size in the table below.
Then measure each angle and put the correct measurement below the estimated one.
Angles which are less than 90° are called acute angles.
Angles which are between 90° and 180° are called obtuse angles and all angles greater than 180° are called reflex angles.
From the angles above, list those which are acute, obtuse and reflex.
Review exercise
1 Without using your protractor draw the following angles.
Then check your guesses by measuring them with a protractor.
Show beside each angle the number of degrees of error.
2 How many degrees will the minute hand of a clock turn through in:
3 Turn to the map on the back cover.
Place your protractor over the outline shown with the centre of the protractor over Belize and the base line over the North-South line.
Now measure the angle between North and each of the following places:
4 Look back to question 1.
Make lists of all the acute angles, obtuse angles and reflex angles.
5 Pick out from the following those things which are horizontal and those which are vertical:
6 Measure the following with your protractor:
2 Number theory
Arithmetic is needed for all kinds of work.
Machines have been built that can add, subtract, multiply and divide; and do other quite difficult calculations in arithmetic.
Check the work these machines have done.
EXERCISE A
Copy and complete these panels.
Find which part of the machine should be used and answer these problems, showing your working.
1 Tim has 24 sweets to share between 4 friends.
How many should he give to each of them?
2 Sadie had 137 shells in her collection.
She gave away 8 shells.
How many had she left?
3 Eddie climbed 38 metres up a tree that was 53 metres high.
How far was he from the top?
4 Danny packs oranges that are just the right size so he can get 38 in a box.
One morning he packed 47 boxes.
How many oranges did he use?
5 Derek had $5 from each of his 5 uncles for his birthday.
He spent $7.50 on a new cricket bat.
How much did he have left?
6 Sarah gives $1.00 to each of her 4 sisters.
If she still has $1.50 left, how much did she have to begin with?
7 A motor car travels at 43km per hour.
How far will it have gone after  hours?
8 After spending $2.50. then $1.75, how much has Troy left out of $8.00?
9 Each page of a book had 45 lines and there were 160 pages in the book.
What was the total number of lines?
10 Find 48-4 x 2-3 +6 using the given order of work.
This car driver has a problem he can only solve by using reverse gear.
In arithmetic, answers can be checked by using "reverse gear" to get back to our starting numbers.
+ is the "REVERSE" of 
× is the "REVERSE" of ÷
Study these examples of checking by reverse work.
Joe has $12 and gets a tip of $3.
He now has 12 + 3 = $15.
Check: He has $15 after getting $3 tip and $15 — 3 = $12.
He had $12 to begin with.
Tom shares 18 cookies between his 3 sisters.
18÷3 = 6
Check: Each sister gets 6 cookies and 3 × 6 = 18.
Tom must have shared out 18 cookies.
Use this method of checking to test your answers to the last exercise.
EXERCISE B
Copy the following and put in place of the dots, the correct signs.
Take care with the next section.
Some numbers are missing, and some signs have been put in.
Exploring numbers
All counting numbers, or "natural" numbers are made up from the same group of symbols or figures: 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9.
Notice that 4 is 2 × 2, 6 is 2 × 3, 8 is 2 × 2 × 2, 9 is 3 × 3.
The numbers 1,2,3,5, and 7 have not been made up by multiplying other numbers together.
Copy out these six numbers and find the next six that cannot be made up by multiplication.
Remember that any number multiplied by 1 (one) stays the same so do not use × 1.
You should now have a list of the first twelve prime numbers.
There are many more, but you now have enough to make up a very long list of counting numbers using prime numbers and multiplication.
Check these:
Why were 11, 13, 17 missed out?
The numbers above have been made up by multiplying together their basic parts or prime factors.
Any number which has no factors other than itself and one is a prime number.
EXERCISE C
Find the results of these multiplications.
Make sure you have only used prime factors.
The factor machine at the side of this page shows how the prime factors of 60 are taken out.
As each factor is taken out by division, the answer is again divided by the next factor until 1 appears as the final result.
All the factors are then collected together giving the result 60 = 2x2x3x5.
This example shows how the prime factors of 72 are worked out using repeated division.
EXERCISE D
Use this method to find the prime factors of:
Common factors
What do you notice if you compare the pictures on the page opposite?
They are all made up of the same shapes-triangles, squares and rectangles.
These shapes are said to be common to each of the three pictures.
In arithmetic, common factors often help when we have to compare two or more numbers.
For example, the prime factors of 12 are 2, 2 and 3 and the prime factors of 18 are 2, 3 and 3.
Notice that 2 and 3 are common to both sets of factors, the other two factors do not match.
2 x 3 or 6 is the biggest number that can be divided into both 12 and 18 without leaving a remainder.
6 is called the highest common factor of 12 and 18.
Take a look at finding the H.C.F. of 16 and 24.
Common factors are 2, 2 and 2, the other pair does not match.
The H.C.F. of 16 and 24 is 8.
EXERCISE E
Find the H.C.F. of the following:
Use the same method of working for three numbers.
So far you have been finding the highest number that can be divided into each example without leaving a remainder.
To find the lowest common multiple, or L.C.M., the smallest number that each of the given numbers can be divided into without leaving a remainder, follow this method.
Example
Find the L.C.M. of 6 and 9.
Prime factors of 6 are 2 and 3.
Prime factors of 9 are 3 and 3.
All the factors here are needed, but common factors (found in both) need not be taken twice in the L.C.M.
The L.C.M. is 2x 3.
3 or 18.
Look back again to question 2.
Find the L.C.M. of 8 and 12.
Prime factors of 8 are 2,2 and 2.
Prime factors of 12 are 2,2 and 3. 2 appears twice as a common factor.
EXERCISE E continued
Notice that the highest common factor can be divided into the numbers we are working with, so it is a small number in most cases.
The lowest common multiple is a larger or higher number than the H.C.F.
Using factors in problems
Example: Edward and Leroy work shifts in the bauxite mines.
Edward gets every fourth day off from work, Leroy gets off every sixth day.
If they are both off work today, how long will it be before they are both off again?
23 Tom and Fred work night shift at the mines.
These shifts are 21 shorter than day shifts so they don't get much holiday.
Tom is off work every eighth night and poor Fred gets every twelfth night off.
They are both off tonight.
Use the L.C.M. to find out when they are both on holiday again together.
24 The timing machine above is part of a computer or calculating box.
The numbers mean that the first bulb flashes every 12 seconds, the next every 8 seconds, and the third every 6 seconds.
When the box is switched on all the lights flash together.
How many seconds will it be before 6 and 12 flash again at the same time?
How many seconds for 6 and 8 to flash together?
How long before they all flash together again?
25 The warning lights on two shipping buoys flash at fixed intervals of time.
They operate in the same way as the lighthouse you read about on page 1.
If buoy 732 flashes every 8 seconds and 733 flashes every 10 seconds, what is the interval of time between the lights flashing together?
You have probably noticed that some operations "cancel" each other out, that is, they return us to our starting point.
Study what happens in 12 x 9 ÷ 9.
Often this work can best be set out in this way.
 Divide by 9 cancels out multiply by 9.
Write down the answers to these questions:  You should have found these very easy if you used the method of cancelling.
Usually we have to look a bit more closely for numbers that will cancel.
Study this example:  We can save rewriting by looking out for common factors above and below the division line.
  
Exercise G
Calculate using cancelling methods:  Follow through the working on this example:  Use this method on the next set of questions.

Often a very difficult-looking question becomes easy when we look for cancelling.
Look for the biggest common factor in each case.
  
Review exercises

Find the numbers which can be written as: 
Find the prime factors of: 
Find the highest common factor of: 
Find the lowest common multiple of: 
Express the following numbers as the products of prime factors:
17 Find the smallest number which can be divided by 12 and 16 leaving the remainder 3 in each case.
18 Find the highest number that can be divided into 18, 30 25 and 42 without leaving a remainder.
19 Two "Road Works" marker lights have been set so that one flashes every 6 seconds, the other every 15 seconds.
At what time intervals do they flash together?
20 Three marathon runners circle a race track at steady speeds.
The first takes 48 seconds to complete a lap; the second, 60 secs; the third, 72 secs.
If they start together at 1 p.m., when will they pass the start again all together? 
Find the H.C.F. of the following sets of numbers:
Calculate with as little working as possible: 
Find the L.C.M. of the following sets of numbers:  
19 When three numbers are multiplied together, the answer is 4,301.
Two of the numbers are 11 and 17.
Find the third number.
20 There are 585 students in a school.
If there are 39 more girls than boys, find the number of boys in the school.
3 Vulgar fractions
This fruit cart is selling approximately equal numbers of 4 different fruits.
We can say therefore that each type of fruit is of all fruit in the cart.
That is, the bananas fill ¼ of the cart.
The bananas and pineapples together fill  of the cart.
Can you say what fraction of all the fruit the bananas, pineapples and mangoes together make?
What fraction of all the fruit are the remaining pawpaws?
Exercise A
1 Here is a rectangle divided into small pieces.
a) How many equal pieces are there?
b) What fraction is one small piece of the whole rectangle?
c) Carefully draw your own rectangle, about the same size and divide it up as shown above.
d) On your diagram shade in  of the large rectangle.
e) Now shade in another  of the large rectangle.
f) What fraction of the whole rectangle have you shaded altogether?
g) What fraction of the rectangle still remains unshaded?
2 a) How many pieces is the circle below divided into?
b) What fraction of the circle is black?
c) What fraction of the circle is unmarked?
d) What fraction is dotted?
e) What fraction is dotted or striped?
3 Here is a fleet of boats.
a) What fraction of the fleet have flags?
b) What fraction have only one sail?
c) What fraction have a flag and one sail?
d) What fraction have a flag and two sails?
Sets of equal fractions
Many fractions look different but are the same when we study them closely.
They are then called members of the same set.
EXPERIMENT
a) Cut out two strips of paper each about 3cm wide and about 15cm long.
The two strips must be exactly the same length.
Take the first strip and fold it in half.
Then fold it in half again, and fold it in half again, and finally, fold it in half once .Now unfold it and draw pencil lines down the folds, as shown below, using your ruler.
Mark on ⅛, ¼, ½ and ¾ as shown.
How many pieces is your strip of paper divided up into?
What fraction is each piece of the whole strip?
Fold the second strip of paper in exactly the same way as the first, but instead of pencilling down the folds, cut down only the folds shown with a black line in the diagram below.
Label the parts as shown.
b) Place strip 1 on your desk and carefully put the ¼ piece, from the second strip, beside it as shown on the side.
How many pieces would you need to cover strip 1?
Complete this sentence: "I need…¼ pieces to make one whole one
c) How many ¼ pieces will make ½ of strip 1?
d) Now place your ⅛ piece beside the piece.
How many  pieces will make a ¼ piece?
e) In a similar way, work out how many  pieces will cover one ⅛ piece.
f) How many  pieces will cover one ¼ piece?
g) Now draw the following table and see if you can fill in the blank spaces, using the strips of paper to help you as you did above.
For example: To answer How many ⅛ pieces make ½? "place your piece on top of the left hand end of strip 1 and you should be able to see by" stepping off"that four ⅛ pieces will make a ½ piece.
Therefore  = ½ This is shown in the table.
Exercise B
You should have discovered the following facts.

Copy these facts into your book, look closely at the fractions and see if you can spot a pattern along each line.
When you do find the pattern, fill in the blank spaces at the end of each line.
4 This is a class of nine students.
What fraction of the whole class is one student?
5 What fraction of the whole class are three students?
6 The nine students are now split into three groups.
What fraction of the whole class is each group?
7 Now look at your answers to question 5 and 6.
Does each answer describe the same number of students?
Does this mean that  is the same as ⅓?
8 Copy the following into your book and fill in the blanks by looking for a pattern along each line.
 Did you find that the top and bottom of each fraction was multiplied by 3 to give the next fraction on the line?
Any fraction can be changed by multiplying its top and bottom by any other number.
Remember that the new fraction still has the same value.
In this example we can see that ⅔ is the same as  and ½ is the same as 
Now change the following by this method:  
LEARN
1 When two or more fractions are the same, they are called equivalent.
2 The bottom number of a fraction is called the denominator and the top number is called the numerator.
Reducing to lowest terms
In working out Exercises A and 13, answers such as ¼ and ⅜etc. often occurred.
Since we already know that  is equivalent to ½'we; can say that we reduce to its lowest term ½ Do you remember from page 21 the quick way of doing this type of division question?  You can use the same method to reduce fractions to their lowest terms, by splitting each part into its factors.
 We call this "cancelling to lowest terms" .
EXERCISE C
Cancel the following to their lowest terms: 
When you get used to cancelling, you can split each number up into its factors in your head, without writing them down.
Example
To cancel  to its lowest terms: Notice we neatly cross out the 18 and 27 and put above them the number of times 9 goes in to each.
Use this method to cancel the following:   
Mixed numbers
Joe and Edward are comparing their catches.
Joe's fish is 6½ dm long.
How long is Edward's fish?
The measurements of the fish are called mixed numbers because they are a mixture of whole numbers and fractions.
 The fraction  is called an improper fraction and is a different way of writing 1½ You will learn more about improper fractions in the next exercise.
Example
Change the following mixed number into an improper fraction:  
EXERCISE D
Change the following to improper fractions.
A clue is given in the brackets to help you.
 Another, often simpler, way of changing to an improper fraction is to do the following.
Multiply the denominator by the  number of whole ones and add on the numerator, then put this answer over the old denominator.
Study the following examples of this.
Examples
Change 2¾ and 1½ to improper fractions:  
EXERCISE D continued
Now try to change the following to improper fractions:  As you have seen in the last few questions, improper fractions Numerator are "top heavy" .
That is, the numerator is greater than the denominator.
If you get an improper fraction as an answer to a problem you should always change it to a mixed number.
You can easily change back from an improper fraction to a mixed number by dividing the denominator into the numerator and putting the remainder over the denominator.
Example
1 Change  to a mixed number.
  Now change the following improper fractions to mixed numbers.
 The last exercise has taught you three things:
1 To cancel, e.g.  = ⅔
2 To change to improper fractions 2¼ = 
3 To change back to mixed fractions,  = 4¾ 
Addition of fractions
At the side of the page we can see Jonathon and his little brother, Raymond, painting a football post.
Jonathon has painted ⅜ of the post while Raymond has painted ⅛ What fraction of the post have they painted altogether?
Obviously this is worked out by doing the addition ⅛ + ⅜ which equals .
Therefore the boys have painted of the post, which is, ½ of the post.
EXERCISE E
Copy and complete the following.

7 Can you write your answers to questions 2,4, and 6, in a more simple way?
The fractions in the questions above had the same denominators.
If the fractions to be added have different denominators, then before you can add them, you have to alter the denominators so that they are all the same.
 
EXERCISE E continued
Now work out the following using the method of the last example.
Give answers in their lowest terms.
 When there are mixed numbers, simply add the whole parts first.
Question 13 is partly done for you.
Finish the question and try the following.
 Sometimes you will find questions like this: ⅖ + ⅓ Here neither  denominator can be changed to be the same as the other.
See if you can follow how this question is done.
  
Example
This time with whole numbers.
 
EXERCISE F
Give your answers in their lowest terms.
 The following are a mixture of the three different types of addition questions.
Subtraction of fractions
We can subtract fractions in much the same way that we add.
Examples
 Now try the following.
EXERCISE G
 If whole numbers are involved, then subtract them first.
Part of Question 7 has been done already.
Complete it and do the rest.
 
Study the following calculation.
 But we cannot take  from 
Take one whole one, from the three whole ones, and change it to twelfths.
 Now finish off in the usual way.
Practise this method with the following:
EXERCISE G continued
 
The importance of units
When we use fractions in our everyday life they have to be a fraction of something.
It is no good saying to your friend that you have "lost a ½" , when you mean "lost ½" a mango".
In mathematics we would say that fractions used in practical work have to be related to a unit.
The following table shows some fractions and their possible related units.
Fill in the empty spaces.
The first row is done for you.
Now use your knowledge of addition and subtraction of fractions to answer some interesting problems.
(Don't forget to put the correct units for each answer.)
EXERCISE H
1 Winston walks 1¾ km to school and the same distance going back home in the afternoon.
What is the total distance he walks each day?
2 Jim catches a 1⅗ Snapper and his father catches a 3½kg Snapper.
What is the total weight of the Snappers?
3 A recipe requires 1¾ cups of milk and 4½ cups of water.
How much liquid is required?
4 If a lobster weighs 3¾kg and a crab weighs 1⅕kg, how much more than the crab does the lobster weigh?
5 The average height of a man is about 1¾ which is quite short compared with the polar bear of height 2⅝m that was found in Alaska in 1962.
How much taller was this polar bear than an average man?
6 A grasshopper jumped 9⅕cm and then jumped a further 15⅞ cm.
How far did it jump?
7 The tallest recorded man in the world measured 2½m while the tallest living man measures 2m.What would be their total height If they stood one on top of the other?
8 Passengers on planes usually are allowed 20kg of baggage.
How much over-weight would you be if your baggage weighed 29kg.
9 The fastest fish is believed to be the sailfish, one of which was recorded doing 109km/h.
A swordfish has been recorded doing 92km/h.
How much faster is the sailfish, than the swordfish?
10 If a boat travels 120½km the first day and 68⅘km the second day how far has the boat travelled in the two days?
Multiplication of fractions
Study the picture of this building with some lights on.
If half the lights are now turned off what fraction of the building is
At the moment  or ⅓ of the building is lit up, so if half of these are turned off then the problem really amounts to working out ½ of ⅓
This can be written as ½ x ⅓
…
To work this out, you simply multiply the top two numbers and the two bottom numbers together.
 
LEARN
In mathematics, you can often put the multiplication sign (×) in place of the word "of" .
Example
 
EXERCISE I
Try these.
Give your answers in their lowest terms as you learnt to do on page 32.

Problem: This giraffe is 5m tall, the rhinoceros in only ⅖ of the giraffe's height.
How tall is the rhinoceros?
This problem requires that we work out:
EXERCISE I continued
11 A knife has a blade 8cm long.
The handle is ¾ of the blade's length.
How long is the handle?
12 It is 1,280km from Freeport to Santo Domingo.
The distance from Freeport to Miami is ⅕th of this.
How far is it from Freeport to Miami?
13 Jamaica is approximately 234km long.
Trinidad is about ths of the length of Jamaica.
What is the length of Trinidad?
14 A fast turtle can travel km in an hour.
How far can the turtle travel in 20 hours at this speed?
15 The population of Belize is about 126,000.
Bermuda's population is ths of this.
What is the population of Bermuda?
16 If this iceberg shows ⅛ of its height above water, how many metres of iceberg will be below water if the whole iceberg is 80 metres high?
Multiplication of mixed numbers
Example
 Change both fractions to improper fractions.
 
Time saver
Look back to page 21 and remind yourself how we cancelled.
You can use cancelling to make many multiplication problems much simpler.
We had from the above example:   
EXERCISE J
Work out the following and save time by cancelling where possible.
 
Division of fractions
Here is a loaf of bread 30cm long.
Each slice of bread is 1 ½cm thick.
How many slices of bread are there in the loaf?
The problem is really just a matter of working out how many "1 ½" there are in 30.
This is a division problem which can be written as 30 ÷ 1 ½.
See if you can follow how this is done.
  
EXERCISE K
Now try these.
The first part of question 1 is done for you.

Now try these problems:
17 A cup of nuts weights kg.
How many cups of nuts are in 30kg?
If it is ⅔km around a running track, how many laps would a runner have to make to do 12km?
19 How many jumps each of 3½cm would a frog have to make to travel 7cm?
20 The largest animal in the world is the blue whale with a weight of about 150,000kg.
The largest land animal is the African bush elephant whose weight is  of the whale's.
How much does the elephant weigh?
The password puzzle
Find the route for getting from start to finish.
You can only use the roads in the direction of the arrows.
To travel along each road you have to know the correct password which is the answer to the calculation shown on the circle you are leaving.
Each road is named with a letter.
When you have finally discovered the correct route write it down by giving the letters of the roads in the order you have used them.
Review exercises
1 There are 20 boys in a class of 30 students.
What fraction of the class are boys?
2 Here is a picture of the Smith family.
a) What fraction of the Smith family are males.
b) What fraction are wearing hats?
c) what fraction have shorts on?
d) What fraction are sitting down?
3 what fraction of this whole book is the part before this page?
4 What fraction of your class are girls?
5 Jupiter has 12 moons circling around it.
Four of them areas large as or larger than our moon.
What fraction of the moons are smaller than our moon?   Give the answers to the following in their lowest terms: 
29 A monkey tries to reach a branch 5½m above the ground by standing on the shoulders of an elephant 4 ¼m high.
Will the monkey reach the branch if he can stretch 1 ¾m?
30 Which is the largest fraction and by how much is it greater than the smallest ⅗,   .
(Hint: Change all denominators to 60.)
Work out the following giving your answers in their lowest form.
  
Problems involving multiplication or division of fractions.
1 What is ⅖ of 90?
2 What fraction of 2 is ¼?
3 How many times bigger than 1 is 2⅜?
4 How many ⅜ are there in ?
5 How many 1¼'s are there in 20?
6 Which is the bigger,  or  and how many times bigger is it than the smaller?
7 One racing bike weighs 10 ¼kg.
What is the weight of 20 bikes?
8 The earth takes 365¼ days to go around the sun.
Mercury takes only ¼ of this time.
How many days does Mercury take to go round the sun?
9 How many ½cm slices of cheese can be cut from a 1½ metre block of cheese?(1 ½ metres = 150cm.)
10 How many times can you fill a small bottle, which holds ¾ litre of water, from a large bottle which holds 48 litres of water?
11 The distance from the earth to the sun is about 92,600,000 miles.
Mercury however is only ⅖ of our distance from the sun.
How many miles is Mercury from the sun?
12 Jill is 12 years old.
Her father is 2 ¾ times as old as her.
How old is her father?
13 If 1 ⅖ metres of material is needed to make one dress how many metres are needed for 10 dresses?
14 What is half of 44/7?
15 What is half of ½?
16 My brother is 1½ metres tall.
I am half as tall again.
How tall am I?
Test papers
1 Find the sum of 108, 82 and 96.
2 (a) 2,319 × 407 (b) 3¾ × ⅖ 
4 12 hand towels can be made from 8 metres of towelling material.
How many towels can be made from 14 metres?
5 Share 20 toffees between Dean and Paul so that Dean gets 4 more than Paul.
How many does each get?
6 What size is the angle at each corner of this page?
7 A farmer owns 9 horses and has enough food to last the horses for 3 weeks.
If he sells two horses, how long should the food last now?
8 Instead of multiplying a number by 98, Julie multiplied it by 89 and got the answer 23,585.
Find, the correct answer.
9 Find the total cost of 27 books at $3.45 each.
10 Find the H.C.F. and L.C.M. of 36 and 90.
4 Decimals
Place value in whole numbers
One hundred and twenty-three thousand, four hundred and fifty-six.
Copy the table of place values above and fit these numbers into the correct places.
1 Three hundred and four thousand, two hundred and six.
2 Two hundred thousand, four hundred and two.
This is our "Place Ball" team Look at their numbers.
Each player must keep in place.
If one player stands in the wrong place, it will change the value of the team number.
3 a) What would the team number be if 6 swopped placed with 4?
b) What would be the difference between the old number and the new one?
c) What would be the difference if 2 changed places with 4?
d) What would be the difference if 5 changed places with 1?
e) what value would the number team read if 6 stayed at home and all the players had to move down one place?
f) If 3 stayed home and nobody else moves, how do we hold his place?
What does the number read now?
Place value in decimals
This number is read "point seven eight nine" .
This means seven tenths, eight hundredths, nine thousandths.
Copy the table and put these numbers in their places.
Remember to use "0" to hold a place that has no number in it.
1 Six tenths, four hundredths, three thousandths.
2 Four tenths and six thousandths.
3 Two thousandths.
These are the other members of our Place Ball team.
Point seven, eight, nine.
If the whole team stands in a row, their numbers would give the result 123, 456.789
When the "ball" or decimal point is passed between the players, the value of the number team changes.
If the decimal point is put in the wrong place, every figure in the number is wrong.
Look at the difference in these sums of money.
Which one would you have?
Place value is very important, so make sure you keep numbers from the same place in line.
Check these decimal machines on +and   
Exercise A
Copy and complete these panels  (REMEMBER In adding and subtracting, decimal points must be in line to keep numbers in their correct places.)  
Subtraction work
 
Working with decimals
In the last section you should have found that place value is very important.
Remember that anything out of place is incorrect.
Look for things that are out of place.
Find what is WRONG in these examples then write them out correctly so that you can work out the answers.
 
Other decimal operations
Multiplication of decimals needs no new rules, but take extra care with place values.
Make sure that each figure in your answers is in its correct place.
Check the working on these problems.
Examples
1 Mr Smith has 10 men working for him and he pays each man $86.55 a week.
Find the total wage bill for one week.
 Notice that each figure in the number has moved up in value one place to the left.
The decimal point keeps its place with two figures behind it to the right.
Joe the jet pilot has logged 100 hours flying his plane at a Speed of 548.25km per hour.
How far has he flown in this time?  Answer 54,825.0 kilometres Again the figures move to higher place values, this time two places to the left while the decimal holds its place.
EXERCISE B
Write out the answers to the following by fixing place values before and after the decimal point.
 Again we can use reverse operations to check answers.
Remember division is the reverse of multiplication.
Check 1 If Mr Smith shares his wage bill of $865.50 equally among 10 men, what does he pay each man?  Check 2 Joe has flown 54,825.00km in 100 hours.
How far must he have flown in each hour? 
In division by 10 each figure moves down in place value while the decimal point stays in place.
EXERCISE C
Write out answers to the following.
The first three answers give a reverse check on Exercise H.
Now try these: 
So far you have used tens, hundreds or thousands to multiply or divide by.
Study these examples which show the method of multiplying two decimal fractions.
  The number of figures after the decimal point, or number of decimal places, is needed to fix place value.
 The number of figures after the point in the answer must always equal the total number of figures behind the point in the numbers which are to be multiplied.
 In each case, multiplying follows the usual method of setting out.
First multiply out as if there was no decimal point to worry about, then fix the place value of each figure in your answer by counting up the number of decimal places.
  Now two tricky ones to try:  Study these worked examples carefully.
1 Working 0.12 (2 decimal places)  Notice that a zero is used in the answer to put the figures in their correct place values.
REMEMBER A misplaced decimal point puts every figure in your answer out of place.
EXERCISE E
Take care with the position of the decimal point.
 
Division of decimals
Dividing a decimal by a whole number needs care again over fixing figures in their correct place.
First put the decimal point in the answer line, then divide out as usual keeping place values correct.
  Again answers can be checked using reverse operations.
 
EXERCISE F
Calculate and check your answers.
 In these examples, watch out for zero place holders.
 Division by a decimal needs extra care, since before starting to divide we must adjust place values.
To understand this process, study the machine.
The machine keeps increasing the numbers it has to divide but the answer line does not change.
This is using the cancelling method in reverse.
Study this example:  Look again.
  Notice that the x 10 machine moves all the figures in the division problem up one place value until we have a whole number to divide by.
Use this method of work in the next exercise.
EXERCISE G
 Now study this example:  Making the decimal 0.12 into a whole number for division the x 10 machine had to be used twice, x 100 in other words, since we had two figures after the point.
Use this method in the next section.
 Long division in decimals follows the same method.
First, adjust place values until you have a whole number to divide by; next place the decimal point in your answer, and finally divide out as usual.
 In problem work we often need to use both multiplication and division to find the answers.
Follow the work through this problem.
Cheri saves her pocket money of $1.50 a week for five weeks, then spends all her money on comic books which cost 25¢ each.
How many comics has she?
Cheri has $1.50 x 5 = $7.50 to spend.
She can buy $7.50 -0.25 comics  Answer Cheri has enough money to buy 30 comics.
EXERCISE G continued
Work out these problems.
35 There are five shelves in a classroom cupboard, each 234cm long.
Each shelf is full of exercise books 4.5cm thick.
How many books are there altogether?
36 A carpenter has six planks of wood each 6.5 metres long.
If he cuts the planks into pieces each 1.3 metres long, how many pieces will he have?
37 A dressmaker has three rolls of cloth each 13.5 metres long.
If she cuts the cloth up into pieces 1.5 metres long how many pieces will she have?
CHECK your work in decimals.
Copy and complete the following machine panels.
The first has been done for you.
EXERCISE H
 "Reverse gear" or reverse operations have been used many times to check answers.
Remember how this is done.
 
EXERCISE 1
Complete these and check your last four answers.
 Fill in the missing signs which will make these correct.
 If you have used reverse operations correctly in previous exercises, you should be able to fill in the signs without too much difficulty.
Vulgar fractions and decimal fractions
Decimals are a particular set of fractions which have denominators of 10, 100, 1000.
Look back at the section on decimal place values and check:  Notice that the place value of the last figure tells you the size of the denominator.
In the next exercise, write these decimals as vulgar fractions and cancel to the lowest terms.
 Would you rather have of this fruit pie or 0.25 of it?
Does it make any difference which you choose? 0.25= and this will cancel to 4, so both fractions are equal.
 Look carefully at 0.25 taken apart.
 Change these decimals to vulgar fractions and cancel.
  Reversing from vulgar to decimal fractions needs care with place values.
Write the following as decimals.
 Not all fractions have denominators that fit into the decimal system.
Often we have to change the denominator to 10,100 or 1000 by division.
Study this example: To change ½ to a decimal the numerator of the fraction is divided by the denominator.
The numerator, 1, is carried over the decimal point to become  This will be divided by 2 giving the answer 5 in the tenths column, or 0.5.
 The numerator carried into the tenths column leaves a remainder which is carried into the hundredths column.
Both examples are easily checked by reverse working:   In mixed numbers only the fraction needs to be divided out in 67 this way.
Whole numbers can be placed in position in front of the decimal point.
 Not all vulgar fractions can be changed into decimals.
See what happens if we try out ⅓ as a decimal using our method of changing over.
 ⅓=; 0.333333 and we could go on forever.
This type of fraction is called a recurring decimal written 0.333.
The extra dot above the last figure shows that it can be repeated many more times.
Experiment with the fractions ⅔, ⅙, 1/7, and see what happens if you try to change them into decimals.
Can you see why they do not work out to fit exactly into the decimal system?
Remember the place values after the decimal point are tenths, hundredths, thousandths, and so on.
 
18 Sam is paid $168 for 40 hours work.
Find his hourly rate.
19 Joe is paid $3.20 an hour.
Find his pay for 38 hours work.
20 How many 15 comics could you buy for $3.45? 
17 Find the distance travelled in 4½ hours at 98.6k/h.
18 Find the cost of 6½ metres of cloth at $1.36 a metre.
19 What is Dean paid for 38 hours work at $2.80 an hour?
20 Jerry's pay is $99 for 36 hours work.
Find his hourly rate.
5 The metric system of measurement
During the French Revolution in about 1790, mathematicians and scientists in France worked out a new system of measurement.
They calculated the distance around the earth, then took a fraction of this measurement as their unit of length and called it a metre.
The metric system was then built up on the decimal system, which you already have been studying.
EXERCISE A
1 Reading from the table, write out each of the metric lengths shown in m, dm, cm and mm.
Follow this example: 4.5 m = 4 m 5dm.
2 Make up a table like the one shown.
Put the following figures in their correct columns, then write each length in metres and decimal fractions of a metre.
 Since the metric system follows the place value method used in the decimal system, changing lengths from metres to decimetres, centimetres or millimetres can be done easily using the table of metric length.
Study the following examples and notice the use of place values.
Examples Express in m, dm, cm, and mm.
 Expressing measurements in different units depends upon careful reading from the table and accurate use of decimals.
Using your table of metric length, fix the places of the following measurements then change each one into m, dm, cm, then mm, as shown above.
   A metre is about 39.4 inches or slightly over a yard in length.
Larger units of measurements in the metric system, are built up in the same way as the number system, based again on tens and tenths.
10 metres = 1 Dekametre (Dm) 100 metres = 1 Hectometre (Hm) 1000 metres = 1 Kilometre (km)
EXERCISE B
1.
Write out the measurements shown in the last table of metric length in km, Hm, Dm and m.
 
2 Copy the table, put the figures of the following lengths in their correct columns, then write each of the measurements in km and decimal parts of a km.
 The complete table of metric measurement of length has the metre in the centre.
Again compare decimal and number place values: Thousands Hundreds Tens Units tenths hundredths thousandths Any metric length correctly placed in the table can be read off to a required unit of measurement.
Study and check these examples:  Lots of practice is needed to become familiar with the metric system, but once you have got to know it you should be able to use this system more easily than if you were working with miles, furlongs, yards, feet and inches.
3 Change these measurements into the units shown:  One of the important advantages of the metric system is that measurement of length, weight, and volume, all depend upon the same principle, Once you have seen that the system is all based on tens and tenths, you should find it less difficult than other weights and measures.
Measurement of weight and volume
The unit of weight used in the metric system is called the gram and it is the exact weight of 1 cubic centimetre of pure water.
Larger and smaller weights than the gram are built up exactly as they were in the system of length measurement, so that again the table of weights follows the place values of number and decimals.
 Any metric weight, correctly placed in the table, can be read off to whichever unit of weight is needed.
 As a comparison with other systems of weight, 1 pound,(1 lb) is roughly equal to 450 grams and 1 kilogram would be approximately 2 ⅕ lbs.
The metric measurement of volume or capacity is based on cubic centimetres. 1000 cubic centimetres = 1 litre.
As a comparison 1 litre is roughly equal to 1 quart and 1 gallon is approximately equal to litres.
The litre is split into smaller units in the usual way.
 Volumes greater than a litre are usually left in tens, hundreds or thousands of litres so only this table is needed for most practical purposes.
   Remember how the metric tables are built up and learn these comparisons.
 
Review exercise
Change the following metric measures into the units shown:  Work out the following and give answers in the units shown:  
1 Fill in the blanks on the following World Record table by copying it out, and where possible give answers in decimal form.
Part a) is done for you.
2 It is approximately, 232,000 metres from Barbados to Tobago.
How far is this in kilometres?
3 A small circular running track is marked out so that one lap of the track is 200 metres.
How many laps of the track would make one kilometre?
4 One millilitre of pure water weighs one gram.
What weight of pure water would fill a 5 litre bucket?
5 A can of beans contains 250g.
How many cans would be needed to make 1 .5kg of beans?
Neat accurate work is important in mathematics.
Study this figure to see how a curve can be made up using only straight lines.
Draw the pattern by following these steps.
1 Draw an angle between 40° and 60° with sides 6cm long.
2 Mark each ½ cm along both lines.
3 Number the ½cm marks from 1 to 12 along one side and 12 to 1 along the other side starting from the corner of the angle.
4 Neatly join up points 1 to 1,2 to 2,3 to 3, and so on.
Now try this"double curve using a 8cm horizontal line and a 4cm vertical line.
Again the points are ½ cm apart.
If this exercise is drawn using two 10cm lines which cut each other in half, many interesting "pairs" of curves can be made up.
Draw a circle 10cm in diameter.
Set your protractor on one half of the circle, and mark every 20° round that part of the circumference.
Now mark each 20° on the other half of the circle taking care to line up 0° and 180° accurately.
Number your points in order around the circle,(you should have 18).
Join up 1 to 5, 2 to 6,3 to 7, 4 to 8 and so on.
Now join 1 to 8,2 to 9,3 to 10,4 to 11 and so on, in a different coloured pen or pencil if you can.
Repeat the instructions above but mark off every 30° instead of 20-.
Do not number your points, simply join one point to every other point around the circle.
Now move to the next point and join it up to every other point and so on until your pattern is complete.
6 Measuring
When you make anything from a box to a dress, it is very helpful if you can measure accurately!
Before you can measure or draw a line exactly you have to know how to use a ruler properly.
The most common type of ruler today is one which measures centimetres and millimetres.
This ruler takes the place of the old fashioned feet and inches ruler.
Rulers which measure in centimetres and millimetres are called metric rulers.
You can see a metric ruler at the edge of this page.
It is divided into millimetres.
On the edge of the next page you will see the same ruler divided into centimetres.
As you can see, each centimetre (cm) is made up of 10 millimetres (mm).
Instead of giving a measurement such as 2cm 7mm we call it 2.7cm.
Measure the following lines using a metric ruler.
To name the top line, simply letter all the corners of the hexagon,(any letters will do), and name the line with the letters at each end of it.
This line is called MG or GM,(the order of the letters does not matter).
Measure the lengths of the following lines using a metric ruler.
8 Should your answers to 1 and 7 be the same?
Naming angles
To help us see how to name an angle imagine the shaded angle to be taken out of the diagram.
You will see what it now looks like.
The angle is bordered by the lines PM and MD.
To name an angle all we have to do is to name the route we would take to go right round the edge of the angle.
In this example we can start at P, go to M and then to D. So the angle is called PMD. of course we could just as easily start at D, go to M and then to P and call the angle DMP.
Both ways are correct.
On top of the three letters we always put the sign (/) which is short for the word "angle" .
Therefore the angle we have been looking at can be called PMD or DMP.
Another example
Draw sketches of the following and name the shaded angles.
Naming Triangles
We name triangles in a similar way to naming angles by simply giving letters to their vertices (corners) and putting the sign for a triangle "b" in front of the letters.
As with angles the letters can be put in different orders.
Examples
EXERCISE B
1 Look back to question 6 at the top of this page.
Name the eight different triangles.
2 Name the three different triangles in question 7 of the last exercise.
Parallel lines
These two lines will never meet, no matter how much you extend them in either direction.
This means they must always be the same distance apart.
Such pairs of lines are called parallel lines.
These three lines are also parallel to each other.
They will never meet.
These two lines are not parallel.
They will meet somewhere off the side of the page.
To show when lines are parallel we put an arrow sign (>) on the lines.
EXERCISE C
1 Is the top edge of this page parallel to the bottom edge?
Is the side edge parallel to the bottom edge?
2 If a car drives across the sand, are the tracks left by the front wheels parallel?
3 There are many edges of this a box which are parallel.
Two are shown on the diagram.
Write down all the pairs of parallel lines that you can find in the following way: AB FG.
([is short for parallel.)
Test papers
4 1 Change (a) S.2km to m(b) 4.7m to cm (c) 57cm to mm.
2 I am cycling the 4.2km to school.
My chain breaks after I have travelled 3.8km.
How many metres do I have to walk to get to school?
3 Work out the following: 
4 Mr Smith spends of his wage on food and ⅗ of his wage on clothes and rent.
What fraction of his wage remains?
5 A car can travel 1 50km on 12½ litres of petrol.
How far can it travel on 1 litre?
6 Answer the following questions from this diagram.
a) Name the triangle which contains a right angle.
b) Name the shaded angle.
c) Name the vertical line.
d) Name the horizontal lines.
e) BC is a side of which triangle? f) Name the angle between the lines FB and BD.
g) Use your protractor to measure the angles BCD, DBC, DEB and EFB.
1 Write the following as decimals of a gram;
2 If I buy 2.5 litres of petrol and use 1.8 litres, how many ml are left?
3 12 pieces of string each 38cm long are cut from a piece 4.8m long.
What length of string remains?
4 Now many 250g bags of sugar can be filled from a 20kg sack of sugar?
5 Work out the following;  
7 Triangles
Do you know in what country this tower can be seen?
The tower is made of steel girders criss-crossed to make it stronger.
The girders form many triangles.
How many can you count?
There are a lot of structures around us that are made into triangles to give more strength.
Two such structures are shown at the bottom of the page.
Make small drawings of any more you have seen.
Mathematicians group all the different shapes of triangles into four main sets.
Set 1 Equilateral triangles
These are three equilateral triangles of different sizes and in different positions.
These triangles have all three sides equal.
Note; When we want to show that lines are of equal length, we can put the same mark on each line.
This has been done on these triangles.
Set 2 Isosceles triangles
These three isosceles triangles each have a pair of equal sides.
Set 3 Scalene triangles
These three scalene triangles have no sides equal.
Set 4 Right-angled triangles
The three right-angled triangles below are simply triangles which have one angle of 90° Can you see which triangle is also isosceles?
Constructing triangles
Suppose that you are asked to draw exactly to size an equilateral triangle with each side 5cm long.
Can you do it?
Try it using a ruler and pencil.
It's not as easy as it sounds!
You may have difficulty getting the third side to join the other two sides and still be 5cm long.
Draw a line exactly 5cm long Open your compasses to and name the ends A and B. 5cm.
Put the compass point on end A and draw a short arc.
Now with the compass point Draw lines from A and B up to on end B (and still open to 5 the point where the arcs cm) draw another arc to cut cross.
the first arc.
Check that each line is 5cm long.
You have now constructed a 5cm equilateral triangle!
Practise this method by drawing the three equilateral triangles shown at the start of this section.
You can use this same method to construct any shape triangle if you are given the measurements of the sides.
It is useful to draw a "rough diagram" first to show the measurements of the triangle.
Example
Draw the following triangle exactly.
Discovery
1 a) Construct an equilateral triangle, each side being 8 cm.
b) Use your protractor to measure the three angles and mark them on your drawing.
c) Now construct a 10 cm equilateral triangle and also measure its angles.
What do you notice?
2 Draw two isosceles triangles having the measurements shown at the side.
a) Measure the angles of each triangle and mark them on the drawings.
b) Do you notice anything about two of the angles in each triangle?
3 Draw two scalene triangle having the measurements shown at the side.
a) As before, measure the angles and mark them on the triangles.
b) Add up the three angles of each triangle and compare your answers.
c) Add up the three angles of the four other triangles you have drawn in this exercise.
what do you find?
CONCLUSIONS
If your drawings are accurate you will have found that:
1 Each angle of an equilateral triangle is 60.
2 There are two equal angles in an isosceles triangle.
3 The sum of the three angles of any triangle is always 180.
Do not be worried if your angles do not exactly add up to 180° As you become more accurate with your work, so you will get closer to 180°.
Problems involving triangles
The facts you discovered in the last paragraph are very important and should be learnt.
These facts can be used to learn more about other triangles.
Example
We want to know the size of this angle without drawing the triangle you know that the three angles of a triangle must add up to 180° Also the two angles given add up to.
Therefore, by subtracting 150° from 180° we find that the unknown angle is exactly 30° 
EXERCISE A
Neatly sketch the following triangles and mark your answers on them.
Do not use a protractor in this exercise.
calculate the angles marked with a "?" or calculate the angles named at the side of the triangle.
7 What type of triangle is that shown in questions?
What can you say about the lengths of MJ and JP?
Give a reason for your answer.
a) What type of triangles are DEB and FDE? b) Calculate DAB and EDB.
c) Calculate FEE and FEED.
d) Work out EFC and ADF.
e) What is the sum of the three angles at D? f) What is the sum of the three angles at E and F? g) Do you notice anything about your answers to (e) and (f)?
We will study this further in the next paragraph.
More about turning
Imagine you are standing at A looking left.
Then you turn round to face the right.
You will, of course, have turned a ½ turn or 180°
Now do the same thing again but this time split your turn into two smaller turns.
You will still have turned the same amount as before, that is 180°.
We can say that the 1st turn plus the 2nd turn adds up to 180°.
Look back to questions 9, 10 and 11 of the last exercise.
Can you find any pairs of supplementary angles?
EXERCISE
Neatly sketch these diagrams and calculate the angles marked with a "?" .
Questions 1 and 4 have been done for you.
You have just learnt that when any two angles add up to 180° they are called supplementary.
There is also a special name given to any two angles which add up to 90°
The following are all right angles (90°) which are split into smaller parts.
Draw a sketch of each and answer the following.
Question 7 has been done for you.
11 What angle would be the complement of 80° (to make 90°)?
12 What angle would be the complement of 9°? 13 What angle would be the supplement of 130°? 14 Are 120° and 70° a pair of supplementary angles?
15 Are 37° and 53° a pair of complementary angles?
16 Look at the protractor on page 8.
Study each pair of numbers formed by the inside and outside scales.
a) What is the sum of each pair?
b) Are the pairs supplementary or complementary?
c) Can you explain why each pair should have the same sum?
Review exercise
1 Draw the following table and fill in the gaps with YES or NO.
Two have been done for you.
2 Use your compass and ruler to construct carefully the following.
Show a rough diagram with each question.
a) A 3cm equilateral triangle.
b) An isosceles triangle with two sides each 7cm and the base 4cm.
c) A scalene triangle having sides 8.4cm, 10cm and 3.3cm.
d) An equilateral triangle of side 5.5cm.
e) Can you draw this shape which is made up of different triangles?
8 Sets
What have these things to do with our work in mathematics?
The heading of this chapter gives you a clue.
The word set is part of the name we would use to describe each picture.
There is a T.V. set, a set of golf clubs, and a set of playing cards.
Look at these rows or sets of numbers.
a) 1,3,5,7,9,…
b) 3,6,9, 12, 15.
c) 2,4,6,8,10…
d) 1,2,3,5,7,…
e) 1,4,9, 16,25.
Copy these sets and write in the next three numbers that would fit in place of the dots at the end of each row.
We can describe a list of numbers without writing them all out if it is a particular set of numbers.
a) is a set of odd numbers,
b) is a set of multiples of 3.
How would you describe the other three sets c), d) and e)?
The word set is used to mean a collection of things,(not only numbers) which all have something in common.
The T.V. contains hundreds of parts which all belong to the same set.
The set of golf clubs is made up of "woods"  "irons" and "putters" .
A set of playing cards has 52 cards of different values and one or two "Joker" cards.
Sets of factors
Find the elements of (factors of 6) and (factors of 8).
Do you have an element other than 1 that is in both sets?
Follow this example which shows how we can use sets.
(factors of 9)(1,3,9)(factors of 12)(1,2,3,4,6,12) 3 is an element of both sets.
It is the highest common factor of 9 and 12.
You have already met H.C.F. work.
EXERCISE B
Write out and compare sets of factors to find the H.C.F. of 1 6 and 9 2 12 and 18 3 14 and 21 4 10 and 15 5 16 and 24 6 18 and 27 7 12 and 36 8 24 and 32 Another way of showing common factors of two numbers is to draw a diagram of the sets.
From the first example you should have found  This method of setting out sets was thought out by a mathematician named Venn, who gave his name to the "Venn diagram" .
Study these three ways in which two sets can be drawn.
1 Disjoint sets which have no common elements, 2 overlapping or intersecting sets with common elements, 3 one set completely inside the other.
Set B has elements which all also belong in set A.
In this case set B is called a subset of A and we write B c A This means "B is contained in A" .
Here is a Venn diagram of the two sets  If we join the two sets together to make one big set, this would become set A union B.
 The order of elements does not matter but it is useful to list the elements in some sort of order.
These fractions have been put in order from smallest to biggest.
Note that elements of  do not go in twice.
Now let us review the symbols we have learnt to use in our "Set Language" .
Exercise D
Can you "decode" these messages or set statements and write out what they mean?
 Write these statements in set symbols.
9. 5 is an element of the set of multiples of 5.
10. 2 is an element of the intersection of sets A and 0.
11.
Set X is an empty set.
12.
The union of sets E and F is the set 2,4,6,8.
13.
Set C is contained in set D.
14.
The intersection of sets V and W is (25).
Example problem: A class of 40 students was asked these questions: A) How many of you like calypso music? 0) How many watch TV regularly?
The results were that 28 said "yes" to "A" , 20 said "yes" to "0" , and 4 students said "no" to both questions Study the Venn diagram.
A = (students who like calypso music) A B = (students who like TV) 4 students do not belong in A or B but have to be placed in, the set of all students in the class.
We now have 36 students left but had 48 "yes" answers.
12 people must have said they liked both music and TV, so they belong in the intersection of the two sets.
Results from the diagram show that: 12 students like both 48 "yes" answers from 36 people 16 like music not TV — 28 less 12 already placed 8 like TV not music — 20 less 12 already placed 4 out of the class of 40 do not fit in A or B.
The total 16 + 12 + 8 + 4 = 40 No-one is missed out.
This is the only possible way that the students could have answered the questions to agree with the information given.
There can be no other arrangement of the numbers to fit this question.
A class of 35 senior school students was asked to answer the following questions: J) How many of you have been to Jamaica?
T) How many have visited Trinidad?
N) How many have not been to either of these places?
The answers given were 22 for question J, 19 for question T, and 8 for question N. 15 Copy the diagram shown and find how the numbers must be placed to complete it.
Let J = (students who have been to Jamaica) Let T = (students who have visited Trinidad) Now answer these questions.
a) How many students have been to Jamaica but not Trinidad?
b) How many have been to Trinidad but not Jamaica?
c) How many have been to both?
Sets and the number line
Here are two new symbols used in set language.
Again they will save writing things out in full once you get used to using them.
When we have to compare the values of numbers it is important to know which has the greatest, and which has the least value.
 Notice the wide end of the arrow is always next to the bigger number.
Exercise E
Use the symbols > or < or to compare these numbers.
Example: 20 and 5 would be written 20> 5.
 In finding the set of numbers greater or less than a given value, the number line is useful as a check that no elements have been missed out.
In the following examples, the letter "n" stands for the number, or numbers in the answer set.
Only natural, or counting numbers (no fractions) are used.
1 (n: n{ 4) = (0, 1, 2, 3, This statement tells us that the set of numbers, n, such that n is less than 4, is the set of numbers 0, 1,2,3. 2 (n:n}8)(9,10,11,12…)
This is the set of numbers greater than 8, and we show that it keeps on getting bigger, by placing a row of dots after 12.
EXERCISE F
Find the following sets of answers:  Your answer to question 2 should have been (7,8,9,10…
I The "limit" of the set, or lowest number is 7.
One place lower would be 6 and of course 6 can not be greater than 6.
The set has no "high" limit, it keeps on going.
Study this example which has high and low limits.
 "n" greater than 2, less than 8 is shown on the line.
Numbers that fit the answer set have the low limit 3, and high limit 7.
No other whole numbers fit both conditions.
Check this example  Now find the answer sets for the following:  For these sets of numbers, write the conditions that apply to limit the sets.
Example  As you will find in algebra work, it is often useful to use a letter in place of a number that we are trying to find.
You have been using "n" to stand for a number or set of numbers.
Remember that 2n means 2 times n and n means n divided by Find the answer sets to the following:   In each of the last set of questions first find the value of  then find the value of n.
In every day life we group things into sets without really thinking about it, to find some kind of order, or pattern which will help us to arrange and organise what we have to do.
You probably have a set of jobs to do before, or after school every day.
Often it is very useful to study your complete set of jobs and arrange the elements of that set in order, so that they can be done better, or more easily than if you did your work in a different order each day.
Imagine doing these things in the wrong order.
1 Put on your shoes then your socks.
2 Dry the dishes after supper then wash them.
3 Play a game of football then put on your boots.
4 Go to a party in old clothes, then put on your best suit or dress after the party.
Review exercise
This set of questions will find out how much you know about sets and set language.
1 What is a set? 2 What is a subset?
3 Something that belongs in a set is called an…of the set.
What is the missing word?
4 Instead of writing "the set of" , we use?
5 The symbol used for "is an element of" is?
6 Set language uses symbols as a short way of saying what we mean.
How would you write "Cat is an element of the set of domestic animals" in set symbols.
7 Write out in full:  (letters of the alphabet)
8 Set A, factors of 12 =?
9 Set 0, factors of 16?
10 The H.C.F. of 12 and 16 is?
11 Using A and 0 as in 8 and 9, what does A 0 mean? 12 Using A and 0 as in 8 and 9, what does A u 0 mean? 13 What name is given to the kind of diagrams shown here?
14 What types of sets are shown in 13 (a),(b) and (c)?
15 Draw diagrams of (a) disjoint sets,(b) intersecting sets, and (c) a set enclosed completely by another set.
16 Find the elements of set A, if each element fits the statement 
17 use the symbols for "greater" and "less" than to describe the set{ 5,6,7,8}
18 a group of 20 students were asked two questions:(a) Do you like "Springheel" sneakers?(b) Do you like "Perfecto" popcorn?
The results were as follows: 14 said they belonged to the sneaker set "S" , 17 said they were in "P" the popcorn set.
All students said"yes' to at least one question.
Draw a Venn diagram to find out:
a) How many students liked "Springheel" sneakers but not popcorn.
b) How many students are in the set S p.
c) How many liked popcorn but not the sneakers.
19 Write ins et symbols "there are no elements in set X" 
Test papers
6
1 (a) x £ A,(b) A 0 = (4).
Write (a) and (b) out in full.
2 (a) Set A has no elements,(b) 10 is the only element of set A intersection 0.
Write these statements in set "language" .
3 Which set of triangles would a triangle with two equal sides fit into?
4 Two angles in a triangle are 70 and 80°.
Find the third angle.
5 Write out the set of factors of 24.
6 Find the set of factors of 30.
7 From the last two sets find the H.C.F. of 24 and 30.
8 Find the size of the angle marked x.
9 Draw a Venn diagram of disjoints sets A and 0.
10 From question 9, complete the statement An 0 =?
7
1 Write in full(a) A = (b) c £ A 0
2 A triangle has two equal angles and the third angle is 80.
What is the size of each of the equal angles?
3 An isosceles triangle, which is also a right-angled triangle must have equal angles of…degrees?
4 Draw a Venn diagram of the following sets: A= (1, 3,5,7),(0=1,2,3,4,5),(C= (4, 5,6,7)
5 Find the set with elements n such that 
6 5  (even numbers Y. True or false?
7 Supplementary angles add up to…degrees?
8 Complete the set (2, 5, 9, 14*, *)
9 Write in set language "Set B is contained in set Y" .
10  What values could x have?
8
1 Two angles of a triangle are 84 and 32.
What is the third angle?
2 What type of triangle has been described in question 1?
3 Set A={3, 5, 7}, set B{ 7, 8, 9}Find (a) set A- 0 (b) set An B
4 Find n if 
5 In the diagram, angle COD must be…degrees?
6 Write out the first 5 elements in the set of prime numbers.
7 Set A= (2, 3,5,7) set B (5, 10, 15) What is the set ?
8 15
9 Write in set symbols: A union B is the set 1,2, 5, 7.
10 What are the elements of the set of all types of triangles?
Project page — Compass construction
For this project you will need a compass, pencil, ruler, plain paper, and perhaps an eraser.
You may have drawn the two figures on page 109 before.
Use your compass set to 4cm, taking care to "step off" accurately from your starting point.
Here are two, more difficult figures drawn using the same basic methods of construction.
See if you can copy them.
The one on the right needs two circles to begin with; one 4cm radius, and a second 3cm radius drawn on the same centre.
Now invent some new designs using-the same methods of construction.
Remember that even the best ideas have to be drawn very accurately to look correct.
9 Calculations with polygons and solids
Jimmy is planning to fence in his chickens.
He has already put up the four corner posts.
Can you work out for him what length of chicken wire he will need?
A polygon is a shape bounded by straight lines.
Poly comes from a Latin word meaning "many" .
So a polygon is a "many sided" figure.
If Jimmy does not completely enclose his chickens he has not made a polygon.
Some special polygons
1 Polygons with three sides are called triangles.
2 Polygons with four sides are called quadrilaterals
3 Polygons with five sides are pentagons.
4 Polygons with six sides are hexagons.
What type of polygon will Jimmy's chicken run be?
The perimeter of any polygon is simply the distance all the way round the edges.
For example the perimeter of Jimmy's chicken run would be 15+8+6+7 = 36 metres.
This means Jimmy needs 36m of wire to fence in his chickens.
EXERCISE A
Write down the special names of each of the following polygons and beside each name give its perimeter by measuring with your centimetre ruler.
7 A square is a special type of quadrilateral with all its sides equal and each angle 90°.
If the square on the side had a square perimeter of 16m what would be the length of each side?
8 This quadrilateral is called a rhombus.
It is like a square, with all sides equal, but each angle is not 900.
What would the length of each side be if the perimeter was 20m?
9 A rectangle is another special type of quadrilateral. rectangle Only its opposite sides are equal.
Notice each angle is 90°
Without measuring, work out the perimeter of this rectangle.
10 This page is a rectangle.
Measure its length and width using your metric ruler, and work out its perimeter.
11 Is your desk a rectangle?
If so, work out its perimeter.
12 A parallelogram is a type of quadrilateral with opposite sides equal and opposite angles equal.
a) How is the rectangle different from a parallelogram?
b) What is the perimeter of this parallelogram?
13 The trapezium is another member of the quadrilateral family.
Usually it has no sides equal but one pair of sides must be parallel.
What is the perimeter of this trapezium?
14 Turn to page 115.
Work out the perimeter of shape 3.
Each small square has 1 cm sides.
15 A rectangle has a length of 10cm and a perimeter of 30cm Can you work out the width of the rectangle?
16 A piece of string 40cm long is pulled out to a rectangular shape with a width of 7cm.
What is the length?
Quadrilateral family
Put a tick in the columns which describe correctly some part of the special quadrilaterals.
Some have been done for you.
Areas of some polygons
You probably know that area describes the amount of surface a shape has.
Areas are always measured in square units.
EXERCISE B
Find the areas of the shapes on the next page by counting the number of whole squares and parts of squares.
Give your answers as so many "square units" .
Did you find the quick way of working out the area of the rectangle in question 1.
Instead of counting the squares all you have to do is multiply the length by the width!
Note: As mentioned earlier, areas are always measured in square units.
Some common units are, square metres (m2), square millimetres (mm2), square centimetres (cm2), square kilometres,(km2).
Don't forget to put your square units at the end of each answer.
EXERCISE C
1 Find the areas of the following:
2 A stamp measures 2cm by 2cm.
a) What is its area?
b) How many could be stuck on a sheet of paper 8cm by 10cm?
3 A piece of string 36cm long has been pulled out to this shape.
a) What is the area enclosed?
b) It is now pulled out to the shape shown below.
The lengths are each 1 6cm.
What is each width?
c) What is the area enclosed by this new shape?
4 The same piece of string, 36cm long, can be pulled in to a lot of different rectangles all having the same perimeter, but different areas.
Complete this table.
Two sets have been done for you.
5 From the table opposite which pairs of lengths and widths would give the largest and smallest areas?
6 Jimmy is fencing in his chickens.
Since fencing is expensive, he will want to enclose the largest possible area with his 36m of fencing.
Use the table in question 4 to decide what measurements he would choose?
7 A room is 12m long and the floor has an area of 96m.
What is the width of the floor?
8 An envelope has an area of 75cm and a width of 5cm.
What is its length?
9 Jimmy's father is making a table top to have an area of 16m.
a) Work out three possible pairs of lengths and widths which would give an area of 16m.
(Use only whole numbers) b) Jimmy's father is going to put a steel edging around the table top.
Which pair of measurements for (a) will allow him to use the least amount of steel edging?
10 a) How many small squares will fit in one row across the large square? b) How many rows will fit down the square? c) Therefore how many small squares will fit into the large square? d) What is the area of each small square? e) What is the area of the large square in mm2? f) Now complete the sentence: 1 cm2 is made up of…mm2.
11 Imagine a square with sides 1 metre long:
a) How many centimetre squares can fit along the top row?
b) How many rows can be fitted down?
c) How many centimetre squares can fit in the whole square? d) Finish this sentence: 1 metre square holds….
13 This is a diagram of Emancia's living room.
To help her find the area of the floor, Emancia imagines a line which splits up the room into two rectangles.
a) Work out the length marked with a?.
(Hint: 12-10)
b) Now work out the area of 10m the small rectangle.
c) Now the area of the large rectangle.
d) To get the total area of the room simply add the answers (b) and (c) together.
Emancia got an answer of 16 + 140 = 156m.
Did you?
Find the area of the following shapes by splitting them up as shown above.
You will find it helpful to work out the length indicated by the? before you work out the area.
Areas of triangles
Look back to page 115, question 6, did you find that the area of 4 units the triangle was 8 sq units.
Imagine the triangle was made into a square as shown at the side.
1 What would be the area of the square (in sq units)?
2 What fraction of the area of the square is the area of the triangle?
Now study the triangle beside this question.
Can you see that it too is ½ of the rectangle?
What is the area of the rectangle?
Therefore what is the area of the triangle?
EXERCISE D
Find the areas of the following triangles using the method shown above.
The first two rectangles have been drawn in to help you.
Did you find out from the last exercise that to get the area of a triangle we simply do the following?
This can be written much shorter as   The dotted line is called the "perpendicular height" of the triangle because it meets the base at right angles.
Look back to page 5 to remind yourself what perpendicular means.
On a spare piece of paper draw a triangle similar in shape to the one below, but of any size.
Draw a rectangle around it as shown and cut out all three triangles,(numbered 1,2, and 3 on the diagram).
Arrange the triangles as shown below with 1 and 3 on top of 2.
Did you find that 1, and 3, exactly cover up triangle 2?
This shows that triangle 2 is half of the rectangle.
Therefore to find the area of the triangle we simply have to halve the area of the rectangle.
Can you see that the height of the triangle is the same as the width of the rectangle?
Therefore the area of the rectangle shown at the bottom of the last page is equal to base x height and the area of the triangle is  We can now see that to work out the area of any triangle we simply need to remember are   
EXERCISE E
Find the areas of the following:
6 a) Turn the book around until AB is at the bottom.
We will call AB the base.
Then AC will be the height since it is perpendicular to AB.
Work out the area of the triangle.
b) Now, with your book the correct way round, think of BC as being the base of the triangle.
What line is Perpendicular to BC to become the height of the triangle?
Work out the area of the triangle using this new base and height.
Note: Your two answers should be the same since they are both giving the area of the same triangle.
You should learn from this that it does not matter what side you choose for the base as long as you choose the correct Perpendicular height to go with the base.
In the following, work out the area of each triangle twice.
Use the sides of the triangle named as the bases.
You have to choose the correct heights to go with the named bases.
Calculations with cuboids
A cuboid is a box shape.
Here are a few boxes.
How many faces does each cuboid have?
Box 3 is a special cuboid.
All its sides are equal.
This type of cuboid is called a cube.
Imagine we unfold cuboid no 1.
The faces have been numbered to help us.
Find the area of each face and complete this table.
You have now found that the surface area of the cuboid is simply the sum of the areas of each face.
See if you can find the area of the faces of this cuboid without unfolding it.
Copy and complete these sentences:
a) Area of end 9 x…cm2.
b) Area of other end=…c) Area of front = 6 x…="…cm2.
d) Area of back=…e) Area of top = 9 x 11 =…cm2.
f) Area of bottom =…g) Total surface area =…
EXERCISE F
1 What area of paper would be needed to stick on the outside of this box to cover it completely?
Work out your answer as shown on page 124.
2 Find the surface area of this store cupboard including the door and floor.
3 What is the surface area of this box of matches?
4 Find the area of glass needed to make this open topped fish tank (Hint: change cm to m first.)
5 Find the least area of cardboard needed to make this box of soap powder.
6 The shape below is called a triangular prism.
It has 3 rectangular faces and 2 triangular ends.
a) How many faces are there altogether?
b) What is the area of each triangular end?
c) What is the area of each sloping face?
d) What is the area of the bottom?
e) What is the total surface area of this prism?
7 Find the surface area of this prism in the same way as shown in question 6.
8 Find the surface area of this shape.
9 If plywood costs $8 a square metre, what would be the cost of making a hollow 1 m cube out of plywood?
(Hint: First work out the surface area of the cube.)
10 The four walls of a room are to be completely covered with curtain material costing $1 a square metre.
If the room is 4m long, 3m wide, and 3m high, work out the cost of covering the walls.
11 If the glass in question 4 costs $2 a square metre.
What would be the cost of the glass needed to make the tank?
12 a) What is the surface area of a 1 cm cube? b) What is the surface area of a 2cm cube? c) What fraction is the first answer of the second?
Volumes of cuboids
You now know how to measure the amount of surface on the six faces of a cuboid.
We are now going to think about the space inside a cuboid.
The space inside this large cube is called 1 cubic metre,(1 m3) which we work out by multiplying the length, width and height of the cube.
This is called the volume of the cube.
The space inside the small cube is called 1 cubic centimetre (cm3) and is worked out in the same way.
Therefore the volume of the cube is said to be 1 cm3.
EXERCISE G
1 How many cubic metres are there in this cube?
2 How many cubic centimetres are there in this cuboid?
3 What is the volume of this cuboid?
When you have done a few problems, as above, it should not now be necessary to divide the large boxes into small ones to find the volume.
 
EXERCISE G continued
Find the volumes of the following:
6 a) What is the volume of the large cube?
b) What is the volume of each small cube?
c) How many small cubes will fit into the large cube?
d) Complete this sentence:
7 a) How many cm3 are there in this cuboid? b) How many mm3 is this?
8 How many cubic metres of water are needed to fill the fish tank on page 125?
9 What volume of water would be needed only to fill ½ the above fish tank?
10 A passenger travelling by boat from Jamaica to Trinidad was told he can only take with him a case of volume 8m3.
a) Is this case too big to go with him? b) Work out two "sets" of measurements that will have a volume of 8m3.
(Use whole numbers.)
Review exercises
1 What is the perimeter of a 5km equilateral triangle?
2 Find the perimeter of a 20cm side square.
3 Work out the perimeter of parts 1,2,3 and 4 on page 115.
4 Explain how a rhombus and parallelogram differ.
5 Explain how a square and rhombus differ?
6 Find the area and perimeter of the following shapes:
7 How many mm2 are in ?
8 Change  into 
9 How many  in  ?
10 Change 452  into .
Calculate the area of the following shapes, giving your answers in the suggested units.
Draw a small diagram for each question showing the measurements.
1 A room measures 7m by 6m 30cm (m2)(Hint: 30cm 0.3m) Find the area of the floor.
2 A field measuring 210m by 720m 
3 An envelope measuring 1 6cm by 6.4cm 
4 A notice board 3m by 2.8m 
5 A table top measuring 1 m 7cm by 1 m 30cm  (Hint: 7cm 0.07m).
6 What is the surface area of a 6cm cube ?
7 What is the surface area of a cuboid (box) 70cm long,
45cm wide and 33cm deep ?
8 What area of Plywood is needed to make a large cuboid 4m long, 2.5m wide and 2m deep ?
9 What area of material would be needed to cover the outside of a jewellery box, without a lid, which measures 1 2cm long, 8cm wide and 5cm deep ?
1 A square has an area of 64mm, what is the length of each side?
2 A triangle has an area of 12cm and a base of 4cm.
What is the length of the Perpendicular height to the base.
3 A 64cm length of string is arranged into the shape of a rectangle with measurements as shown.
Work out the measurements of five more rectangles which can be made from 64cm of string and put your answers in the table shown below.
The pair of measurements from the diagram are already shown in the table.
4 Calculate the area of the shaded parts in each shape by finding the area of the large shape and subtracting the area of the small shape.
10 Algebra
On the parade ground soldiers often have to shout out their numbers to help them in drill work.
But the secret agents of SMERSH have to remain secret, so they use a code letter instead of numbers.
Unfortunately a new recruit calls out his proper number by mistake.
Can you now "back track" and work out:
1 The other agents numbers?
2 What number x is standing for?
3 What should the new recruit have called out?
4 What would the agent next in line to the recruit call out?
Did you find that x was standing for 10.
Now you know the secret code, work out the proper numbers of these secret agents.
The code is changed every month.
Next month x will stand for 8 and not 10.
What will be the new proper numbers of the agents at the side of the page when now stands for 8?
Sometimes "super" secret agents use two letters to stand for their proper numbers.
For example this secret agent has a code (b c) and last month b stood for 12 and c for 5.
This meant his proper number was really 7.
EXERCISE A
Work out the actual numbers of the following agents remembering the code that b 12 and c 5 
8 The agent at the side has forgotten his code number.
But he knows his code number is 5 bigger than his friend's.
Can you write down his code?
9 What number is 10 more than
10 What number is 7 less than The agents were using algebra to keep their numbers secret, by using letters to stand in place of numbers.
In mathematics we use algebra wherever we are not sure of the number, by Putting a letter in Place of the number.
Algebra will help you in the following Problems.
The box at the side of the Page holds a certain number of sweets.
Since we can not see how many, we will let the letter $ stand for the number of sweets in the box.
If one extra sweet was added there would be $ + 1 sweets in the box.
Answer the following questions using the letter $ as part of each answer.
Remember, there are $ sweets in the box to start with.
11 If 4 extra sweets are added how many are in the box now?
12 6 sweets are now taken out.
How many are left?
13 Another 5 sweets are taken out.
How many are now in the box?.
14 Seven sweets are put back in.
How many are in the box?
You should have found in question 14 that the answer is which means that the same number of sweets are Present now were at the start.
15 If an extra e sweets are added to the box how many are there now?
16 If you got the answer $ +e you were correct.
How many sweets would the box hold if another e sweets were added?
Algebra shorthand
Examples
If y stands for a number, then y + y + y + y stands for a number 4 times larger than y.
This new number can be written as 4 lots of y =4 x y 4y (The times sign x can be missed out)
2 Write m +m +m +m +m +m in a shorter form m +m +m +m +m +m = 6 x m = 6m 
EXERCISE B
1 Write the following in a shorter form: 
2 Write the following short forms out in their full meaning.
((a) is done for you.)  Another shorthand technique is the following: example If K stands for a number,
a) what is ⅕ of the number? ⅕ of K is written as ⅕ 
b) what is ⅘ of the number? ⅘ of K is written as ⅘ 
EXERCISE 8 continued
8 Put the following in their shorthand form.
a) ⅓ of m b) Two sevenths of P c) Four fifths of A d) Eight ninths of x
9 Rewrite the following "short forms" out in full:  
Algebraic sentences
Whole sentences can be written in "shorthand" form using algebra.
Example
Study this sentence.
 "I am thinking of a number, I then multiply it by seven and add on five" .
You can use algebra shorthand to rewrite this sentence by letting a letter stand for the number being thought of.
Compare this short algebra sentence with the much longer sentence it replaces.
The shorthand sentence is called an algebraic expression.
EXERCISE C
Write the following sentences as algebraic expressions.
 
Simplifying algebraic expressions
Algebraic expressions often contain similar terms which can be added or subtracted to shorten expressions.
Examples 
Study the following
 Note: We cannot add together such terms as 3c + 3a because it would be like adding 3 cars to 3 apples and getting 6 apple cars!
EXERCISE D
Simplify the following expressions by Putting only like terms together.
 
The algebra machine
The following are diagrams of a machine where a letter is put in and operated on by each box in turn as the letter goes along the conveyor belt.
each box is labelled with the operation it does.
Work out the result.
Substitution
If you follow football you will already know that a substitute is a man who takes the place of another player.
In algebra a similar thing happens when we substitute numbers for letters.
That is, a number takes the place of a letter.
You have already done this on page 132.
Study this problem.
This sum is impossible if you do not know what x stands for.
However if you were let in to the secret that x stands for the number 10 then you can work out this problem in the following way  
EXERCISE E
1 The expression 4p +2 can stand for many numbers depending on what number p is standing for.
Work out the different values of 4,:) + 2 when: a) 
2 If you are told that 1 stands for 8, that is 1 8, find the value of the following: 
3If y 5 find the value of the following: 
4 If x+ ½ find the value of the following:   If we want to find the value of an expression with more than one letter in it, we have to know what number each letter is standing for and then substitute the correct number in place of each letter.
Example
 
EXERCISE E continued
Set your work out as in the above example.
  
Equations
Equations describe equal things.
Equations are always in balance.
This boy on the see-saw with his 5kg brick is being balanced by 50kg of bricks on the other end.
1 What would happen to the see-saw if the boy threw his brick away?
2 Without putting his brick back, how could the see-saw regain balance?
3 What weight of bricks would now be on the left hand side?
4 Can you now say what the boy's weight is?
Let us do this problem again, but now we will use algebra to work out the boy's weight.
Let w kg stand for his weight.
This equation describes how the see-saw is balanced.
Note: To find the boy's weight, w, he had to be by himself on one side of the see-saw or equation.
That is why we subtracted from both sides of the equation.
Example
Here is another equation, We wish to find what number I stands for,  We have now "solved the equation" for You may well be thinking that all this working out is not needed since you can work out the answer in your head Very soon though you will be given problems too difficult to work out in your head, At that time you will have to use the method you re practising now,
EXERCISE F
Solve the following equations setting your work out as shown in the last example:  This is a useful way of checking your answers, Simply substitute your answer for the letter in the question and both sides of the equation should be equal, Use this method to check your answers.
Jimmy has a box of 0 cricket balls, each weighing 1 kg but he found that he had to take two out of the box to make it balance with a 40kg, weight, The equation which describes this balance would be:   If Jimmy put back the two cricket balls into the box what would happen to the balance?
How could the balance be restored without again taking the two balls out of the box?
The answer is in this equation.
 Note: To find the value of the letter we again had to get it by itself on one side of the equation.
EXERCISE G
Solve the following equations.
Set out your work as shown on the last page.
 After you have studied the see-saw problems you should have discovered an important rule about how to keep an equation in balance.
LEARN
You can add or subtract any amount from one side of an equation as long as you do the same thing to the other.
You should also have noticed that when you solved equations: To remove a plus number you subtract and to remove a minus number you add.
These two rules will help you solve the following equations.
EXERCISE G continued
 You have already seen that we can use equations to work out problems.
Here is another example.
 
EXERCISE H
Work out the following by first forming an equation and then solving it.
4 I had x dollars but lost S dollars.
If I now have 2 dollars left, how much did 1 have to begin with?
5 A piece of wood, Am long, has 10m cut off.
If there are now 7m left how long was the original piece?
6 In a class of 35 pupils there are x boys and 20 girls.
How many boys are there?
7 A girl bakes G cakes at school and a further 5 cakes at home, to make a dozen altogether.
How many did she bake at school?
8 A coin collector has C coins and is given a further 20 coins.If he now has 2,352 coins altogether, how many did he have at first?
9 A car and trailer together are 5m long.
If the car is Ym long and the trailer 2m long, find the length of the car.
10 1 think of a number j, add on seven and the result is 762, find j.
In the last exercise you learnt that to remove a number from one side of an equation you simply had to do the opposite or reverse operation to both sides.
 Once you have learnt this method you will have little difficulty solving the following equation.
 Note: As in Example 1 and 2 above, we have used the reverse operation here to remove the number 4 by dividing by 4.
EXERCISE 1
Solve the following by setting out your work as shown above.
   
EXERCISE 1 continued
Set out the following in the way shown above.
 we can use the equations you have just learnt in the following way.
Example
Jimmy has x chickens, but his friend Mark, has twice as many as Jimmy.
Altogether they have 33 chickens.
How many chickens does Jimmy have?
The equation for this problem will be: Jimmy Mark Total  
EXERCISE J
Now work out the following by forming an equation and solving it as shown in the last example.
It will not do to simply write down the answers.
1 John is x years old while his father is three times as old.
If the sum of their ages is 48, find John's age.
2 I am thinking of a number g.
I double it and the sum of the two numbers is 39, find y.
3 My brother is three times as old as I am and our age difference is 16.
Find my age.
(Hint: Let my age be m.)
4 I am thinking of a number d.
I then multiply it by five and the larger number exceeds the smaller number by 8.
Find d.
5 Find x in the following:
6 There are x crayons in a box.
They can be divided exactly amongst 5 girls so that each receives 9.
Find the number of crayons in the box.
7 Jill's height is four times greater than her younger sister's, who is x cm high.
If the sum of their heights is 200cm find Jill's height.
Review exercises
 
2 Solve the following equations: 
3 Write algebraic expressions to answer the following questions.
a) I think of a number m and double it.
What is the new number?
b) There are 20 students in a class.
8 are boys.
How many are girls?
c) I have x dollars, my brother has four times as much as I. How much have we altogether?
d) What is the number 10 less than g?
e) How many cm in 9 metres?
f) How many cents in p dollars?   Find the unknown in the following equations:  Solve these problems by making an equation and solving it:
13 I open a book to page x.
What is the number of this page if 4 pages back is page 80?
14 What number do I have to multiply by seven to make 84?
(Let x stand for the number.)
15 If one cricket ball costs $3 how many can I buy for $57?
(Let c stand for the number of balls.)
16 John's bag is twice as heavy as Mary's bag.
If the two bags weigh 42kg altogether, how heavy is Mary's bag?
(Let M stand for the weight of Mary's bag.)
17 On a journey of 12 kilometres Ann walked part of the way and rode a bus for the rest of the distance.
If she walked twice as far as she rode, how many kilometres did she ride?
(Let R stand for distance she rode.)
18 A camel can trot at x km/h for 6 hours and cover a distance of 54km.
What speed was the camel doing?
IV Find the value of the following expressions if  Write algebraic expressions to answer the following:
11 I am walking at 4 km/h, how far will I travel in a) 2 hrs b) 7 hrs c) t hours?
12 One tin of paint costs $6.
a) What is the cost of 5 tins? b) What is the cost of g tins? c) What is the cost of g + 1 tins?
13 John is twice as old as Karen and Karen is twice as old as Lisa, who is m years old.
How old is John?
14 A triangle has a perimeter of 40cm.
Two sides are equal and each measure b cm.
What is the length of the third side?
15 A car can travel 20km on 1 litre of petrol.
How many litres will be needed to travel  These seem strange answers.
Look at the diagram and work them out yourself.
Add 4 hours to 10 o'clock (10 + 4) result 2 o'clock.
Take 4 hours away from(or before) 1 o'clock, result 9 o'clock.
Note that to add we move forward in time or clockwise around the numbers.
To subtract, we move backward in time, or anti-clockwise around the numbers.
  Now look at this "Modulo" 6 clock, This can be used in the same way.
Check these examples.
3 + 4 = 1.
Start at 3, count 4 places forward, result 1.
6 = 1.
Start at 1, count 6 places "back" or anti-clockwise, result 1.
 
11 Graphs
Vincent had his tonsils taken out yesterday.
Every hour after the operation, a nurse took his temperature and plotted it on a progress' graph.
This made it easy for the doctor to see at a glance how Vincent's temperature had changed up or down, since the operation without studying a long list of figures.
 "X" on the graph shows that after 2 hours his temperature was 990, "X" is directly above 2 hours and in line with 990,
EXERCISE A
Read from the graph to find the temperature 1 after 1 hour, 2 after 6 hours, 3 after 4 hours.
After what time or times was his temperature 4 97°, 5 100°, 6 98°?
Graphs are often used to show information in a way that gives the reader a quick picture of what has been happening or is likely to happen, in the future.
The graph below shows Mr Richard's sales of bananas for the week.
No wonder he is sad.
Make a copy of the last graph and on it plot the sales of Mr Gordon Mr Richard's rival for the same week.
To find each new point on the graph move up the "day" line until you are level with the correct number of kg for that day.
Join the points.
From the graph read the following information:
7 On what day did both men sell the same amount?
8 On which day did Mr Gordon sell twice as many bananas as Mr Richards?
9 Which day did Mr Richards sell 500kg more than Mr Gordon?
10 Who would you expect to sell most bananas on the Monday of the following week?
Compare these two graphs.
They were used to advertise toothpaste by two imaginary companies.
Take special notice of the difference in scales, or units used down the sides of the two graphs.
1 Which company sold most toothpaste each week?
2 a) Did "Certo" sales increase over the six weeks? b) By how much?
13 a) Did "Toothless" sales increase over the six week period? b) By how much?
14 Which toothpaste seems to be most popular?
Do not be misled by the "higher" graph line on the left.
The scale of values used to draw a graph is very important if you are to read it accurately, Look at the same advertising graphs again, this time both are drawn to the same scale.
This very simple type of graph is called a number line It can be used to count off answers to + and — operations.
follow the arrows from 0 to reach the answer to this question: +5-3?
The result, 2, is found by moving the correct number of places along the number line, right for + and left for — signs.
EXERCISE B
Draw a number line like the one above and use it to answer the questions, starting from zero each time.
   Count carefully to find the positions.
 Be sure to show Positions as + (right) or —(left) of 0.
Notice that we have been using reverse operations to show direction, Forward or "plus" to the right of 0, backward or "minus" to the left.
You have probably noticed + and — signs are important in other things besides arithmetic.
What happens if you fit batteries, in a torch or a transistor radio, the wrong way round?
Here is another example of plus and minus amounts turning out very badly.
Check Paul's account with his bank for the week.
On our number line Paul's account shows this: Starting from "0" the moves are +56 then +12 for money paid the bank.
The line then reads -36 -27 and -12 which places Paul at the position — 7, or $7 in debt.
He has gone too bar in the minus direction.
EXERCISE C
Draw a number line to read in equal spaces from  The building at the side of this page has an elevator which carries people up or down to save them from climbing the stairs.
Which floor would the elevator (or lift) stop at, if it started from street level, went up 4 floors, came down 3 floors, then went up 2 floors again?
The building at the side of this page has an elevator which carries people up or down to save them from climbing the stairs.
Which floor would the elevator (or lift) stop at, if it started from street level, went up 4 floors, came down 3 floors, then went up 2 floors again?
Plotting points on a graph
Remember how our first two graphs showed spaces moved both across and up the graphs to give information.
Horizontal and vertical number lines like the ones you have been using are put together to describe or plot positions on a graph.
A is 3 places across the horizontal line and 5 places up the vertical line.
8 is 2 places across and 4 places up, and so on.
The first number of each plotted position is read across the horizontal line,(called an axis), the second number is read up the vertical axis.
EXERCISE D
Practise your plotting, study Bluebeard's Pirate Treasure Map.
EXERCISE E
Draw a graph like the one above to read from -6 to +6 on the horizontal axis and up to +6 on the vertical axis.
Do not draw in the Bonito.
Plot and join up the following sets of points and name the shapes you have drawn.
 Draw a graph similar to the treasure map to read from 0 to 10 horizontally and vertically.
Plot and join up the following sets of points.
 
Travel graphs
Mrs Simmons drives to town each Saturday afternoon to shop at the market.
She leaves home at 1 pm., arrives at the market at 3 p.m. and takes an hour to do her shopping.
She then drives home again arriving back at 6 pm.
Mrs Simmons, lives on a farm 60km from the town.
Study the travel graph of her journey.
Read the graph to check these statements:
a) At 2 p.m. she is 30km from home.
b) From 3 pm. until 4 p.m.
c) At 5 pm. she is again 30km from home.
d) Her speed is 30km per hour both going to market and coming home again.
8 Draw your own graph, using the scale shown, for Mrs Simmon's journey to the market and back, when one Saturday she changes her usual times and speeds.
Plot points carefully to show this information:
1 Mrs Simmons leaves home at 1 p.m. but travels to the market at 60km per hour.
2 She stays at the market for 1 hour, then starts to drive home at 40km per hour.
3 At 4 pm. her car engine starts playing up a bit so she slows down to 20km /h for the rest of her journey home, Answer these questions from your graph.
a) How far was she from home at 1.30 p.m.?
b) How far has she travelled back from the market when her car engine went wrong?
c) How far was she from home at 4.30 pm.?
d) How long did she take on her journey home?
Notice how your graph line changes direction with each change of speed.
EXERCISE F
Study this travel graph.1 At noon, a motor launch left Montego Bay heading for Miami at a speed of 10km/h.
The boat's engines had to be slowed down because of an oil leak at 3 pm. and the Captain radioed for help.
A Coast Guard cutter set out after the launch at 3 p.m. 10
1 When the cutter left at 3 pm., how far away was the launch?
2 What speed was the launch travelling after the engines had to be slowed down?
3 How far was the launch ahead of the cutter at 4 pm.?
1 What time did the ships meet?
How far away from Montego Bay were the ships when they met?
Copy the last graph and use the following information to complete both the story and the graph.
Both ships stopped for an hour while repairs were made to the launch's engines.
The ships then set out to return to base at speed of 10km/h. at 8 p.m. the cutter increased speed to 20 km/h while the launch kept going at 10 km/h.
Both boats arrived safely back in Montego Bay.
6 How far had the boats still to travel at 8. p.m?
7 What time did the cutter arrive back at the base?
8 How far had the launch still to go when the cutter arrived back at base?
9 What time did the launch arrive back in Montego Bay?
10 How far had each boat travelled?
Graphs for equations
Most graphs are used to compare two things by giving a picture of how their respective values alter over the range of the graph.
You have compared time/temperature; day/sales; time/distance measurements in graph work.
This is a graph of an algebraic equation.
On the graph, the horizontal base line is the x axis the vertical scale is the y axis.
By reading off the plotted points can you see that for each point the x value is equal to the y value.
The line joining these points is the graph of the equation x = y.
We can use this idea to "see" what an equation looks like as a picture.
Exercise G
Copy this graph, then follow the method shown below to find the points for the equation 2x = y.
First draw up a table comparing x and y.
If x = 0 then y = 0, if x = 1 then y = 2 and so on.
plot the points (0,0)(1,2)(2,4) etc. to show this equation on your graph and label it.
On the same axes plot the equation y = ½ x by first working pout your table of points.
Here is the table with some values shown.
Notice the slope of each line, or the angle between the x axis and the graph line.
This gets larger if we increase the number in front of the x value in our equation.
Plot y = 3x and y = ⅓ x (using x = 0, x = 3, x = 6) to see if this true.
Some graphs of equations do not pass through the point x = 0, y = 0.
Study the following table of values for the equation y = x + 1.
Notice that the graph line has the same slope as x = y, but each y value is one place higher than the x value at any point on the line.
Copy the graph, then complete the following table to find the points needed to plot y = 2x — 1.
Some points are shown to help you.
This time ½ values are also shown.
On the same axes, draw up and label the equations y = 3x — 2 and y = ⅓x + 2.
In each case, first work out a table of values for x and y.
Equations like these each form a straight line graph so they are called linear equations.
Review exercise
Study this graph of "Super" Sam's cricket scores for the first 8 matches of the season as a batsman.
1 Would you say that Sam is a "steady" batsman?
2 In which games did he score 80 or more?
3 What was his score in the 4th match?
4 What was his highest score?
Copy the graph and plot on it "Steady" Freddy's scores shown opposite.
Join up the points in a different colour, or with a dotted line so that you can compare,
5 Which batsman seems to be getting steadily better?
6 Who had the highest score in most matches?
7 In which match did Sam beat Freddy's score by 30 runs?
8 In which match did both batsmen have the same score?
Choose suitable scales on the x and y axes, and draw graphs of the following equations, First draw a table of values for each equation.
 
12 Symmetry and reflection
In studying what is meant by these two topics we must think about shapes, and opposite or reversed shapes.
If you look at yourself in a mirror, a pool of water, or any shiny, flat surface, you will see your own reflection.
Look carefully is the reflection exactly the same as what is in front of the mirror?
Hold this page up to face the mirror and study this.
What is this word?
You can probably guess the word that is in the rectangle because four of the five letters have lines of symmetry.
Two of them are shown on the right with their lines of symmetry drawn.
These lines cut the letters into perfectly balanced halves.
The letter "S" comes out backwards if it is reflected into your eyes by a mirror, since it does not have a symmetrical shape.
EXERCISE A
1 List all the letters of the alphabet that have lines of symmetry, and draw in the lines that cut these letters into symmetrical or exactly similar halves.
A line of symmetry does not have to be drawn vertically up and down your page.
The letter "0" has many lines of symmetry though all of them must pass through the centre of the letter.
2 Copy the figures below and draw in all their lines of symmetry.
Two lines are shown for you.
3 Now copy and complete these figures which are only half drawn.
Many of the trees, plants and insects that you see almost every day show natural examples of symmetry.
Study the pictures on the left and try to draw some that you have seen today.
Both sides of the line of symmetry are exactly alike.
Now look at one of the letters you should have left out of the first question.
The two sides of the dotted line do not look the same.
The letter does not have a line of symmetry and if we make the right side look exactly like the left, we get a circle with lines on it.
Here is the same letter with a reflection line.
We now have a mirror image"of the letter.
The shapes on each side of the line are the same now, but we have two reflected figures.
The shapes are "back to back" .
4 Complete these figures by drawing a reflection on the opposite side of the line of reflection.
Imagine you have a mirror placed on edge along each line of reflection.
What would you see?
Number lines and graphs can be used to study the ideas of symmetry and reflection.
This number line has an axis or line of symmetry through its centre, point "0" .
It is balanced at this point, and each space to the right of "0" has a corresponding space, or partner, to the left of "0" .
Only the signs in front of the numbers are different depending upon whether we read to right or left.
Study the graph below, based on the number line to see how points and shapes can be "mapped" or translated by reflection across the I, axis.
5 Draw up a grid like the one shown but without these figures.
List the following table of points to be plotted on the right side of the graph, then complete the table of points for the reflected figure and draw it.
If your work is correct, the Y, axis should be a line of reflection, and the joined up sets of points will be "mirror images" .
Test papers
1 A living room measures 1 6m by 1 0m while the kitchen measures 1 2m by 1 2m.
Which is the larger room and how much larger is it?
2 Find the area and perimeter of the shape opposite.
3 A kitchen table has an area of 5m2 and its width is 22m.
Find the length of the table.
4 How many square wooden blocks of side 60cm will be 30 cm needed to cover a floor 1 2m long and 1 0.8m wide?
5 This table shows the number of students absent from a local school during one week.
Draw a graph of this information, putting the days on the horizontal axis.
6 Draw sketches of an isosceles and an equilateral triangle of any size.
Show on them all the possible lines of symmetry.
1 If carpeting costs $9 per m2, how much will it cost to carpet a floor 6m by 12m?
2 A farmer has 42m of fencing available to make a square enclosure for his cow.
What measurements should he choose to enclose the largest area and what will be this area?
3 What is the surface area of a 2 ½cm cube?
4 Draw a pair of axis similar to those shown on page 165.
Plot the following points on them: R (4,3), 5(5,6), T (1,6), U (I, 1) Now draw the reflection of this shape in the vertical axis.
5 This diagram shows a garden with a fish pond in it surrounded by grass.
Book review tests
Book test papers

3 Gregory gives Paul 75c and has $3.45 left.
Form an equation and solve it to find how much Gregory had at first.
4 Peter can jump 4.53 metres.
how many centimetres is that?
5 Draw a graph of the equation y = 3x — 2 from x = 1 to x = 4. from the graph find x when y = 7.
6 Find the area and perimeter of a rectangle 8.4. metres by 3.6 metres.
7 What set of triangles have no equal sides?
8 A ship changes course from N.E to S. Through what angle has the ship turned in a clock wise direction?
9 Find the L.C.M and H.C.F of 60 and 84.
10 Without measuring, list and give the size of angles 1 — 4.

5 Instead of multiplying a number by 42, Jane multiplied it by 24 and got 432.
What was the correct answer?
6 Half full of water, a tank weighs 12 kg, full it weighs 19 kg.
Find the weight of the tank.
7 Find the change from $10 after buying 96 books at $1.16 a dozen.
8 Use a protractor to draw angles of a) 55 b) 152 c) 258
9 The sum of two numbers is 32, their difference is 2.
Find the numbers.
10 Find the set A if its elements, n, satisfy 2{ n{ 9.
2 A ball rebounds to ⅖ of the height from which it is dropped.
After falling 6 ¼ m how high does it rise on second bounce? 
4 12 hand towels can be made from 8 metres of towelling.
How many could be made from 14 metres? 
7 Sketch a square and a rectangle showing their lines of symmetry.

9 Find the area of the largest square that could be made using 64 metres of fencing.
10 Without measuring, name and give the size of angles 1–5.

4 Find the sum of the angles of a hexagon.
5 An isosceles triangle has an angle of 108.
Find the other angles.

9 12 men take 9 days to build a wall.
How long should it take 18 men to build a similar wall?
10 What is the smallest number that can be divided by 1 8 or 30 and leave the remainder 5?
Puzzle corner 1
1 This farmer has to get his dog, a duck and a bag of corn to market on the other side of the river.
His boat is only big enough to carry himself, and one of the three things at a time.
The problem is, if he leaves the duck and the corn together on one side of the river the duck will eat the corn.
If he leaves the dog and the duck together, the dog will eat the duck.
How can he get all three safely over the river?
He cannot make the dog or the duck swim across.
2 The picture shows three newly built houses that have to be supplied with gas, water, and electricity from the three tanks.
The problem here is that none of the gas, water, or electric supply lines must cross over each other.
The tanks can be placed in any position except on top of a house.
Draw your own diagram and see if the problem of how to lay the pipes can be solved.
Puzzle corner II
1 Can you draw this figure without going over the same line twice?
You must not lift your pencil from the paper until you have completed the figure.
2 Easy?
Now try the next figure, which has one line less in it.
3"Brothers and sisters have I none, Yet this man's father is my father's son.
Who is speaking, and who is "this man" ?
4 A big game hunter left his base camp and walked 40km due South.
He then tracked a bear for 40km travelling due East, and shot the bear dead.
Next he hiked 40km due North and arrived back at his base camp.
The puzzle is-where in the world must his base camp have been placed?
Puzzle Corner III
1 A gardener planted a special kind of water lily in the middle of a lily pond that measured 1 5m across.
The lily grew so fast that each day it filled twice the amount of space that it did the day before.
In fact it doubled itself in size every day.
In 20 days, the water lily completely filled the pond.
Can you figure out on which day the lily filled exactly half of the pond?
A big frog fell into a 12m deep drainage ditch, and started jumping up the side of the slippery, muddy ditch trying to get out.
The ditch sides were so slippy that every time the frog jumped 2m up the side of the ditch, it slipped back down 1m.
How many leaps did the frog have to take before he was out of the ditch?