

MODEL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
A. LAYOUT PLC
Year ended 31st March 1991
A. LAYOUT PLC
Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991
Contents
A. LAYOUT PLC
Report of the directors for the year ended 31st March 1991
The directors submit their report together with the audited financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991.
Results and dividends
The results of the group for the year are set out on page 5.
On 31st March 1991, dividends of £121,000 were paid to the preference shareholders.
The directors recommend a final dividend of 8.0p (1990 — 8.33p) per ordinary share.
This, when taken with the interim dividend of 5.25p per share paid on 31st December 1990, gives a total dividend of 13.25p (1990 — 13.79p) per share for the year ended 31st March 1991.
It is proposed to transfer profit of £6,565,000 to revenue reserves.
Principal activities, review of business and future developments
The group manufactures models and model layouts for commerce and industry and sports clothing and equipment.
It also publishes reproductions of paintings.
The group has manufacturing units in Swansea, Coventry, Melbourne (Australia) and Munich (West Germany) with sales offices in London, Edinburgh, Apeldoorn (Holland) and a number of agents in Australasia and South East Asia.
The group's activities have continued to expand, particularly in the Far East, and the recent move into leisure and related industries is producing promising results.
During the year, the new Revolutionary Government of the Whitsun Islands confiscated the property of the local branch that had been set up there by A. Layout Pty.
Every effort is being made to obtain compensation, but in the meantime the directors have written off the cost of the property as an extraordinary charge against profits.
The property was held as stock.
Profitability of the model and model layout sector has declined due to increased foreign competition but market share has been maintained.
The directors anticipate improved performance in this area next year.
During the year, the group acquired 32% of the equity capital of Model Type Ltd and 100% of the capital of Model Layout Ltd and of Model Manufacturing Ltd.
It is anticipated that this will enable the group to maintain its leading position in the model layout sector.
The company also became a party to a joint venture, Model Marketing Company, set up to market model layout products in the Far East and Australasia.
The Companies Act 1989 has changed the definition of a subsidiary and as a result A. Layout (Leisurewear) Ltd has been treated as a subsidiary for the first time.
This has had the effect of including all the profits and net assets of the company in the group accounts, with appropriate adjustments for the minority interest.
During the year, the group disposed of the entire share capital of Model Developments Ltd as part of the policy of improving profit; ability of the group.
The group's factory and offices in Coventry are currently being re-equipped and refitted to provide the necessary facilities for further growth in the sportswear and equipment market.
The directors' policy is to continue the expansion of the group in its existing growth areas.
These include its overseas interests in the Far East and UK interests in the leisure industry.
The leisure industry interests will be significantly extended when the new factory to produce keep-fit equipment opens in Sept; ember 1991.
Steps will also be taken to increase the profitability of the model and model layout sector.
Source
Comments
Events since the end of the year
Give particulars of any important events affecting the company or any of its subsidiary undertakings which have occurred since the balance sheet date.
Research and development
Give an indication of group research and development activities, if any.
Fixed assets
Give details of significant changes in the fixed assets of the group during the year.
(In this example, all changes in fixed asset investments have been given in the review of the business.)
Market value of land and buildings
The difference between market value and book value of land should be disclosed where it is substantial and the directors think it is of significance to the members.
Charitable and political contributions
Disclose separate totals of political and charitable contributions made by the group, if together they exceed £200.
For each political contribution over £200 state the name of the recipient or the political party and the amount of money given.
This is not required in the accounts of wholly owned subsidiary undertakings of companies incorporated in Great Britain.
Employment of disabled persons
For any company with more than 250 employees, give the policy applied by the company during the financial year: for giving full and fair consideration of applications for employments made by disabled employees for continuing employment and training of employees who have become disabled and otherwise for the training, career development and promotion of disabled employees.
Events since the end of the year
Since the 31st March 1991, the group has been awarded a major contract to supply model layouts to the Department of Transport.
It is anticipated that this contract will substantially increase sales over the next three years.
Research and development
The product development department in London has been expanded by the recruitment of two additional senior staff and the group continues to be in the forefront of new product development in its field.
Fixed assets
The main increase in fixed assets during the year was due to the investment in machinery in the sportwear and leisure equipment section and the acquisition of Model Layout Ltd and Model Manufacturing Ltd.
Market value of land and buildings
The group's properties in the UK were valued on 31st March 1991 at open market value and are shown at that value in the balance sheet.
It is anticipated that all overseas land and buildings will be revalued during the next two years.
The directors are of the opinion that there is no material difference between the market values of these properties and the amounts at which they are shown in the financial statements.
Charitable and political contributions
During the year the group made the following contributions:
Employment of disabled persons
The group is committed to a policy of recruitment and promotion on the basis of aptitude and ability without discrimination of any kind.
Management actively pursues both the employment of disabled persons whenever a suitable vacancy arises and the continued employment and retraining of employees who become disabled whilst employed by the group.
Particular attention is given to the training, career development and promotion of disabled employees with a view to encouraging them to play an active role in the development of the group.
Source
Comments
Employee involvement
For companies with more than 250 employees, give a description of the action taken to maintain or develop the provision of information to and consultation with employees.
Directors
Give the names of all persons who were directors at any time during the year.
Show directors' interests (including options to acquire) in shares and debentures of the group at the beginning of the year (or date of appointment if later) and at the end of the year for each person who was a director at the year end.
If no shares are held by a director, this should be stated.
State whether any rights to subscribe for shares in or debentures of the group were granted to or exercised by each director during the year.
Give the number of shares or amount of debentures involved.
Disclose beneficial and non-beneficial interests and options.
Give any movement in directors' interests in capital of any member of the group between the balance sheet date and a date not more than one month prior to the date of the notice of the AGM.
For those directors retiring at the AGM, give details of the unexpired term of directors' service contracts.
Give the identity of independent non-executive directors together with a short biographical note on each.
Insurance
Disclose that payments were made for insurance of officers or auditors against liabilities in relation to the company or group.
Employee involvement
The flow of information to staff has been maintained by our staff newspaper.
Management regularly visit branches and discuss with members of staff matters of current interest and concern to the business.
Directors
The directors of the company during the year and their interests (beneficial unless stated otherwise) in the ordinary share capital of the holding company were:
Mr P A Jones resigned on 11th January 1991.
There have been no changes in the above between 31st March 1991 and 30th June 1991.
No director has any interest in the preference shares or debentures of the company nor in the shares of any of the subsidiary companies.
By an agreement dated 3rd May 1990 between Mr C A Johnson and the company, Mr Johnson was granted a right to subscribe for up to 5,000 ordinary shares of 25p each in the company.
This right is exercisable at any time before 1st March 1992 at a price of 50p per share.
No part of it had been exercised at 31st March 1991.
The director who retires by rotation is Mr J E Smith who, being eligible, offers himself for re-election.
In addition, Mr H A Velasquez, who was appointed to the board since the last annual general meeting, retires in accordance with the articles of association and, being eligible, offers himself for re-election.
Both these directors have service contracts which expire on 1st March 1992.
Mr D J Smith jointed the board as a non-executive director in 1987.
He was born in Toronto, Canada in 1940 and has extensive experience in the leisure industry, particularly in the marketing of sports clothing and keep-fit equipment.
He has previously been a non-executive director of Fitness Daily PLC and Moving Wear PLC.
Insurance
During the year the group made payments for insurance of directors against liabilities in relation to the group.
Source
Comments
Substantial shareholder
Give particulars of holders (other than directors) who have a substantial interest (more than 3%) in share capital of the company at a date not more than one month before notice of AGM.
(Negative statement required if none.
Include interests of groups of individuals and/or companies if known, even if less than 3% held by individual members of the group.)
Close company status
Give a statement showing whether or not, as far as the directors are aware, the company is close for taxation purposes and whether there has been any change in that respect since the year end.
Auditors
There is no statutory requirement to refer to this in the directors' report.
Approval and signature
Directors' report to be approved by the board of directors and signed on behalf of the board by a director or the secretary of the company.
State the name of the signatory.
Substantial shareholder
On 30th June 1991 Large Designs plc held 4,950,000 ordinary shares of 25p, being 14.4% of the issued ordinary share capital.
No other person has reported an interest of 3% or more in the ordinary shares.
Close company status
The company is not a close company for taxation purposes.
Auditors
Stoy Hayward have expressed their willingness to continue in office and a resolution to re-appoint them will be proposed at the annual general meeting.
By order of the Board
H M B Sanders Secretary 15th July 1991  
Source
Comments
Format
The profit and loss account should follow the standard format.
Format 2 has been adopted by the company.
For Format 1 see A. Layout Limited.
Items denoted by Arabic numbers in the standard Companies Act formats may be rearranged and adapted if the nature of the business warrants it, and headings for which there are nil balances in both the current and prior year may be omitted.
Corresponding amounts should be shown.
Advantage has been taken of the option to combine certain headings on the face of the profit and loss account and the appropriate disclosure is included in the notes to the accounts.
Turnover
Turnover should be stated after deducting VAT, trade discounts and other taxes based upon turnover.
Investment income
In the investing group's consolidated profit and loss account, include the investing group's aggregate share of profits less losses of associated companies.
The following should be separately disclosed for the investing group, showing the aggregate share of: profit before tax, tax charge, extraordinary items if material to the group's results, net profit retained (shown in the notes to the accounts).
Minority interest
Show minority interest in profit or loss on ordinary activities and in profit or loss on extraordinary activities attributable to shares in subsidiary undertakings included in the consolidation held by or on behalf of persons other than the parent company and its subsidiary undertakings.
Disclosure
Show as separate items on the face of the profit and loss account: profit or loss on ordinary activities before tax, transfers to or from reserves, aggregate net dividends paid and proposed.
In the case of extraordinary items disclose:
profit/loss after tax before extraordinary items
nature, particulars and amount of extraordinary items, with related tax to be separately disclosed (usually in the notes)
profit/loss after extraordinary items.
Retained profits
Make a reference on the face of the profit and loss account as to the position of the statement of retained profits if it does not immediately follow the profit and loss account.
Earnings per share
Show earnings per share on the face of the profit and loss account.
The method of calculation must also be disclosed.
A. LAYOUT PLC
Consolidated profit and loss account for the year ended 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
Format
The balance sheet must follow one of the specified formats.
Format 1 has been adopted by the company.
If headings are combined on the face of the balance sheet, they should be set out in full in the notes.
Creditors
Amounts falling due within one year and after one year are to be shown separately.
Minority interests
Show minority interests, on the face of the consolidated balance sheet as a separate heading, either after accruals and deferred income or after capital and reserves.
Signatures
Although the consolidated balance sheet must be approved by the board no signature is needed.
Disclose the date on which the accounts were formally approved by the board.
A. LAYOUT PLC
Consolidated balance sheet at 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
Format
The balance sheet must follow one of the specified formats.
Format 1 has been adopted by the company.
If headings are combined on the face of the balance sheet, they should be set out in full in the notes.
Creditors
Amounts failing due within one year and after one year are to be shown separately.
Signatures
The balance sheet should be signed on behalf of the board by a director of the company.
State the name of the signatory.
Disclose the date on which the accounts were formally approved by the board.
A. LAYOUT PLC
Balance sheet at 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
Statement of source and application of funds
A statement of source and application of funds with comparatives is required in financial statements intended to give a true and fair view of the financial position and profit or loss, except for enterprises with a turnover or gross income of less than £25,000 The statement should show the profit or loss for the period, together with the adjustments required for items which did not involve the movement of funds.
The following other sources and applications of funds should, where material, be shown: dividends paid, acquisitions and disposals of fixed and non-current assets, funds raised by increasing, or expended in repaying or redeeming, medium or long-term loans or the issued capital of the company, increase or decrease in working capital sub-divided into its components, and movements in net liquid funds.
Where the accounts are those of a group, the statement of source and application of funds should reflect the operations of the group.
Show the effects of acquisition or disposal of subsidiary undertakings, and how funded, differentiating between consideration satisfied in cash and by issue of shares.
A. LAYOUT PLC
Consolidated statement of source and application of funds for the year ended 31st March 1991
The notes on pages 9 to 32 form part of these financial statements.
Source
Comments
Accounting policies
State accounting policies adopted for items which are material or critical in determining the profit or loss for the year and in stating the financial position.
State whether the accounts have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards and give details of and reasons for any material departure.
Basis of consolidation
A description of the bases on which subsidiary companies have been dealt with should be given.
Acquisition accounting should be used for all acquisitions and merger accounting may be used for mergers.
Include in the consolidated balance sheet the investing group's interests in associated companies.
Use equity accounting for associated undertakings.
State the accounting treatment adopted for business combinations (whether acquisition or merger).
Show the nature and amount of any significant accounting adjustments by the combining companies to achieve consistency of accounting policies.
Goodwill
The accounting policy followed in respect of goodwill should be explained.
If goodwill is treated as an asset it should be amortised systematically over the period of its useful economic life.
Disclose the period chosen and the reasons for choosing that period.
The amortisation period should not normally exceed 20 years.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991
1.
Accounting policies
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, as modified by the revaluation of land and buildings, and are in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
The following principal accounting policies have been applied:
Basis of consolidation
The consolidated accounts incorporate the financial statements of A. Layout Plc and all of its subsidiary and associated undertakings made up to 31st March 1991.
Either the acquisition or the merger method of accounting is used to consolidate the results of subsidiary undertakings in the group accounts.
Acquisition accounting and goodwill on consolidation
Acquisitions are accounted for by the acquisition method of accounting.
Under acquisition accounting, the results of subsidiary undertakings are included from the date of acquisition.
Goodwill arising on consolidation before 1st April 1985 and arising after 1st April 1990 is amortised through the profit and loss account over the directors' estimate of its useful economic life.
Useful economic lives range from 15 to 20 years.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions between 1st April 1985 and 31st March 1990 was written off to reserves in the year in which it arose.
Merger accounting
Where the conditions for merger accounting are satisfied the investment in shares in group undertakings is accounted for by the merger method of accounting.
The shares issued are recorded in the company's balance sheet at nominal value together with the amount of any additional consideration.
In the group accounts, the subsidiary undertaking is treated as if it had always been a member of the group.
In the year it joins the group, its results are included for the whole period.
The corresponding figures for the previous year include its results for that period.
In the group balance sheet the assets and liabilities of the subsidiary undertaking are included in full.
Its reserves are included after taking into account any difference between the nominal value of its shares acquired by the group and the shares issued by the group to acquire them.
The corresponding amounts at the previous year end include its assets and liabilities at that date and show the shares issued by the group to acquire it as if they had been in issue then.
Associated undertakings
A company is treated as an associated undertaking when the group holds a substantial interest in it for the long term, and exercises a significant influence over its operating and financial policy decisions.
The group's share of the results of associated undertakings is included in the consolidated profit and loss account using the equity method of accounting.
The investment in associated undertakings included in the consolidated balance sheet is based on the group's share of the net assets of associated undertakings, together with any premium or discount arising on acquisition, less amounts written off.
Joint ventures
Unincorporated joint ventures are included in the group accounts by proportional consolidation.
Source
Comments
Depreciation
Explain the policies for depreciation and diminution in value of assets.
Show for each major class of depreciable asset the depreciation methods used and the useful lives or depreciation rates used.
Stocks and long-term contracts
Disclose the accounting policies that have been applied to stocks and long-term contracts, in particular the method of ascertaining turnover and attributable profit.
Foreign currency
Give the methods used in the translation of the financial statements of foreign enterprises and the treatment accorded to exchange differences.
1.
Accounting policies (continued)
Turnover
Turnover represents sales to outside customers at invoiced amount less value added tax.
Revaluation of land and buildings
Freehold and long leasehold land and buildings are revalued to market value at intervals not exceeding five years.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost or valuation, less estimated residual values, of all tangible fixed assets, except freehold lane, over their expected useful lives.
It is calculated at the following rates:
Stocks
Stocks are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is calculated as follows: Raw materials — cost of purchase on first in, first out basis Work in progress — cost of raw materials and labour together with and finished goods attributable overheads.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling prices less further costs to completion and disposal.
Long-term contracts are assessed on a contract by contract basis and are reflected in the profit and loss account by recording turnover and related costs as contract activity progresses.
Where the outcome of each long-term contract can be assessed with reasonable certainty before its conclusion the attributable profit is recognised in the profit and loss account as the difference between the reported turnover and related costs for that contract.
Valuation of investments
Investments held as fixed assets are stated at cost less any provision for a permanent diminution in value.
Investments held as current assets are stated at the lower of cost and market value.
Foreign currency
Profit and loss accounts and assets and liabilities of foreign subsidiary undertakings are translated into sterling at the rates of exchange ruling on the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences which arise from translation of the opening share capital and reserves of foreign subsidiary undertakings are taken to reserves.
All other differences are taken to the profit and loss account.
Foreign currency transactions of individual companies are translated at the rates ruling when they occurred.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the rates ruling at the balance sheet dates.
Any differences are taken to the profit and loss account.
Source
Comments
Deferred taxation
Give the accounting policy for deferred tax if material.
Research and development
The accounting policy for research and development costs should be clearly explained.
Leased assets
Give the accounting policies for leased assets if material.
Pension costs
Give the accounting policy for pension costs.
Turnover, profits and net assets
Give turnover, profit before tax and net assets relating to each major class of business and to each major geographical market.
If 50% or more of total overseas operations relates to one continent give a further analysis of turnover and profit before tax by country.
The above information on turnover, profit and net assets may be omitted if in the directors' opinion its disclosure would be prejudicial to the interests of the company.
The fact that any such information has not been disclosed must be stated.
1.
Accounting policies (continued)
Deferred taxation
Provision is made for timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes to the extent that it is probable that a liability or asset will crystallise.
Research and development
Expenditure on pure and applied research is charged to the profit and loss account in the year in which it is incurred.
Development costs are also charged to the profit and loss account in the year of expenditure, except when individual projects satisfy the following criteria: the project is clearly defined and related expenditure is separately identifiable; the project is technically feasible and commercially viable; current and future costs will be exceeded by future sales; and adequate resources exist for the project to be completed.
In such circumstances the costs are carried forward and amortised over a period not exceeding five years commencing when the group begins to benefit from the expenditure.
Leased assets
Where assets are finance by leasing agreements that give rights approximating to ownership ( "finance leases" ), the assets are treated as if they had been purchased outright.
The amount capitalised is the present value of the minimum lease payments payable over the term of the lease.
The corresponding leasing commitments are shown as amounts payable to the lessor.
Depreciation on the relevant assets is charged to the profit and loss account.
Lease payments are analysed between their capital and interest components using the actuarial method.
The interest is charged to the profit and loss account.
The capital part reduces the amounts payable to the lessor.
All other leases are treated as "operating leases" .
Their annual rentals are charged to the profit and loss account on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Pension costs
Contributions to the group's defined benefit pension scheme are charged to the profit and loss account so as to spread the cost of pensions over employees' working lives with the group.
Turnover, profits and net assets
Source
Comments
Other operating income
Property rental income net of rates and other outgoings should be disclosed if it is a material part of total revenue.
Operating charges
Advantage has been taken of the option to combine certain items on the face of the profit and loss account.
The items have been disclosed in the notes to the accounts.
Disclose the total amount of research and development expenditure charged in the profit and loss account, analysing between the current year's expenditure and amounts amortised from deferred expenditure.
This disclosure only applies to: public or special category companies or subsidiaries of such companies, or companies satisfying at least two of the following criteria:
turnover exceeds £80m
balance sheet total exceeds £39m
number of employees exceeds 2,500
Disclose the total charge for depreciation on fixed assets.
Disclose the total depreciation charged for assets held under finance leases.
Disclose the amount charged for amortisation of goodwill.
Hire charges for plant and machinery should be disclosed.
Disclose the total finance charge in respect of finance leases.
Disclose the total of operating lease rentals charged to profit and loss account, split between amounts payable for hire of machinery and for other operating leases.
Disclose remuneration paid to auditors for audit services.
Remuneration includes expenses and benefits in kind.
Disclose the nature of any such benefit.
Disclose remuneration paid to auditors or their associates for non-audit services.
Remuneration includes expenses and benefits in kind.
Disclose the total exchange difference charged to profit and loss account.
Source
Comments
Employees
State the average number of employees (wherever employed) in the year, analysed into categories appropriate to the business and disclose their:
aggregate wages and salaries
social security costs incurred by the company on their behalf
other pension costs incurred.
5.
Employees
The average weekly number of employees of the group during the year, including executive directors, was as follows:
Source
Comments
Directors
Show the total amount of directors' emoluments.
This amount includes fees, taxable expense allowances, pension contributions, benefits in kind and amounts paid to obtain the services of a director ( "golden hello" ).
Analyse the amount between payments: for services as director of the company, and for services as director of any subsidiary undertakings while also director of the company for management of the affairs of the group.
Where the company is a parent or subsidiary undertaking or where the total directors' emoluments (including pension contributions) is £60,000 or more, the following should be disclosed: emoluments of chairman emoluments of highest paid director if they exceed the emoluments of the chairman the number of directors whose emoluments fall within rising bands of £5,000.
The amounts disclosed should exclude pension contributions.
Emoluments of directors whose duties are mainly discharged outside the UK need not be disclosed.
Where the company is a parent or subsidiary undertaking or where the total directors' emoluments (including pension contributions) is £60,000 or more, disclose the number of directors waiving emoluments and the total amount (including pension contributions) thereof.
Disclose the total amount of pension payments distinguishing between pensions for services as director and other pensions.
The amount includes benefits in kind.
The nature of such benefit should be disclosed.
Disclose the total amount of payments for compensation for loss of office.
The amount includes benefits in the kind and the nature of such benefit should be disclosed.
Show the total amount paid to or receivable by third parties (other than connected persons) for making available the services of any person as a director of the company or any subsidiary undertaking while also director of the company.
The amount includes benefits in kind.
The nature of such benefit should be disclosed.
Disclose directors' interests in the following transactions: loans, quasi-loans, credit transactions and indirect arrangements agreement to enter into such transactions any other transactions or arrangements in which a director had directly or indirectly a material interest.
State if there has been no such contract.
The auditors should give the details required by 6 Sch in their report if disclosure is not made elsewhere in the accounts.
6.
Directors
The payment made by the company on termination of office included a motor car valued at £20,000.
Mr D Smith is a director and major shareholder of David Smith Sports Ltd, to which a significant proportion of the sales of A. Layout (Leisurewear) Ltd were made.
During the year, sales of £143,986 (1990 — £129, 174) were made to David Smith Sports Ltd, and at 31st March 1991, £65,226 1990 — £44,183) was due to A. Layout (Leisurewear) Ltd.
There were no other contracts of significance during the year in which a director of the company had a material interest.
Source
Comments
Income from fixed asset investments and interest receivable
Income from fixed asset investments should be analysed between income from group undertakings and other fixed asset investments.
Other interest receivable and similar income should be analysed between income from group undertakings and other sources.
Disclose income from listed investments, including the tax credit in the case of franked investment income.
Interest payable
Disclose interest or similar charges on: all bank loans and overdrafts, and other loans wholly repayable within five years (excluding loans from group undertakings) and all other loans (excluding loans from group undertakings).
Disclose interest payable to group undertakings.
Disclose the aggregate finance charges for the period in respect of finance leases.
7.
Income from fixed asset investments and interest receivable
8.
Interest payable
Source
Comments
Taxation
Disclose the charge for taxation, distinguishing between the following:
UK corporation tax based on the profit for the year, showing the basis of computation.
deferred taxation
UK income tax (ie tax attributable to franked investment income), showing the basis of computation of the charge.
overseas tax, relieved and unrelieved, specifying the part of unrelieved overseas tax which arises from the payment or proposed payment of dividends.
irrecoverable ACT.
If ACT cannot be set against the balance on deferred taxation account and recovery is not assured without reasonable doubt the balance must be written off.
Show the amount of unprovided deferred tax in the period.
Extraordinary items
Disclose separately extraordinary income or charges and the extraordinary profit or loss and tax on the extraordinary profit or loss on the face of the profit and loss account or in a note.
The amount of each extraordinary item should be shown individually either on the face of the profit and loss account or in the notes.
Explain the nature of each extraordinary item.
9.
Taxation
The tax charge for the year has been reduced by £572,000 (1990 — £902,000) in respect of accelerated capital allowances, for which no deferred tax has been provided.
10.
Extraordinary items
Trading stocks of A. Layout Pty to the value of £858,000 were confiscated by the new government of the Whitsun Islands after the revolution which took place in 1990.
No tax relief is available in respect of this loss.
Source
Comments
Profit for the financial year
Where the accounts are prepared using merger accounting, show: an analysis of the current year's attributable profit before extraordinary items between pre- and post-merger an analysis of the attributable profit before extraordinary items of the current year up to the date of the merger and of the previous year between that of the issuing company and that of the subsidiary.
an analysis of extraordinary items to show whether each individual extraordinary item relates to pre- or post-merger events and to which party the item relates.
For a significant acquisition disclose:
profit or loss of the undertaking acquired for the period from the beginning of the financial year up to the date of the acquisition and for the previous financial year.
the date from which the results of the major acquisitions have been brought into the accounts.
Where the group has disposed of an undertaking during the year disclose:
name of undertaking
profit or loss of the undertaking up to the date of disposal.
Dividends
Disclose the aggregate dividend paid and proposed, excluding ACT and tax credit.
Disclose the aggregate proposed dividend.
Disclose any shareholders' waiver of dividends.
11 Profit for the financial year
Profit before extraordinary items and the extraordinary items are analysed between A. Layout Plc and Model Manufacturing Ltd and between the periods before and after the date of the merger on 28th August 1990 as follows:
The results of Model Layout Ltd have been brought into account from 1st October 1990 and the company contributed a profit of £11m for the six months to 21st March 1991.
Prior to acquisition, Model Layout Ltd reported a profit of £110,000 for the period 1st April 1990 to 30th September 1990 and a profit of £209,000 for the financial year ended 31st March 1990.
The results of Model Developments Ltd have been included for the period 1st April 1990 to the date of disposal of 1st January 1991.
During this period the company reported a profit of £98,000 
12 Dividends
Source
Comments
Earnings per share
For listed companies the earnings per share on a net basis should be disclosed on the face of the profit and loss account.
The basis of calculation shown be shown, including the amount of earnings and the number of equity shares involved.
Where there is a material difference between earnings per share calculated on a net basis and on a nil distribution basis, the latter should be shown.
If there is dilution of over 5%, the fully diluted earnings per share should be disclosed or the fact that it is not material should be stated.
Intangible assets
For each item shown as an intangible fixed asset disclose:
cost at beginning of year and at balance sheet date
revaluations in year
acquisitions in year
disposals in year
transfers to or from that item.
In respect of depreciation disclose: accumulated depreciation at beginning of year and at balance sheet date charge for year and provision for diminution in value adjustments for disposals other adjustments.
Disclose movements on deferred development expenditure.
Goodwill
The amount of goodwill recognised on acquisitions during the year should be shown separately for each acquisition where material.
State the cumulative amount of goodwill resulting from acquisitions in that and earlier financial years which has been written off.
Show the figure net of goodwill attributable to business disposed of before the balance sheet date.
Disclose the amount of purchased goodwill attributable to the business disposed of and how it has been treated in determining the profit or loss on disposal.
13 Earnings per share
Earnings per ordinary share have been calculated on the number of shares in issue during the relevant financial periods, after taking into account the number of shares issued in the merger with Model Manufacturing Ltd, as if the merger had been effective throughout these periods.
The number of equity shares in issue on which the calculation is based is 34,320,000 (1990 — 34,320,000).
The calculation is based upon earnings of £11,022,000 (1990 — £7,854,000).
This is profit before extraordinary items but after preference dividends.
14 Intangible assets
The cumulative amount of goodwill resulting from acquisitions during the current and previous years which has been written off, net of goodwill attributable to disposals before 31st March 1991, totals £3,850,000.
The purchased goodwill attributable to Model Developments Ltd, which was disposed of during the year, was £227,000.
The goodwill was fully written off in the year of acquisition and has been excluded from the calculation of profit on disposal (see note 28).
Source
Comments
Tangible assets
For each item shown as a tangible asset, disclose:
cost at beginning of year and at balance sheet date
revaluations in year
acquisitions in year
disposals in year
transfers to or from that item.
In respect of depreciation disclose:
accumulated depreciation at beginning of year and at balance sheet date
charge for the year and provisions for diminution in value
adjustments for disposals
other adjustments.
For each category of fixed assets, either:
disclose gross amounts of assets held under finance leases together with the related accumulated depreciation or
integrate these amounts with the figures for owned fixed assets and disclose separately the net amount of assets held under finance leases.
15 Tangible assets
The net book value of tangible fixed assets includes an amount of £720,280 (1990 — £771,815) in respect of assets held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts.
Source
Comments
Tangible assets
Show separately:
freehold land and buildings
leasehold land and buildings, where the unexpired term of the lease is more than 50 years
leasehold land and buildings, where the unexpired term of the lease is less than 50 years
Where assets have been revalued in the financial year, the names or qualifications of the valuers and the bases of valuation should be given.
If the persons making the valuations are officers or employees of the company or group this fact should be stated.
Where a note to the accounts states that the value of an asset materially differs from its book value, show the tax implications of the realisation of the asset at the stated value.
15 Tangible asset (continued)
Land and buildings
The group's freehold and long leasehold land and buildings in the UK were revalued on 31st March 1991 by Rostock Evans & Co.
Chartered Surveyors, at open market value.
The surplus arising of £3,663,000 (Company — £1,826,000) has been credited to revaluation reserve.
If the land and buildings were sold at this value, it would give rise to a tax charge of £1,000,000 (Company — £561,000).
Source
Comments
Tangible assets
If assets are included at other than historical cost amount, disclose:
the historical coat amount or
the difference between the historical cost amount and the balance sheet amount.
Give the years in which the assets were valued and the various values.
Give particulars of capital expenditure authorised but not yet contracted for, and also capital expenditure contracted for but not provided for.
Source
Comments
Fixed asset investments
For each item shown as a fixed asset investment, disclose:
cost at beginning of year and balance sheet date
acquisitions in year
revaluations in year
disposals in year
transfers to or from that item.
In respect of depreciation, disclose:
accumulated depreciation at beginning of year and balance sheet date
charge for year and provisions for diminution in value
adjustments for disposals
other adjustments.
Listed investments are to be distinguished between those listed on a recognised stock exchange and others.
The investing group's share of post-acquisition accumulated reserves of associated companies and any movements therein should be separately disclosed.
In the consolidated balance sheet, the investing group's interests in associated companies should be shown as the total of:
the investing group's share of net assets, other than goodwill, of the associated companies, stated, where possible, after attributing fair values to the assets at the time of acquisition of the interest in the associated companies
the investing group's share of any goodwill in the associated companies' own balance sheets
the premium or discount paid on acquisition insofar as it has not been written off.
The first item should be shown separately, but the other two may be disclosed in aggregate.
Analyse investments between listed and other investments.
For listed investments, state the aggregate market value if different from the balance sheet value.
16 Fixed asset investments
There was no premium on acquisition relating to the associated undertakings.
The other investments are listed on a recognised stock exchange.
Their present market value is £2,244,000 (1990—£2,057,000).
Additions during the year include £330,000 in respect of the merger with Model Manufacturing Ltd.
Source
Comments
Fixed asset investments
For each subsidiary undertaking show:
name
country of incorporation if outside Great Britain
country of registration if incorporated in Great Britain
address of principal place of business if it is unincorporated
whether the subsidiary undertaking is included in the consolidation and, if not, give reasons for excluding it from consolidation
which of the conditions specified in s 258(2) or (4)(definition of a subsidiary undertaking) has been satisfied.
This is not required if the relevant condition is that the parent undertaking holds a majority of the voting rights and holds the same proportion of shares as it holds voting rights
an indication of the nature of business of principal subsidiaries) country of operation.
For each subsidiary undertaking give proportion of nominal value and description of shares of each class held, distinguishing between shareholdings by the parent company and by the group if different.
For each associated undertaking show:
name
country of incorporation if outside Great Britain
country of registration if incorporated in Great Britain
address of principal place of business if it is unincorporated
an indication of the nature of its business.
For each associated undertaking give proportion of nominal value and description of shares of each class held, distinguishing between shareholdings by the parent company and by the group if different.
Where the parent company or group has a significant holding (10% or more shares of an undertaking or more than 10% of the investing company's assets) in an undertaking (which is not a subsidiary undertaking, joint venture or associated undertaking) the following must be stated:
name
country of incorporation if outside great Britain
country of registration if incorporated in Great Britain
address of principal place of business if it is unincorporated
description and proportion of minimal value of the shares of each class held.
Where such a significant holding amounts to 20% or more of shares in an undertaking the following must also be stated if material:
aggregate capital and reserves of the undertaking as at the end of its relevant financial year, and
its profit or loss for that year.
For each unincorporated joint venture which is dealt with in the accounts by proportional consolidation, disclose the following: name address of principal place of business factors on which joint management of the undertaking are based proportion of the capital of the joint venture included in the consolidation.
16 Fixed asset investments (continued)
The following were subsidiary and associated undertakings at the end of the year and have all been included in the consolidated accounts.
A. Layout (Leisurewear) Ltd is included in the group accounts as a subsidiary undertaking under s 258(4) since A. Layout Plc has a participating interest in the company and both companies are managed on a unified basis.
No fair value adjustment was necessary as a result of the change in status.
For all subsidiary undertakings listed above, the country of operation is the same as its country of incorporation or registration.
The company also held 10% nominal value of the ordinary share capital of Reproduction Artwork Plc, registered in England.
On 1st October 1990 the company set up a partnership.
Model Marketing Company, with three other parties.
The partnership is based in Sydney, Australia.
The company contributed a quarter of the working capital requirements of Model Marketing and is jointly responsible for all costs and management decisions of the business.
One quarter of the capital and results of the joint venture is included in the group accounts as shown by its results for six months to 31st March 1991.
Source
Comments
Stocks
Stocks should be sub-classified in the balance sheet or notes to the financial statements to indicate the amounts held in each of the main categories of balance sheet formats of 4 Sch.
The amount of long-term contracts, at costs incurred, net of amounts transferred to cost of sales, after deducting foreseeable losses and payments on account not matched with turnover, should be classified as "long-term contract balances" and separately disclosed within stocks.
Show separately:
net cost less foreseeable losses, and payments on account.
If cost has been determined using FIFO, LIFO, weighted average cost or a similar method, and the difference between historical cost and replacement cost of stocks is material, this amount should be disclosed in a note to the accounts.
Debtors
Amounts falling due after more than one year should be shown separately for each item included under debtors.
For long-term contracts the amount by which recorded turnover exceeds payments on account should be classified as "amounts recoverable on contracts" and separately disclosed within debtors.
The following should be disclosed for transactions or arrangements (mainly loans, quasi-loans, guarantees and credit transactions) between a group company and a director (or connected person) which fall within s. 330:
a statement that it was made or subsisted during the year the names of the directors and connected persons concerned principal terms
for loans — the maximum liability in the period, the amount of any arrears of interest, the amount of the liability at the beginning and end of the period, any provision against non-repayment of principal or interest.
for any other transaction, agreement or arrangement, its value.
17 Stocks
The loan to a director is an interest-free loan of £14,000 to Mr E D Johnson, the sales director, to assist in the purchase of his house.
The loan was made prior to Mr Johnson's appointment to the board and remained at £14,000 throughout the year.
It is repayable on cessation of employment.
Source
Comments
Investments
Split investments between listed and other investments.
Listed investments are to be distinguished between those listed on a recognised stock exchange and others.
For listed investments, disclose aggregate market value if different from accounts value.
Creditors falling due within one year
For each item in creditors for which security has been given: state the amounts secured give a general indication of security.
Disclose the amount of provision for aggregate recommended dividend.
ACT on the proposed dividend should not be included with the dividend, but included as a current tax liability.
Liabilities for taxation and social security should be separately disclosed.
The amounts of obligations under finance leases should be shown separately.
For long-term contracts, where any payments on account not matched with turnover, and offset against long-term contract balances should be separately disclosed under creditors as "payments on account" .
Where the provision or accrual for foreseeable losses exceeds costs incurred, the excess should be included within either provisions for liabilities and charges or creditors as appropriate.
19 Investments
20 Creditors falling due within one year
The bank overdraft is secured by a floating charge over the assets of the company.
Source
Comments
Creditors falling due after more than one year
If debentures have been issued during the year, give: the reason for the issue classes of debentures issued for each class, the amount issued and the consideration received.
For items where security has been given: state the amounts secured give a general indication of the security.
For each item included in creditors due after one year, disclose separately: amounts payable otherwise than by instalments more than five years hence amounts payable by instalments any of which are due more than five years hence, and the total of such instalments
amounts payable between one and two years
amounts payable between two and five years
Where any part of the debt is payable after more than five years, show terms of repayment and rates of interest payable.
If this produces a statement of excessive length, give a general indication of the terms and rates of interest.
Disclose obligations under finance leases separately and split between those payable in two to five years inclusive, and more than five years.
21 Creditors falling due after more than one year
(a) £3,520.000 of 12% debenture stock 1999, secured by a fixed charge on the group's properties, was issued on 1st October 1990 at par to finance the acquisition of Model Layout Ltd and the refitting of the group's offices and factory in Coventry.
(b) £550,000 (1990 — £220,000) due to subsidiary undertakings is repayable between one and two years.
The balance of the amount due to subsidiary undertakings is repayable between two and five years.
These amounts are interest free.
(c) Obligations under finance leases and hire purchase contracts are due as follows:
Source
Comments
Deferred taxation
Show any provision for deferred taxation separately from any provision for other taxation.
Deferred tax should be accounted for to the extent that it is probable that an asset or liability will arise.
Disclose the following:
the major components of the net balance
where deferred taxation relates to movements on reserves, transfers to and from deferred taxation separately as part of such movements
where a note to the accounts states the value of an asset which differs from its book value, the tax implications of disposing of the asset at this stated value if material
the amount of unprovided deferred tax analysed between its major components
transfers to and from deferred tax
where potential deferred tax on a revalued asset has not been shown because the revaluation does not constitute a timing difference, the fact that it is not a timing difference and that tax has therefore not been provided should be shown.
Recoverable ACT should be deducted from the deferred tax account if a deferred tax account is available for this purpose.
22 Deferred taxation
The amount of unprovided deferred taxation and the amount provided are as follows:
Source
Comments
Share capital
Allotted share capital and called up share capital which has been paid up should be disclosed separately.
State the authorised share capital, and the number and total nominal value of shares of each class allotted.
For redeemable shares, give:
the earliest and latest dates for redemption
whether redemption is mandatory, or at the company's option
the amount of any premium payable on redemption.
If the company has allotted shares during the year, give:
the reason for making the allotment
the class of shares allotted
the number and aggregate nominal value of each class of share issued and the consideration received by the company for the allotment.
If the company makes an arrangement attracting merger relief under s. 131 during the financial year, give the following information:
the name of the other company
the number, nominal value and class of shares allotted
the number, nominal value and class of shares in the other company issued, transferred or cancelled, and
details of the accounting treatment adopted for the issue, transfer or cancellation.
Where merger accounting has been used disclose the composition and fair value of the consideration given by the issuing company.
In respect of any options on the unissued share capital, state:
number, description and amount of shares involved
period during which option is exercisable
prices to be paid for shares allotted.
23 Share capital
As a result of the acquisition of Model Manufacturing Ltd, the company issued, credited as fully paid, 1,320,000 ordinary shares of 25p each and acquired 660,000 ordinary shares of 50p each in Model Manufacturing Ltd.
The fair value of the shares issued was £990,000 based on a market price of 75p per ordinary share as at 28th August 1990.
No share premium has been accounted for on this issue.
The called up share capital disclosed in the Balance Sheet fro the group at 31st March 1990 has been presented on the basis that the 1,320,000 ordinary shares of 25p each issued on the merger with Model Manufacturing Ltd had been in issue at 31st March 1990.
The cumulative preference shares are redeemable at a premium of 3p per share between 1998 and 2001 at the option of the company.
An option has been granted and is still outstanding to a director in respect of 5,000 ordinary shares of 25p each in A. Layout Plc exercisable at any time before 1st March 1992, at a price of 50p per share.
Source
Comments
Reserves
A holding company need not publish a separate profit and loss account if: it publishes group accounts, and the notes to the company's individual balance sheet show the company's profit or loss for the financial year, and the fact that the company has not published a profit and loss account is stated in a note to the group accounts.
Give a reconciliation of all movements on reserves showing:
balance brought forward
transfers to and from reserves
source and application respectively of such transfers
balance carried forward.
Disclose net movements on reserves arising from foreign exchange differences and net amounts of gain or losses on foreign currency borrowings less deposits, identifying separately:
amounts offset in reserves
amounts charged/credited to profit and loss account.
The investing group's share of aggregate net profits less losses retained by associated companies should be disclosed separately in the financial statements of the investing group.
An amount may only be transferred from the revaluation reserve: to the profit and loss account, if the amount was previously charged to that account or represents realised profit, or for the issue of bonus shares.
The revaluation reserve shall only be reduced to the extent that the amounts transferred from it are no longer necessary for the purposes of the valuation method used.
Contingent liabilities
For material contingent losses which are not accrued, give:
the nature, including the legal nature, of the contingency
the uncertainties which are expected to affect the ultimate outcome.
details of any valuable security provided in connection with the liability
a prudent estimate (before tax) of the potential financial effect, or a statement that it is not practicable to make such an estimate the taxation implications, if necessary for a proper understanding of the financial position.
24 Reserves
The company has taken advantage of the exemption from presenting its own profit and loss account.
The amount of deferred taxation on revaluation surpluses is shown in note 22.
25 Contingent liabilities
The company has given a guarantee of up to £693,000 (1990 nil) in respect of a bank advance to a prospective overseas agent.
At the year-end the total amount outstanding was £605,000.
Source
Comments
Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking
Disclose the following information for acquisitions made during the year:
name of the undertaking acquired
whether the acquisition has been accounted for by the acquisition or merger method of accounting.
For a significant acquisition disclose the following information:
composition and fair value of consideration given
where the acquisition method of accounting has been adopted, provide a table showing the book values immediately prior to the acquisition, and the fair values at the date of acquisition, of each class of asset and liability of the undertaking acquired.
Include a statement of the amount of any goodwill arising on the acquisition, together with an explanation of any significant adjustments made
where the merger method of accounting has been adopted, explain any significant adjustments made to the amounts of assets and liabilities of the undertaking acquired, together with a statement of any resulting adjustment to the consolidated reserves (including the restatement of opening consolidated reserves).
Disclose the effects of acquisition or disposal of subsidiary undertakings and how funded, differentiating between consideration satisfied in cash and by the issue of shares.
26 Acquisition of Model Layout Ltd
On 30th September 1990 the group acquired Model Layout Ltd for £2,530,000 paid by cash, giving rise to goodwill of £330,000.
In calculating the goodwill arising on acquisition, the fair value of net assets of Model Layout have been assessed and adjustments from book value have been made where necessary.
Adjustments are summarised in the following table: The revaluation of fixed assets relates to increases in value of freehold properties since their last revaluation in 1983.
A bad debt provision has been made against a customer's debt where insolvency proceedings have recently commenced.
The accounting policy alignment relates to a change of stock valuation from weighted average cost to FIFO which is used by the group.
27 Acquisition of Model Manufacturing Ltd
On 28th August 1990 the group acquired Model Manufacturing Ltd and accounted for the acquisition by the merger method of accounting.
The effects of the acquisition are not given since it is treated as always having been a member of the group.
The corresponding figures have been adjusted accordingly.
Source
Comments
Disposal of subsidiary undertaking
Disclose the effects of disposals of subsidiary undertakings.
Show the profit or loss on disposal.
Pensions
Disclose any pension commitments at the year end.
Disclose total amounts charged to the profit and loss account for pension costs.
Give the following details of pension arrangements:
the nature of the scheme
whether it is funded or unfunded
the accounting policy and, if different, the funding policy whether the pension cost and provision (or asset) are assessed in accordance with the advice of a professionally qualified actuary and, if so, the date of the most recent actuarial valuation or later formal review used for this purpose.
If the actuary is an employee or officer of the reporting company, or of the group of which it is a member, this fact should be disclosed
the pension cost charge for the period together with explanations of significant changes in the charge compared to that in the previous accounting period
any provisions or prepayments in the balance sheet resulting from a difference between the amounts recognised as cost and the amounts funded or paid directly
the amount of any deficiency on a current funding level basis, indicating the action, if any, being taken to deal with it in the current and future accounting periods.
an outline of the results of the most recent formal actuarial valuation or later formal review of the scheme on an ongoing basis.
This should include disclosure of:
(a) the actuarial method used and a brief description of the main actuarial assumptions
(b) the market value of scheme assets at the date of their valuation or review
(c) the level of funding expressed in percentage terms
(d) comments on any material actuarial surplus or deficiency indicated by (c) above
any commitment to make additional payments over a limited number of years
an explanation of the accounting treatment adopted for a refund that is subject to the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 where a credit appears in the financial statements in relation to it
details of the expected effects on future costs of any material
changes in the group's and/or company's pension arrangements.
Where a company or group has more than one pension scheme, disclose details on a combined basis, where possible, except that a deficiency of funding in one scheme should not be offset against a surplus in another scheme.
28 Disposal of Model Developments Ltd
Profit on disposal of Model Developments Ltd has been calculated as follows:
29 Pensions
The group pays contributions to a defined benefit pension scheme established under an irrevocable Deed of Trust by A. Layout Plc for its employees and those of subsidiary undertakings.
The scheme is managed by a corporate Trustee accountable to the pension scheme members.
The scheme is valued every three years by independent consulting actuaries using the projected unit method.
The most recent valuation, at 31st March 1990, indicated that, on the basis of service to date and current salaries, the scheme's assets were sufficient to meet its liabilities.
It was assumed that the investment return would be 9% per annum, that salary increases would average 7% per annum and that present and future pensions would increase at the rate of 4% per annum .
At 31st March 1991 the scheme, which is contracted out of the state scheme, had assets of approximately £28.6m (1990 — £24.2m) at market value.
Contributions to the scheme by employees and the group companies have been maintained in accordance with the recommendations of the actuaries in their previous valuation.
The company is committed to pay 5% of total salaries for the next three years.
The charge for the year includes special contributions of £88,000 (1990 — £77,000) made to augment pensions of some scheme members made redundant during the year.
Source
Comments
Commitment under operating leases
Disclose the operating lease payments due in the next year, analysing between commitments expiring in the next year, in the second to fifth years inclusive and over five years from the balance sheet date.
Show separately the commitments in respect of leases of land and buildings and other operating leases.
Post balance sheet event
Details of a material post balance sheet event should be given where:
it is a non-adjusting event of such materiality that its non-disclosure would affect the ability of users of the accounts to reach a proper understanding of the financial position
it is the reversal or maturity of a transaction entered into before the year end, which was entered into primarily to alter the appearance of the company's balance sheet.
Related party transactions
Disclose the following information for each abnormal transaction with a related party:
name of related party
relationship between the parties
percentage ownership of the reporting enterprise in the related party or vice versa nature of the transaction
amounts involved, either in percentage or in monetary terms
amount due to or from the related party at the balance sheet date
basis on which the transaction price has been determined
any other information necessary for an understanding of the substance of the transaction and of its effects on the financial statements.
Disclosure of transactions with an individual related party may be made on an aggregate basis unless disclosure of an individual transaction is necessary for proper understanding.
Where a related party controls the enterprise, the existence and nature of the enterprise, together with its name, should be disclosed whether or not any transactions between the parties have taken place.
Where the enterprise has an economic dependence on another party, disclose the identity of that party and the extent of the dependence.
30 Commitments under operating leases
As at 31st March 1991, the group had annual commitments under non-cancellable operating leases as set out below:
31 Post balance sheet event
Since 31st March 1991 the group has been awarded a major contract to supply model layouts to the Department of Transport.
It is anticipated that this contract will substantially increase sales over the next three years.
32 Related party transaction
During the year, the company entered into a sales agreement with Large Designs Plc, which owns 14.4% of the company's ordinary share capital.
The agreement involves the design and sale of model layouts.
The terms of the sale were negotiated on a normal commercial basis but the company agreed to a significantly longer credit period than usual.
During the year, sales to Large Designs Plc totalled £2,015,000 and the amount owing to the company at 31st March 1991 was £493,000.
Source
Comments
Audit report
An audit report is required for every set of accounts prepared for every reference period (except dormant companies — s 250).
The audit report should specify the standards which have been followed during the audit.
The audit report should state whether, in the opinion of the auditors, the accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and give a true and fair view of the state of the group's and the company's affairs and of the group's profit or loss for the year.
Reference should be made to the source and application of funds statement in the opinion paragraph.
If any of the following requirements have not been met, the audit report should state that fact: proper accounting records must be kept proper returns must be obtained from branches not visited by the auditor the accounts must be in agreement with the accounting records and returns all information and explanations considered necessary for the audit must be obtained.
If the information required on emoluments and other benefits of directors is not given, the auditors must disclose it in their report.
If the information in the directors' report is not consistent with the accounts, the auditors must state that fact in their report.
The audit report should refer to significant departures from SSAPs where either they are not explained in the accounts or they are explained in the accounts but the auditor does not concur.
The audit report should be signed by the auditors and state their identity.
The date on the audit report should be the date on which the auditors sign the report, which should be on or after the date of board approval.
Where the audit report is qualified and the company proposes to pay a dividend, the auditors will have to state in writing whether their qualifications is material in determining whether the company can lawfully make the proposed distribution.
This information could be given to the members of the company as a separate statement.
Report of the auditors
To the members of A. Layout Plc
We have audited the financial statements on page 5 to 32 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and the group at 31st March 1991 and of the profit and source and application of funds of the group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Stoy Hayward 8 Baker Street, London W1M 1DA 15th July 1991  
Source
Comments
Notice of meeting
Auditors must be appointed at each general meeting at which accounts are laid.
The auditors' remuneration must be fixed or determined in some way by the company in general meeting.
Any member of a company entitled to attend and vote at a meeting is entitled to appoint another person (whether a member or not) as his proxy to attend and vote instead of him.
The company must send proxy forms, with provision for two-way voting on all resolutions intended to be proposed, with the notice of meeting.
The register of directors' share interests must be available throughout the meeting.
Copies of directors' service contracts of more than one year's duration must be available for inspection during normal business hours at the registered office from the date of notice of the annual general meeting until the date of the meeting and must be made available for at least 15 minutes prior to and during the meeting.
A note to the notice of the annual general meeting must state the place and time at which copies of all such service contracts can be inspected or that there are no such contracts.
Notice of meeting
Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of the shareholders of A. Layout Plc will be held at 19 Wood Street, London W1A 7BN on 12th August 1991 at 12.00 noon for the following purposes:
1.
To consider the financial statements and the reports of the directors and of the auditors for the year ended 31st March 1991.
2.
To declare a final ordinary dividend of 8.0p per share.
3.
To consider re-election of those directors retiring in accordance with the articles of association:(a) Mr J E Smith (b) Mr H A Velasquez
4.
To re-appoint Stoy Hayward as auditors and authorise the directors to fix their remuneration.
By order of the Board
H M B Sanders Secretary 15th July 1991 
Note
A member entitled to attend and vote at this meeting may appoint a proxy or proxies to attend and, on a poll, vote instead of him or her.
The proxy need not be a member.
Instruments appointing proxies must be lodged with the company's registrars not less than forty-eight hours before the time fixed for the meeting.
A statement of directors' share transactions and copies of their service contracts are available for inspection during normal business hours at the registered office from the date of this notice until the date of the annual general meeting and will be available at the place of the meeting for fifteen minutes prior to and during the meeting.
A. LAYOUT LIMITED
Year ended 31st March 1991
Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
The directors' report to be attached to every set of accounts prepared for every accounting reference period.
Results and dividends
Disclose the amount that the directors recommend should be paid as dividend, and the amount they propose to carry to reserves.
Principal activities, review of business and future developments
Give the principal activities of the company, significant changes in those activities during the year, and likely future developments.
Give a fair review of the development of the company during the year and of its position at the balance sheet date.
Give details of any important events affecting the company which have occurred since the balance sheet date.
Fixed assets
Give details of significant changes in fixed assets.
Market value of land and buildings
The difference between the market value and book value of land should be disclosed where it is substantial and the directors think it is of significance to the members.
Charitable and political contributions
Give separate totals for political and charitable contributions if together they exceed £200.
For each political contribution over £200, state the name of the recipient or political party and the amount of money given.
A. LAYOUT LIMITED
Report of the directors for the year ended 31st March 1991
The directors submit their report together with the audited financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991.
Results and dividends
The trading profit for the year before tax was £72,106 before charging an extraordinary loss of £5,544 incurred as a result of closing the depot in Acton.
The directors recommend a final ordinary dividend amount to £21,000 which, with preference dividends of £665, leaves retained profits of £17.068.
Principal activities, review of business and future developments
The company is engaged in the sale and distribution of models and model layouts to commerce and industry.
Turnover has increased by 21.4% to £502,811 and the directors believe it will continue to improve.
During the year the company acquired premises and opened a new sales office in Manchester.
It also sold the existing warehouse at Acton which has been under-used since the main London warehouse has come into operation.
The introduction of the new sales office will give opportunities to expand sales in the North of England in the next year.
The directors also anticipate an increase in European sales.
There have been no events since the balance sheet date which materially affect the position of the company.
Fixed assets
Movements on fixed assets are set out in note 10 to the accounts.
Market value of land and buildings
The directors consider that the market value of the company's interest in land and buildings amounts to £110,000 which is £48,956 greater than the net book value shown in the accounts.
Charitable and political contributions
During the year the company made the following contributions:
Source
Comments
Directors
Give the names of all persons who were directors at any time during the year.
Directors' interests
Show directors' interests (including options to acquire) in shares or debentures of the company at the beginning (or date of appointment, if later) and end of the year for each person who was a director at the end of the year.
If no shares are held by a director, this should be stated.
Show directors' rights to subscribe for shares in or debentures of the company granted to or exercised by each person during the year.
Give the number of shares or amount of debentures involved.
Auditors
There is no statutory requirement to refer to this in the directors' report.
Approval and signature
The directors' report should be approved by the board of directors and signed on behalf of the board by a director or the secretary of the company.
State the name of the signatory.
Directors
The directors of the company during the year and their interests in the ordinary share capital of the company were: No director has any interest in the preference shares of the company.
The director who retires by rotation is Mr C A Johnson who, being eligible, offers himself for re-election.
Auditors
Stoy Hayward have expressed their willingness to continue in office and a resolution to re-appoint them will be proposed at the annual general meeting.
By order of the Board J E Smith Secretary 15th July 1991  
Source
Comments
Format
The profit and loss account should follow one of the standard formats.
Format 1 has been adopted by the company.
Items indicated by Arabic numbers may be rearranged and adapted if the nature of the business warrants it, and headings for which there are nil balances in both the current and prior year should be omitted.
Corresponding amounts should be shown.
Advantage has been taken of the option to combine certain items on the face of the profit and loss account and the relevant detail has been shown in the notes to the accounts.
Turnover
Turnover should be stated after deducting:
VAT
trade discounts
other taxes based upon turnover.
Disclosure
Show as separate items on the face of the profit and loss account:
profit or loss on ordinary activities before tax
transfers to or from reserves
aggregate net dividends paid and proposed.
In the case of extraordinary items disclose:
profit or loss after tax before extra-ordinary items
nature, particulars and amount of extraordinary items, with related tax to be separately disclosed (usually in the notes)
profit or loss after extraordinary items.
Retained profits
The financial statements should include a statement of movements on reserves.
Profit and loss account for the year ended 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
Format
The balance sheet must follow one of the specified formats.
Format 1 has been adopted by the company.
If headings are combined on the face of the balance sheet, they should be set out in full in the notes.
Creditors
Amounts falling due within one year and after one year are to be shown separately.
Signatures
The balance sheet should be signed on behalf of the board by a director of the company.
State the name of the signatory.
The date on which the accounts were formally approved by the board should be disclosed in the accounts.
Balance sheet at 31st March 1991
These accounts were approved by the Board on 15th July 1991.
C A Johnson Director
The notes on pages 6 to 13 form part of these financial statements.
Source
Comments
A statement of source and application of funds with comparatives is required in financial statements intended to give a true and fair view of the financial position and profit and loss, except for enterprises with a turnover or gross income of less than £25,000.
The statement should show the profit or loss for the period, together with the adjustments required for items which did not involve the movement of funds.
The following other sources and applications of funds should, where material, be shown:
dividend paid
acquisitions and disposals of fixed and non-current assets
funds raised by increasing, or expended in repaying or redeeming, medium or long-term loans or the issued capital of the company.
increase or decrease in working capital sub-divided into its components, and movements in net liquid funds.
Statement of source and application of funds for the year ended 31st March 1991
The notes on pages 6 to 13 form part of these financial statements.
Source
Comments
Accounting policies
State accounting policies adopted for items which are material or critical in determining the profit or loss for the year and in stating the financial position.
State whether the accounts have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards and give details of and reasons for any material departure.
Depreciation
Explain the policies for depreciation and diminution in value of assets.
Show for each major class of depreciable asset the depreciation methods used and the useful lives or depreciation rates used.
Investment property
Investment properties should be included at open market value.
The directors may depart from statutory requirements if they would prevent the accounts from showing a true and fair view.
In this case, no depreciation has been charged on investment properties.
Particulars of the departure from the statutory requirements and reasons for it must be stated.
Stocks
State the accounting policy followed in respect of stocks.
Deferred taxation
Give the accounting policy for deferred tax if material.
Leased assets
Give the accounting policy for leased assets if material.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991
1.
Accounting policies
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, as modified by the revaluation of land and buildings, and are in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
The following accounting policies have been applied:
Turnover
Turnover represents sales to outside customers at invoiced amount less VAT.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost less estimated residual values of all fixed assets, except freehold land, over their expected useful lives.
It is calculated on the original cost of the assets at the following rates:
Investment property
The investment property is included at its open market value.
No depreciation is provided on the freehold investment property and the directors consider that this accounting policy results in the accounts giving a true and fair view.
Stocks
Stocks are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is based on the cost of purchase on a first in, first out basis.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling prices less further costs to completion and disposal.
Deferred taxation
Provision is made for timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes, to the extent that it is probable that a liability or asset will crystallise.
Leased assets
Where assets are finance by leasing agreements that give rights approximating to ownership ( "finance leases" ), the assets are treated as if they had been purchased outright.
The amount capitalised is the present value of the minimum lease payments payable over the term of the lease.
The corresponding leasing commitments are shown as amounts payable to the lessor.
Depreciation on the relevant assets is charged to the profit and loss account.
Lease payments are analysed between capital and interest using the actuarial method.
The interest is charged to the profit and loss account.
The capital part reduces the amounts payable to the lessor.
All other leases are treated as "operating leases" .
Their annual rentals are charged to the profit and loss account on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Pension costs
Contributions to the company's defined contribution pension scheme are charged to the profit and loss account in the year in which they become payable.
Source
Comments
Turnover and profits
For each substantially different class of business, show:
turnover
result before tax.
For each substantially different geographic market disclose turnover.
The above information on turnover and profit may be omitted if in the directors' opinion its disclosure would be prejudicial to the interests of the company.
The fact that any such information has not been disclosed must be stated.
Distribution and administrative expenses
Distribution and administrative expenses must be stated after taking into account provisions for depreciation.
Disclose the total finance charge in respect of finance leases.
Disclose the total of operating lease rentals charged to profit and loss account, split between amounts payable for hire of machinery and for other operating leases.
Show total charge for depreciation of fixed assets.
Disclose remuneration paid to auditors for audit services.
Remuneration includes expenses and benefits in kind.
Disclose the nature of any such benefit.
Disclose remuneration paid to auditors or their associates for non-audit services.
Remuneration includes expenses and benefits in kind.
Other operating income
Property rental income net of rates and other outgoings should be shown if it is a material part of total revenue.
2.
Turnover and profits
The turnover and profit before taxation is attributable to one activity, the sale and distribution of models and model layouts.
Turnover is analysed by market below:
3.
Distribution and administrative expenses
4.
Other operating income
Source
Comments
Employees
State the average number of employees (wherever employed) in the year, analysed into categories appropriate to the business and show:
aggregate wages and salaries
social security costs incurred by the company on their behalf
other pension costs incurred.
Directors
Show the total amount of directors' emoluments.
This amount includes fees, taxable expense allowances, pension contributions, benefits in kind and amounts paid to obtain the services of a director ( "golden hello" ).
Distinguish between amounts receivable for services as directors and other amounts receivable for management of the company.
Disclose the total amount of pension payments distinguishing between pensions for services as director and other pensions.
The amount includes benefits in kind.
The nature of such benefits should be disclosed.
Show the total amount paid to or receivable by third parties other than connected persons for making available the services of any person as a director of the company.
The amount includes benefits in kind.
The nature of such benefits should be disclosed.
The auditors should give the details required by Sch 6 in their report if disclosure is not made elsewhere in the accounts.
Transactions involving directors
Show:
that the transaction was made or subsisted during the year
the principal terms of the transaction
the name of the director and connected person and the nature of interest
the value of the transaction.
5.
Employees
The average weekly number of employees, including directors, during the year was as follows: A pension of £3,000 (1990 — £2,500) was paid to a former director.
6.
Transactions involving directors
During the year, the company entered into the following arrangements in which Mr C A Johnson had an interest:
(a) Sale of models to A N Other Ltd, in which Mr Johnson is a major shareholder, of £52,000.
(b) Book-keeping fees of £10,000 payable to B G Ltd, a company controlled by Mrs Johnson.
(c) Purchase of property from Mr Johnson for £25,000.
Source
Comments
Taxation
Disclose the charge for taxation, distinguishing between the following:
UK corporation tax based on the profit of the year, showing the basis of computation
deferred taxation.
Show the amount of any unprovided deferred tax in the period.
Extraordinary items
Disclose separately extraordinary income or charges and the net extraordinary profit or loss and tax on the extraordinary profit or loss on the face of the profit and loss account or in a note.
The amount of each extraordinary item should be shown individually either on the face of the profit and loss account or in the notes.
Explain the nature of each extraordinary item.
Dividends
Show the aggregate dividend paid and proposed, excluding ACT and tax credit.
Show the aggregate proposed dividend.
7.
Taxation
The tax charge for the year has been reduced by £4,200 (1990 — £2,900) in respect of accelerated capital allowances for which no deferred tax has been provided.
8.
Extraordinary charge
9.
Dividends
Source
Comments
Tangible assets
For each item shown as a tangible asset disclose: cost at beginning of year and at balance sheet date
revaluations in year
acquisitions in year
disposals in year
transfers to or from that item.
In respect of depreciation disclose:
accumulated depreciation at beginning of year and at balance sheet date
charge for the year and provisions for diminution in value adjustments for disposals
other adjustments.
Investment properties should be included at open market value.
Give the names of the persons making the valuation or particulars of their qualifications, together with the bases of valuation.
If a person making the valuation is an officer or employee of the company state this fact.
The carrying value of investment properties should be prominently displayed in the financial statements.
If assets are included at other than historical cost amount, show: historical cost, or difference between historical cost amount and balance sheet amount.
For each class of fixed asset either: disclose gross amounts of assets held under finance leases, together with the related accumulated depreciation and depreciation charge for the period, or integrate these amounts with the figures for owned fixed assets and disclose separately the net amount of assets held under finance leases and the related depreciation charge for the period.
Stock
Sub-classify stocks in the balance sheet or notes to accounts to show the amounts held in each of the main categories in the standard balance sheet format.
If cost has been determined using FIFO, LIFO, weighted average cost or a similar method, and the difference between historical cost and replacement cost of stock is material, this amount should be disclosed in a note to the accounts.
10.
Tangible assets
The investment property was valued at open market value during the year by the directors, resulting in a surplus of £4,000 which has been credited to the revaluation reserve.
The original cost of the property was £15,000.
The net book value of tangible fixed assets includes an amount of £9.013 (1990 — £5,279) in respect of assets held under finance leases.
The related depreciation charge for the period was £2,296 (1990 — £1,343).
11.
Stocks
Stocks comprise goods held for resale, and have a replacement cost of £54,500 (1990 — £35,000) at 31st March 1991.
Source
Comments
Debtors
Amounts falling due after more than one year should be shown separately for each item included under debtors.
Creditors falling due within one year
For each item in creditors for which security has been given:
state the amounts secured
give a general indication of the security.
Liabilities for taxation and social security should be separately disclosed.
State the amount of provision for aggregate recommended dividend.
ACT on the proposed dividend should not be included with the dividend, but included as a current tax liability.
The amount of obligations under finance leases should be shown separately.
Creditors falling due after more than one year
For items where security has been given:
state the amounts secured
give a general indication of the security.
For each item included in creditors due after one year, disclose separately:
amounts payable by instalments any of which are due more than five years hence, and the total of such instalments
amounts payable otherwise than by instalments more than five years hence.
Where any part of the debt is payable after more than five years, show terms of repayment and rates of interest payable.
If this produces a statement of excessive length, give a general indication of the terms and rates of interest.
Disclose obligations under finance leases separately and split between those payable in two to five years inclusive, and more than five years.
12 Debtors
These amounts are all due within one year.
13 Creditors falling due within one year
14 Creditors falling due after more than one year
The bank loan bears interest at 10% per annum and is repayable in annual instalments on 30th December each year.
It is wholly repayable within five years.
The current portion is shown in creditors falling dues within one year.
The loan is secured on the company's land and buildings.
Obligations under finance leases are due as follows:
Source
Comments
Deferred taxation
Show any provision for deferred taxation separately from any provisions for other taxation.
Deferred tax should be provided to the extent that it is probable that an asset or liability will arise.
Disclose the following:
the major components of the net balance
where a note to the accounts states the value of an asset which differs from its book value, the tax implications of disposing of the asset at this stated value, if material
the amount of any unprovided deferred tax analysed between its major components
Recoverable ACT should be deducted from the deferred tax account, if there is a deferred tax account available for this purpose.
Share capital
Allotted share capital and called up share capital which has been paid up should be shown separately.
State the authorised share capital, and number and total nominal value of shares of each class allotted.
For preference shares issued pre 6.4.73 at a fixed rate of dividend the new rate should be shown.
Revaluation reserve
Give a reconciliation of movements on reserves showing:
balance brought forward
transfers to and from the reserve
source and application of such transfers
balance carried forward.
Disclose the treatment for taxation purposes of amounts debited or credited to the revaluation reserve.
The investment property revaluation reserve should be displayed prominently in the financial statements.
15 Deferred taxation
16 Share capital
17 Revaluation reserve
The amount of deferred taxation not provided on revaluation surpluses is shown in note 15.
Source
Comments
Pensions
For a defined contribution scheme disclose:
the nature of the scheme (ie defined contribution)
the accounting policy
the pension cost charge for the period
any outstanding or prepaid contributions at the balance sheet date.
Capital commitments
Give particulars of capital expenditure authorised but not yet contracted for, and also capital expenditure contracted but not yet provided for.
18 Pensions
The company operates a defined contribution pension scheme.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the company in an independently administered fund.
The pension cost charge represents contributions payable by the company to the fund.
19 Capital commitments
Source
Comments
Audit report
An audit report is required for every set of accounts prepared for every reference period (except dormant companies — s.253).
The audit report should specify the standards which have been followed during the audit.
The audit report should state whether, in the opinion of the auditors, the accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985 and give a true and fair view of the state of the company's affairs and of its profit or loss for the year.
Reference should be made to the source and application of funds statement in the opinion paragraph.
If any of the following requirements have not been met, the auditors report should state that fact:
proper accounting records must be kept
proper returns must be obtained from branches not visited by the auditor
the accounts must be in agreement with the accounting records and returns
all information and explanations considered necessary for the audit must be given.
If the information required on emoluments and other benefits of directors is not given, the auditors must disclose it in their reports.
If the information in the directors' report is not consistent with the accounts, the auditors must state that fact in their report.
The audit report should refer to significant departures from SSAPs where either they are not explained in the accounts or they are explained in the accounts but the auditor does not concur.
The audit report should be signed by the auditors and state their identity.
The date on the audit report should be the date on which the auditors sign the report, which should be on or after the date of board approval.
Report of the auditors
To the members of A. Layout Limited
We have audited the financial statements on pages 3 to 13 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company at 31st March 1991 and of its profit and source and application of funds for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Stoy Hayward 8 Baker Street London W1M 1DA
15th July 1991  
A. LAYOUT LIMITED
Abbreviated Accounts
Year ended 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
A company is not entitled to file abbreviated accounts if it is, or was, at any time within the financial year to which the accounts relate:
a Plc
a banking or insurance company
an authorised person under the Financial Services Act 1986 or, a member of a group containing one of the above.
In order to qualify as a small or medium-sized company in respect of a financial year, a company must satisfy for that year and the preceding year at least two of the following conditions:
A parent company's accounts:
may be filed as "small" abbreviated accounts only if the group falls under the small group limits
may be filed as "medium" abbreviated accounts only if the group falls under the medium group limits.
An abbreviated balance sheet may be restricted to the headings denoted by letters or Roman numerals on the required formats.
No profit and loss account or directors' report is required to be filed with the Registrar for a small company.
Where the directors have produced abbreviated accounts, they must include a statement immediately above their signatures that:
they have taken advantage of the exemptions available for small (or medium) companies
they have done so on the grounds that the company is entitled to the benefit of those exemptions as a small (or medium) company.
Signatures
The balance sheet should be signed by a director on behalf of the board.
State the name of the signatory.
Disclose the date on which the accounts were formally approved by the board.
Balance sheet at 31st March 1991
In preparing these abbreviated accounts we have relied upon sections 246 and 247 of the Companies Act 1985 on the grounds that the company is entitled to the benefit of those sections as a small company.
C A Johnson Director
15th July 1991
The notes on pages 2 and 3 form part of these financial statements.
Source
Comments
Only limited notes need to be given in the abbreviated accounts for filing with the Registrar:
accounting policies
share capital and particulars of allotments
fixed assets movements and depreciation
aggregate creditors due after five years and secured creditors
basis of foreign currency translation
corresponding amounts
amount of debtors and creditors falling due after one year
loans to directors and officers
significant holdings in undertakings
particulars of, reasons for and effect of departures from law where such departures have been made to give a true and fair view
name of the ultimate holding company.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31st March 1991
1.
Accounting policies
There have been no changes in the accounting policies during the year.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, including the revaluation of land and buildings, using the following accounting policies:
Turnover
Turnover represents sales to outside customers at invoiced amount less value added tax.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost less estimated residual values of all fixed assets, except freehold land, over their expected useful lives.
It is calculated on the original cost of the assets at the following rates:
Investment property
The investment property is included at its open market value.
No depreciation is provided on the freehold investment property and the directors consider that this accounting policy results in the accounts giving a true and fair view.
Stocks and work in progress
Stocks are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is based on the cost of purchase on a first in, first out basis.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling prices less further costs to completion and disposal.
Deferred taxation
Provision is made for timing differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes, to the extent that it is probable that a liability or asset will crystallise.
Leased assets
Where assets are financed by leasing agreements that give rights approximating to ownership ( "finance leases" ), the assets are treated as if they had been purchased outright.
The amount capitalised is the present value of the minimum lease payments payable over the term of the lease.
The corresponding leasing commitments are shown as amounts payable to the lessor.
Depreciation on the relevant assets is charged to the profit and loss account.
Lease payments are analysed between capital and interest using the actuarial method.
The interest is charged to the profit and loss account.
The capital part reduces the amounts payable to the lessor.
All other leases are treated as "operating leases" .
Their annual rentals are charged to the profit and loss account on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Pension costs
Contributions to the company's defined contribution pension scheme are charged to the profit and loss account in the year in which they become payable.
2 Tangible assets
3 Creditors falling due after one year
The bank loan bears interest at 10% per annum and is repayable in annual instalments on 30th December each year.
It is wholly repayable within five years.
The current portion is shown in creditors falling due within one year.
The loan is secured on the company's land and buildings.
4 Share capital
Source
Comments
Audit report
Where abbreviated accounts are filed with the Registrar of Companies, a special auditors' report should be filed instead of the report on the full accounts.
The special auditors' report should:
state that in their opinion the requirements for exemption are satisfied and the abbreviated accounts have been properly prepared, and
reproduce the full text of their auditors' report on the full accounts of the company.
If the audit report is qualified the special report should include any further material necessary to understand the qualification.
The audit report should be signed by the auditors and state their identity.
The date on the audit report should be the date on which the auditors sign the report, which should be on or after the date of board approval.
Auditors' report to the directors of A. Layout Limited pursuant to paragraph 8 of Schedule 8 to the Companies Act 1985
We have examined the abbreviated accounts on pages 1 to 3 together with the full financial statements of A. Layout Limited for the year ended 31st March 1991.
The scope of our work for the purpose of this report was limited to confirming that the directors are entitled to deliver abbreviated accounts and that the abbreviated accounts have been properly prepared from the full financial statements.
In our opinion the directors are entitled under sections 246 and 247 of the Companies Act 1985 to deliver abbreviated accounts in respect of the year ended 31st March 1991, and the abbreviated accounts on pages 1 to 3 have been properly prepared in accordance with Schedule 8 to that Act.
On 15th July 1991 we reported, as auditors of A. Layout Limited, to the members on the full financial statements prepared under s.226 of the Companies Act 1985 for the year ended 31st March 1991 and our audit report was as follows:
We have audited the financial statements on pages 3 to 13 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the company's affairs at 31st March 1991 and of its profit and source and application of funds for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Stoy Hayward 8 Baker Street London W1M 1DA
22nd July 1991  
A. LAYOUT (DORMANT) LIMITED
Year ended 31st March 1991
Source
Comments
A company is regarded as dormant: in any period during which no transaction occurs which must be recorded in the company's books, and if it can claim small company exemptions under s.246, or could have but for belonging to an ineligible group, and is not required to produce group accounts.
Advantage can be taken of the filing exemptions as a small company provided that the appropriate note is included on the balance sheet.
Disclose the names of persons who were directors at any time during the year.
Give details for directors at the year end of interests in shares and debentures of any group company at the year end and at the beginning of the year or subsequent date of appointment.
Directors' report to be approved by the board of directors and signed on behalf of the board by a director or the secretary of the company.
State the name of the signatory.
The balance sheet of the company must contain a statement from the directors, immediately above the signature, that the company has been dormant throughout the financial year.
The balance sheet should be signed by a director on behalf of the board.
State the name of the signatory.
Disclose the date on which the accounts were formally approved by the board.
A dormant company may pass a special resolution not to appoint auditors.
Year ended 31st March 1991
Directors' report
The directors hereby submit the annual report and accounts of the company for the year ended 31st March 1991.
The company has not traded during the above financial year, and accordingly no profit and loss account has been prepared for the year.
The directors of the company during the financial year were C A Johnson and J E Smith.
No director holds any interest in the issued share capital of the company.
The interests of C A Johnson and J E Smith in the share capital of A. Layout Plc, the company's ultimate holding company, are disclosed in the accounts of that company.
The director retiring by rotation is C A Johnson who being eligible offers himself for re-election.
Signed on behalf of the Board.
H M B Saunders Secretary
22nd July 1991
Balance sheet at 31st March 1991
The company, whose ultimate holding company is A. Layout Plc, was dormant, within the meaning of section 250 of the Companies Act 1985, throughout the financial year.
Signed
C A Johnson Director
22nd July 1991