

EGYPT
From the windows of the train, the world appeared to be emerging still from the waters of the Deluge.
Everywhere one looked there was water, and the narrow tongues of land seemed newly born and tenuous.
The railway line to Rashid, where the Nile disgorges into the sea, ran along a low ridge between the Mediterranean and the marshy expanse of Lake Edku.
The train was a shabby affair of two antique carriages which creaked and pitched like tethered ships.
Bars of sunlight broke through the slatted windows and swept back and forth across the floor, and the smell of the sea came up the carriage bearing memories of childhood outings.
We passed the village of Edku secure on a mound above the watery plains.
Against the sky were the ruins of windmills.
Beyond dunes of palm trees, the sea was grey.
Far out on the horizon a ship glinted in the sun.
Across the lake, a remnant of an earlier mouth of the river, fishermen poled boats past great banks of reeds.
The low flat boats were barely visible, and the distant figures appeared to be walking on water with tall poles and long smooth strides.
In Rashid the cobbled streets were too narrow for cars, and the town was crowded with donkeys and carts.
We went looking for the river.
The houses of eighteenth-century merchants, with mashribiya windows and columns pillaged from a more ancient town, leant over the streets.
Outside a corner teahouse long-eared donkeys gazed mournfully through the windows at their owners chatting over breakfasts of tea and beans and tobacco.
We passed a mosque with a deep forest of columns where men in white gallibayas sat reading in the gloom.
The Nile appeared quite suddenly at the end of a street, blue and shining between the tall houses.
We came out on the waterfront into a gust of wind.
It was roughening the surface of the river and turning a row of feluccas moored along the bank.
On the far bank were thick reeds, a line of palm trees leaning in the wind, and a dust road.
The sea was just out of sight, a mile or two downstream.
A man was unfurling a sail on one of the feluccas, and we ran along the bank and asked him if he would take us across the river.
He waved us aboard.
With the hem of his gallibaya caught between his teeth to keep it dry, the boatman waded into the river, pushed the bow out, then climbed aboard and swung the tiller over.
The sail filled and the boat lifted in the water as the wind took it.
In a moment we were in mid-stream, caught up in the arms of the river.
The boatman laughed and shook his head when we said we didn't know where we were going.
 "Anywhere," we called back to him from the bow.
 "Anywhere on the far bank." 
He stood in the stern balancing himself against a stay, guiding the tiller with his bare foot.
We slanted across the river, the wind carrying us against the current, and coasted up the far bank.
We passed a sheikh's tomb, a small white-domed shrine almost buried in the reeds.
 "Sheikh Ibrahim," the boatman called to us.
He made the gesture of someone sleeping, tilting his head and laying it on his hands, and smiling peacefully.
Then he looked up and appealed to the tomb with a traditional boatman's chant: "It is not our will that we sail past, O Father.
But the wind blows and the boat goes, and we have no power to stay."
The Nile has two mouths, one at Rashid and the other some 90 miles to the east at Damyat; just below Cairo the river bifurcates for its last run to the sea.
In this matter of mouths, the Nile can be said to be modest.
The river is not more than 300 yards wide at either mouth.
The mouth of the Amazon, the Nile's only serious rival, is over 150 miles across.
The Nile has little need of such display.
It is a giant amongst rivers, the longest and mightiest in the world.
From Rashid to the river's headwaters in the heart of the continent is over 4,000 miles.
For almost half that length, through northern Sudan and all of Egypt, it is joined by no tributary, flowing as it does through pure desert.
For millennia the people along its banks have depended entirely on its bounty.
The twentieth century has done little to reduce its importance.
For over fifty million people, the Nile remains life itself.
Melinda and I lay on the hot bank, watching the swallows dive.
Their migrations were the journey on which we were embarking, following the course of the Nile, through Egypt and Sudan and on into Uganda.
I had not known Melinda when I first entertained the idea of travelling the length of the Nile.
But now, going to the Mountains of the Moon without her would have been heart-breaking, and I was overjoyed when she decided to join me.
With typical diligence she undertook an intensive Arabic course, and arrived in Egypt chatting to boatmen like a veteran.
The river slid by at our feet, broad and tangible and full of promise.
The north wind gave the day a restless feeling, and the journey stretched before us like an early map whose faint features were pleasingly unreliable.
In the garden of a blue house, a few yards from the rivermouth, we met a holy man with a cherub's face and a patchy beard.
He shook  our hands, holding them for a moment and laughing softly.
He was much given to questions and hilarity.
He enquired about where we were from, why we had come here, and where we were going, and laughed uproariously at all our answers.
It was a soft infectious laughter, as if we were sharing private jokes.
He sat with his back against a palm tree.
He spent most of his time in this one spot for he was a cripple.
He raised the skirts of his gallibaya to show us his legs.
They were short and deformed and looked as if they were made of rubber.
He lifted one of the plump feet and let it drop again to show us how lifeless it was.
He laughed at this too.
He rocked his head and his shoulders shook.
Then suddenly, without introduction or explanation, he began to recite verses of the Koran in a sing-song chant.
His voice was strong and thrilling.
He sat with his eyes closed, lifting his head to sing each verse and dropping it again in the silences between the passages.
Gone was the comic character.
His voice filled the garden.
He stopped as abruptly as he had begun.
 "Wallali," he said, taking our hands and laughing.
He was his old self again.
 "A blessing for your journey." 
 "Tell me," he continued.
 "Have you no rivers in your own country?" 
 "Only little ones," I replied.
"Yes, of course.
Inglistan is a very little country, isn't it?
And yet always making such big noises.
But listen, you must come and see me after your journey.
Tell me what the other end of the river is like.
You will find me here."
He patted the ground.
 "I don't think we will be going home this way." 
"In that case, a letter will do.
I want to know a number of things.
Religion, of course.
Are the people worshipping Allah?
Food.
How many wives the men take.
Do they have policemen?
Are they friends with the Libyans?
Oh, and the question of nakedness."
 "Nakedness?" 
"The women going about in the streets showing their nakedness to everyone who passes.
I have heard much about this."
We promised to write, and he waved farewell from his place beneath the tree.
We could hear him laughing as we closed the garden door.
In the main square in Rashid we caught a taxi back to Alexandria.
The driver drove like a madman.
On the dark road unlit lorries loomed up like demons.
It is said that Alexander himself paced out the plan for his Egyptian city before hurrying off to conquer the rest of the world.
He returned to Alexandria some eight years later, in his coffin.
His tomb is reputed to lie beneath a mosque in what is now the Sharia Nebi Danyal.
Excavation has proved impossible but there is a story that hints at great finds.
In 1850 a dragoman from the Russian consulate claimed, marvellously, to have seen the body of Alexander through a hole in a wooden door in the cellars of the mosque.
It sat, he reported,"in a sort of glass cage with a diadem on its head and half bowed on a sort of elevation or throne.
A quantity of books or papyrus were scattered round".
Sadly, the man was a notorious liar.
Ancient Alexandria was the prototype of the Hellenistic city, open, enquiring, cosmopolitan.
The great public buildings were stuccoed with gypsum to make them dazzle in the bright sea-light.
The Canopic Way, lined with marbled colonnades, ran from one end of the city to the other, from the Gate of the Sun to the Gate of the Moon.
It was the city of the Ptolemies, of Callimachus and Euclid and Eratosthenes, and of Antony and Cleopatra.
Even then Alexandria had been a city of expatriates, maintaining a precarious balance between two worlds, the world of the Mediterranean and the world of the Nile.
It was a Hellenistic city in Egypt, and an Egyptian city in the classical world.
Both worlds mistrusted it as alien; its inhabitants belonged to no one.
Their loyalties were personal and their tastes cosmopolitan.
The decline of the Hellenistic world left Alexandria isolated, and it did not again become a great cosmopolitan city until the nineteenth century when its resurrection was built on the profits of cotton.
Greeks and Levantines, French and Italians all made the city their home.
But this later Alexandria had little of the conviction of its  Hellenistic predecessor.
It was a subtle, sophisticated, languorous place, a city of intrigue and profane ambition.
It had about it an air of doom.
For a long time that was a great part of its charm.
European Alexandria lingers on in the Italianate architecture, the long lines of balconies along the seafront, in the old shop signs in French and Arabic, in the Greek cafes like Trianon's and Pastroudis with their air of idleness and neglect, and in old-fashioned pensions like the Hotel Normandie.
The Hotel Normandie was on the fifth floor of one of the tall buildings overlooking the east harbour.
Sand had drifted into the hallway on the ground floor where a one-eyed watchman, who remembered the names of all the English officers who had stayed there during the war, lived beneath the stairs.
The lift, an ancient grilled affair, was a silent relic for which spare parts could no longer be found.
The lobby of the hotel was a large room crowded with dark bureaux and wicker settees with dusty velvet cushions.
There were chandeliers but the burnt-out bulbs had not been replaced.
Ranged round the lobby were the rooms of the hotel.
They were light and spacious with tall double doors and small balconies overlooking the harbour.
Hanging by the entranceway was a framed photograph which showed an expatriate gathering in the lobby in 1950, a happy smiling group.
Standing in their midst, beaming out at the camera, her arms linked with two guests, was the plump figure of Madame Melasse, the former proprietress.
Two years after the photograph had been taken Nasser came to power in a nationalist revolution which signalled the end for the European community in Alexandria, as it did for European domination of Egyptian affairs.
Expatriates, who between the wars numbered 80,000 in a city of half a million, began to depart.
It was a painful process.
Most had made their lives in Alexandria; many families had lived there for generations.
The Suez crisis, which  prompted the expulsion of all French and British citizens, hastened the end.
Madame Melasse was one of the handful of Europeans who remained.
She had nowhere else to go.
As her friends left the city one by one, she carried on at the Hotel Normandie in spite of the declining trade.
Her evening soirees, like the one in the photograph, became a thing of the past.
Standards slipped but there were none of the old crowd now to witness the decay.
The Madame lived to the age of 90. when she died, some time in the 1970s, the hotel was left to Abdulrahim, a Nubian from Aswan who had come to work for the Madame as a young boy before the Second World War.
The hotel had become his home, and it was fitting in the new Egypt that he should own It.
Abdu was now a considerable patriarch who moved about the lounge in the evenings in a splendid white gallibaya which did much to hide his enormous paunch.
He spoke four languages, as well as his native Arabic, the languages of old Alexandria: Greek, French, Italian and English.
His large family lived on the floor above and scampered between hotel and home by climbing through a window and up a fire escape.
Abdu retained a great loyalty to his former mistress and spoke of her with reverence.
The photograph confirmed that he had changed almost nothing in the hotel.
The heavy furniture of the lobby was still arranged exactly as it had been in 1950.
The only expatriate survivor from the old days was Sophie, a Pole whose family had lost all their property when the Communists came to power after the Second World War.
She had lived in Cairo since childhood.
Her friends were all White Russians.
She had been coming to Alexandria, to the Hotel Normandie, for a few weeks every spring for almost forty years.
Sophie was a small frail woman who moved about the lounge as silently as a cat, greeting everyone in whispered French.
She remembered Abdu as the little Nubian boy sent out to fetch the morning editions of the European newspapers.
Her friends were all gone now, even the White Russians.
 "Egypt is no good," she sighed.
 "If you have somewhere else to go, you will go." 
She remembered Madame Melasse well.
In the last years she was one of the few people to visit her in her room.
"She became un petit fou, you understand.
Always she was wanting the window open.
And asking about boats.
Could we see any boats arriving in the harbour?
She was waiting for a boat, you understand.
She thought someone was coming to fetch her in a boat to take her away.
No one ever knew where it was she hoped to go.
She had been such a fine woman.
Everyone had liked her."
One morning in the Sharia Salah Salem we came upon a shop of curios and antiques.
Inside it was dark and cavernous.
At a desk by the window sat a round-shouldered man.
He did not look up when we came in.
He was counting money.
The desk lamp was on, and his hands moving over the piles of money were bathed in yellow light.
The shop was crowded with relics of old European Alexandria, the things left behind by people abandoning a way of life.
There was a stuffed and mounted gazelle's head with one of its glass eyes missing.
There was an ornate sofa with velvet brocade cushions which raised clouds of dust when we sat on them.
There was an oak hallstand with a fogged mirror, a pile of faded carpets and tapestries, oriental vases, a complete leather-bound edition of Balzac, and glass cases of silver and china.
At the back of the shop we found an old mannequin with a bob hair-do and a 1920s low-waisted dress.
Beside the mannequin was a wind-up gramophone in a dark cabinet.
As we examined it the man from behind the desk appeared soundlessly at our side.
He was a heavy man in a baggy suit.
He had a grey face and there was something wrong with his eyes.
He wore spectacles and behind the thick lenses his eyes were cloudy and shifted continually from side to side so you were never sure where he was looking.
 "His Master's Voice," he said, stroking the dark wood of the cabinet.
 "English company." 
We nodded.
The eyes shifted back and forth like a metronome.
He took a 78 from the shelf in the cabinet, wiped it with a fat hand, and laid it on the turntable.
He wound the crank and lifted the heavy needle on to the record.
It crackled like a ship's radio, and then, as if from a very great distance, we heard a band strike up.
It was an old dance melody of the thirties.
The music sounded so faint and far-off it seemed to come from somewhere streets away, a voice from a vanished Alexandria:
 "Will you love me for ever and ever, So that nothing will sever this love?" 
The manager sank into the dust of the brocaded sofa.
 "The gramophone belonged to a Hungarian count," he said.
We must have looked suspicious.
"I acquired it from him myself, along with a few other incidentals.
He was very proud of the gramophone.
He used it, he said, when he was courting the daughters of wealthy cotton magnates.
The rich are so hungry for titles.
The one thing they cannot buy.
At least not without selling their offspring."
 "Was the count successful?" 
I asked.
"Rather too successful, I understand.
He married twice."
 "Not so unusual." 
"The problem was he omitted to divorce the first wife.
Her father had proved less generous than expected."
 "How did he hope to get away with it?" 
"Oh, I think he was accustomed to getting away with a great deal.
They lived in Rome, the first wife and her family.
I presume he believed they would never hear of the second marriage.
But bad news has a way of travelling."
 "What happened?" 
"The father of the first wife was friendly with the Interior Minister.
Problems arose about his papers and he was deported."
 "What happened to him?" 
Melinda asked.
"Went to America.
Ran a garage in Pittsburgh.
The second wife, I understand, ran off with a baseball player."
We took a bus south through the Delta to Cairo.
The road was crowded with ancient American cars.
Men in flapping gallibayas hung from the running boards like gangsters.
As we passed them on the road we glimpsed great crowds of people in the wide back seats, a jumble of merry faces at the windows.
The more crowded the car the merrier the faces seemed to be.
The Delta was a confusion of water and lush fields beneath a huge pale sky.
Its labyrinth of canals was clogged with water hyacinths, and small bands of moorhens pushed their way through the shiny leaves.
Willow trees along the banks trailed their branches in the current.
Irrigation ditches like thin strips of sky ran away through the flat fields where figures bent to work with short hoes.
At midday we crossed the Nile at Kafr el-Zaiyat.
A felucca, piled high with newly baked water jugs the colour of wet earth, ran upstream before the north wind.
On the far bank children played on an old boat, rotting at the river's edge, jumping from the stern into the water, their brown bodies glistening like fish.
Women came down to the river in groups to wash clothes and pots.
They stood in the water up to their knees, their bright skirts floating about then.
Then they lifted the wide metal pans of washing on to their heads and set off back to their villages, erect along white lanes, their clothes a bright flash of colour in the green landscape.
In ancient times there was none of this cultivated order about the Delta: it was a wilderness of undrained marshes, just the kind of primeval watery wastes from which the ancient Egyptians believed the world first emerged.
In those days it was the haunt of crocodiles and hippopotamus, both symbols of evil in the iconography of ancient Egypt.
Today neither inhabits the Delta, nor for that matter any of the Egyptian Nile.
Now one must go a long way upriver to find them, far into Sudan and Uganda.
The Nile passes through Cairo like a stranger.
In all its long journey from the heart of Africa, it has seen nothing like this: the tall modern buildings sprouting suddenly along its banks, the incessant flow of traffic across bridges, the noise, the confusion.
The river is like the fellahin newly arrived from the countryside, appalled, hoping to pass through the city unnoticed.
Like everything in Egypt, Cairo is the creation of the Nile but the river and the city seem estranged.
Cairo's problem is the problem of Egypt epitomized: a huge and rapidly growing population in a confined space.
Its population has doubled in the past ten years and will double again in the next ten; its growth is due as much to the constant influx of newcomers from the Nile villages as to Egypt's birth-rate.
The shortage of housing is so acute that the vast Cairene cemeteries, known as the City of the Dead, host a population of squatters thought to number over a million.
They eke out an existence in cardboard and tin shacks amongst the graves.
There is a Dickensian quality about Cairo: the dense narrow lanes, the rubbish and stench of the streets, the jostling crowds, the animals, the dramatic disparity between rich and poor, the spectacle of young children hard at work, the host of people scraping a living from the most menial of tasks porters, scavengers, match-sellers, bootblacks, water-carriers.
But like the flyovers which effortlessly criss-cross the city above the congested streets, there is another Cairo removed from the distress of the slums.
It is a Cairo of wealthy suburbs and western consumer affluence.
The lifestyle of its inhabitants is not markedly different in style or expectation from the middle classes of Los Angeles or Lyons.
Though they inhabit the same city as the great mass of the Cairene poor, theirs is another world entirely.
Their conspicuous consumption of all that is beyond the reach of most Egyptians and their eager embrace of foreign influences is a breeding ground for political unrest and religious fundamentalism which, increasingly in Egypt, are two sides of the same coin.
We spent two months in Cairo, living in the western suburb of Shafeyeen in an apartment rented from a French teacher who was away on home leave in Normandy.
The apartment was prone to nocturnal visitations, for the teacher had neglected to inform her many lovers of her absence.
We came to recognize the furtive knocking of these late callers, and tried to alleviate their disappointment by inviting them in for tea and sympathy.
They proved a pleasant and varied lot: a secret policeman, an Under-Secretary, a garage mechanic from Damyat, and an alcoholic expatriate.
One evening the Under-Secretary and the expatriate managed to call within minutes of each other and we found ourselves playing host to them both.
They got on exceptionally well over a bottle of whisky which the expatriate had brought as a gift.
The streets around the apartment building were invariably submerged, like many parts of Cairo, beneath an overflow of sewage.
These lakes of black fetid water were tidal, reaching their high point in the early evening before subsiding again through the night.
Only the fact that the streets were also under construction made them passable; one made one's way cautiously from one mound of earth to another.
The building's elderly bowwab or watchman lived with his family in a shed in the yard.
When the tides were in, the black water ran through the yard and invaded his home.
From our balcony we could see pots floating through the doorway and the family wading in and out in their bare feet.
His wife, an enormous woman in black, wailed and wrung out the ends of her skirt.
Eventually it became too much, and one afternoon we looked down to see the bowwab moving out.
Men were piling his furniture on to a cart in the street.
It took three of them to hoist his wife up.
She sat wedged between a bureau and a wet mattress.
The cart trundled off through the greasy water.
In the bureau mirror we could see the wife's doleful reflection bouncing against a background of blue sky.
Neighbours said they were going back to the country.
We spent days exploring the old quarters of the city.
The bus for the centre of Cairo took us down to the Nile and then along the Corniche to the 6th of October bridge.
The river shone in the early light.
Along the banks the acacia trees were heavy with red and purple blossoms.
We passed a small park where a row of conscript soldiers slept beneath the trees.
They were, in their way, an incentive to early departure for if we passed a little later than usual we would find them at their morning defecation, squatting in a row along a low wall.
The bus terminated in the chaos of Midan el-Tahrir, Liberation Square.
The bus station was a nightmare of greasy pavements, surging crowds and hot engines.
Only the fit and the young braved the terrific congestion of Cairo's buses, which careered through the city with men hanging from their doors and windows like barnacles.
Behind the bus station, through the glass doors of a luxury hotel, you could see the feluccas passing on the river.
In the other direction is nineteenth-century European Cairo with its straight avenues and tall Parisian facades, reminiscent of Haussmann.
Huge painted posters overhang the streets depicting the garish colossi of the latest films: threatening mustachioed young men and sultry women in tight dresses.
Beneath them cars sit bumper to bumper in a haze of exhaust fumes.
Beyond the Ezbekia Gardens and as far as the Moqqatam Hills lies the medieval city, dense, ruinous and vital.
In its narrow streets are to be found the great architectural masterpieces of Fatamid and Mamaluke Cairo.
The Sharia al-Mu'izz was the High Street of medieval Cairo.
Now it is filled with the cacophony of coppersmiths.
Domes and minarets rise above the street, the madrasahs and mausoleums of Qalaun, of al-Nasir, his son, and of the Sultan Barquq.
Built in the thirteenth and fourteenth century, they are contemporaneous with many of the great Gothic cathedrals of Europe.
Their virtues, evident even in decay, tend towards intimacy.
Away from the noisy public confessional of the street, the quiet courtyards, the stuccoed passageways and the domed tomb chambers offer the solace of fine detail, birdsong and a watery half-light.
Nearby, in the courtyard of the madrasah of al-Salih Ayyub, we found two boys kicking a football through the dust.
Ruins, which had once sheltered all the intricate legal debates of medieval Cairo, loomed over their game.
A Corinthian column, plundered by the Muslim builders from a Greek ruin, supported the torn awning of a tea-house.
A line of washing, big white drawers and a pink headscarf hung from a Mamaluke window.
In the southern quarter of the city is the Mosque of Ibn Tulun, the finest monument of Islamic Cairo.
We found the courtyard a wide sea of light.
At midday we climbed the minaret and looked out over the rooftops of Cairo, stretching like a vast uneven plain from the Moqqatam Hills to the tall modern buildings along the river.
The terrible teeming streets appeared only as dark clefts between the buildings.
The rooftops looked like some devastated land, arid and littered with debris.
Here and there a few people moved about amongst the chicken coops and the junk: a girl chasing a goose into a pen, a boy flying a kite.
Bright lines of washing flapped in the wind.
Away to the south-west, on the far bank of the river, standing up on the desert bluffs, we could see the Pyramids of Giza, shimmering through the haze above the city.
In the early morning at Giza, before the tourist buses and the touts, you can almost have the pyramids to yourself.
Walking up from the main road we passed the camel drivers squatting round their early morning fires.
Their animals, richly caparisoned for the tourists, were munching at green piles of clover and swatting their tails against the early flies.
It seemed, fleetingly, like an encampment of Bedouin on the edge of the desert.
The morning was full of sounds.
The voices of camel riders half a mile away were uncannily clear.
The pyramids acted as great  sounding boards in the thin air of the desert.
Disembodied whispers, laughter, voices fell from their slopes like stones.
At a distance the effect of the pyramids is aesthetic; close up, simply astonishment, for nothing can prepare you for their scale.
Attempts to illustrate their size tend to stupefy rather than enlighten.
Napoleon calculated that the stone from the three Giza pyramids would build a wall, three metres high, round the whole of France.
Their size is only matched by the scale of human suffering which they represent.
The pyramids were already 2,000 years old when Herodotus visited them in the middle of the fifth century BC, but he found the Egyptians still told tales of misery about their construction, the horrors suffered by the populace.
The Egyptians could hardly bring themselves to mention the names of Cheops and Chephren, he reports, and preferred to call the pyramids after Philitis, a shepherd who tended his flocks in the area.
Their long history as tourist attractions reveals the sad decline in standards of graffiti.
Early practitioners were poetic.
A Roman woman inscribed a simple lament on the casing stones: "I saw the pyramids without you; sadly I shed tears here." 
On one of the Sphinx's toes there is quite a passable poem in ancient Greek:
Later visitors tended to forgo such poetic forays.
Flaubert denounced the great number of "imbeciles" whose names littered antiquities.
He climbed to the top of the Great Pyramid only to find inscribed in black letters "a certain Buffard, 79 Rue Saint-Martin, wallpaper manufacturer." 
We became friends with the Under-Secretary who, always hopeful of the French teacher's early return, paid a number of late-night visits to the flat.
He gave us his telephone number at the Ministry, and one afternoon when we rang him there he invited us to dinner.
Hasan lived in an exclusive suburb to the west of the city.
His apartment was decorated like a hunting lodge.
There were racks of rifles of various sizes and vintages, a stand of archery bows, a wall display of arrows, a mounted cross-bow, and a glass case with a pair of eighteenth-century pistols.
Between the weapons were the mounted heads of the victims, mainly gazelle and ibex which he hunted in the eastern desert.
We sat on a sofa beneath the doleful gaze of these trophies while Hasan plied us with drinks and an array of Egyptian delicacies which he brought simmering from the kitchen.
He himself ate nothing but stood beaming in the middle of the room, his whisky glass clutched in his hand.
He had a wonderful smile which took hold of his whole face.
He was a small man with the posture of a pigeon, chest and buttocks protruding.
His arms hung at his sides slightly apart from his body.
When he turned or moved, they swung about stiffly like things that did not belong to him.
He had been blown up by a landmine in the '73 war and he was held together, he told us, with metal pins.
He was dismissive of our plan to travel the length of the Nile.
 "The desert," Hasan sighed.
"You must go to the desert.
In the desert nothing changes.
Not like the river valley.
And in the desert you are alone.
That is a great thing in Egypt.
To be in an empty place."
He showed us his collection of guns, taking them down from their racks and handing them out to us as if we were about to set off on some dangerous mission.
We stood about the living-room heavily armed.
Then he seized on the idea of demonstrating his cross-bow.
He set up a pile of cushions on the sofa and propped two telephone directories against them.
He waved us across the room to stand behind him.
There was a delay while he struggled to load it.
 "I never use it for hunting," he said as he wrestled with the mechanism.
He knelt and sighted, swaying slightly.
The loading had made him break out in a terrible sweat and perspiration ran down his forehead into his eyes.
He stopped to wipe it away, then sighted again.
The bow went off with a terrible noise, like bones breaking.
The arrow had gone through the directories, through the pillows and the back of the sofa, and into the wall behind.
The tip was barbed and we couldn't get it out.
The sofa, pinned to the wall, had been killed with a single shot.
 "Very powerful bow," Hasan muttered, pulling in vain at the shaft.
He slumped in a chair, still smiling.
He was pouring with sweat.
We sat on the sofa with the arrow shaft between us at eye-level.
He topped up our glasses and filled his own.
 "I am a very good Muslim," he laughed.
 "The Koran tells me never to drink a drop of wine." 
He gulped his whisky.
 "I never do." 
He sat in the chair for a moment, breathing heavily.
Then he was seized with a new idea.
"Let us go for a drive.
And see Cairo."
Hasan hunched over the wheel of his car with a great effort of concentration, swinging it this way and that to avoid the atrocious pot-holes.
We bounced against the roof as the car banged in and out of each one.
We became alarmed as he turned the car towards El Gala bridge and the city.
Rush-hour in Cairo lasts all night.
The streets were still teeming.
Chatting gaily to us over his shoulder, he sped between clanging trams and wayward donkey carts and crowds of children chasing footballs.
Finally we drove up into the Moqqatam Hills whose wide boulevards were mercifully empty.
It was a delightful place, wooded and spacious, with views over the whole city.
The hectic streets were reduced to strings of lights.
Without warning Hasan bumped over a kerb and drove across a stretch of grass towards a precipitous drop.
For an awful moment I thought he was going to drive over the edge, but he stopped abruptly and we all got out.
We could see the Kasr el-Nil bridge, the lights of the cars streaming over it and the dark width of the river.
 "My father left me land here," Hasan said.
He seemed more sober out from behind the wheel.
 "Where?" 
I asked.
"Here.
This land.
We are standing on it.
My father left it to me.
There were many children and this is what he left me."
 "What are you going to do with it?" 
I asked.
"I sold it.
Almost twenty years ago, just after the '67 war.
We were young, we lived for the moment.
We didn't know if we would be alive next month, next year.
I sold it and used the money for a good time."
He was turning about to look at the view and the slope of grass back up to the road.
His arms swung round.
"It is my great regret.
My father loved this place.
It was his legacy to me.
Now it is too late.
What can I do?
I cannot afford to buy it back at today's prices."
He gestured towards the road.
"They are making plans.
They are going to build houses next year.
This will be someone else's garden where we are standing.
What did Hannibal say?
The gods do not give you two chances."
We spent several days in the Egyptian Museum, a large sandstone building between the river and Midan el-Tahrir.
The rooms were tall and dusty, and I had the feeling of rooting through an attic chest, the effects of a dead person, and coming to know them, through the old letters, the scraps of journals, the keepsakes, with a disturbing intimacy.
The world of ancient Egypt is one of order and optimism.
The Egyptians portrayed themselves, striding forward, as confident civilized beings, in harmony with the gods and with their fellow men and women.
There is an effortless quality to their endeavours.
Crops are harvested almost without sweat, boats set off on journeys with full sails, celebrations are carried off with style and decorum.
No nightmares cloud this vision.
The streets of Cairo, the squalor of its slums, the pain and ineptitude of life, find no echo here.
It is  a strangely innocent world, without a single moment of distress.
Ancient Egypt has been called the infancy of the soul, but coupled with that innocence is the terrible knowledge of death.
More than anything else, the Egyptians feared personal obliteration.
The museum contained rooms full of the most delicate domestic articles, not just tomb artefacts but things people had handled and loved.
There were vases of schist and porphyry and alabaster, hand mirrors of polished brass, paste jars shaped like flowers and hairpins shaped like hands, necklaces of turquoise, garnet and lapis lazuli.
One imagined the fine-featured Egyptian women at their toilet, carefully choosing their jewellery for the eyes of friends or lovers.
Four of the most beautiful bracelets had been found on the skeletal arm of a female mummy.
At the far end of one room was a wooden false door of the kind which enabled the spirit to leave its tomb at will.
The wood was riven with deep cracks and smelled, after all these millennia, as old wood always smells, of libraries.
Many of the life-size figures, with their polished skin and fine long limbs, have a terrific sensuality.
Mykerinus, who built the third pyramid at Giza, is seen with the beautiful goddess Hathor, the goddess of dance, music and love.
Her breasts show through her tunic.
Her arm is round his waist.
The light touch of her hand is electrifying.
Everywhere there were boats, endless models of boats like discarded toys.
They sail the Nile unworried by rogue currents or ill winds.
Beneath the awnings little toy people chat and listen to the music of harpists.
A pilot points the way ahead as if to will the journey was sufficient to make it happen.
Many of the boats carry sarcophagi for it was the wish of all Egyptians to journey after death to Abydos, the abode of Osiris, the god of the Underworld and of Resurrection.
The miniature boats were placed in their tombs like promises.
Everywhere too was the figure of Anubis, the dog-headed god, the major-domo of the Underworld.
He seemed a sinister character with his long snout and bony body, alert, watchful, suspicious.
His daughters, the serpents, the goddesses of freshness, waited nearby.
The coffins of the dead seemed innumerable, one inside another  like Russian dolls, like layers of meaning, with only the thin desiccated mummy at their heart.
Carved on the lid of the sarcophagus of Psusennes I is the pharaoh's effigy, his arms folded contentedly across his chest.
A kneeling figure, the goddess of the North Wind, cradles his head.
She will carry his boat "home" to Abydos, to Osiris and eternal life.
On the underside of the lid is carved the goddess Nut, the goddess of the Sky.
The heavenly bodies are her children; they enter her mouth and emerge again from her womb in their endless cycles.
Thus she too is connected with resurrection.
Beneath the coffin lid, the goddess lies above the wrapped body of the pharaoh.
She is barefoot and her arms are extended above her head.
She is clothed in a simple shift which reveals the outline of her thighs, the slight curve of her abdomen, her small round breasts.
Her body is adorned with the stars of the night sky, and round her limbs boats sail the Nile.
Coming out from the museum one evening into the Cairene twilight, we strolled along the Corniche.
The lights of the Gezira stretched across the darkening river.
Beyond the 6th of October bridge we found ourselves amongst an agitated crowd.
A body had been spotted in the Nile.
From the bank we could see it floating through the reflected lights like a submerged log.
Two men swam out to guide it towards a moored boat.
It was bloated and heavy, and the men gathered on the deck of the boat to receive it had great difficulty lifting it out of the water.
As they hauled it aboard, it spewed water over them like a broken vessel.
There is an idea, anciently held, that rivers, like gods, require sacrifices.
In Greece, the Arcadian boys of Phigalia cut their hair and threw the locks into the river which ran through the wooded glen below the city.
It was a way of feeding its fertility.
In Egypt, where the Nile is life itself, more extreme customs once  prevailed.
Every year when the Nile began to rise at Cairo, a young virgin was dressed in bright apparel and thrown into the river.
She was the arooseh, the bride of the Nile, and her sacrifice was meant to ensure a plentiful inundation.
When the Muslims arrived in Egypt in the seventh century, they put a stop to this particular barbarity.
The custom continued, however, with inanimate stand-ins.
Edward Lane, writing in the mid-nineteenth century, described the celebrations which still greeted the rising Nile each summer.
The climax of the festivities was the Yom Wefa el-Bahr, the Day of the Breaking of the River, when a small earthen dam built across the main canal at Cairo, dry in the low season, was breached by the rising waters.
People spent the previous night in boats sailing up and down the river, watching the fireworks.
Boats full of musicians and dancing girls passed amongst them.
At dawn, amidst much clamour, a channel was cut through the dam and the Nile surged into the dry canal.
Beyond the dam, in the middle of the canal, was a pillar of earth which the river now swept away in its swirling waters.
The earthen pillar was still called the arooseh, the bride of the Nile, and its drowning by the rising waters was greeted with great cheers and tumult by the watching crowds.
There are two parts to Egypt, the desert and the river, what the ancient Egyptians called the Red Land and the Black Land.
Though virtually nothing grows in the desert, the dry sands will preserve all that is left in them intact.
The river valley is a place of decomposition and transformation.
Egypt is 98 per cent desert.
Rainfall, except along the Mediterranean coast, is minimal.
Without the Nile, the whole country would be a barren wasteland.
It was not always so.
Millennia ago the Sahara was a green rain-fed savanna, not unlike the plains of East Africa today.
Its many rivers can still be seen from the air, etched like fossils across the  desert's blank expanses.
In the hills of Fezzan in southern Libya and at Tassili-n-Ajer in Algeria are galleries of madder-coloured animals engraved on the rocks: rhinoceros and giraffes, elephants and hippopotami, buffalo and antelope, all of which once grazed the lush pastures of the Sahara.
The best of the human figures are lithe and graceful with slender necks and delicate hands.
They were nomads who hunted the plentiful game and tended herds of cattle and sheep.
Throughout these long millennia of rain the Nile valley was a trough of dense and inhospitable swamp, a place of terror for the nomads of the sunny uplands.
The dramatic desiccation of North Africa is a perplexing phenomenon.
Pluvial and arid periods had always alternated but at some point the latter must have come to dominate in a prolonged drought.
The failure of the rains led to overgrazing and deforestation.
In time the landscape was stripped, the soil blew away, and the barrenness reinforced the drought.
This sad cycle of drought, deforestation and desertification continues to this day as the Sahara grows year by year.
With the withering of their grasslands, the nomads of the Sahara were forced to descend into the narrow jungle of the Nile valley, there to take up the toil of agriculture.
The golden age of pastoralism was finished.
Henceforth life in Egypt was forever tied to the banks of the river.
To understand the river, one must see the desert.
On our way to the oasis of Bahriyah in the western desert I had a misadventure with my hat.
It was an old-fashioned straw hat of the kind worn by alcoholic husbands in Somerset Maugham stories.
I had purchased it in a back street in Alexandria, and had become, in a short time, unreasonably attached to it.
We had taken a taxi to the Sharia el-Azhar from where the buses depart.
While we were unloading our bags and paying the driver, a bus behind us began honking its horn impatiently.
We ignored it.
But when the taxi drove off and the bus continued to honk, I looked round.
The driver of the bus was pointing frantically at the now disappearing taxi.
In its back window sat my hat.
I set off in pursuit.
The taxi driver, unaware of his cargo, twisted expertly through the traffic, and I fell further and further behind.
But just as I was on the point of giving up, the honking bus swerved past me.
The driver was bent over the wheel, while his passengers leant out of their windows waving and shouting to attract the attention of the taxi driver.
With its horn blaring and its lights flashing, the bus had left its route to take up the chase.
Beyond the Ezbekia Gardens heavy traffic slowed both vehicles.
The bus driver threw the door open and a stream of passengers leapt down to give chase on foot, finally catching the taxi at a red light.
By the time I arrived, breathless, my hat was being borne in triumph through the traffic to be presented to me.
I met Salah in a dingy toilet at the back of the greasy yard where the oasis bus was preparing to leave.
He was a short crumpled man, with a swollen nose and an anxious unshaven face.
He grinned at me in the gloom, and introduced himself as if I might recognize the name.
 "You have the tickets?" he asked.
I nodded.
"Good, good.
Crazy people, no tickets, big problem."
He wandered off, smoothing his unruly hair with his palm.
In the yard, under the gaze of the assembled passengers, an old man in his underwear, his head wrapped in a towel, was hosing down the inside of our bus.
The water sluiced out through the open door carrying all before it: cigarette packets, banana skins, the shells of nuts, an old shoe.
It was an ancient bus with a broken windscreen and a variety of rusting bruises.
When the old man was finished we trooped aboard and settled ourselves on to the wet seats.
The oasis of Bahriyah is over 200 miles from Cairo.
In the old  days the journey took nine or ten days by camel.
Now it is eight hours by bus along a narrow asphalt road.
Not far from Cairo the road was joined by a single-track railway line which carries mined iron ore from the oasis and a line of telegraph poles.
In the the great expanse of desert these three, the road, the railway, the telegraph poles, were inseparable.
At midday we stopped at a rest-house, a square concrete building by the roadside, the only structure we had seen since leaving Cairo, four hours before.
 "Tea, tea," Salah said to us as he passed our seats on the way to the door of the bus.
At the tables the passengers unfolded elaborate picnics.
A young bridal couple at the next table, returning from their honeymoon in Cairo, peeled hard-boiled eggs and ate in silence.
The man wore an old grey suit with a white shirt and no tie.
He had a depressed face with long lines of worry.
The bride wore a heavy black dress beautifully embroidered on its bodice with red and yellow silk.
Across its breast were rows of copper discs like coins.
She had a small mouth and large eyes, darkly outlined with kohl.
Her hands, struggling with the egg-shells, were the hands of a child.
She looked no older than 14.
Salah, smoking a strange-looking cigarette with the driver, waved to us from across the room.
 "Who is he?" 
Melinda asked.
 "I don't know," I said.
 "I met him in the toilet at the bus station." 
Back in the bus, hot winds.
blew through the windows.
We slept fitfully, waking always to the flickering telegraph poles and the same glaring emptiness stretching away to distant horizons beneath a vast sky.
In the west, it ran thus the width of the continent — 3,000 miles to the Atlantic Ocean.
Later in the afternoon the desert became stony.
Small hills appeared, then beyond them higher ridges with dark outcrops of  rock.
Finally we crossed a low pass and descended into the wide depression of the oasis where straggling clumps of trees and patchy cultivation marked the first springs.
We dropped people at outlying villages.
The railway veered off towards the mine.
The bridal couple got down at a tiny village of low mud houses.
The only sign of life was a goat chewing on a rag at the corner of a house.
From the road we could see them walking, small dark figures in the white desert, the young bride trailing a few paces behind her husband, with the wind beating her dress.
In Bawiti, the main village of the oasis, Salah got down from the bus and waved us after him.
"Come.
Come.
No problem."
We found ourselves in a wide desert street, lined unevenly with flat adobe buildings, the same dun colour as the street and the surrounding desert.
Salah was half-way up a rising side street, dragging an outsize suitcase behind him.
He called back to us.
"Come.
Come.
Hotel.
No problem."
At the top of the hill, past a cemetery and a low wall, were two white-washed buildings on either side of a yard.
Over the door of one, iii large bleached letters, was "Casino Alpenblick" while over the door of the other was "Hotel Salah" .
The "Casino" was a primitive tea-house with an earthen floor and a roof of reed matting.
Low adobe platforms round the walls served as benches for one or two rickety tables.
It was dark; the two windows were shuttered against the afternoon heat.
By the door was a large earthenware pot of water with a metal drinking cup set on its lid.
Salah stood grinning in the gloom.
 "Welcome to Bawiti," he said, stretching his arms to encompass all the charms of the room.
"Tea, tea.
You like."
He went behind a counter and put a kettle on a gas ring.
"Bus too long.
Too much problem.
Crazy people."
 "Bawiti?" he asked.
 "One day, two days?" 
"We'll stay three or four days, I think.
Then we'll go on to Farafra."
"Okay.
No problem.
Welcome Hotel Salah."
He beamed a big smile full of silver teeth.
His anxieties seemed to have been left behind in Cairo.
The hotel, across the yard, had six rooms off a wide central hallway.
The floors were bare adobe and the walls had been painted pale blue.
In each room a naked bulb hung from a flex above the metal cots.
Electricity in Bahriyah was erratic, and the bulbs proved more decorative than practical.
A rusty barrel in the yard served as washroom.
Round it a prolific jungle of weeds had grown up in the otherwise bare yard.
Under a pillow on our bed I found a cache of fat neatly rolled marijuana joints.
I showed them to Salah.
"No problem.
No problem,"he said, stuffing them into his pockets.
 "Music, dancing, crazy people." 
Bawiti was a village of crooked streets and blank-walled houses which faced inward on to courtyards.
Mud channels carried the precious spring water through the streets to walled gardens and orchards.
There were a couple of shops.
They sold tinned fish and beans, packets of stale biscuits and dates.
In a side street a vegetable seller, squatting in the shade of a wall, offered fresh produce.
On a cloth before him was a mound of soft tomatoes, and another of spoiling melons.
Tacked to the wall in the Casino Alpenblick was a long misspelt menu.
It ranged from omelettes and vegetables to kebabs and beer, none of which was available.
When asked about the dishes on the menu, Salah shrugged.
"Maybe yes.
Maybe no.
Maybe tomorrow."
Tomorrow never came, and we made do with bread, onions, and a form of processed cheese called La vache qui rit, the Laughing Cow.
On the packet was a toothy cow, laughing.
When you ate the cheese, you understood the joke.
Salah led a roguish and uncertain existence.
He had the air, not of the proprietor of the hotel, but of a long-term guest who no longer bothered to pay his bills.
Despite Melinda's proficiency in Arabic, he preferred to keep others in ignorance of our conversations by speaking to us in English.
In this he achieved a remarkable fluency without the benefit of grammar or vocabulary.
Every afternoon Salah drove us in his jeep to a spring in the desert where he sat in the shade of the palm trees eating watermelon and smoking hashish while we swam.
The jeep was called SuSu and her name was painted with Salah's, rather romantically, on both doors in intertwining calligraphy.
She was an ancient and temperamental Russian jeep of a sort seen now only in old war films.
She had her faults — she needed to be push-started and she had lost gears the way old people lose teeth — but it was difficult not to love her.
As she jolted gamely through the desert, her torn canvas top unravelled in the wind like a loose turban.
On the way home every day SuSu broke down.
The first day a tyre burst with such a loud crack I thought someone was shooting at us.
There was no spare.
Another time the carburettor became clogged with sand, and a third time she simply ran out of fuel.
There was no fuel gauge.
 "Crazy Salah, crazy SuSu," Salah sighed.
We sat in the shade of a wall while a boy went for help.
A stream of riders passed on reliable donkeys, making their way home to Bawiti from the outlying springs.
The desert was the colour of almonds.
In the distance were pink mountains deeply furrowed with shadow.
The hashish had made Salah reflective.
He mused on the problems of the world.
 "One crazy, two crazy, no problem," he announced.
 "Many crazy, big problem." 
In the evenings musicians from the village gathered in the "Casino" .
They brought skin drums stretched over round frames, and narghils, a long double-shafted wind instrument.
They sat cross-legged on the adobe platforms round the walls of the room, and drank hot tea with loud sucking noises.
They were shy, quiet men with old-fashioned country manners.
Each new arrival went around the room greeting individually every one present before finding a place to sit.
The greetings were warm and elaborate, like those of old friends who had not met for years.
They sat for some time talking and drinking tea before the music began.
A man with a pointed head rolled joints of hashish.
Salah brought in a plate of watermelon pieces.
The men were too polite to accept them without being pressed a second and third time.
When they finally took them, they inclined their heads with a dignified gratitude.
The music began casually, almost as part of the conversation, a falling line of notes and a soft wooden rhythm near the edge of the drum.
Then the voices fell away and the music took hold of the room.
It was a wailing plaintive sound given a febrile edge by the African rhythms of the drumming.
The narghil is a remarkable instrument, rather like an oboe.
One of its shafts provides a bass drone and the other the melody.
Like the bagpipes, the drone requires sustained wind.
To provide this, players develop a technique of circular breathing which involves making their cheeks and throats into wind chambers, from which they can continue to exhale, while inhaling through the nose.
The effect is like a frog swelling its neck.
Buoyed up on the crescendo of the drum and the wailing narghil, the men sang.
Their voices hovered between joy and anguish, as if there was little to distinguish between the two.
One old man, sitting on the edge of his seat and leaning forward on his stick, sang to thrilling effect.
He shouted out the lyrics in a coarse powerful voice, and the musicians smiled and redoubled their efforts to keep pace with him.
When he ran out of verses, the old man got up to dance.
He danced with his stick, planting it firmly on the ground and shuffling  round and round it, hunching his shoulders and swaying in the gaslight like a man possessed.
The only other dancer was Salah, who brought a louche air to the proceedings.
As the music grew frenzied, he took to the floor.
With one hand behind his head and the other at his waist, he swivelled and ground his hips in a parody of the belly dance.
He went on and on, faster and faster, until he collapsed into his seat, his face bathed with sweat.
 "Crazy Salah," he laughed.
 "Crazy music." 
The most beautiful song of the evening was a long lament, a Bedouin song about a desert journey from Siwa on the Libyan borders to the Nile.
The singer was bringing camels to market.
But he did not spend a single night in the river valley, preferring to return to his camp in the desert.
The people of the valley, he sang, were rogues and thieves.
The river was a blue serpent.
A hundred miles beyond Bahriyah lies the further oasis of Farafra, to which few people ventured.
It was the smallest and the most remote of the four western oases.
Compared to Farafra, Bahriyah was a metropolis.
We got a lift with three lorries transporting water pipes.
The lorries appeared one morning in the main street in Bawiti.
When we walked down to investigate, we found the drivers asleep in the road beneath their cabs.
When they emerged from their slumbers at about five o'clock in the afternoon, they repaired to the tea-house in the main street, calling for tea and seishas, or water-pipes.
They were rough uncouth men with the air of outcasts, unshaven and unwashed.
They smelt of sweat and tobacco and oil, and they picked their teeth with twigs torn from a bush.
They bantered and argued with each other, laughed raucously, became angry and fell into sulks, changing moods as quickly and as unpredictably as children.
A group of shy  Bawiti men, seated at another table in their immaculate gallibayas, eyed them with alarm.
The journey to Farafra was not an easy one.
Squashed between the driver and the mechanic on top of the engine housing in the first truck, we found ourselves in the role of unwitting umpires, keeping the two men from each other 's throats.
They quarrelled fiercely, spitting at each other across our laps.
The road ran on into the desert alone, no longer accompanied by the railway line or the telegraph poles.
Sand drifted over the asphalt like curling wisps of smoke.
The desert was scattered with hills, like smooth dark whales riding in a flat sea.
After a time a magnificent escarpment of red and pink stone closed on the road from the east.
Similar escarpments appeared in the west, their faces in shadow.
Slopes of sand had drifted up against their flanks, moulding themselves into the deep crevices.
Night fell.
Beyond the scope of the headlights, the narrow road and the gravel verges, all was blackness.
Farafra, when it appeared, was a distant cluster of lights floating like a single constellation in a great black sky.
The village of Farafra was like a bare room, swept clean.
There was none of the decay or rubble of the crowded villages along the Nile.
In the treeless streets between high blank walls one saw no cars and only a few people.
There were no shops, and no tea-houses or eating-houses We had, it seemed, ventured beyond the realm of commercial activity.
But where commerce ended traditional hospitality blossomed.
We met a small boy, and asked the way to one of the springs.
He looked at us solemnly for a moment then, without a word, took us home for lunch.
Farafra still enjoyed the strict rites of Arab desert etiquette in which hospitality was considered both a duty and an honour.
The whole village saw themselves as our hosts.
We had  only to go for a walk through the empty streets and someone would appear in a doorway to invite us for dinner.
On the edge of the mound was a broad open area, set apart from the houses, overlooking the desert.
It was the doorstep of the village, where people paused to chat.
There was little to see: the expanse of sand, occasionally a rider making his way homeward on his donkey.
But at night the sky was dense with stars, and the men stretched out on the sand to gaze heavenward.
It is said that Farafrans know the night sky better than most people know the rooms of their own home.
The gardens formed another part of Farafra, quite separate from the houses.
They were threaded with narrow winding lanes and the lanes were bounded with crumbling walls and lattices of dry palm fronds.
Irrigation ditches, cracked like parchment, ran through the lanes.
Sometimes one found them frothing with water from the spring.
Everywhere there was the smell of wet earth and dry dung.
Insects droned in the hot stillness.
The garden doors, splintered with age, were so low it seemed that only children were meant to enter.
They were opened with huge and ancient keys, and led one into a secret world of liquid green shadows.
Silent birds stirred in the foliage.
Pruning seemed unknown here.
The olive trees were like thick bushes.
The grass grew wild, and the heavy bunches of grapes were almost hidden amongst the vine leaves.
Deeper into the gardens, beyond the scaly shafts of the palm trees, were groves of orange and lemon, pomegranate and apricot trees.
Clouds of spiders' webs hung from their leaves.
Perhaps because I always went there in the heat of the afternoon, I rarely saw anyone in the gardens.
After the shadeless streets and the barren desert, they were a green and enchanted world, an echo of the lushness of the river valley, enclosed and protected behind their ramshackle walls.
They felt sweetly immune to distress.
I sat  in the still shadows and listened to the water bubbling in a ditch beyond the wall.
From somewhere came the sound of a woodman's axe, like the final moments of Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard.
The next day we got a ride back to Bahriyah in the back of a pick-up truck.
At the hotel, Salah greeted us as if we had returned from the dead, pumping our hands and laughing, "Crazy English, crazy English." 
The following morning we caught the bus back to Cairo.
Some malicious twist in the labyrinth of Sudanese bureaucracy required us to obtain our Sudanese visas, not at the embassy in London, ill the tranquillity of St James's, but in Cairo.
The first challenge of the embassy in Cairo was one of access.
Martial law had recently been declared in Sudan which meant that all Sudanese nationals abroad required a visa to return home.
Egypt is host to thousands of Sudanese students and workers, and most of them appeared to be assembled outside the gates of the embassy when I found it one morning in a leafy street not far from the Nile.
Behind the grilled window of the visa section were three weary-looking men, their heads buried in ledgers.
The surging crowds pressed against the grille and clamoured for attention.
I retreated.
I could be days working my way to the front of that crowd.
I would have to find a way of bypassing it.
I donned a tie and went to call on the manager of the Sudan Air office in the guise of an Important Person.
I told him I was writing a book about Sudan, and managed to make some tenuous link between this and benefit to his airline.
He was busy, and to get rid of me lie wrote me a letter of introduction to Ahmed Ahmedi, the vice-consul at the embassy.
The letter proved a great success.
The following day it gained me entrance to the main gate of the embassy.
Ahmed Ahmedi was at the airport and for a time no one knew what to do with me.
I was transferred from one office to another before being shown into  an office whose occupant was asleep in an armchair by the window.
I woke him gently, and handed him my letter.
He sat slumped in his chair with the letter propped against his belly and drifted off to sleep again.
Fearful of waking him a second time I waited.
After a time he awoke again and asked me what I wanted.
 "A visa," I said.
He considered this in silence, gazing at the letter with a glazed expression.
His eyelids were drooping.
Eventually he whispered, "Where to?" 
 "To Sudan." 
I showed him our itinerary and he read the names aloud slowly and haltingly as if thee were the names of some distant land whose pronunciation he was unsure of.
Then he asked for our passports, made some notes at the bottom of the itinerary and handed the passports back.
 "No problem," he said.
 "Come back in three weeks." 
He closed his eyes.
As I shut the door quietly behind me, I saw our itinerary flutter to the floor.
I returned to the embassy a month later.
My now dog-eared letter gained me admission again through the main gates and into the office of a Mr Saleb, a shabby fellow in slippers and an undershirt.
 "Mr Ahmed Ahmedi is at the airport," he announced.
I began to feel that this was a euphemism for "fall from grace" .
I imagined Mr Ahmedi in some upstairs room, sweating in the glare of a lamp, being questioned by security men under orders from Khartoum.
When I explained about the sleeping man and his promise of a visa, Mr Saleb looked at me as if ! was talking gibberish.
 "We have no sleeping man here," he said with a note of pity.
There followed an interlude of musical offices.
It went like this.
I was shown into an empty office where I sat waiting for a minimum of ten minutes.
A man entered who I had not seen before.
 "Please follow me," he said.
I followed him along corridors to another empty office.
 "Wait here, please," the man said, then disappeared.
I waited another ten minutes and then the ritual was repeated, a different man, another office.
Eventually I came to rest again in Mr Saleb's office.
Here a new character entered the drama, an elderly Englishman kitted out in an English safari costume of the pre-war years: baggy khaki shorts, long stockings, a khaki shirt with big pockets and epaulettes, and a broad-brimmed hat.
He had pale eyes, grazed bony knees and very pink skin.
We exchanged news.
He had been waiting for his visa for three months.
After a time Mr Saleb reappeared.
He seemed startled to see me as if applicants, once embarked on musical offices, rarely returned.
 "I will see Mr Ahmed Ahmedi about your case," he said impatiently.
"Unfortunately he is at the airport today.
Come back in two or three days."
With this he dismissed me.
At the door the pink Englishman gripped my arm.
 "Wait," he whispered.
 "Have they looked in the book?" 
 "What book?" 
"The book, the book.
They must check for your name in the book."
He looked over my shoulder at Mr Saleb who was talking to a colleague in the corner.
 "Wait outside the office," he hissed.
"He is taking me to see the book.
When we come out follow us."
Something about the place, the ritual of musical offices or the mystery of the sleeping man, encouraged a conspiratorial approach.
The acquisition of a visa was clearly a matter of guile.
A few minutes later Mr Saleb emerged.
He swept along the corridor and up a flight of stairs with the Englishman at his heels.
I followed at a distance.
We passed through the embassy and emerged in a yard beside the office of the visa section.
Before we knew what was happening a guard had ushered us outside the gate and into the milling crowd in the street.
Mr Saleb had gone into the visa office.
We could see him behind the grille over the heads of the crowd.
The Englishman knew the form.
For all his apparent frailty, he dove into the crowd and fought his way towards the grille like a rugby forward.
When he reached the front, Mr Saleb handed him a huge ledger over the top of the grille.
I reached his side as he finished scanning the list of names on the last page.
He was despondent.
 "It's no good," he said.
 "One's name is never in the book." 
I peered over his shoulder at the spidery script.
The last name on the last page was my own.
 "That's my name," I said pointing.
"That is your name?
Here, this name?"
He was overwhelmed.
"Your name is in the book.
This is wonderful."
He handed the book to me.
 "Hang on to it," he said.
 "Whatever you do do not let them take the book back without admitting that your name is in it." 
He leaned towards me and whispered.
"The book is everything.
When you know your name is in the book, they are powerless.
They must act."
With that, he disappeared.
In the office beyond the grille, Mr Saleb was calling for the book.
The surging crowd had carried me some rows back from the front.
I held the book aloft.
 "My name," I shouted, "my name is in the book." 
He could not hear me above the din of the crowd.
He climbed on to the counter and, reaching over the grille, grabbed the book.
I hung on, and we stood thus, on tiptoe, joined over the heads of the crowd by the famous book.
 "My name," I shouted again, "my name is in the book." 
The clerks at the counter looked up from their ledgers.
Mr Saleb stopped tugging.
 "Your name is in the book?" 
He looked at me with disbelief.
I nodded frantically.
In the excitement I seemed to have lost my voice.
Mr Saleb's face broke into a huge grin.
 "Congratulations," he shouted.
"Welcome in the Sudan.
You have a visa.
Ten pounds please."
We set off upriver one hot morning in July, on the train south from Cairo.
The taxi driver who left us at the station, enchanted by the idea that we were setting off for the source of the Nile, refused to accept any fare.
This remarkable event, as unlikely as a Papal Bull encouraging polyandry, we took for a good omen.
The fields of maize and sugar-cane along the track were bedraggled and white with dust.
Beyond them, a brown light seeped through the columned groves of palm trees.
Chaff blew across the beaten earth between the trees, powdering it with yellow.
In the patches of shade, men and dogs and heavy-headed cattle slept through the midday heat.
At the edge of the villages were huge pigeon towers like crumbling castles full of birds and turrets.
Out of sight beyond the trees and the flat fields lay the river, marked by the tall slanting masts of moored feluccas.
Now and then it came into view, wide and smoothly blue, with low reedy islands breaking its shining surface.
Just before El Wasta we passed the Pyramid of Medium, which rose above the cultivation on the edge of the desert.
Built about 2600 BC, it was the first true pyramid.
We had visited it from Cairo.
On the black walls of the tomb chamber were scraps of graffiti written in the eighteenth dynasty, a thousand years after the pyramid was built.
It had already been looted.
One passage was penned by the scribe Aa-Kheper-Re-senb.
He chose to ignore the ultimate horror of the looted tomb and inscribed his lines as if all was well: "Aa-Kheper-Re-senb came to see the beautiful temple of King Seneferu.
He found it as though heaven were within it and the sun rising in it.
Then he said: "May heaven rain with fresh myrrh, may it drip with incense upon the roof of the temple of King Seneferu." 
The air of the tomb chamber had tasted of lime.
At El Wasta we changed trains.
It was a small town of dust lanes and wide shade trees.
The river passed at its feet, pulling at the reeds along the bank.
Tall egrets picked their way daintily through the shallows, and away upstream feluccas were adrift on their own reflections.
At the railway station families were encamped between walls of baggage.
The smell of onions and kerosene drifted across the plat  form where women were cooking supper.
The women here did not wear the outer black street dress common in Cairo but bright knee-length dresses and baggy harem pantaloons.
The dresses were open-necked and the women were continually drawing out long thin breasts to feed one of the multitude of infants crawling amongst the baggage.
A train hooted and a moment later flashed past with a shriek.
Beyond the flies and the squatting figures of the platform was a sudden streak of metal, a glimpse of shiny carriages, venetian blinds, heads asleep against the windows.
It was the express train to Aswan, its first-class carriages full of tourists.
Our train was late.
The sun was settling into the tree-tops up the line when it finally curved into view.
Silhouetted against the red sky were rows of people on the roofs of the carriages.
The train was overflowing.
The passengers inside, already hopelessly crowded, had locked all the doors.
They looked out through the grimy windows and shook their heads.
The crowds on the platform shrieked at them and banged on the glass, then ran to the end of the carriages to climb on to the roof.
Roofs presented us with a problem: Melinda was adamant that we were not travelling on them.
She was happy to go anywhere, under any conditions, with the sole exception of the roofs of trains.
We ran the length of the train looking for an unlocked door.
I had finally resolved to stage a roof coup, to climb on to one of the forbidden roofs iii the probably vain hope that the prospect of being left behind might change Melinda's views, when suddenly a metal door opened and arms reached down to pull us up.
We were deposited on a rough floor as the train jerked and started.
It was the guard's van.
Rows of mustachioed men looked down at us from their perches on metal shelves along the walls.
A guard tipped a heavy safe on to its side and offered it to us as a seat.
He squatted opposite us in the open doorway and lit a cigarette.
 "It is forbidden for anyone to travel in the guard's van," he said.
He shrugged and pointed to his guard's uniform.
"I am the guard but what can I do on such a train?
There are too many people.
They have locked all the doors.
I cannot even collect tickets.
The passengers are revolting."
 "We can see the difficulties," Melinda said.
 "There are crowds of people on the roofs." 
 "It is forbidden for anyone to travel on the roof," the guard said.
He had the air of a man overwhelmed by cruel fate.
"What can I do?
They are like flies."
 "It must be very dangerous on the roof," Melinda said.
I felt that she had read my mind, that she knew I had contemplated transgressing the roof taboo.
I avoided her eye.
 "They are regularly falling off," the guard said glumly.
I looked guiltily out of the open door.
Melinda coughed meaningfully.
The guard blew smoke out through the doorway.
 "Maleesh," he said.
"Never mind.
There is nothing to do."
The setting sun flickered through the trunks of the palm trees along the track, disappearing into haze before it reached the horizon.
Lakes of blue mist appeared in the palm groves.
In the failing light the men on the shelves of the unlit van became indistinguishable.
To cheer himself up, the guard asked about us and what had brought us to Egypt.
He was surprised to see foreigners on a local train from El Wasta.
But our answers only deepened his depression.
 "I am not a guard at all." 
He plucked at his uniform as if meaning to tear it off.
"I am poet.
But a poet in Egypt is a sad man.
The nation does not listen.
Do you write poetry?"he asked me.
 "Not that I allow anyone to read," I said.
"I understand.
It is too painful.
I am a follower of Lorca myself.
I am very much in love with this man."
There seemed no end to his grief.
He squatted in the doorway with the darkening landscape passing behind him, and quoted Lorca:
Cordoba.
Remote and lonesome.
Ay!
The road is dark and long.
Ay!
My horse is tired yet brave.
Death is waiting for me there Before I get to Cordoba.
At Beni Suef we got down into a dusty twilight.
The streets were full of people going home.
A few cars honked their way through  the crowds and cyclists rang their bells.
A line of dark barouches waited outside the station, the horses' heads buried in their nose bags.
Billowing smoke drifted across the street from the grilled fish and kebab stalls.
We found a room in a hotel on the far side of the canal.
The room reeked of the cheap perfume worn by the blowzy woman who was vacating it as we arrived.
The night was busy.
The amplified muezzins of the town's mosques spent much of it chanting at full volume.
Beneath the window dogs howled and fought.
Somewhere in the hotel a woman wailed and broke china.
When our exhaustion overcame even this, the trains awoke us.
They hurtled past, just across the street, with their whistles blaring.
The sound was so terrific the trains seemed to pass across the end of the bed, and we drew up our feet instinctively.
They sounded, Melinda said sleepily over breakfast, like Judgement Day.
In the lobby of the hotel we met a Coptic priest.
He wore dusty black robes, a black square hat and a white beard.
He spoke English with a Texan drawl he had acquired at the University of Austin.
A large wooden cross hung from a chain round his neck.
His wife, an — American, was a tall exhausted-looking woman.
Strain had settled round her eyes like old make-up.
 "You have heard of course of the famous monasteries of St Antony's and St Paul's in the eastern desert," the priest said.
We had.
"Permit me to invite you.
I am leading a pilgrimage to the monasteries and would be most pleased if you joined us."
It seemed too good to pass up.
 "When is the pilgrimage?" 
I asked.
He consulted his watch.
"In about twenty minutes.
Christianity came early to Egypt.
According to tradition it was brought by the apostle Mark who is said to have written his gospel on the banks of the Nile.
The old religion of ancient Egypt had ossified, and the country was ripe for conversion.
But the old religion had elements which prepared its adherents for the symbolism of the new: the death and resurrection of Osiris, the representations of the mother goddess Isis with her son Horus on her lap, the symbol of life in the form of a cross, the Egyptian ankh.
When the Arab armies of Amr ibn el-As arrived in Egypt in the seventh century, Egyptian Christians welcomed them as deliverers from Byzantine tyranny.
The Arabs gave the Christians the name Copt which was a corruption of the ancient Egyptian word for "Egyptian" .
But the Arabs and their own new religion proved even more persuasive than Christianity.
Much of the population quickly embraced Islam, and the Copts were reduced to a minority.
Today they number about one in five of the Egyptian population.
Their reputation amongst Europeans has not always been high.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Edward Lane found them "of sullen temper, extremely avaricious, and abominable dissemblers" .
Within half an hour a crowd of pilgrims had gathered outside the hotel.
When the priest emerged they gathered round him, kissing his hand and greeting him,"Abutta, Abutta.
Our Father, Our Father."
We crossed the river on felucca ferries to where a long modem bus waited on the east bank.
The road into the desert was empty.
Outside the windows the landscape shimmered.
In the air-conditioned cocoon of the bus, the Copts prayed and sang songs of praise.
Our Father went up and down the aisle with a microphone, leading the singing in a tuneless baritone which boomed from a loudspeaker at the front of the bus.
The microphone and the evangelical enthusiasm seemed at odds with the orthodox  robes and the white beard.
Our Father bestrode the aisle like a cross between the late Archbishop Makarios and Billy Graham.
Our Father's mother, an old woman with a luminous face, sat across the aisle from us.
She seemed to have come on the retreat more out of material loyalty than religious devotion.
She saw us as allies and babbled to us in a mixture of French and Arabic throughout the hymns, then sighed loudly and looked out of the window as the prayers droned on.
 "La monasterie" she whispered across the aisle, "ce n'est pas belle." 
Beyond the window the desert looked like the tough dry hide of some prehistoric beast.
Monasticism began in the deserts of Egypt.
Its earliest inspiration was a young man born in a village on the banks of the Nile about 250 AD.
At the age of 18, Antony heard the passage of scripture that was to change his life: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give it to the poor" (Matt. 19: 21).
Perfection is a powerful Incentive.
Antony gave away his money and his land, and began an ascetic life of prayer, fasting and manual labour.
His neighbours, caustically, nicknamed him God's Friend.
But Antony felt his life was still too indulgent and he longed for more complete mortification.
He left his village and went to live in a deserted tomb; an obliging friend locked him inside and brought him bread from time to time.
Then at the age of 35 he moved to the ruined fortress of Pispir on the east bank of the Nile.
His growing band of admirers, who gathered outside, were accustomed to hearing a great tumult from inside the walls, like riotous crowds fighting.
It was Antony and the Devil in yet another engagement of their continual war.
According to Antony the Devil came to tempt and torture him in a variety of fantastical forms from lascivious women to wild beasts.
He wrestled manfully with them all.
The Temptations of St Antony were later to prove a rich theme for European painters.
The flight to the desert which Antony had begun became a flood during the fourth and fifth centuries.
Men and women in their tens of thousands left the Nile to join monastic desert communities.
It was claimed that the population of these desert ascetics was equal to that of the Nile towns, but religious fervour can hardly be trusted to have a head for figures.
Not long after Antony's death, Athanasius, the patriarch of Alexandria, wrote his biography.
With this as its inspirational text, monasticism spread through the Middle East and into Europe.
By the middle of the sixth century novices were reading the Life of Antony in remote monasteries in Ireland, and claiming visions mode/led on Antony's own temptations.
It was"lot a phenomenon universally admired:
There is perhaps no phase in the moral history of mankind of a deeper or more painful interest than this ascetic epidemic.
A hideous, distorted, emaciated maniac without knowledge, without patriotism, without natural affection, spending his life in a long routine of useless and atrocious self-torture, and quailing before the ghastly phantoms of his delirious brain had become the ideal of the nations which had known the writings of Plato and Cicero, and the lives of Socrates and Cato.
So wrote Lecky.
One has to sympathize.
Where was all the self-assurance, the sophisticated enlightenment of the classical world, of which Egypt had been a part since the time of Alexander?
And where were the values of ancient Egypt, whose celebration of the physical world runs like a sensual current through the Cairo Museum?
Antony was said to blush when he had to eat.
It was this conflict between the physical and the spiritual which formed such a break with the past, that and the idea of the Devil.
The Egyptian and the classical worlds knew demons, forces of darkness, but they were bit players compared to Antony's Devil.
To the desert ascetic the smell of battle hung over his religious observance.
One cannot help but feel that Antony marks the loss of an irretrievable innocence.
In Alexandria armies of monks sacked the Serapeum, the great temple to Osiris, and destroyed the library  which had made it one of the world's chief centres of learning.
Fundamentalism could brook no rivals; fear and intolerance were ascendant.
The Red Sea came into view in the late afternoon, an intense blue that washed along the flat desert shore in a long line of white.
On the far shore lay Sinai.
Somewhere amongst the  ochrous jumble of mountains to the south Moses had received the Ten Commandments.
After a time we turned inland on a rough track which climbed through ravines into the desert hills.
When finally we came in sight of the monastery, the pilgrims broke into song, a slow deep melody which matched the laboured- progress of the coach up the last half mile of track to the monastery gates.
The monastery of St Paul's stood on a slight rise.
It was walled like a fortress, and the only entrance was through a massive pair of wooden gates.
Above the wall we could see a few palm trees, a double row of adobe domes and a square keep.
The outer wall was pierced high up with the small black windows of the monks' cells.
Beneath each window were long encrusted brown stains, stretching to the ground, where the monks over the centuries had emptied their latrine buckets.
Inside the walls the monastery was like an enclosed Nile village whose inhabitants had fled its ruinous lanes.
The monks, bearded and serious, passed in their black robes and cowls like cats on padded feet.
A plump monk named Bertie showed Melinda and me round the monastery while the pilgrims ate noisily in a fly-ridden refectory.
He was a plodding lugubrious fellow, and we were delighted with his Wodehousian name.
The monastery had been founded in the fourth century, not long after the death of St Paul the Egyptian who, like his contemporary Antony, had been a desert ascetic.
There were four churches within  its walls.
The oldest was built around the cave in which St Paul is said to have lived.
It was a subterranean structure.
Bertie led us down a sloping alleyway to a heavy door where we left our shoes.
Inside, after the bright desert light, we found ourselves blind in the darkness.
The dark church felt cool and velvety.
We heard Bertie fumbling with something, then a match struck.
He lit candles and handed them to us.
We were standing in a small domed sanctuary.
The walls were black with age.
Bertie held his candle up to show us frescos of four saints beneath the dome, and then more robed figures around the walls, four archangels and the angel of the fiery furnace.
The paint was peeling off the stone, and in places it was difficult to pick out what was left.
The faces in the candlelight were distraught, fearful, deranged.
Their faith had brought them neither peace nor confidence.
To one side of the central sanctuary was a curtain.
Bertie kissed it, then drew it aside.
Behind was the small cave in which Paul had lived.
His remains lay in a coffin beneath a red cloth embroidered with crosses.
It seemed hardly large enough for a child.
In the monastery garden the mood lightened.
Bertie worked in the garden and he pointed out the rows of vegetables with pride.
Beyond the olive trees, beneath the west wall, was the monastery spring, the same spring which had sustained Paul.
Jerome speaks of it in his biography of the saint.
The view from his cave was of dripping water and a palm tree.
It was the merest trickle, four cubic metres a day according to Bertie, precious little for a monastery of thirty monks and related workers arid visitors.
Bertie seemed almost giddy in its presence, and talked with animation about the storage pools and irrigation channels.
I thought of the Nile, abundant, seductive and charismatic.
In the old days visitors to St Antony's were pulled up in a basket through a trap-door which overhung the entrance.
When we reached it the next day, we were disappointed to find that in our more prosaic age they simply open the gates.
Behind the monastery rises Mount Kalalah.
High on its flanks was the last retreat of St Antony, a cave in the cliff-face where he went to escape his followers, who gathered below on the site of the first monastery.
It is a place of special pilgrimage, and after a hearty lunch our party of pilgrims set off en masse to visit it.
It was an arduous climb of over a thousand feet, and we were labouring under a midday sun.
Remarkably no one but ourselves brought flasks of water.
As the slopes grew steeper people clung to us like limpets in the hope of a drink.
Our supplies were quickly depleted.
The climb coincided with a major sporting event in Cairo: a football game between the great rival teams of Zamalek and al-Ahly.
All Egypt hung on the result.
The game was being broadcast live and the young men of the party, Zamalek supporters, all carried radios.
At crucial moments, they froze in mid-stride and stared anxiously at the ground, their radios pressed to their ears.
Two hours' climbing brought us to the narrow ledge from which one entered Antony's cave through a cleft in the cliff-face.
The view was one of beautiful desolation.
The flanks of the mountainside fell away beneath us, cut by ravines of white boulders.
The monastery was hidden by a fold in the lower slopes.
Beyond was the Wadi el-Araba, powdered with fine grey gravel.
It ran like an empty thoroughfare between the Nile and the Red Sea.
On the far side of the wadi were the pale heights of the Gebel el-Galala.
Our Father was the last person to gain the ledge.
His robes were wet with perspiration and he was gasping for breath.
His face, which had gone green, had collapsed.
He drained the last of our water-bottle.
 "Hamdilallah," he said hoarsely.
Thanks be to God.
God, I thought unkindly, had nothing to do with the simple foresight of bringing a water-bottle on a desert outing.
As his eyes began to focus, Our Father took in the vast emptiness  before him.
Along the ledge a group of young men stood anxiously, their ears cocked to their radios.
Zamalek were having trouble clearing the ball.
When he had recovered, Our Father squeezed through the cleft into the cave.
The pilgrims went in after him in groups of five or six at a time.
The narrow fissure stretched some twenty-five feet into the cliff before opening up into the tiny cave.
It was a claustrophobic's nightmare.
The chanting of the pilgrims leaked out through the cleft like birdsong.
When it was our turn to go in, we found Our Father looking sinister in the candlelight.
There was a  gaudy shrine, and for a moment I felt we had entered the den of a fortune-teller.
Had he smiled I would have expected gold teeth.
Instead he told us sombrely of the deprivations of St Antony.
He seemed to speak with some feeling after his climb.
But I was weary of this endless masochism.
Antony seemed a neurotic, peevish, self-obsessed character, full of self-loathing and delusions.
There was nothing in the tradition which implied a man with the humility and charity to sit down and wash the feet of a common prostitute.
That night Melinda was woken by someone tugging at her sheet.
Our Father's wife stood at the end of her bunk.
 "Cover yourself," she hissed.
 "You will be disturbing the monks." 
Melinda's sheet had risen up to reveal her calf.
The monks' cells, just visible through the windows of the women's dormitories, lay 500 yards away, far enough for them to have required a telescope and searchlights if disturbance had been on their minds.
The Palace Hotel in Minya was a place of faded but fantastic decoration.
A double stairway led up from a dusty hallway past walls of hieroglyphics and adolescent gods, set between huge mirrors advertising an Italian cognac popular in the 1920s.
The stairway brought one to a first-floor lobby, a vast room of chandeliers and mahogany panelling and bentwood chairs with velvet cushions.
Stained-glass skylights above an upper gallery framed an enormous ceiling painting of the Egyptian countryside.
The rooms had not been ignored.
Tall lotus blossoms grew up over their doors, and their ceilings were covered with stars.
At one end of the lobby was a high reception desk.
Behind it stood an old-fashioned switchboard and numbered pigeon-holes for the guests' post.
Wires hung unconnected out of the back of the switchboard and the pigeon-holes had grown cobwebs.
Minya was once an important stage on the journey up the Nile but aeroplanes, express trains and tourist cruise ships have left it a provincial backwater.
The Palace Hotel was run by a trio of brothers: a burly one-eyed masseur, a half-witted fellow with a pointed head, and a hugely obese young man who joked from his chair in the lobby, from which he rarely stirred, that he was expecting twins.
The only member of staff with any authority was Muhammad, a boy of 9 or 10, who hurried about the place all day in his pyjamas, seeing to the guests' needs.
We soon became fast friends, and the brothers joked that we should take him with us on our journey.
Muhammad smiled his delightful smile, and nodded eagerly.
Minya was a genteel tree-lined town of old colonial villas built by Italians for Greek and Egyptian cotton magnates.
Behind the high iron railings and the gardens of palm trees, the villas had fallen into quiet decay.
The cotton magnates had gone elsewhere and their villas had been taken over as government offices and army posts.
From the square in front of the hotel, an avenue led down to the Corniche where people strolled arm iii arm along the Nile.
Stallholders sold soft drinks and grilled corn cobs and sweet potatoes.
Across the river were orchards where the evening sun hung sheets of coloured gossamer between the trees.
We had come to Minya by train, but hoped to leave by boat.
At the far end of the Corniche was the boat-yard where felucca ferries came and went delivering people and goods from outlying villages.
It was there that we met Ramses.
He was a small wizened man, not much above five feet.
The skin of his face and neck was like dark ancient leather, creased and hard and glossy with wear.
He had a narrow prunish face with thin yellow eyes and three yellow teeth.
He wore a patched gallibaya and the soles of his feet were split with deep cracks like dried mud.
His real name was Ahmad Osman but he looked exactly like the mummy of Ramses the Great in the Cairo Museum.
Rainses had sat next to us at the boat-yard tea-house, and we had asked him about boats to Be-ni Hasan, a group of tombs some fifteen miles upstream.
There are few passenger-boat services up and down the Egyptian Nile railways and roads are quicker — but we hoped to find a felucca to hire for the day.
Without a word Ramses led us to a boat moored at the end of the dock, a small felucca with a heavily patched sail.
It looked as old as he did.
The cracked gunwales showed the faintest traces of paint, and the tiller was a tree branch.
We climbed in on to plank benches, and in a moment we were off.
We had to assume we were off to Beni Hasan, for Ramses had yet to speak a word to us.
We slanted across to the far bank and ran before the wind, well out of the main current.
About a mile upstream Ramses drew the boat into a side pool, scampered into the shallows and lashed the boat to a tree.
Then he disappeared into a banana grove.
A trio of geese paddled past.
An old boat lay half-submerged against the bank with reeds pushing up through the holes in its hull.
Willows with their feet in the water cast green shadows over the pool.
A few yards along the bank a group of women were washing enormous pots, scouring them with handfuls of gravel.
They were young and sturdy and beautiful.
One came shyly along the bank.
She wore brass anklets, and her feet were wet from the river.
 "Itfadel," she said, motioning towards a house through the trees.
It was the traditional invitation of hospitality.
The house looked like a house in a fairy tale.
The young woman had a frank and innocent gaze.
We thanked her and explained that we were going upriver.
She inclined her head and returned to her friends.
After a time a small boy emerged from the banana grove carrying a kerosene stove, a teapot, a glass, a home-made seisha and a bag of bread.
Ramses reappeared with another boy of about 15.
All three climbed aboard and we pushed off.
The older boy, who took charge of the boat, was a handsome fellow with a lovely turban of purple and white cotton and remarkably soft hands.
 "Beni Hasan?" we asked.
We had begun to worry that Ramses was a deaf mute.
Ramses was already puffing at his seisha, but the older boy nodded.
 "Inshallali," he said.
 "It will take about five hours." 
 "Are these your grandsons?" 
Melinda asked Ramses.
He looked at her for a long moment, puffing on his seisha, then spoke for the first time.
 "My sons," he said.
We suddenly saw the wizened old man in a new light.
I realized with a start that the beautiful young woman who had spoken to us on the bank was his wife.
Perhaps they were all his wives.
 "How old are you?" 
Melinda asked.
 "Seventy-five." 
He blew smoke rings over the water.
 "I am not ready for grandchildren." 
Bits of coloured rag, sewn to the leech edge of the sail, beat in the wind.
 "He two," the boy said.
 "Helwa hawa." 
A sweet wind.
Egypt is blessed by its wind.
It blows year round from the north while the current of the river flows from the south.
This happy combination has facilitated travel up and down the Nile since long before the days of the Pharaohs.
There are three elements to the Nile valley: the blue river, the green of the cultivated banks and the dun colour of the desert ridges which enclose them both.
The different characters of the two Nile banks reflect the contrast between the two deserts.
The eastern desert, rocky and mountainous, closes in aggressively upon the river with high bluffs restricting the fields to a tenuous strip.
In places the cultivation is crowded out altogether and stretches of gravel come boldly down to the river's edge.
The western desert offers few natural restrictions.
The cultivation stretches inland for miles.
The desert, if visible at all, appears as a low and distant range of sand hills.
In the mud banks which rise ten feet or so above the water's edge, you can see the strata of silt deposits brought down each year by the river in the days before the High Dam.
Children swam from the banks, and women washed clothes and pots.
When they drew water, they climbed the banks on beaten paths, swaying like camels, with the full jugs on their heads.
Back from the riverbanks, men in gallibayas glided through orchards of apricot trees.
Villages floated up on either bank, with trees crowding round the low jumble of houses.
Below them were moored feluccas with their long thin yards curving back and up from the masts in the same immaculate line.
Ramses's son called to people he knew on the banks, hailing them with long drawn-out greetings.
After a time we were beyond his own district, and he greeted only the other boatmen, asking them about currents and winds.
Their voices echoed back and forth across the water like the calls of water birds.
The tombs of Beni Hasan lay in an escarpment on the eastern bank.
We followed a raised path from the river through stands of reeds and then through fields of sugar-cane thickly planted between palm trees.
The desert appeared abruptly, and we stepped on to sand as one would step across a threshold, in a single stride.
It was half a mile to the bottom of the cliff.
A path led up to a level terrace from which one entered the tombs.
A watchman came  forward to meet us, a splendid fellow in white pantaloons and a white silk waistcoat.
At his hip he wore a pistol in an ancient leather holster.
He lived in one of the tombs.
There are thirty-nine tombs at Beni Hasan, of which twelve are decorated.
They are the tombs of provincial governors, dating roughly from 2000 to 1800 BC, a relatively quiet and prosperous period during the Middle Kingdom.
The guard opened the iron gates with antique keys, and we stepped into the dark chambers.
There, when our eyes had adjusted to the gloom, we found the world of the river that we had just left.
Painted on the walls were scenes of everyday life.
Fellahin bending over their sickles cut swathes through fields of wheat.
Women carried water jars.
Families picked grapes, trod them and poured the new wine into storage jars.
Fishermen pulled Nile perch from the current.
A canoe nudged a bank of reeds where herons and ibises perched and swallows swooped overhead.
A funeral barge passed upriver towards Abydos, its sails set full to the north wind.
Elsewhere another crew struggled against the current, pulling hard on their oars on a windless day.
The paintings lack the finesse of the best Egyptian work, but they have vitality and conviction.
The moments they portray are the life of the next world, for the Egyptians saw paradise as an idealized version of their own lives along the banks of the Nile.
It is a remarkably innocent view, this notion of carrying all the beloved moments of this world beyond the grave where one would find the river and the green banks and the boats sailing on the north wind as always.
I was reminded of Camus' comment: "What does eternity matter to me?
To lose the touch of flowers and women's hands is the supreme separation."
Then I thought of St Antony, so horrified by the world that he fled to the desert, and of the faces of the saints at St Paul's staring down from the dome, haunted by demons.
The guard invited us for tea.
He lived in the last tomb, a bare chamber with a mat, a kettle, a kerosene stove and a radio which didn't work.
He was in a great tradition of Egyptian tomb dwellers.
Monks had lived at Beni Hasan for centuries, and their religious graffiti can be seen everywhere.
We wondered if the musicians and bare-breasted dancers amongst the tomb paintings brought them comfort or torment.
We drank the tea squatting in the shade, gazing down over the desert and the river valley.
We could see our boat moored beyond the reeds and our boatmen asleep beneath a tree.
The river was in splendid panoramic form, curving gently away upstream and down, followed by the high ridge of the eastern desert.
A large sodden island of reeds lay out in mid-stream like a moored barge.
Two feluccas glided over the surface of the water like birds.
On the walls of the guard's tomb was the graffiti symbol of a boat, a stark line drawing of a felucca.
We had seen it in the other tombs as well, sometimes carved on top of the paintings.
The boats were a recurring metaphor, for the river, for journeys, for rites of passage, carved across the static innocence of the tomb paintings.
The guard, an aristocratic character of impeccable manners, believed they were symbols of escape, of flight.
He thought they had been carved by people living in the tombs, perhaps the monks, who dreamed fine dreams of other places, who longed for new horizons.
The idea reflected his own frustrated desires, tied as he was to his duties at Ueni Hasan.
I asked him where he would like to go.
 "Mecca," he said immediately.
 "And then Paris." 
We sailed home through the late afternoon.
The light lengthened through the palm groves and the villages glowed between the trees.
The bluffs of the eastern bank were cast in gold light and blue shadows.
The blue of the river deepened to dark sapphire.
Sound, like light, grew longer and clearer, lingering across the surface of the water: the boy hailing the other boatmen, voices from the villages on the banks, children splashing at the river's edge, calling to one another.
The sun went down, seeping into the darkened fields of the western bank.
For a moment the river was washed with pink and then with a beautiful grey.
Then the light failed.
With twilight a calm descended on the river.
The wind died and we lay out in midstream drifting with the current.
A few lights came on in the villages.
After a time a full yellow moon rose above the ridge of the eastern desert.
It whitened as it climbed the sky, casting a long path of broken moonlight across the river.
Ramses slept curled on the bow deck with his turban as a pillow and the youngest boy slept beside his brother at the tiller in the stern.
The river was glassy and inviting.
From the banks we could hear dogs barking.
The night thickened about us, and we drifted home to Minya through the moonlight.
In the night, in the Palace Hotel, I became feverish.
But towards dawn the fever broke, and after a breakfast of tea and warm bread I felt better.
We decided to go on to Mallawi by train.
Sadat's assassin came from Mallawi.
It seemed the kind of place in which people grew embittered.
It was a shoddy disreputable town which stank of open sewers and rotting vegetables.
The buildings were mean and in the streets, littered with rubbish, people jostled against us.
Big old American cars pushed their way through the crowds with deranged faces pressed against their windows.
The only hotel overlooked the canal and rows of defecating men.
The room was hot and stuffy and swarming with flies.
A radio whined somewhere.
My fever had returned and I took to my bed.
Fully dressed, I shivered violently beneath a pile of blankets.
Huge trucks passed up and down the road outside the hotel, their horns blaring.
Through the window I could see the rooftops of a grand old rococo building, an oriental fantasy of domes and cupolas.
Melinda went to investigate and found it ruinous.
A small child emerged from a ditch by the entrance and threw a spoon at her.
In the morning we took a shared taxi back to Minya.
I lay in the refuge of our old room in the Palace Hotel.
A doctor with a soothing voice and an old-fashioned black bag pronounced, absurdly, that I had a cold.
For its cure he prescribed antibiotics.
The three brothers crept in on tiptoe to leave jugs of iced lemon juice by my bedside.
The masseur promised to drive the fever out with his special massage.
I pleaded with Melinda to take him away.
Muhammad appeared regularly, whispering to me in Arabic.
He took limes from his pyjama pockets and left them on the blankets.
A family came to call, bringing claustrophobia as some people bring fresh air.
A Copt who ran the soft drink stall across the square brought three kilos of grapes and prayers.
Most of the grapes eventually rotted in the bottom of the wardrobe.
The prayers fared better.
On the third day I was well again.
One morning we set off to find the primal mound where the world began.
An early train from Minya left us at Roda, a country station where old taxis and barouches waited at a crossroads for fares.
There were no roads direct from the station to where the world began, but the carriage drivers, squatting over their breakfasts, directed us to an abandoned railway line which cut across country.
The railway line ran through tall fields of durra.
The early morning was cool and birds still chattered in the long grasses along the line.
In the distance pale trees were wrapped in the morning mists.
We passed a huge pigeon tower with pigeons strutting the dung-spattered ramparts.
Rising from the blue fields like a medieval castle, it gave the morning a fantastical air.
At this hour the old railway line was a busy thoroughfare.
Men  riding past on donkeys called elaborate greetings to us.
Children grazed water buffalo along the thick grass of the embankment, beating the huge animals into line with tiny sticks.
Two old women passed and smiled at us, wrinkling their blue-tattooed cheeks.
Two tall young men in finely cut gallibayas and white scarves asked rather formally if they might walk with us, then lapsed into shy silence.
At their turning they bowed and shook our hands in farewell.
A man on a donkey directed us to where the world began, pointing up a lane between two walls of durra.
We emerged on a dry stretch of open ground.
A hundred yards away lay the village of Ashmunein.
Camels and oxen nudged each other in front of the painted houses.
All about us were the mounds and ruins of Hermopolis.
The visible remains were disappointingly recent, primarily Graeco-Roman.
There were various mounds among them.
Identifying the one on which the world began proved tricky.
Indeed it must be admitted that there are at least two other sites in Egypt which lay claim to this distinction.
One is in the Delta; the other is in Heliopolis, now a suburb of Cairo, but not even a cynic could believe the world began in the suburbs.
Having come this far, we had a vested interest in Ashmunein, and we resolutely climbed the largest of its mounds.
At the beginning of time it was said to have arisen from the primeval waters, the waters of Chaos.
On this mound Thoth, the god of wisdom, engendered four divine couples, the male and female aspects of the four elements of the primeval waters: Eternity, Mystery, Night and Darkness.
They in turn created the egg from which the sun was hatched.
In the egg with the sun was a goose, and when it emerged it flew honking away: the first sound of this world.
Later, wandering further through the ruins, we noted that the process of creation seemed to have gone into reverse.
The water-table at Hermopolis had risen to overtake many of the remains.
We found the column bases of the temple of Thoth almost buried in reeds in a black pond where a bloated rat floated belly-up.
The tombs of Tuna- el-Gebel, the ancient necropolis of Hermopolis a few miles to the west, appeared to be drowning in desert.
The tombs imitated houses with blind windows and mock stone panelling.
Sand drifts smothered the front steps, climbed walls almost to the gables, and in one place blocked off a whole street.
Against the angular and decaying walls of the tombs, the drifts of sand had a sensuous grace, immaculate and virginal.
The wind had rippled their surface like a sea-bed.
We had come to see the tomb of Isidora.
She was, apparently, still in residence.
We climbed a short flight of steps to the front door.
Inside were two bare rooms.
In the second room lay Isidora herself mummified but unwrapped, in a long glass case.
She was a slight, delicate figure.
There was no trace of breasts, and her hip bones jutted out like a young girl's.
Her skin, like leathery bark, was stretched tightly over the skeleton, and in places where it had cracked and parted you could see the bones inside like old wood.
She had long slim fingers and very long thumbs.
One leg lay slightly askew, broken either when she drowned or by mishandling in death.
In the middle of her chest was a gaping hole where the viscera had been removed.
She looked as if she needed a pillow; her head was thrown back awkwardly.
Looking closely you could see traces of fine reddish curls at her temples.
Only the mouth gave the face its expression.
The lips were drawn back over a row of small pointed teeth in a ghastly grimace, a shriek of pain or terror.
The preservation of Isidora was the preservation of this death howl.
It filled the room, a silent banshee wail.
Isidora had drowned in the Nile in the second century AD.
A particular sanctity was attached to victims of the river, as if they embodied some terrible truth.
To die in the waters of the Nile, the giver of life, was a paradox which compelled the ancients.
We found it difficult to leave.
The room felt horribly lonely.
There were no paintings of musicians or dancing girls or peasants treading grapes here.
Night, Darkness, Mystery and Eternity seemed to be her only companions.
A fat unshaven man sat opposite us on the train eating guavas.
They were very ripe and the juice had squirted on to his shirt-front like bloodstains.
It was a white shirt, buttoned at the neck without a tie.
The man had large hands covered with dark hairs, and a delicate mouth between fat cheeks.
He fumbled in his bag and drew out two guavas.
 "Itfadel," he said, handing them to us.
Outside the windows were fields of silver cabbages and tall sunflowers, their heads drooping.
exhausted in the heat.
The palm groves were full of brick kilns and trails of black smoke snaked between the trees.
 "Asyut," the fat man said, biting into another guava.
Juice rolled down his chin.
 "I hope you are not going to Asyut." 
He knew we were.
He had been eating guavas. and listening, when we had discussed our destination with the conductor.
 "We are," I said.
 "Asyut is not good," the fat man said.
 "It is a bad place." 
He crunched another guava.
He looked as if he had been shot in the chest.
 "My wife is from Asyut," he said.
"She has gone back there to her family.
I told her,"Go to Asyut.
Go to hell. "" 
He laughed.
showing us a mouthful of guava.
 "Have you any children?" 
I asked.
"No children.
My wife does not give me children.
She is cursed.
I should not have married her.
Now I send her back to Asyut.
He picked guava pips from his teeth.
 "Are you married?" he asked.
 "Yes," we said.
It was what we said for convenience; there was no concept in Egypt of unmarried couples.
 "Have you children?" he asked.
 "No." 
He took this news quietly.
I had half expected him to begin raving about cursed women and sending Melinda to Asyut.
Perhaps he didn't bother because we were going there anyway.
We passed a small shrine, a humble domed square of whitewashed adobe, the tomb of a saint, adorned with rags.
It was a  common sight in Egypt.
The rags were bits of clothing of childless women who came to the shrine to pray for fertility.
A woman's position in Egyptian society depended upon her children, particularly her sons.
Without children, she had no status.
The rags hung limply on wires round the muddy walls.
I imagined the fat man's wife, a fat woman, making her way alone through the palm trees, tearing a strip from her dress and tying it to the shrine.
 "How old is your wife?" 
Melinda asked.
 "Sixteen," the man said.
"It is too bad not to have children.
Every man must have children.
When he is old they will care for him.
When he is dead they will remember him.
This is how it should be.
They are his blood."
He got off at the next village and waddled away up a street with his bag of guavas.
It was a village of narrow lanes and tilting walls.
The lanes were crowded with children and donkeys and geese.
Women in black squatted in doorways sifting through pans of dry rice, picking out the stones.
From the train we looked down over the clutter of the rooftops, things broken, things abandoned, things stored and forgotten: broken water-jugs, wheel-less bicycles, rolls of rush matting.
Everything was brown except for one glorious sunstruck line of washing.
The square outside the train station at Asyut was a maelstrom of crowds and buses and shouting taxi drivers.
We fled down a long avenue towards the river.
On the Corniche we asked a traffic policeman in a white booth where we might find a hotel.
As we were turning to follow his directions, he drew up his cuff and showed us the blue tattooed cross that all Copts have on the inside of their wrists.
 "Do you love our Lord?" he asked.
In the lobby of the Lotus Hotel a luminous picture of the Virgin Mary, like a Hollywood starlet, filled an entire wall.
A sober Copt  showed us to a room overlooking the street.
The walls were bright green and the mattresses of the cots were littered with dead flies.
After Cairo and Alexandria, Asyut is the largest town in Egypt.
There is a barrage and bridge across the river, the first bridge since He/wan just south of Cairo.
It has a university and technical colleges, and its large student population has helped to give it a reputation as a trouble-spot Muslim fundamentalist groups are very active in Asyut, and the Coptic population is large.
There have been frequent clashes between Coptic and Muslim students and between fundamentalist groups and the authorities.
Troops guarded the crumbling mansions, now government buildings, along the Nile.
For us Asyut had a more innocent significance It was a place where many of the Nile barges broke their journey.
The barges were moored along the river's edge beneath the Corniche.
There was no dock, only a gravel embankment into which the bargemen had driven mooring stakes.
At close range, after the feluccas, they seemed vast.
They were iron-hulled and their cargoes were in open holds beneath tarpaulins.
The engine rooms lay astern and in the bows, beneath awnings, were wheels as tall as a man.
The barges were the new lords of the Nile, and we were determined to hitch a lift on one.
The bargemen greeted us as formally as if we were visiting them in their own homes, which I suppose we were.
At each barge they ran down boarding planks for us, sat us on a long bench by the wheel and set about producing tea.
They were gracious and hospitable.
Some were waiting for spare parts from Cairo, some were waiting on instructions from their owners, some were going downriver.
None was able to help.
In the evening we went to eat in one of the eating houses near the station.
We were walking up the road from the hotel when a young man padded up behind us and greeted us in English.
 "Hey man," he said.
 "Excuse me for bothering you." 
He had a thin face and pockmarked skin.
His hair was plastered  forward over his scalp to hide the fact that he was already balding.
"I just wanted to offer you any help if I can.
To find the way, or to give you any advices.
Where are you from?"
 "From England," I said.
We did not like the look of him and kept walking.
He matched his stride to ours.
 "I am a member of the Friends of the Tourist Organization," he said.
 "It is our duty to help foreigners We have been watching you, and would like to help you." 
At this point a second young man appeared.
He had obviously been waiting to see how the first got on.
 "This is my chief in the Organization," the first one said.
The chief smiled and introduced himself He had the bloated appearance of someone who had gained weight too quickly.
A long curving moustache framed his large mouth.
 "We hope we are not bothering you," the chief said.
"But we know it is difficult for foreigners in Egypt to deal with all the many problems.
We like to help them.
It is our duty.
We give them advices about the way to go, the correct prices, many things.
We can help, you to meet Egyptian people and learn about Egyptian customs.
 "That is very kind of you," I said.
"But we have been in Egypt for three months.
We have learnt to manage."
"But we would like to help you here in our own city.
"Thank you.
But we can manage."
 "Do you not like talking to Egyptians?" the chief asked.
He managed a note of injury.
"Yes of course we do.
But we are very busy this evening.
We want to post some letters, and then we must go to eat."
 "You have letters," the chief said.
I realized I had made a mistake.
"Please.
Allow us to show you where to post them."
They led us up a series of side streets to a post office near the station.
Then they accompanied us to an eating house.
The chief did virtually all the talking.
We hoped our lack of response would eventually put him off His side-kick, the thin man, was edgy and sat forward on his seat.
He laughed loudly at things that weren't funny and littered his English with expletives to appear more at home in the language.
The chief, smug, supercilious and opinionated, was undaunted by our indifference.
The English, he said, were a strange people.
They liked to pretend that they were fair-minded and polite, but he himself had found that they were not polite.
They did not like to talk to Egyptian people.
The sun, he thought, had set on them now for sure.
He was dismissive of Melinda's Arabic, and insisted on speaking to us in English which he declared a simple language, like the.
h language of a child.
Our problem was that we had not learned enough.
Egyptian Customs, he declared, this is what we must learn.
We needed someone like himself, a Friend of the Tourists, who could take us through Egyptian Customs step by step.
After paying the bill, we pointedly shook their hands and said goodbye.
 "You are going to your hotel?" the chief asked.
 "Yes," I said.
 "Good-night." 
"We will walk with you.
We live near the hotel."
We walked on quickly.
 "You are interested in boats?" he asked, quickening his pace to keep up.
 "Not particularly." 
 "But we saw you today talking with the boatmen on their boats." 
"That's right.
We want to travel on one of the barges."
The chief clung to my side.
"I think perhaps I can help you.
My uncle owns a company with many barges.
I will speak to him and try to arrange this for you.
The boatmen cannot help you.
They are bad men.
Many are thieves.
You must not trust them."
 "They seemed very pleasant." 
 "They are bad men." 
At our hotel we bade them good-night again.
The chief wanted to know when he could bring us news of his uncle's barges.
We told him to look for us in the evening.
We hated to give them any encouragement but something might come of his uncle, if he existed.
Upstairs from our window we could see the two men at a soft drinks stall across the road.
They were drinking bottles of Coke and trying not to appear as if they were watching the hotel.
We spent the following day on the far bank of the river in a paradise of guava orchards and banana groves.
In the afternoon we had tea in a house full of the most beautiful women.
They had dark eyes and gold teeth and were all young and slim and muscular and small-breasted.
They wore bright scarves and pantaloons and silver anklets.
They spoke with almost incomprehensible country accents.
They had never heard of England, but thought it must be somewhere near Cairo.
Back in Asyut the Friends of the Tourists were waiting for us outside our hotel.
Melinda pleaded a headache and went inside, and I took them across the road to the soft drinks stall to hear the report of the uncle, and then get rid of them.
They seemed disappointed to hear that we had had such a pleasant day on the far bank.
 "Why didn't you tell us?" the chief said.
"We could have come with you.
Shown you the way.
Made the people there give you some hospitality.
They are very ignorant, the people in the country side, and do not know good manners."
I tried to enquire about the uncle and the boats.
He drew on his Coke, savouring the fact that he had something I wanted.
 "It is a very difficult matter," he said.
 "Let us go and take some food and I can explain it to you step by step." 
I feigned lack of interest and made to go.
The explanation suddenly became simpler.
His uncle, he said, was very displeased that the bargemen had been talking with us.
They were not allowed to take passengers on the river.
For this they would require the written permission of the owners, and a police permit.
I thanked him for his help, assured him that we would begin to go through the proper channels tomorrow, and said good-night.
While we had been on the opposite bank a new barge had come upriver from the direction of Minya and had moored near the end of the Corniche.
Later in the evening, with our two Friends still waiting opposite the hotel, we slipped out by a back door and made our way down to the river.
I had no intention of going through the proper channels; it could take weeks.
Egyptian bureaucracy is  slow and it is common practice to circumvent officialdom whenever possible.
But we were concerned now to keep our barge arrangements secret from the Friends of the Tourists, for they could easily thwart us, if they chose to, by denouncing our plans to the authorities.
At the end of the Corniche, opposite where the newly arrived barge was moored, was a police post and an army barracks.
We cut down to the riverbank before we reached them and walked along the water's edge out of sight of the buildings above.
We hailed the nearest bargemen and they ran a plank down for us.
There were five barges moored abreast here, and we climbed over the first four, greeting the startled crews as we went.
On the last barge we found a group of men gathered around a bench beneath a canopy in the bow.
Seated cross/egged on the bench at the centre of the group was a large man smoking a homemade seisha.
He returned our greeting in a loud authoritative voice.
 "Are you going upriver?" we asked.
He nodded, puffing on his seisha.
 "To Luxor." 
He Pronounced it in the way of Upper Egypt, dropping the "L" 
 "May we travel with you?" 
 "Of course," he said, without hesitation.
 "When do you leave?" 
 "Tomorrow morning at five o'clock." 
 "Okay," we said.
 "We will be here." 
He nodded again, still puffing away.
He asked no question5 of us.
No one else had spoken.
We hesitated for a moment then took our leave.
As we were stepping on to the adjoining barge, the man on the bench called out to us.
 "Hawaga," he said.
Foreigner.
We looked back.
 "Ahlan w'a sahlan," he said.
Welcome.
 "Ahlan beek," we said, returning the formulaic greeting.
This pleased him, that we knew the proper response.
He took his pipe out of his mouth, smiled and waved.
 "Tomorrow," he said.
In the morning we were woken by the muezzin at four o'clock.
We packed in the dark and crept downstairs.
Opening the outside door we stepped into the sharp night air.
In the pooled streetlights the street was empty.
Across the way a man was huddled asleep against the soft drinks stall.
 "Turn right," I whispered.
Melinda looked at me.
I took her arm and we turned towards the station away from the river.
We had only gone a few steps when a voice called out from across the street.
"Hey, hello.
My friends.
Where are you going?"
Footsteps ran after us.
The thin man came panting up to us.
 "Where are you going?" he asked.
He was confused, befuddled by sleep and the sudden departure of his charges.
 "To the train," I said "We have decided to go to Luxor by" My heart was pounding.
I had thought I was being paranoid about their obsessive interest in us, but now, finding one of them waiting outside our hotel at half past four in the morning, I was alarmed.
 "Could you help us?" 
I asked.
"Our bags are heavy.
Would you go up to the station and get a taxi for us?
Then we could have some tea together before we catch the train.
He stood for a moment chewing his lip.
He didn't know what to do.
He was still half asleep.
 "Okay," he said at last.
 "I will be right back." 
When he was out of sight we picked up our bags and turned into a side street.
Keeping to back lanes we made our way down to the river.
We passed the police sentry who grunted a sleepy greeting.
Further on, opposite where the barge was moored, we passed soldiers hunched behind sandbags at the army post.
We walked on until we reached an unlit stretch of the Corniche, then climbed over a low wall and down the short slope to the river's edge where we were out of sight of the sentries.
Then we doubled back to the barges.
The boarding plank had been taken up for the night.
Above us on the wall of the Corniche two men were wrapped in a blanket.
 "Hello mister," they called sleepily.
We had to get on to the barge before these two characters  unwittingly alerted the army sentries across the road, or before the Friends of the Tourists turned up looking for us.
The barges, at the end of their mooring ropes, lay some fifteen feet from the shore.
I rolled up my trousers and carried the bags out to the first barge.
Behind me I could hear the men calling again,"Hey, mister.
Hello mister."
The water was deeper than I had thought.
It swirled up above my waist.
The bottom was large slippery boulders.
I threw our bags up on to the deck of the first barge, about ten feet above me.
Melinda waded out after me and we climbed up one of the mooring ropes on to the deck.
The men on the wall seemed to have lost interest, and burrowed into their blanket again.
We made our way across the first four barges.
On the fifth we settled down to wait on deck.
We could see the army post now and the shuffling sentries and a few jeeps passing in and out of the gate.
But the barges were in darkness and they could not see us.
A dog whined somewhere in a hold.
Thankfully it was tied up.
We sat for about an hour waiting for the bargemen to wake.
It was dark and we were cold and wet.
We changed into dry trousers and extracted sweaters from the bottom of our bags.
A crescent moon hovered above the trees of the far bank and there was a scattering of cold stars.
Dark clumps of water hyacinths floated downstream like tiny islands cut adrift.
Moonlight glinted between them.
In the dark stillness only the surface of the river moved.
In the pre-dawn, the river was the colour of ink.
A straggling formation of geese flew upriver, low over the water, squawking faintly.
In the town, roosters began to crow.
We could see the bargemen now, asleep about the boat, huddled in blankets.
One was on the bench at the front, another atop the tarpaulin over the hold.
They awoke all at once, as if an alarm had gone off.
Greeting us sleepily, they began immediately to cast off  The engine started and a moment later we were pulling away from the other barges in a wash of white water.
Asyut slipped astern.
The big man, whom we had spoken to the previous evening, sat on the bench in the bow, sucking deeply on his seisha.
He patted the cushions beside him to indicate that we should join him.
He introduced himself as Muhammad, the reis, the captain.
The pilot, Milhaez, was at the wheel immediately behind the bench.
A third man, Romany, the mechanic who looked after the engine, squatted in the bow, sleepily making tea.
These three were the barge's crew.
The riverbanks were wreathed in mist.
The banana groves and the guava orchards of the east bank were blue and gloomy.
There was no one about.
Three white ibises flew along the bank, their long yellow legs almost trailing their own blurred reflections.
Gradually the river lightened and the banks began to awake.
A man carried a bunch of fishing poles down an empty village street, a dog barking at his heels.
Another man in another village was setting off for the fields, his hoe over his shoulder.
Now and then people appeared on the banks to wash, squatting on their haunches, leaning forward to scoop up handfuls of water.
The river was a lilac grey colour but the water splashing over their upturned faces and running off their arms was silver.
Caryatid figures passed through the fields with tall water jugs on their heads.
Finally the sun appeared, rising beyond a stand of palm trees.
Their curving silhouettes slid across its red face as we passed upstream.
With the sun, the bargemen came to life.
Milhaez, at the wheel, began to sing.
He had a good strong voice and he whistled the instrumental parts, shaking his head in time.
In his baggy white shorts and bright yellow waistcoat, he looked like a street entertainer.
Romany washed the tea glasses in a bucket of water lifted from the river.
He had a gentle startled face, and the skin round his eyes was dark and bruised-looking.
He wagged his head to the music and his turban slipped over one eye.
Beside us on the bench the captain, Muhammad, puffed fiercely on his seisha.
When it expired he handed it to Romany to prepare another.
Released from his pipe, at least momentarily, he inhaled the morning air.
 "Sob et Kir," he boomed, to us, to the river.
Good morning.
 "Hawaga." 
It was the way he would always address us: foreigner.
 "Where are you going?" 
 "To Sudan," I said.
 "Al-Sudan." 
He widened his eyes, and began to give us directions.
"We are going to Luxor.
After Luxor, you will find Aswan.
After Aswan, you will find a big lake.
On the other side of the lake, you will come to Sudan."
 "How long will it take to get to Luxor?" 
Melinda asked.
 "Two days," he said, holding up two fingers.
"We are going home to Luxor.
The journey home is always the quickest."
We expressed mild surprise, and examined our maps.
He tapped me on the knee.
"Hawaga.
Two days.
We are not a felucca."
At midday Romany cut the engines, and Milhaez steered the barge into a narrow inlet where we moored between the bank and a low island of reeds and stunted palms.
Our cargo of cement was destined for a factory at Tima, a town which lay a few miles back from the riverbank.
We spent five days moored in this inlet while the barge was unloaded.
It was a pleasant interlude, and we did not mind the delay nearly as much as the captain did.
In spite of all evidence to the contrary, he always believed that we were leaving bokra, tomorrow.
But the unloading, all done by hand, was a slow process.
The third bokra was a Friday, the Muslim holy day, when the labourers did not come at all.
Each morning trucks from the factory bumped along a dust road and turned down on to the low gravel bank where we were moored.
All day long a team of labourers, pale with cement dust, streamed  up a plank out of the hold with the bags of cement, like a trail of ants.
In the afternoons the owner of the factory usually came to visit and to check the progress of the work.
The stream of barefoot labourers quickened their pace while he was on board.
The owner was a fat boyish figure in a neatly pressed gallibaya.
He had a fat shiny face and a smug smile.
He sat on the bench sipping tea and described his wealth to me.
He owned the factory.
He owned many trucks.
He owned so many feddans of land.
He owned, it seemed, half of Tima.
I made a show of looking bored with this recital of wealth.
To further aggrandize himself, he tried to supplant the captain as our host.
 "I would like to invite you to come and stay at my house," he said.
"I have a large house in Tima.
You would be very comfortable there.
Later I could arrange for a car to take you on to Luxor.
 "That is very kind," I said, "but we are happy here." 
 "But you have no beds, no cushions, nothing." 
"We like the barge.
We prefer to be on the river."
The captain beamed with satisfaction, and the owner lost interest in us.
Like any Egyptian, the captain took his role as host very seriously.
While the labourers were on the boat, he insisted that Melinda go into purdah.
The labourers, he explained, were bad men.
They would took at her.
He pronounced took like a curse, and mimed the bad men looking by jutting his head forward and glaring at her like a demented goldfish.
As a host it was his duty to protect a female guest from such horrors.
It was impossible to refuse his request; to do so would have been an insult.
So for the potential crime of the bad men, all of whom seemed perfectly pleasant, sentence was passed on Melinda, who was duly imprisoned in the hold.
There she languished throughout the hot hours of the day, emerging each evening only when the workmen had departed.
She took it philosophically, and spent her days reading The Seven Pillars of Wisdom.
When I went below for visits I found her eating dates and musing on Lawrence's alleged masochistic sexuality.
The life of the river and the riverbanks went on about us.
Beyond the gravel beach where the trucks drew up, the bank was a mass of reeds and elephant grass, their ripe heads shot through with light.
The women who came down to the river, no doubt fearful of looks themselves, avoided the barge.
We could hear them laughing and chattering beyond the reeds, their dresses flashing bright glints of colour through the green stalks.
Downstream an ancient felucca lay in against the bank, its hull the colour of granite.
Early one morning a horseman appeared on the bank in rich blue robes, his horse caparisoned with coloured ribbons.
He cantered back and forth on the gravel beach, then rode off through a corn field.
In the afternoons fishermen in small skiffs laid nets along the low island of reeds which lay between us and the main channel, returning to gather them at night.
Through the day the river graduated from the silvery grey of the morning to the pale marine-colours of midday to a deep velvety blue in the early evenings.
The long desert ridges above the far bank looked like petrified pink brocade.
In the evenings the smell of cooking pervaded the boat.
We ate at a low round table set out on the foredeck, splendid meals of hot ful beans, salads of tomatoes and onions, and fresh fish from the river.
The meals were prepared by Milhaez and Romany while the captain smoked his seisha.
His life aboard was entirely idle; the others waited on him like two wives, catering to his needs and bolstering his ego.
In the twilight after dinner he was like a Buddha on his bench, Wreathed in tobacco smoke.
They had been away from home for eight weeks, and one evening the captain showed us the presents he had bought for his wife.
He kept them beneath a cushion at the end of his bench.
There was a flimsy nightdress which seemed to consist only of feathers and ribbons, and a mysterious stick of what looked like fudge.
We did not understand the word for this, so the captain resorted to mime.
First he engaged in enthusiastic eating of the fudge, and then in even more enthusiastic kissing.
Book, film or quote?"
I asked.
 "It's a very lovable sweet," Melinda said.
 "It's a kind of lipstick," I said.
The eating and the kissing grew more abandoned.
 "An aphrodisiac!" 
I cried.
He tucked it away safely beneath his cushion, smiling mischievously.
 "Hawaga," the captain said.
 "Do you miss your home?" 
 "No," I replied.
 "What about you?" 
In answer he quoted a boatman's saying: "The sailors of the Nile have no home but the river, and the river is home to no one." 
It sounded marvellous in Arabic.
One afternoon we went for a walk to a nearby village where we met an old man with a stick and a long grey moustache who invited us home for tea.
The old man sat next to us on the mastaba, a low adobe platform which ran round the walls of the front room of his house.
He had a wan creased face and wore an old double-breasted suit jacket over his gallibaya.
The room was empty save for a pile of cushions and blankets in one corner and an enormous television set on a stool in the middle of the earthen floor.
 "Have you just moved in?" 
Melinda asked.
 "I was born in this room," he said.
Tea was carried out to us on a brass tray from the women's quarters.
As news of our presence spread through the village, more and more people arrived to stare at us.
The old man instructed his grandson to bring us cushions.
Two enormous bolsters, as hard as planks, were produced.
Perched atop these monoliths like exhibits, we towered absurdly above the old man.
By now the entire village had crowded into the room.
A sea of hushed and bemused faces stared up at us.
Our host was shy, and when conversation flagged he resorted to the television.
He introduced it proudly as the only television in the village.
It had been bought by his three sons who all worked in Saudi Arabia.
From atop our cushions we dutifully watched the television, while the assembly of villagers watched us watching the television.
An American film was showing which I recognized as Double Indemnity.
Physical attraction was drawing an insurance salesman into a web of murder.
How was he to know, he mused, that murder smelled of honeysuckle?
The old man leaned forward on his stick and solemnly read the Arabic sub-titles aloud.
He seemed to be doing this for our benefit, unaware that the sound-track was in our own language.
The dialogue was quick-fire stuff, and he never got more than half-way through each sub-title before it was replaced with the next one.
After a time we were invited into the harem in the rear of the house.
The women sat on a mastaba against a sunny wall with their legs drawn up into red velvet skirts.
Children clustered round our knees.
A plate of dates was produced and we threw the stones over a low wall to three black goats who munched them mournfully.
The room smelled of animals and cooking.
There were three women, the wives of the old man's three sons.
They were bold and animated and all talked at once, sometimes in unison.
They asked us a stream of questions, and laughed and chattered about themselves and their children.
Their husbands, they said, only came home once a year, to father more children.
They did not miss them, they confided to Melinda.
It was not easy when they came home.
They were like stranger".
Later, when I returned to the old man, I found him alone with a few boys and the American film.
It was reaching a murderous conclusion.
The old man seemed to have lost interest in it.
He patted the bench beside him, and I sat down.
He pointed at the boys in thrall to the film.
 "They are not as we were," he said.
"When we were boys, we wanted to be like our fathers.
But our sons now do not want to be like us."
On the afternoon of the fifth day the unloading was completed.
We unlashed the mooring cables almost as the last bag of cement was carried down the gangplank.
Coming out into the main channel, we made a wide U-turn and headed upriver.
We felt elated to be on the move again.
In the late afternoon light, the banks glowed with colour.
The faces of the eastern mountains, lilac pink, were deeply creased, and pockmarked here and there with ancient tombs.
A group of acacias, standing above a village made golden by the late sun, blazed with crimson blossoms.
In mid-stream the river was a deep sapphire blue while along its banks it was washed with green and ochre and fulvous reflections.
With sunset the colours drained away.
The eastern mountains quickly faded to a sombre brown.
The fields of the west bank darkened by stages.
The river itself clung longest to the light, shining opaline blue between gloomy banks.
Then it too faded to a greasy blackness.
We did not stop with nightfall.
There was no moon, and in the pale starlight the river showed between the banks as a slightly thinner shade of black.
After a time Milhaez began to sing and the boat seemed to be carried upriver on his voice.
He sang for miles and miles.
The captain joined in with a long raucous song, beating time on the tea tray.
In the moments of stillness between the songs, the hugeness of the night overwhelmed the boat.
Singing, we came upon Sohag.
The bridge was a trail of lights between the two banks.
After the dark river, the town looked as bright and brassy as Manhattan.
But beyond Sohag we seemed to enter an even darker reach of the river.
We saw no more villages, and the river, broken now into narrow channels by low islands, began to curve.
Milhaez stopped singing and the captain went forward in the bow to stand as look-out.
The night was pitch black and we could see nothing.
The huge boat cleaved the darkness blindly.
Milhaez spun the wheel this way and that, negotiating islands that only appeared, at least to our unfamiliar eyes, at the last moment.
I never  knew how much Milhaez could see, and how much he steered from memory.
 "You must come to our house," the captain said.
"We will have a big meal, mulikai, chicken, rice, fresh bread.
My wife is a very good cook."
We were eating breakfast, crusts of petrified bread dipped in sweet tea.
Morning mists curled across the surface of the river.
The welcome we would receive at journey's end, and the fine meal we would have, was a recurrent theme of conversation.
 "You will meet my mother," the captain said.
 "She is very big." 
He leapt up from his bench and waddled across the foredeck like an enormous goose.
 "You will meet my daughter," Milhaez said.
"She is four, and she is very beautiful.
When she grows up she will be a doctor and live in England."
On the bank a line of children running through a field of clover were knee-deep in mist.
Their voices across the water were dreamlike.
Ahead of us a headland loomed out of the mist like the prow of a huge ship.
The river was smooth as a pond.
We sat on the bench and watched the sun come up above the eastern ridge and the mist clear like drifting smoke.
Out of sight, on the edge of the desert beyond the wide stretch of cultivation, lay Abydos, one of the most sacred sites of ancient Egypt, where the souls of the dead gathered at the tomb of Osiris.
As the morning wore on the captain became preoccupied.
 "There is a problem," he said after a time.
 "At Nag Hammadi there is a lock and at Qena there is a police check." 
 "You could let us off," we said.
"We don't want to make trouble for you.
He became conspiratorial.
"At Nag Hammadi, you can go below.
No one will see you.
There will be no problem.
But at Qena we will have to bribe the police not to check the boat."
 "How much?" 
 "Fifteen pounds." 
We gave him the money and he handed it immediately to Romany, the administrator of bribes.
The barrage at Nag Hammadi came into view in the early afternoon round a wide bend.
It was a long, low-arched bridge with a lock at the west side.
We went below.
 "Only half an hour," the captain said.
He closed the hatch.
We sat in the darkness feeling the motion of the boat.
After a time the engines slowed and we could hear the wheel turning.
The engines reversed and cut out altogether, and we knocked gently against a mooring.
The men went ashore.
We could hear their voices grow fainter.
Then the boat was silent.
We waited in the dark hold for an hour, then two.
Voices and footsteps above us heralded their return.
The captain was complaining about something.
There were other voices we did not recognize.
We crept in under a low table and covered ourselves with a tarpaulin.
A moment later the hatch shot open and men in boots came down into the hold, their voices loud in the confined space.
Their boots scraped on the floor; we could just see them from beneath our tarpaulin.
They stopped near us, then turned and went up the ladder again.
They left the hatch open, and we could hear them going about the barge, arguing with the bargemen.
Then they were gone.
Presently the engine started, and from beneath the tarpaulin I could see the shadow of the wheel turning  in a square of sunlight on the floor.
The light dimmed and we bumped something hard.
There was the smell of wet stone and water dripping.
We were in the lock.
It filled slowly.
We could measure the rise of the water by the gradual lightening of the hold and the change in the quality and volume of sound.
We rose into birdsong and the evening call to pray.
In a moment we were underway.
A few minutes later Romany pulled off the tarpaulin.
He was squatting at our feet grinning his wide sheepish grin.
From the deck above the captain was calling us.
The bargemen were in high spirits, the problems of the lock now behind them.
The men in boots were inspectors who had taken an unusual interest in our barge.
Romany mimed them going about the boat, looking here and looking there.
Everyone laughed, and the captain clapped me on the back and called me a good fellow.
Our hiding under the tarpaulin delighted them.
Above us on the east bank an enormous headland reared up, the colour of ripe apricots.
Beneath it, at the water's edge, was a single dom tree, the split palm tree which is the first sign of Upper Egypt.
We travelled all night.
The bargemen had scented home.
We passed towns whose mosques were lit up with coloured neon strips like amusement rides.
In one of the darkest reaches of the river, we came upon a cluster of lights on the east bank.
A faint hum, like insects, became music, a whining narghil, and drums.
There were lights suspended in the trees, crowds of people, dust hanging.
It was a wedding.
The sharp shadows of branches swayed across the lighted crowds of dancers.
Then the night closed in again.
At Qena we went below while the bribe was administered.
We could hear the police launch coming alongside.
They pulled away again almost immediately.
We were back on deck in a quarter of an hour.
The river and the night seemed endless.
We sailed on into a warm  enveloping darkness.
Far behind us our wake exhausted itself on the banks, and the river was still again.
Looking up at the stars I thought of the goddess Nut, her breasts spangled with constellations.
Of all the gods one was happiest to see her, this beautiful figure, slim as a girl.
The ancients thought of her as resurrection, giving birth to the sun each morning.
One found her beneath the lids of coffins and stretched across the ceiling of tombs, hovering above the dry bones of dead men.
When I woke in the morning, we were drawing into the bank.
The captain was at the wheel; Milhaez, who had piloted the boat through the night, lay asleep on the deck in a bundle of blankets.
The river was wide and empty.
The sun was just coming up over the far bank, trailing a red reflection across the water.
On our side the bank was slow and grassy and sloped up to trees.
We nudged against it, and the engines cut out.
The sweet stillness of birdsong stole over the barge.
 "Home," the captain said.
He and Romany ran a plank down on to the bank, then beckoned us to follow them.
We took up our bags and left Milhaez still sleeping on the deck.
The village lay a few hundred yards back from the river across fields of yellow stubble.
We went up a narrow street where children peered out of doorways.
At the end, in the doorway of the captain's house, his mother waited for us, an enormous woman in black.
She had a kindly face and smooth soft skin.
When she moved she waddled just as the captain had illustrated.
She welcomed us home as if we were lost children.
The mother was the centre of the household.
Her husband was dead, her daughters had gone to live with their in-laws, and her two sons, Muhammad and Milhaez, had brought their wives home to her.
They all lived together in two rooms-and a courtyard.
The  sons with their wives had the rooms, and the mother slept on a wide divan behind a curtain in a corner of the courtyard.
Her sons were delighted to see her, and were as warm with her as they were distant with their wives, greeted, after eight weeks on the river, with diffident handshakes.
Hovering in the background, like unwelcome neighbours, the wives eavesdropped on the tales of the river.
The captain's wife, a woman of the most extreme ugliness, smiled toothlessly at me.
I tried not to think of her in the feathery nightdress under the influence of the aphrodisiac.
We sat in a high vestibule between the street and the courtyard.
White doves fluttered down through the doorway and children swarmed in and out.
In the courtyard a chicken shrieked as one of the wives wrung its neck.
Milhaez cradled his daughter in his lap, the one who was to be a doctor in England.
She was a thin sickly child with a tremendous head of dark curly hair, a tiny shrunken face and enormous eyes.
Her limbs seemed lifeless, and she never spoke or uttered a sound.
She lay in her father's lap like a limp doll, gazing at him blankly, as if in a trance.
Lunch was as the captain had promised, a grand meal of many dishes.
The mother ate with us.
She sat with the chicken pot in her lap, tearing off pieces of the bird and handing them round.
The wives and the children would eat later.
In the afternoon a car was sent for.
The family stood outside the house as we drove off.
The children shouted after us, and the mother waved both hands like fat fluttering birds.
We stayed only one night in Luxor before turning downriver again to visit the great temples of Abydos and Dendera which we had passed on the barge.
At El Balyana we found rooms above a tea-house on the edge of town.
The rooms gave off a dark upper hallway where an old man slept on a bench in his underwear.
Presumably he had been locked  out of his room, for the tea-house manager searched in vain for keys to the antique padlocks which fastened the tall double doors.
Eventually he opened one for us by hitting it with an old chisel.
The keys must have been lost for some time.
Our room appeared not to have been inhabited in living memory.
It was furnished with an ancient iron bedstead and a wooden table so decrepit that it collapsed as I walked past it.
There were sand drifts in the corners, and what I took for lace curtains at the windows turned out to be spider webs.
El Balyana was a town of dirt streets full of donkey carts and horse-drawn barouches.
The men of the town carried long walking sticks of the sort one saw in the ancient temple reliefs.
On the walls of tombs throughout Egypt are boats sailing the Nile.
The boats, and the journeys they undertake, are symbols of resurrection.
Their destination is Abydos, the home of Osiris, one of the most ancient and venerable sites in all Egypt.
It was the object of pilgrimage for the living and the dead, and the focus for their hopes for life beyond the grave.
The story of the resurrection of Osiris, like the resurrection of Christ, was the promise of resurrection for all.
Once a virtuous king, whose subjects hailed him as a god, he was killed by his jealous brother Seth.
With the help of friends, Seth lured Osiris into a coffin-like box.
Then they sealed the lid and threw him into the Nile.
His body was eventually found by Isis, who was both his sister and his wife.
She performed the funerary rites so essential to Egyptians, but not before conceiving a child by the corpse.
Incest and necrophilia were as nothing to the amorous Egyptian gods.
Safely buried, Osiris now arose from the grave to train his son Horus for the punishment of Seth.
After a terrific struggle, in which Seth lost his testicles and Horus an eye, Horus emerged triumphant.
It was a pivotal moment in the history of the Egyptian gods, the triumph of good over evil.
As the site of the principal tomb of Osiris, Abydos was a place of particular sanctity for the ancient Egyptians.
Everyone wished to be buried there, or at least to set up a cenotaph on hallowed ground.
After death, the deceased journeyed to Abydos to begin the process of resurrection.
It is these metaphorical journeys that one sees on the walls of their tombs: the dead sailing the river in search of a promise.
Abydos lies to the west of El Balyana on the edge of the desert.
The Temple of Seti, its principal monument, rose beyond the fields like a grey ship with shabby bits of Egyptian village clinging to the outer walls like barnacles.
The temple is a magnificent building, with some of the finest reliefs in Egypt.
Out of the hard glare of the open courts we passed into cool, columned halls which offered the same inviting refuge as the palm groves along the banks of the river.
The gloom was cut by long thin shafts of light falling between the columns from ventilation holes in the high ceiling.
They struck the stone floor in points of pure whiteness.
Figures moving through the dark halls flickered like ghosts as they passed through these moments of light.
One vast hall of columns gave on to another as the temple rose in long slow ramps towards the inner sanctuaries: seven chapels dedicated to seven gods.
They are high narrow rooms, their walls covered with reliefs depicting the rites appropriate to them.
One of the rooms, the Osiris chapel, leads through to a further suite of rooms, dedicated to the Osirian cult.
It is here that the sacred mysteries of Osiris's resurrection were celebrated.
In the gloom, temple attendants were sweeping.
The dust they raised filled the room.
Vertical shafts of light, full of dust, stood  against the darkness like solid white columns.
But when we plunged our hands into them, the dust-filled light ran through our fingers like water.
We went to Dendera in a carriage along a road lined with dusty trees.
Wandering around the ruins of its outlying buildings, we found the rough foundations of a sanatorium.
In the small cells the insane had waited on stone beds for the divinely inspired dreams which they believed would offer prescriptions for their cure.
At one end were basins for water-cures.
Patients were immersed in water from the Nile which had been poured over divine statues inscribed with magical spells.
The main building at Dendera is the Temple of Hathor.
It is Ptolemaic and is rare amongst the buildings of ancient Egypt for being architecturally intact.
It dates from the last years of Egyptian independence and was still being built during the lifetime of Christ.
The temple illustrates the animal fetishism that lies at the dark roots of Egyptian religion and which it never really outgrew.
Hathor is depicted either as a beautiful young woman or as a rather sad cow.
Sometimes she appears as a strange hybrid of the two: a woman's face with long cow's ears.
In the last century, before the Suez Canal was cut, when the Indian Army passed Dendera on their march from the Red Sea to Alexandria, the sepoys identified the figures of Hathor with Shiva's bull, Nandi, and much to the surprise of their British officers, worshipped in the columned halls of the temple.
A breeze passed between the columns of the Hypostyle Hall.
High above us an elongated Nut stretched across the ceiling and swallowed the sun.
Gods and goddesses sailed through the celestial oceans of stars scattered across her tunic.
The ceilings of the inner sanctuaries told another story.
They had been colonized by bats, whose black dung crunched beneath our feet.
In the furthest and most sacred rooms the smell was so intense  it was difficult to breathe.
Thousands of bats squirmed hideously on the ceilings.
They had taken possession of the abodes of the gods.
We were sitting on a column base in the Hypostyle Hall reading when the first figure appeared.
I did not see him come in but looked up to find him standing suddenly between two columns.
He was dressed in white: white shorts, a white T-shirt which did not quite cover an enormous stomach, and a white floppy hat with a white handkerchief covering the back of his neck.
Over his mouth and nose was a white mask of the sort that the Japanese wear in the streets of Tokyo.
He came well-equipped.
He wore headphones and a yellow battery pack strapped to his arm.
A camera hung from his neck, a small shiny backpack from his shoulders, and a plastic water bottle from his belt.
He looked in that first moment like a spaceman who had landed suddenly and unexpectedly on a strange planet.
He stood for a moment between the columns, staring into the gloom.
Then he moved on, stepping carefully in"his heavy boots as if the floor might have been sown with mines.
As he passed out of sight behind a column another strange figure appeared from the direction in which he had come.
She was short and fat.
She wore a matching top and shorts of turquoise towelling stretched to breaking-point.
She too was loaded with heavy equipment and wore a white mask.
 "Elmer," she whispered, peering through the columns.
Then she plodded out of sight in his wake.
She was followed by another, and then another, and then many.
They filed into the temple, a stream of garish colour and silly hats and bare white flesh.
Most wore white masks and all of them bristled with equipment: fly whisks, cameras, binoculars, Walkmans, water bottles.
 "Bus number two this way," a guide called.
They gaped at the massive columns and passed on.
A few stragglers pointed cameras, and flash guns popped in the darkness.
We were curious about the masks, and asked a matron in a pink jumpsuit and a pair of bat-wing spectacles about them.
"Well, it seems I'm allergic to all the dust in the air over here.
We're in Egypt for a whole week, you know."
A row of masked faces went by.
No one, it seemed, wanted to be left out of the allergy.
And then, as suddenly as they had appeared, they vanished.
I remembered reading a quotation attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, a Ptolemaic deity linked with Thoth, the god of wisdom.
It was a prophecy:
There will be a time when…all holy reverence for the gods will vanish and be made of no effect…
Egypt will be abandoned, and the land which was the home of worship will be stripped of the presence of the deities and left bare.
Foreigners will fill this region and the land; and there will be not only a neglect of devotions but, what is harder, religion, piety, and divine worship…
Then this most holy land, the abode of shrines and temples, will be most full of graves and of dead men.
On the train to Luxor we witnessed an arrest.
Just before it left Qena three policemen boarded.
The first was a young officer with a well-cut uniform and a shiny vain face.
In his wake were two older men in crumpled uniforms, unshaven clumsy fellows, carrying their rifles gingerly as if they feared they might go off unexpectedly.
Their badges were pinned to their uniforms with safety pins.
The young officer advanced on the ticket collector at the end of the carriage.
 "We are searching the train," he announced.
 "Do not let anyone off." 
The ticket collector shrugged, and the policeman passed up and down the carriages questioning passengers.
Just before Qift, they arrested a sheep.
The young officer got down from the train and went into the station building.
His subordinates  followed, carrying the captive in a wicker cage.
They put it down in a strip of shade and stood to attention on either side with their rifles.
The sheep gazed through the bars at the departing train with a look of woolly innocence.
In the old days Luxor and Aswan were favourite winter haunts of a wealthy and leisured class of Europeans.
They came for the climate, the charm of the river, and the antiquities.
Archaeological discoveries in the latter half of the nineteenth-century had caused a considerable stir in Europe.
European newspapers avidly followed the adventures of antiquarians and treasure-hunters in distant lands, as workmen back home wrestled crated colossi from the temples of the Nile through the entrance halls of the British Museum and the Louvre.
The nineteenth-century tourists came upriver from Cairo in the new Thomas Cook steamers or, more grandly, in privately hired dahabeeyahs.
They stayed in the splendid hotels of the era the Old Winter Palace at Luxor, the Cataract at Aswan.
They hired dragomans to escort them round the tombs and temples in the shade of parasols.
They played croquet and bridge, had picnics in the Valley of the Kings, exchanged visiting cards and arranged dinner parties.
In the evenings they rode out in carriages to see Karnak by moonlight.
It was a pleasing interlude in privileged lives to which the alien shabbiness of the town beyond the hotel gardens, and the very remoteness of the place on the edge of the civilized world, added a whiff of adventure and glamour.
Luxor and Aswan still draw tourists up the Nile, but times have changed and standards have slipped.
Their hotels are likely to be one of the faceless cement blocks which have sprouted in both towns.
Their stay is far from leisurely.
They are doing Egypt, and they are in a hurry.
The chief redeeming feature of tourism is that it adheres strictly  to preordained patterns.
In Egypt one will encounter tourists in Cairo, Luxor and Aswan, and occasionally in Alexandria.
The rest of the country escapes their notice.
Luxor, next to Karnak and across the river from the Valley of the Kings, suffers most.
In the winter season the town is awash with tourists.
Their contact with the local population is largely commercial, and the agent of that exchange is the tout.
Between them, the tourist and the tout manage to capture most of the worst elements of their respective cultures.
They deserve each other.
We were fortunate to be in Luxor in mid-summer when the heat makes it off-season.
The drivers of the polished and ornamented barouches which stood idle beneath the trees smoked and gossiped in the depths of the leather seats, and we were the only guests in our hotel.
Our hotel overlooked the Temple of Luxor and the river.
After the more spartan conditions of the past two months, it seemed the height of luxury.
There was a writing table and an adjoining bathroom, and clean sheets arrived each morning.
For this, we had tourism to thank.
In the evenings from our balcony we watched the setting sun slant through the columns of the Temple of Luxor and lay a golden radial across the floor of the main court.
Beyond, the river was a polished blue and the feluccas glided across it like pink-winged swans.
Beyond the river were the ancient faces of the Theban Hills.
We grew very fond of the Temple of Luxor which we saw from our window in every mood of light.
Visitors in the nineteenth century found its columned halls crowded with mean hovels, the slums of Luxor.
Now cleared, it has a unity and humanity of scale not found at Karnak, its more famous neighbour.
Its statuary is delightful.
A smoothly sensual colossus o one of the Ramses guards a doorway.
The face is serene, and almost smug.
In the corner of one of the courts a small figure of Queen Nefertari is depicted  standing by the feet of a colossus.
On the column next to it a Greek tourist, visiting the temple over 2,000 years ago, carved the figure of Paris as a huntsman, a compliment to her beauty.
Karnak on the other hand is vast; the site could accommodate ten European cathedrals.
The ruined columned halls seem endless.
It is astonishing but lifeless, a parody of the worst of Egyptian architectural excess.
We spent a week in Luxor.
To avoid the heat of the day we went out in the mornings, waking while it was still dark.
By the time we had dressed the first grey light of the day had appeared at the window.
In the streets the shops were closed and shuttered.
The bicycle hire man, struggling with his lock, talked of Winston Churchill.
He was a great admirer of Churchill, and remembered the cigars with particular affection.
We pedalled off on our bicycles to a ful stall in the souk where the smell of the beans filled the street and the bread was still warm from the bakery.
The early mornings at Luxor were misty.
The river was white, and on the ferry in mid-stream, it seemed we were adrift in a cloud.
On the west bank we pushed the bikes up a steep slope and cycled along a long straight road towards the desert and the tombs past green canals, lines of heavy trees and slumbering houses.
We passed the Colossi of Memnon in a stony field, their shins covered with the graffiti of Greek and Roman tourists.
Long tails of mist were curling out of ditches and melting in the sunlight.
Ahead of us, the Theban Hills, flushed pink in the early sun, looked creased and worn.
The Theban necropolis, which includes almost 400 tombs and a handful of major temples, lay scattered across a sloping swath of desert between the cultivation and the hills.
The village of Gourna, a disparate sprinkling of houses, shared the dry slopes.
Its inhabitants have lived off the dead for millennia, first as tomb robbers and then as tomb guardians.
There are those who believe that their houses  are built over tombs, unknown to archaeologists, and that the owners still supplement their incomes by selling off the contents bit by bit on the black market.
Certainly it is the only Egyptian village I know where the houses are placed so far apart.
We had one social engagement during the week, with Sheikh Ahmed, one of the guards at the Temple of Medinet Habu.
He was a friend of a friend, and gave us a warm welcome and invited us to lunch.
His daughters emerged shyly one by one from the rear of the house to greet us"as we ate our meal, each more beautiful than the last.
 "They are looking for husbands," Sheikh Ahmed said.
"In the village there are no good husbands.
Take them to England with you,"he said casually, picking lamb out of his teeth.
For a dizzy moment, I pictured myself at home in London surrounded by an entire harem of these dark-eyed beauties.
Then Melinda kindly guided me outside into the harsh sunlight of the street.
At the Ramesseum, we met another old friend: Ozymandias who inspired Shelley's poem, known to more careful historians as Ramses II.
His colossal statue lies toppled at the entrance to one of the courts of the temple.
It was one of the largest free-standing statues in Egypt, 17.5 metres high.
The index finger alone is a metre long.
Diodorus thought the statue magnificent.
It is a fine piece, and retains a remarkable delicacy for all its size.
But unfortunately it has fallen face down and Shelley's "shattered visage" is now pressed to the "lone and level sands" .
The royal tombs in the Valley of the Kings concern themselves exclusively with the rituals required for a successful passage through the Underworld.
We left our bicycles at Deir el-Bahari and climbed the mountain track to the valley.
Below us the broad terraces of Hatshepsut's temple were set into the curving amphitheatre of the cliffs.
From the top we had a wide view of the valley with its bands of colour: the blue of the river dotted with white sails, the green fields on either side, and the enclosing tan-coloured deserts.
It had a striking symmetry, from dust to dust.
Beneath us kites turned high above the temple.
We picked our way across the broken mountain heights.
The air was rarefied and invigorating and one almost forgot the heat.
For a time we could see nothing but high endless desert.
Then the Valley of the Kings opened at our feet, a wide bowl.
We slid down a steep path past a lonely long-eared donkey who snuffled at our backs.
Round the floor of the valley are set the entrances to the tombs.
They are all variations on a basic pattern: long passageways descending underground to a series of antechambers and finally to the burial chamber itself.
The walls are lined with paintings depicting the Pharaoh engaged in the rituals which facilitated his passage to resurrection.
The journey to the Elysian fields of the next world, so closely modelled on the world of the Nile, was undertaken at night.
The deceased sailed along a river whose banks were crowded with mythical creatures and enemies of Re, the god of the sun.
The illustrations and quotations from religious texts which line the walls are a kind of map, enabling the soul to navigate these treacherous currents and overcome the pitfalls and creatures which might impede his passage.
Royal barques, hawk- and ram-headed gods, rising suns, scarab beetles, crowd one upon another.
The dark passageways of the tombs have been transformed into an ordered progress where the terrors of death have been subdued and banished.
The whole is orchestrated towards the moment of resurrection, with the rising sun, in the domain of Osiris.
In their tomb portrayals the deceased are always seen as young and fit, the image of eternal youth.
The Pharaoh is met by the lissom naked figure of Nut who takes his wrist gently and leads him forward to his tomb.
Behind him is the god Horus who guides his elbow while patting him lightly on the shoulder.
The dead king seems mesmerized by them as they lead him gently but determinedly down the long ramps.
Vultures fly down the ceilings into the depths of the tombs.
Osiris presses an ankh, the symbol of life, to the lips of the dead king.
Fantastic creatures stalk the riverbanks.
Blue vaults arc painted with yellow stars, the constellations bright and distinct.
In the depths of the night, in the presence of Osiris, the sins of the deceased heart arc weighed against a feather.
A dreadful creature, with the body of a hippopotamus and the head of a crocodile, strains forward to devour those unfortunates who fail the judgement.
But it is not the fear of this judgement which so pervades the tombs; careful preparation and knowledge of the proper formulae were all that were required.
The horror of the tombs is a thing unspoken: the fear of total annihilation from memory.
It crept in amongst the ordered ranks of hieroglyphics in a simple line of graffiti, scrawled in French, on the hull of one of the royal barques: "You must not forget me." 
The tombs in the Valley of the Kings all date from the New Kingdom.
Their occupants, who had seen the pyramids of the Old Kingdom looted and defiled, were paranoid about tomb robbers and took elaborate precautions against them.
Their tombs, in a remote valley, were unmarked.
Their design included hidden doors and false burial chambers.
But in the end it was all in vain.
Only Tutankhamun's tomb survived intact.
In the twenty-first dynasty the situation in Egypt had become so unstable that the Theban priests became seriously concerned about their royal charges.
In secret, they removed the mummies from their tombs and hid them, some in the tomb of Amenhotep II, thought to be more secure, others in a cleft in the rocks high above Deir el-Bahari.
There they remained until they were discovered in the late nineteenth century.
In the 1930s the royal mummies were taken to the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
Amenhotep, who had been found with a garland of flowers still round his neck, went by train, first class sleeper, where he was given the top bunk.
Others went by river steamer.
As the dead pharaohs sailed downstream the fellahin appeared on  the banks lamenting, the women crying and tearing their hair.
The archaeologists accompanying the mummies remarked on the way these scenes echoed the mourning scenes in the tombs themselves.
But the archaeologists' obsession with the past had blinded them to the real cause of the lamentations they witnessed along the river.
The annual floods had been low for some years, and conditions in the villages were very bad.
Many people were dying from hunger.
In Luxor we hired a felucca with two crewmen to take us the 120 miles by river to Aswan.
The journey took four days.
We left on a windless morning, and for a time the town seemed impossible to shake off.
Hugging the bank we laboriously rowed and poled our way past the endless stone quays of riverside hotels and the flanks of cruise ships.
Our captain was Mahmud, a lad of 17, short and stocky with a face flattened like a boxer's.
He had been working the river between Luxor and Aswan since he was 12.
His crewman was his older brother, Ahmed.
He had just finished three years of national service.
He had been posted to the police in Asyut and had hated his time there.
 "The police in Asyut," he said darkly, "are very bad men." 
A few miles upstream from Luxor we moored beneath a high bank.
The two lads poured with sweat and our sail hung limply from its yard.
 "We'll wait for a barge," Mahmud said.
We spent the long afternoon reading and dozing beneath the boat's awning.
About five o'clock we were roused by the distant thudding of an engine.
A few moments later a barge hove into view.
We hurriedly pushed off and rowed out into mid-stream.
Mahmud waved his shirt and the barge cut its engines for a moment for us to come alongside.
When we were secured, we went aboard the barge to meet its captain.
He sat cross-legged on his bench in front of the wheel, a piratical figure with an Errol Flyn moustache, a fancy turban which trailed down over one shoulder, brightly dark eyes and a flashing smile.
His two crewmen were ancient decrepit fellows who hovered at his shoulder like ragged parrots.
The captain spoke in a smooth torrent of words, ending each sentence with his wonderful smile.
He was a man of the most terrible charm.
With a wave of his hand he ordered chairs brought for us, and tea.
He was from Minya, and we told him of our stay in the town.
 "Minya." 
He glowed.
"I am from Minya.
My mother is from Minya.
My grandfather is from Minya.
We are people of Minya."
 "And you," he went on, "you must be" the Foreigners Who Travel on Barges "." 
He had already heard of us on the river grapevine, about our journey upriver with Muhammad and Milhaez and Romany.
He asked us where we were from.
 "England." 
He laughed heartily at this.
"England with the crazy Eden.
How is the crazy Eden?"
 "He is dead." 
 "Ah," he nodded with his wicked smile,"this is good.
This is good news.
All Egypt will be happy to hear of the death of the crazy Eden.
The sun set and a swollen orange moon rose through the tousled heads of palm trees.
The captain lit a long cigarette and ordered more tea.
 "Tell me," he said, "do you have a river and barges in England?" 
At midnight we cut loose from the barge, and dropped astern.
The orange rectangle of light from its engine room grew rapidly smaller and smaller on the wide river.
We drifted ashore and the bow whispered on to sand.
When I woke once in the night I could feel the north wind blowing softly on my cheek, and knew we would have good sailing the next day.
In the morning the wind was up and we set off immediately.
By mid-morning we had reached Esna, where there is a barrage.
We walked into the town while our felucca waited its turn at the lock.
It was a dusty, dreary place.
Flaubert, on his way up the Nile in 1850, found Esna much enlivened by the presence of ulmeh, literally "learned women" , prostitutes who had been banished from Cairo by Muhammad Ali some years before.
Flaubert went to the house of Kuchuk Hanem, a famous Cairene courtesan reduced to eking out a living in this provincial backwater.
Brothels, Flaubert wrote, are"a meeting place of so many elements — lust, bitterness, complete absence of human contact, muscular frenzy, the clink of gold…
One learns so many things in a brothel, and feels such sadness, and dreams so longingly of love."
Kuchuk Hanem danced "The Bee" for which the musicians were blindfolded.
She was"a tall splendid creature…her skin is slightly coffee-coloured.
When she bends, her flesh ripples into bronze ridges.
Her eyes are dark and enormous, her eyebrows black, her nostrils open and wide; heavy shoulders, full apple-shaped breasts…
On her right arm is tattooed a line of blue writing."
He spent the night.
The coups, he wrote, were good, "the third especially was ferocious, and the last tender…" 
He lay awake much of the night in an intense reverie.
When he slept, he entwined his fingers in her necklace as if to hold her should she awaken.
He loved the bittersweet aura of it all, the mixture of ecstasy and debasement that he felt lay at the paradoxical heart of life.
 "How flattering it would be to one's pride if at the moment of leaving you were sure that you left a memory behind, that she would think of you more than the others." 
But he knew this to be a delusion.
Years later he wrote to his mistress that while he wove an aesthetic about Kuchuk Hanem he knew that he had vanished completely from her memory.
"Travel makes one modest.
One sees what a tiny place one occupies in the world."
The gods of Egypt were great travellers, and great lovers.
Their journeys, from the stuffy confines of their temples, often had romantic motives.
Each year the goddess Hathor came upriver from Dendera to Edfu for a conjugal visit with Horus.
Happily she chose these occasions to appear in the form of a young woman rather than her more usual guise of a cow.
Reliefs show the divine lovers sailing out to greet each other at this "Feast of the Beautiful Meeting" .
They spent every night together between the new and the full moon.
The temple at Edfu, which we reached on the morning of the third day, was dedicated to Horus, for this was the spot where he was said to have vanquished Seth, and thus to have established the ascendancy of good over evil, This is never a, convincing concept, and the reliefs display the struggle and its happy outcome with an adamancy that seems to betray doubt.
The pharaoh of the day is nobly shown as Horus's second.
Seth appears in the form of a hippopotamus.
The inner sanctuary at Edfu was flooded with a green watery light.
In a further room, Horus's Chamber of Victory, we found a huge sailing barque, a replica of the kind used to convey the statue of Horus to his assignation with Hathor.
It loomed out of the darkness like a sunken ship.
We sailed on after sunset.
In the darkness we passed through the defile of Gebel Silsila where the river narrows dramatically to a width of no more than a few yards.
The moon was not yet up and in the darkness we could only just make out the rock face of the west bank above us, a cliff some thirty feet high.
The east bank appeared to be the same.
The wide and leisurely Nile, constant for over 600 miles, had contracted suddenly to a dark gorge.
Between the high walls of the banks was an eerie silence.
Though the wind appeared to have died we were still carried gently forward.
After hundreds of miles of open river, the gorge seemed unreal.
In the darkness we could hardly be sure what we were seeing.
Peering into the night we could just discern the gaping portals of tombs in the rock faces.
Eventually we emerged from the defile, and the river widened again.
The low, flat banks seemed deserted.
After a time we came upon three moored feluccas, with only their masts visible against the sky.
A group of men huddled round a fire, silhouetted against the orange flames.
Beyond the moored boats and the fire we drew up on the bank for the night.
The men from the fire walked over to us.
They were Nubians, tall and dark-skinned with elegant gallibayas and long turbans.
They greeted us formally and elegantly, in a manner that suggested we were their guests.
The tallest of the tall Nubians spoke to Mahmud, enquiring about us, the foreigners.
When Melinda answered him in fluent Arabic, they all looked at her as if they had seen a ghost, bade us goodnight, and melted away into the darkness again.
With every day the riverbanks became more tenuous.
We had left the endless reliable fields of Middle Egypt behind.
A fresh north wind was carrying us into another Nile where the desert pressed close upon the riverbanks.
At Gebe/ Serag the cultivation on the east bank disappeared altogether and the desert came down to the river, leaving only the railway line and a few scrubby bushes clinging to the water's edge.
Sandpipers stalked the dunes above the river in disciplined hunting parties.
Herons abounded on the desert bank, rising awkwardly out of the reeds as we approached and flapping heavily away.
On the fourth day we passed the Temple of Kom Ombo perched heroically on a promontory above the river.
Like Edfu and Dendera, Kom Ombo dates from the Ptolemaic period, the last spasm of ancient Egypt when a Hellenized dynasty ruled the country from  Alexandria.
There is more than a hint of classical Greece in the architecture, and the blue river seen through the sand-coloured columns gives it a Mediterranean freshness.
On one corner of the site the river had eaten into the bank and pulled part of the masonry of an out-building down into the current where it lay half-submerged, growing gardens of weeds.
Beyond Kom Ombo the mighty west bank, miles wide in Middle Egypt, shrank to a line of palm trees which tossed their heads and leaned towards the south.
The great escarpments of the east bank had fallen away, leaving only distant reaches of desert sky.
We saw few people, and when they appeared they were taller and darker than Egyptians to the north.
They seldom waved or called to us, responding only when we greeted them with a most unEgyptian reserve.
The dark children, swimming from the banks, stopped their play to watch us pass in shy silence.
We felt a long way from the Mediterranean.
We were sailing into Africa.
We moored in the early evening against a low grassy bank which rose to a wood of tamarisk trees.
Beneath the trees were paths of white dust.
The evening smelt of dung fires.
Mahmud bathed from the stern of the boat and then went off through the trees to buy some food from a nearby village.
The wind had fallen away and the evening was spread out across the river, still, languid, suffused with golden light.
On the far bank white oxen were coming down to the water.
Ahmed sat in the stern looking at the river.
Throughout the journey he had seemed withdrawn and preoccupied.
To make conversation now, we asked him about Asyut.
 "Mish kwiss," he said.
 "Not good." 
He had said this before.
It was not unusual.
Egyptians usually spoke badly of anywhere other than their own village and district.
 "You didn't make any friends there?" we asked.
He shook his head.
He seemed depressed and we wanted to cheer him up.
On the far side of the river the oxen stared down at their reflections in the orange shallows.
"It must be an easy life, a policeman.
What do you do?
Stand on the street corners and watch the cars?"
He shook his head, looking at the river.
 "Not like that," he said.
"It is not like that.
Asyut is a very bad place.
There is much trouble there."
 "What sort of trouble?" 
 "There is fighting." 
 "Who is fighting?" 
"Students.
They fight with each other and with the police and the army."
 "Were you in the fighting?" 
He nodded.
He sat in the stern, half-turned away from us so we saw only the side of his face.
The length of the boat was between us.
I wanted to hear about the riots in Asyut and found myself leaning forward, anxious that he should not clam up.
He said nothing for a time.
 "The fighting was very bad," he said after a time.
His voice was higher and his shoulders had risen.
"What did you see?
What was it like?"
I asked.
He sat looking at the river with his shoulders hunched up.
The sun had set and the colours were all draining away.
On the far bank the oxen had become ghostly.
 "Was there much shooting?" we asked after a while.
 "Yes," he said.
"There was a great deal of shooting.
They gave us ammunition for the guns, and many people were shot."
 "Where was that?" 
"In the streets.
Near the railway station."
"How did it happen?
The shooting."
"They came up the streets towards the station, crowds of people, young men.
They had banners and they were shouting."
He needed no prompting now, and he spoke with a rush of relief.
"There were many of them, hundreds, coming up the street towards us shouting.
The officers ordered us to draw our guns on them.
We thought they would stop, with the guns drawn, but they kept coming, shouting.
Then the shooting began.
We were all shooting at the  crowds, as if the guns were not loaded, and only meant to frighten them.
The front row of people seemed to trip and fall.
Then the crowds were running, and the ones who had fallen did not get up.
His voice was strange.
The darkening river made it sound hollow.
"They made us carry the injured into the station.
There was blood everywhere.
When the hospital people came they shouted at us too, and called us dogs."
I suddenly realized he was crying.
He stared at the river with his shoulders shaking and his hands clasped tightly in his lap.
Tears ran down his face.
We sat in silence.
The tears were entirely unexpected.
Nothing in our four days on the felucca with this sullen boy had prepared us for this, as nothing could have prepared him for that afternoon in Asyut.
He was a country innocent from a world of dust lanes and riverside villages.
The events of Asyut seemed to belong to another world.
 "Maleesh," I said at last.
 "Never mind." 
It seemed wholly inadequate but it was what Egyptians said in the face of any crisis.
Maleesh.
Maleesh.
The words were a kind of balm.
He nodded, his face turned away from us.
Later, when the boys had gone below deck to sleep we sat in the bow and trailed our hands in the warm water.
 "The stream mysterious glides beneath," Melinda quoted, "green as a dream and deep as death." 
 "What is that from?" 
I asked.
"I can't remember.
I've had it on my mind all week."
Early legends, blithely ignoring the further river, often located the well-springs of the Nile at Aswan.
Immediately above the town lay the barrier of the First Cataract, and for millennia Aswan was the boundary of Pharaonic Egypt and the known world.
Beyond it lay Nubia, and beyond that the Land of Punt, an almost legendary region which the Egyptians penetrated only briefly in the imperial  years of the New Kingdom.
Right down to the middle of the nineteenth century travellers to Aswan felt they had reached the limits of civilization.
Today it is even more emphatically the end of Egypt.
A few miles upstream is the High Dam.
Behind it lies Lake Nasser, which stretches to the borders of Sudan, and beyond, covering all of what was once Egyptian Nubia.
Aswan has none of the melancholy transience of most end-of the-line towns.
It is a delightful and civilized place and nowhere in all Egypt is the Nile in more picturesque form.
It threads through the town, full of islands and reflections and white-sailed feluccas, between banks of smooth red granite and yellow sand.
The river breezes fan the town, and in the evenings the tree-lined Corniche is one of the finest promenades in the world.
It is no wonder that the former Aga Khan, with the whole world to choose from, spent his winters at Aswan and chose to be buried there.
Opposite the town, high up in a sandy ridge, lie the Tombs of the Nobles, ancient Egyptian border officials and governors of Aswan.
Most date from the Old and Middle Kingdoms, and were already ancient when the first tomb shafts were sunk at Thebes.
The inhabitants of these tombs were some of the earliest explorers of the upper reaches of the Nile.
Inscriptions refer to expeditions upriver into the Land of Punt, the Sudan.
Harkhuf, a governor, lists the treasures he brought home: incense, ebony and leopard-skins.
On his fourth journey, he seems to have reached equatorial Africa, perhaps even the sources of the river.
He returned, he reports,"with a dancing dwarf…from the land of spirits', probably a pygmy.
In one of the tombs we peered through a dark gap and saw a broken mummy lying exposed at the bottom of a shaft.
It was in two pieces, both black, as if they had been thrown up charred from the fires of hell.
For ancient Egyptians the careful preservation of the deceased and his tomb ensured success in the after-life.
But no one succeeded in escaping the tomb robbers.
The Nile was one long cemetery of desecrated tombs, and Egypt, for the followers of Osiris, a land of restless and tormented souls.
The construction of the High Dam just above Aswan in the 1960s created a vast reservoir to regulate the flow of the Nile, and to lift forever from Egypt the threat of flood or drought.
The result was Lake Nasser, 250 miles long, covering almost a fifth of the Egyptian Nile, and stretching some 70 miles into Sudan.
At the time the world's attention was caught by the drowning of the antiquities along this stretch of river, and the heroic efforts made to save temples like Abu Simbel.
The plight of the many thousands of displaced Nubians seemed to go almost unnoticed.
Most were resettled in"government housing in the Kom Ombo basin downstream of Aswan- Traditional Nubian society was torn up by its roots.
But it is not just population displacement that has made the High Dam at Aswan such a controversial issue.
For thousands of years Egyptian agriculture was dependent on the annual flooding of the river.
Drought in Ethiopia and Sudan often meant famine in Egypt.
The dam has broken this threat.
It has secured and increased the supply of water.
Two crops a year are now taken rather than one, and extensive desert reclamation schemes are underway.
It seemed the only salvation for a country with a burgeoning population and limited arable land, wholly dependent upon irrigation.
But Egypt has paid a heavy price for its hubris.
The annual flooding replenished the soil with silt.
Now Egypt is dependent upon imported fertilizers which drain foreign currency reserves.
Fishermen blame falling catches on the dam, and the loss of the silt has accelerated the river's flow.
It has begun to erode the banks which it built up over millennia.
Some military strategists see the lake as Egypt's sword of Damocles.
Should an enemy ever bomb the High Dam, Egypt would be washed into the sea by the very waters which have created it.
The bleak shores of the lake remain uninhabited.
For years there has been talk of building a road and railway along the shore to link Aswan with Wadi Halfa, the first town inside Sudan.
But nothing has come of it, and the only way to reach Wadi Halfa from Aswan is by a regular boat service that plies the lake.
In the afternoons in Aswan we collected our post and wrote letters home.
We wrapped packages of film and journals and sent them to Cairo and to England.
Sudan did not have the facilities of Egypt and we would be out of touch for at least six weeks, until we reached Khartoum.
In the evenings we would stroll along the Corniche and have dinner at a riverside restaurant where we could watch the feluccas passing through the reflections of the lights on Elephantine Island.
The knowledge that we would not see restaurants or hotels for some time gave a poignancy to our days in Aswan.
On our last night a new crescent moon arose above the town.
It was the Muslim New Year.
After dinner we went back to our hotel and threw open the shutters to cool the room.
On the balcony we spread out our maps.
They showed the Sudan huge and blank, and the river curving through empty spaces.
The idea of the Sudan had followed us up the Nile like a rumour.
Suddenly here in Aswan, we realized it was well-founded: incredible but — true.
We were leaving in the morning.
SUDAN
The boat left from a quay near the High Dam.
Rattling through the broken no man's land between the town and the dam, the dark windows of the train showed only our own reflections.
After a time it stopped.
We cupped our hands against the window and peered out.
We could see nothing.
 "Do you want the boat?" a man across the aisle asked us.
 "Yes." 
"This is it.
Quickly.
The train does not stop long."
We threw our bags down into the darkness, and climbed after them.
Almost immediately the train jerked and moved off.
We found ourselves in the middle of nowhere.
We could see neither station nor buildings.
At some distance was a cluster of lights.
We made towards them, picking our way over a welter of tracks.
Eventually we came upon an empty railway shed with a paved road and a line of street lamps along one side.
Between the shed and the road were rows of white tents and a miscellaneous assortment of huts and gas-lit stalls.
Encamped on the ground around them, behind high walls of baggage, were a couple of hundred people, mainly Sudanese.
Music wailed from the stalls, and the smell of onions and ful filled the air.
The soft drinks sellers tapped out rhythms on the sides of their coolers with bottle-openers, keeping up an incessant chant of Peps, Peps, Peps, although Pepsi was the one drink that none of them had.
A warm wind blew newspapers between the stalls like heavy erratic birds.
Along the broken kerb of the road stood a line of taxis, their drivers dozing in the back seats with their legs dangling out of the  open doors.
In one direction the road disappeared into the darkness, presumably towards Aswan.
In the other it ran a few hundred yards to a high chain-link fence with a locked gate, and then on to another distant cluster of lights, the harbour buildings.
Beyond lay the lake, invisible in the darkness.
We turned back to the sprawling baggage, so profuse and various it seemed organic, mushrooming in the rich compost of arrivals and departures.
The great mounds were the trappings of lives not just of journeys.
They overwhelmed their poor owners and gave them the air of refugees, caught between the darkness and the high wire fence.
At about 1 a.m. word passed through the encampment that we would not be boarding until the morning.
We carried our own humble bags across the road, and lay down to sleep on a gravel slope in the lee of a hut.
In the morning we could see the lake.
It lay below us' still and blue, between bleak desert hills.
The dam lay off to our right, a low gravel embankment.
It seemed far too insignificant to be holding back a lake large enough to stretch from London to the Scottish borders.
We waited all morning.
As the sun climbed higher, people moved into the narrowing band of shade along the wall of the railway shed, and when that shrank to nothing, they stretched sheets between the walls of baggage and crawled beneath them.
In the early afternoon the gate finally opened, and the crowd arose as one and began loading each other with boxes and sacks.
The baggage was on the move.
The boat was a modern German vessel with fittings so basic it looked unfinished.
Nearby was moored an old wooden riverboat, one of two such boats which until recently had served the run between Aswan and Wadi Halfa.
The previous year fire had broken out on its mate which sank with great loss of life.
The remaining  boat was taken out of service for fear of a repeat disaster, and new German boats were ordered.
 "Everyone died," a man next to us said.
"Three hundred and thirty people.
The unlucky ones who didn't drown were eaten by crocodiles in the water, and by scorpions and snakes if they reached the shore."
We were travelling steerage and had secured a place on a bench on a port deck.
From a deck above us, a row of anonymous bare feet dangled.
All about us our fellow passengers were camped amidst their prodigious baggage.
On the open deck in the stern, between life-jackets and coiled mooring ropes, prayer mats were laid out and men came and went throughout the day to pray towards the eastern shore.
The Sudanese were already proving far more devout than the Egyptians.
Our neighbour looked out across the lake.
The barren shores were tinged with the red of Aswan granite.
"So many people in Nubia said they would rather die than move.
But when the time came, they all moved.
What choice did they have?
The flood was coming."
In the night the shores of the lake were dark.
This was the Empty Quarter of the Nile.
The night was cold.
A myriad of green long-legged insects danced crazily around a light which shone all night above our heads.
In a fitful sleep I dreamt I was swimming through drowned villages.
Palm trees waved like underwater weeds.
I swam through houses where the sodden relics of habitation floated in the middle of rooms, a child's shoe, a disintegrating book, a scrap of carpet, its red dye still leaking into the green water.
At one house the door was jammed and when I pushed against it a body floated up weightlessly.
Then more bodies appeared, drowned children with bleached faces, their long hair brushing hideously across my face.
I woke with a start to find one of the green insects fluttering on my cheek.
In the morning we passed Abu Simbel.
The seated statues stared unblinking into the sun, their hands laid rather primly on their knees.
At this hour the stone was amber-coloured.
From the lake the temple looked smaller than I had expected, and terribly neat, like a life-size model of the real thing.
It was saved from the flood by being cut into blocks and moved piece by piece to higher ground.
Some say they left its soul behind.
At midday, we were standing in the stern when a voice hailed us from an upper deck.
We looked up to see an old man in a flapping gallibaya pointing to the eastern shore.
 "Hawaga," he called, "Wadi Halfa." 
He was pointing to a completely barren shore.
Binoculars revealed a low quay against the dark sand, and off to one side figures standing about on a bare slope with piles of baggage.
There were no buildings, no trees, nothing.
We dropped anchor offshore, and passengers and baggage were off-loaded on to a barge.
The quay, which acted as the customs shed, was three rusting barges lashed together and covered with a roof of corrugated iron.
We walked down an unsteady plank into the Sudan: a desert plain, dotted with scrub, stretching away to steep hills which rose from the sand like islands from a sea.
Away to the left was a small encampment of black nomad tents, their side flaps hoisted to catch the afternoon breezes.
Wadi Halfa lay a few miles inland.
A collection of jeeps and small Toyota pick-ups waited to ferry the arriving passengers to the town.
Standing in the back of one of the pick-ups as it sped across the hard sand, with the dust spiralling out behind us across the vast plain, it seemed that a whole new world was opening up.
The air smelt differently, and the feeling of space was overwhelming.
It felt like Africa.
The sedentary instincts that we had begun to feel in Aswan were swept away in the wind.
Old Wadi Halfa had been a delightful riverside town full of palm trees and fine houses.
It had a population of 11,000 people.
It lies  now beneath the waters of the lake, about ten miles out from the shore.
Its inhabitants, with the inhabitants of all the drowned villages of Sudanese Nubia, were transported to Khashm el-Girba, east of Khartoum, almost 600 miles away.
A few people remained to take up lives in the new Wadi Halfa, a bleak tenuous place which sprang up where the railway line from Khartoum comes to an apparently arbitrary end against a low wall of sleepers.
There are no streets and no trees.
The plain-faced buildings sit in the desert like tents, and straggling flocks of goats wander among them searching for scraps.
The bleakness of the place was exacerbated by the heat.
From eleven in the morning until four in the afternoon nothing stirred.
We were there in September when the daytime temperatures never fell below 100°F, and at midday were closer to 110°F.
We longed for the arrival of autumn, but began to doubt that such a season existed in Sudan.
We were to wait another six weeks before the fierce summer heat showed any sign of breaking.
The buildings of Halfa all face north to avoid the worst of the sun and to catch the northerly breezes.
In the souk were dim shops which sold batteries and bottles of scent and boxes of safety pins.
The tea-houses were poor places with earthen floors and blackened walls, and the fruit and vegetable sellers, squatting beneath awnings, were all specialists who sold only one kind of produce each.
They arranged them on the sand lemons or onions or oranges — in careful little piles and sold them for so much a pile.
The prices were fantastic, far higher than in Egypt.
Sudan was a land of scarcity where fresh vegetables, and much else, were luxuries.
Of tailors, Halfa had no shortage.
There seemed to be scores of them in the town.
In the mornings they worked outside in the streets on their ancient pedal machines, raising a loud chorus of whirring.
At midday they retreated into the cool darkness of their shops.
They worked only in white, for unlike the Egyptians, Sudanese men wore only white gallibayas and pantaloons.
The women made up for this restraint.
In the streets, over their house clothes, they wore splendid full-length wraps, called tobs, of the most startling colours and patterns.
At one end of the town was a bank where we went on our first  day to change some money.
It was a big dusty room with a wide counter.
The clerk looked at us uneasily, torn between his duty and his better instincts.
He glanced over his shoulder then leaned towards us.
 "Do not change money here," he whispered.
"Go to the shops.
They will give you a much better black-market rate."
We stayed in a hotel near the railway station, a humble place of three adjoining courtyards.
The hotel was blue.
The floors of the rooms were covered with cracked blue and white tiles, the walls were a pale blue wash flaking on to the sand and the doors a bright sea blue.
In the centre of each courtyard were large earthenware water jugs which sweated gently in the breeze under the shade of thatched canopies.
They were replenished each evening with barrels of muddy water brought from the lake on donkey carts.
We ventured out only in the mornings and the evenings when the sun was low and the shadows of the tall robed figures stretched to impossible lengths across the sands.
The afternoons we passed in the hotel courtyard where we ate, read, played cards, and slept like cats in a paradise of shade, northerly breezes and birdsong, while the town outside baked.
The terrific heat of northern Sudan is the inspiration for the peripatetic bed.
Life in a Sudanese hotel revolves around the courtyard and the bed, usually a light metal cot with a thin mattress.
The room is of no consequence.
It is unfurnished and used only to store your baggage.
During the day the bed is moved into the shade of the arcades around the courtyard where you sit or lie upon it outside your door, and catch whatever breeze is going.
In the evening the beds move out from under the arcades into the courtyard itself where you spend the night sleeping under the stars with your fellow guests.
In the morning the beds return to the gentle shade of the arcades.
What this arrangement lacks in privacy it gains in congeniality.
Friendships quickly develop as guests help each other carry their beds back and forth.
We shared our courtyard with a large colony of sparrows, who resided in two stunted trees, and a company of merchants from Berber.
The merchants were a cheerful but rather mysterious lot.
In answer to our enquiries they said they were waiting for goods coming from Egypt to receive customs clearance.
We thought we detected more than a hint of irony in this answer, and we suspected that they were smugglers.
They dressed well and were seemingly unconcerned about their long wait in what was not Halfa's cheapest hotel.
Like everyone else they spent their days lounging in the arcades of the courtyards.
In the mornings we would see them in the souk holding hands with strange men.
The merchants were devout Muslims and their prayers in the patchy shade of the two courtyard trees, prefaced by elaborate washing, punctuated the day.
They were dismissive, however, of President Numeri and his introduction of Sharia, Islamic law, which demanded the amputation of the hands of thieves and forbade all alcohol under threat of public flogging.
 "You must not worry about these laws," they said.
"They apply only in Khartoum.
Here in Wadi Halfa, in Dongola, in Berber, everywhere else, these laws do not matter."
In the evenings the merchants invited us to join them as they sat chatting on their cots in the middle of the courtyard.
Gas lanterns at their feet threw deep shadows across their faces.
The oldest reminded us of the barge captain.
Next to him were two brothers, tall beautiful men with liquid eyes and graceful hands.
Opposite them was a small elfin fellow who wore a shiny blue waistcoat over his gallibaya.
The merchants were handing round a five-litre plastic jug of the kind normally used to carry petrol.
Each drank from it in turn.
They handed it to us, and waited for our response.
It was seiko, a clear spirit made from dates which tasted rather like home-made grappa without the subtlety.
I blew through my lips as if I was breathing fire.
 "Very good," I said.
They laughed and clapped me on the back and handed the container round the circle again.
 "If you throw it up in the air," the elfin one said,"it will evaporate before it reaches the ground.
But we will not try it.
It is a sin to waste the gifts of Allah."
Later the men began to sing for us, sitting forward on the edge of their cots.
The songs were slow and melodic.
They sang very softly, at times almost whispering the words.
The songs were about love and loss, aspiration and disappointment, but the men smiled as they sang, as if the melodies and the sheer pleasure of singing overcame the tragedy of the words.
Wadi Half a was a town of transients, waiting on the boat to Egypt or the train to Khartoum.
Both appeared about twice a week.
They were meant to coincide so that travellers would have a smooth connection, but they rarely did, and the tea-houses and cheap hotels of Half a were swollen with travellers who invariably had to wait for days.
We became regulars at a tea stall in the open desert between our hotel and the"souk which served the delicious spiced and milky Sudanese tea.
There were no tables and one sat on the sand to eat.
At night the stall was lit with gas lanterns and the sands beyond their uncertain light were crowded with shadowy figures eating and drinking.
In spite of the sacrifice it had made for the High Dam at Aswan, whose turbines generated megawatts of electrical power, Wadi Half a still had no electricity.
The owner of the stall reminisced about old Wadi Halfa where his father had owned a big tea-house on the Corniche.
It had been a most beautiful place, he said, before the flood.
"There were fine buildings all along the river, a long avenue of palm trees, perfectly straight, beautiful mosques and many beautiful houses.
Not like here."
He gestured towards the darkness beyond the circle of light.
"You could have stayed in the Nile Hotel.
All the rooms looked over the gardens which ran right down to the river.
The flood took  everything.
The last part of old Halfa to disappear was the minaret of the Tawfikia mosque."
Fifty thousand Sudanese lost their homes to the rising waters of Lake Nasser.
Twenty-seven villages, as well as the town of Wadi Halfa, were submerged.
The administrator in charge of compensation and resettlement was Hassan Dafalla, an intelligent and sensitive man who managed a difficult task with considerable skill.
He was one of the last people to leave the old town of Wadi Halfa after its inhabitants had been transported south, and he has left a chilling account of the empty town's last days.
The deluge began on the first day of September 1963.
Dafalla woke to find the railway station yard covered with water, and half a mile of track submerged.
In the early afternoon the river breached its bank opposite the Tawfikia mosque and invaded part of the market.
Later in the afternoon the embankment at El Geiger was overwhelmed and water surrounded the Ismaili mosque.
The following day the entire market area was submerged, and the shops, built of mud-brick, melted like biscuits, leaving islands of rubble in a brown lake.
The hospital was encircled and parts of it began to collapse.
Water rushed across the road to the Nile Hotel, carrying scorpions and reptiles into the drowning rooms.
In the evening Dafalla found the waters were seeping into the gardens of his own house.
Shrubs, which had been dying from lack of water since the supply had been cut off, were suddenly green and straight again in a brief moment of health before the rising waters overwhelmed them.
Rats living in the storerooms of his house emerged from their holes, carrying their young in their teeth, and ran to higher ground.
That night, worried about the water entering his house as he slept, he left the edge of his bedsheet dangling on the ground so that the water would awaken him.
In the morning he found the Nile had reached his garden parapet.
Soon only the groves of palm trees, the waters rising up their trunks, showed where the houses had stood.
I was reminded of Isidora whose mummy we had seen at Tuna el-Gebel and of a recurring paradox, destruction by the forces of creation.
The further we went up the Nile, the more the river seemed to express some awful ambivalence.
In the deserts of northern Sudan the Nile describes a huge S-curve.
At Abu Hamed the river turns back on itself and runs south-west for some 200 miles before it turns again and reasserts its northerly course.
It is a considerable diversion.
Following the river, it is almost 1,000 miles from Wadi Halfa to Khartoum while as the crow flies it is less than 500.
The railway, built by Kitchener in 1897 as part of the reconquest of the Sudan, takes the shorter route and cuts across the desert.
The much longer route along the river, which we chose to follow, has neither a railway nor any proper roads.
The first leg of our journey was to Abri, a village on the river almost 100 miles to the south.
The only means of transport was by truck.
We tracked down the drivers in the tea-houses of the souk.
They were vague about dates of departure, and only shrugged and said bad bokra, a phrase which literally means "the day after tomorrow" but is generally understood to imply something rather more indefinite.
The drivers' uncertainty was due in part to the vagaries of the train from Khartoum, on which half the town seemed to be waiting.
The trucks would leave only after the train had arrived.
We searched out the station master at the station.
 "When is the next train arriving from Khartoum?" we asked.
"Probably on
Monday,"he replied.
He was a morose man hunting flies in a stuffy office beyond a grille.
 "What time on Monday?" we asked.
 "In the morning," he said, bringing his slipper down on his desk with a crash.
 "If not in the morning, then in the afternoon." 
It did not let him down.
Late on Monday afternoon the long owlish hoot of the train whistle was heard throughout the town.
We stood outside the hotel and watched for it.
It appeared, coming across the desert, as a long trail of dust.
It was dark by the time the arriving passengers began to fan out through the town in search of lodgings.
Many came to our hotel, arriving on donkey-cart taxis laden with baggage.
They emerged out of the darkness into the gas-light of the doorway like ghouls, their black faces powdered white with the dust of their journey.
Sudan is Africa's largest country with an area of almost a million square miles, ten times the size of Great Britain.
It is also one of the continent's least populated, with just over 20 million people.
But a final statistic captures even more eloquently the nature of the country: in all its million square miles, there are only a thousand miles of paved roads.
On the rough tracks which criss-cross the vast distances of Sudan, lorries are the only reliable means of conveyance.
They carry both cargo and people; the two travel under much the same conditions, and are generally indistinguishable by journey's end.
The interiors of the cabs, which represent a kind of first-class, are decorated like seraglios with floral upholstery, tasselled curtains, quotations from the Koran and heavily retouched photographs of Sudanese pop singers.
But sadly they are small, and there is room for"only two or three passengers beside the driver; everyone else travels steerage in the open back of the lorry.
Heaven only knows what kind of pull is required to secure a seat in the cab, probably direct descent from the Mahdi at the very least.
The morning after the arrival of the train, we found a lorry in the souk preparing to leave for Abri.
We climbed into the back, already full of people perched atop a deep pile of cargo, and squeezed into a rear corner, hoping there was no one else to come.
This proved naive.
A never-ending stream of people kept climbing over  the sides and lowering themselves and their tremendous baggage into the sea of bodies.
It was becoming increasingly difficult to move.
When at last the influx appeared to have slowed to a trickle, the engine was started.
At this signal, another fifteen men climbed over the sides and squeezed in.
The crush was appalling.
There were over sixty people in the back of the lorry.
Twenty would have been crowded.
Despite the conditions the journey began in jaunty mood.
Bumping along the rough track out of the town towards the range of red hills to the south, everyone joked and laughed like children on a school outing.
The rows of young men perched atop the slatted sides sang snatches of song which no one could hear above the noise of the engine.
The track turned and twisted through the desert hills.
The town was soon lost from view but the lake appeared off to our right.
After a time we dropped down from the hills on to a flat gravel plain where the track ran straight as a drawn line.
The route to Abri took us across the western edge of the Nubian desert, known as the Batn el-Hagar,, the Belly of Stones.
It is an uninhabited and notoriously hostile desert, which has contributed as much as the Nile's cataracts to the historical isolation of Sudan.
We crossed contorted ranges of hills between the empty plains, the lorry thumping over rocks and labouring in its low gears.
Occasionally I saw birds, huge buzzards, squatting on rock outcrops, and once a small antelope, far off across an expanse of stones.
The sky was huge, and as pale as porcelain.
The sun seared down on us through the thin air, and when we slowed and turned our own cloud of dust enveloped us.
The lake had long since disappeared from view.
 "I am living in fear of my internal organs," said the man pressed between my shoulder blades.
I turned my head.
Like myself, he was  clinging to the side of the lorry like a shipwreck victim.
Between the fearsome jolts he released one hand from the lorry and clutched his side in pain.
The lorry bumped and shuddered mercilessly through the rutted desert tracks.
At the back we took the worst of it.
The battering was violent and continual.
Time and again the bumps lifted us off our feet.
Crowded against the other passengers and against the sides of the lorry it was impossible to cushion the landings.
As we pounded up and down, sharp stitches developed in our sides.
The only relief was occasional stretches of soft sand in which the lorry was in danger of getting stuck.
We went slowly through them in low gear, rolling like a ship in a heavy sea, our rigging of ropes, which lashed all the bags in place, creaking loudly.
A tense silence fell on the passengers as they peered over the sides.
But our driver was expert and we always emerged safely.
The continual jolting and the cramped conditions made for unexpected hazards.
Thrown high into the air by one bump, one of our closer neighbours, a young man in a gallibaya, lost control of his bowels.
The result was deposited on one of Melinda's shirts which was draped over my camera bag at my feet.
It was a narrow escape.
A moment before Melinda herself had been sitting on the bag.
We stopped twice at primitive tea-houses, the only buildings we saw in over eighty miles of desert.
Both were run by wizened old men who passed their days listening for the distant whine of, approaching lorries.
When they heard one, they put the kettle on.
The first tea-house was a low straw hut; the second occupied a corner of an abandoned building by a well.
We huddled in its dark ruinous rooms sipping bitter tea while gusts of sand blew in at the doorways.
A row of men were praying in the shade of the lorry.
I spotted the incontinent Nubian slinking off into the desert to squat behind a hill.
At Akasha we reached the river again.
We rose over the shoulder"of a hill, and suddenly it was there beneath us, looking glorious with the afternoon light sparkling on its rippled surface.
We had not seen the Nile proper since Aswan, only the lake.
Here at Akasha it was its old self again.
After the desolation of the Batn el-Hagar and the physical exhaustion of the lorry ride from Wadi Halfa, I felt almost tearful at the sight of it.
We stopped by an empty building and disentangled ourselves from each other.
The men from the lorry picked their way through a graveyard of broken stones to pray at a sheikh's white-domed tomb, while we made our way across a wide flood plain of gravel and cracked mud to the river.
We washed on the bank.
The water was brown and fast-moving, spilling over a bed of white gravel.
The river turned through a wide bend and we could see no other habitation either upstream or down.
There was a thrilling emptiness about the place.
On both banks steep hills were darkening with the sunset.
The light in mid-river was silver, and the current stronger than any we had seen in Egypt.
Only a few miles upstream was the Dal Cataract.
The water felt silken on our hot cheeks.
We sat entranced on the riverbank, until we heard the hoot of the lorry's horn signalling our departure.