

THE ROPE OF SAND
"My friend Lee would smile and tell me that I would never get real unity among seafaring men because they would not stick together.
He described them as a rope of sand that is washed away with every tide".
Havelock Wilson, My Stormy Voyage Through Life, Cooperative Printing Society, 1925, p.67.
Seamen and the Sea
Seagoing is as old as history and the merchant seaman as old as trade itself.
On these islands the sailor has long featured as a national paradox as both saint and sinner, as both saviour and scamp, as both hero and victim of oppression.
Respect, envy, fear and sympathy have been his lot in varying proportions.
But seldom, until the last decades of the nineteenth century was he regarded as a likely subject for trade unionism.
Even then the chances of successful organisation were reckoned to be small.
The foundations of the popularity of the seamen were laid at the end of the fifteenth century with the voyages of discovery of Bartholomew Diaz, Vasco da Gama, John Cabot and Christopher Columbus — the space explorers of their times.
In the Tudor age, patriotism in response to the threat of Philip II and the Inquisition, the spirit of Hawkins, Howard and Drake, was added to the explorations of Frobisher and the solid achievements of merchants in creating the foreign trade which rapidly became the basis of the country's wealth.
The Royal Navy created by Henry VIII was manned by merchant seamen who fought the great naval battles which cleared the seas and made possible future trade with the East, while these same seamen, under letters of marque, plundered the bullion and seized the vessels of the enemies of England en route from the New World.
If few sailors themselves became wealthy, the British merchant fleet grew apace in tonnage along with the reputation of its crews.
A fleet of 50,000 tons at the time of Drake had become a grander fleet of 200,000 tons a century later when Samuel Pepys was "clerk of the king's ships" .
When Cook made his first exploratory voyages to the South Seas between 1768 and 1771, that figure had more than doubled to 450,000 tons.
Small wonder that the enthusiasm of some writers was unbounded.
One of these was R.Campbell, the author of the earliest of career guides for parents, in which they could "study and improve the Genius, Temper and Disposition of their Children before they bind them Apprentices" (1747).
Contemptuous of some trades, his praise of "sailors and mariners" was fulsome:
"This Class of Men are the Source of the Wealth and the Support of the Freedom of Great-Britain.
Without them we had been, as formerly, a Prey to every petty Invader; and the flourishing Empire of Great-Britain would be of no more consequence in Europe than the petty Republick of Lucca in Italy.
They make us dreaded abroad and enable us to live in plenty, nay in luxury at Home.
Every Man bred to the Sea is a Benefactor to his Country and adds new Strength and Riches to the Kingdom every Voyage he makes".
That there were snags in setting the sons of the literate parent to the sea, Campbell was willing to admit, though with a little care these could be overcome:
"To make a common practical Sailor requires no more than a natural Inclination to the Sea, and a sturdy healthy Constitution.
I am sorry to observe so little Care taken of the Education of our Youth designed for the Sea, even such as have a Prospect of commanding Ships either in the Government or Merchant Service: The element in which they live renders them rough and boisterous which makes a little Education more necessary to give them an early Byass.
Was a polite Behaviour joined to that honest Sincerity and social Disposition which is remarkable in the English Sailors, I think they would not only be the most useful Men in the Island, but by much the most agreeable Companions: For this Reason, I would recommend it to Parents who are to breed their Sons to the Sea, to give them an early Taste of Letters, especially  the European Tongue, which will be of great Service to their Business as well as polish their Manners".
Campbell was little concerned with the lives of ordinary seamen; nor did he reflect the alarm which many of his contemporaries felt about the sea and the behaviour of those who sailed on it.
Few Britons in the middle of the eighteenth century had seen the ocean or were likely ever to do so.
The appalling state of the roads and the cost of transport by coach placed most journeys out of the reach of all but the affluent classes who had begun coastal visits for medical treatment and relaxation in the early part of the century.
By the 1790s such small beginnings had created a substantial seaside trade which included a smattering of working people as visitors by corn hoy to Margate and Ramsgate and Manchester "manufacturers" travelling on foot or by cart to the coast at Blackpool.
Such developments gradually overcame the popular fear of water in general and of the ocean and drowning in particular which had been inherited from the Middle Ages.
But it remained a fact that the British were not truly a maritime race.
They might believe in the sea as the source of Britain's greatness; they might share in the romance of the Navigators and of great naval victories and learn the benefits of seabathing and relaxation by the ocean.
But very few had ever been to sea or had any desire to do so or had anything in common with seamen.
Most sailors came from the coast or from coastal villages; many were members of families which like those of Henry Woodruffe, Thomas Hodson, J.B.Butcher and other early union leaders, were born and bred to the sea itself.
Voyages took the seaman from port to port where his life was led in the streets, alleys and boarding houses of yet other seagoing communities, a ready prey to disease and vice of all kinds.
Conditions at sea were well known to be squalid and comfortless, wages beggarly, food too often no more than salt beef and weevilly biscuit, while officers were often no more than petty tyrants.
Lack of proper food led to much illness among seamen, both directly and in deficiency diseases such as scurvy and beri-beri and indirectly by reducing their resistance to other ailments.
In Bristol in 1787 the mortality rate among the 2,838 men who signed on 203 voyages during the year was some 4.5 per cent, with higher than average rates on voyages to the tropical Africa and the West Indies.
The annual rate of loss by shipwreck or burning during the same period may have been about 4 percent.
Among the other abuses of the day it was not unknown for a managing-owner and a master to conspire to defraud merchants by stealing their goods before "casting away" the ship in which they were being carried, or similarly defrauding the underwriters concerned with marine insurance, with consequent losses of crewmen.
Even higher losses could be expected among men who responded to the lure of privateering, or whose ship took out a letter of  marque.
In the Seven Years War over 30 per cent of the Letters of Marque vessels from Bristol were lost, while a third of Bristol privateers during the American War of Independence met the same fate.
Samuel Johnson, the lexicographer and wit was among those who, given the mortality rates of seamen and their privations on board, thought it nothing less than cruel for a father to take Campbell's advice and commit his son to a life at sea.
"From the quarter-deck to the space below you see the utmost extremity of human misery; such crowding, such filth, such stench.
A ship is worse than a gaol.
There is in a gaol better company, better conveniency of every kind.
A ship is a gaol with the chance of being drowned".
Life at sea was certain to blight a man's prospects for ever.
 "Men go to sea before they know the unhappiness of that way of life; and when they have come to know it they cannot escape from it because it is then too late to choose another profession" .
 Johnson's biographer Boswell admitted cautiously that the good Doctor's views might be extreme and that "his abhorrence of the profession of sailor was uniformly violent" .
But "Jolly Jack" was evidently one thing and "Poor Jack" another.
Patriotism, cheerfulness and the romance of the sea were one aspect of the situation; the day-to-day privations of the seaman, on shore as well as on ship, were quite another.
Jack might be jolly enough and a fine fellow when spending his hard-earned cash ashore, but he very quickly became "Poor Jack" when, after months cooped up at sea, he found himself fleeced by prostitutes, brothel keepers, slop-sellers and crimps for no better reason than exploitation of his hunger for female company and his desire for entertainment and refreshment.
Philanthropy and Agitation
The merchant seaman's need for benevolence did not go entirely unnoticed in the eighteenth century.
In 1696 an Act of Parliament "for the Encouragement and Increase of Seamen" had provided that mariners, irrespective of rank, should pay 6d. per month out of their wages to support the Royal Naval Hospital at Greenwich which should act as an alternative to the parish relief which few sailors were able to claim even if they wished to do so.
The Hospital quickly became unable to cater for all the victims of ill health, disaster and old age, and eligibility became restricted to merchant seamen only if they had served for some period in the Royal Navy.
An alternative was needed.
This was provided in 1747 by the establishment of a national Merchant Seamen's Fund, similarly supported by seamen's contributions, and administered in practice port by port.
The scheme was ahead if its time in providing pensions for seamen and their widows as well as short term relief.
It was initially highly successful.
Ultimately the Fund was overwhelmed by claims as the merchant marine expanded in the  nineteenth century and it was brought to an end in 1851.
The Merchant Seamen's Fund provided an illustration and stimulus for the development of a large number of private philanthropic societies to provide relief for sick and shipwrecked mariners, Sailors' homes and schooling for seamen's children which endeavoured to do something to ease their lot.
Many of these continued into the twentieth century.
The mixture of adulation and censure with which seamen were regarded continued to provide the same rich harvest for the sentimental and the censorious.
Moral condemnation could, however, be turned into action for moral improvement.
It might be that, humbug aside,"the life and habits of the common seaman render him one of the most unfeeling, unprincipled beings on earth.
How could it be otherwise "?, asked a" British Shipmaster".
"When they were out of a ship they were more or less in a state of intoxication, during which time they were in the society of the very lowest description that could be found.
And when they joined their ship, they had been plundered to the last farthing, most probably in debt and diseased in mind and body.
But all this could be turned to good account.
 "What guilty neglect and vicious treatment" , wrote one clergyman,"could have led to all the depravity of the maritime population?
Christians of all denominations!
DO you desire a new sphere for your benevolent exertions?
Let us work till every sailor become a Christian missionary and every seaport a Tyre whose merchandise shall be holiness to the Lord and every ship a floating church".
As the nineteenth century proceeded, there was no lack of volunteers to promote such benevolent attentions.
Remarkably little initiative to improve their lot seems to have emerged from the sailors themselves.
Little direct evidence has been found of systematic organisation in the eighteenth century, a period in which trade and benefit clubs among other working men in Britain abounded.
The majority of those who brought censure upon themselves as wastrels and hardly civilised brutes were long voyage men who shipped out from such ports as London, Liverpool and Bristol in the East Indian, West Indian, African and American trades.
Hired by the voyage, and at the mercy of the shipowners, they had no opportunity for combination at sea short of mutiny and only rare opportunity when on shore, and then only by petition and demonstration.
Sudden bursts of anger over wrongs and grievances by seamen were common enough in the eighteenth century — over wages at Southampton in 1739, Bristol in 1746, London in 1750, 1768 and 1770 and Liverpool in 1762 and 1775, and over the employment of foreigners at lower wages in London in 1773 and 1783, are among those incidents of which we have evidence.
The course of events was often confused but not essentially dissimilar on most of these occasions.
Having determined their grievances and immobilised their ships by unreefing sails, cutting rigging or picketing, the sailors would march with a petition to the most readily available  source of authority.
1n I768 a procession of sailors "with colours flying, drums beating and fifes playing" marched to St. James's Palace on Saturday 7 May to petition the King, George III.
On the following Monday some of them pursued him to a review that was taking place on Wimbledon Common, while others went to the City, occupied the Royal Exchange and picketed the coffee houses, carrying placards reading More Wages.
On this occasion, after a further orderly march of I4,000 seamen from Tower Hill to Westminster to lobby both Houses of Parliament and mediation by Sir John Fielding, the sympathetic Bow Street magistrate, the incident was peacefully resolved.
This was not always the case.
Three seamen were arrested in 1762 for leading a similar procession around Liverpool docks claiming a minimum wage of 40s. a month.
On their way to Lancaster for trial the holiday crowd at Maghull Wakes engineered a riot to secure their escape.
Even more spectacular was the Liverpool affair of August 1775 which occurred against the background of the American War of Independence, the beginning of which had interrupted trade to such an extent that some 3,000 seamen were swelling the ranks of the normal Liverpool unemployed.
The situation was triggered by an arbitrary cut in the pay of sailors hired to rig the Guineaman Derby who, in protest, cut down all the rigging.
Their example was followed by sailors on all the rigged ships in harbour.
The Derby men were arrested and imprisoned.
Eight of them were released when a crowd of two or three thousand seamen threatened to destroy the prison, followed by the ninth prisoner when similar threats were renewed.
The sailors then regrouped and on Saturday marched on the Exchange, which then doubled as the Town Hall, demanding increased wages and paraded around the town.
This tactic was repeated on the following Monday and Tuesday and a delegation sent to meet the Mayor.
Whether this resulted in a concession is not clear, for the authorities appear to have hired and armed a body of men and posted them in the Exchange to arrest the strikers.
When news of this plan leaked out, a crowd surrounded the building.
This was fired at and a number of demonstrators were reported as killed.
Thoroughly angered, a thousand seamen, armed, we are told, with "cannon, guns, muskets, musquetoons, blunderbusses, pistols, swords, cutlasses, clubs, sticks, stones, bricks and other offensive weapons" surrounded the Exchange, some of them also regaling themselves from the contents of the stores of nearby wine merchants which had been broken into.
Further attempts at negotiation failed but by the time the dragoons appeared, the crowd had unaccountably melted away.
As in London, the civil authorities were anxious not to court unpopularity by exacting vengeance on the twelve seamen ultimately arrested.
The Mayor of Liverpool opened an appeal to assist them, and the eight  men against whom a "true bill" was ultimately found were all discharged on agreeing to enlist in the Navy for war service.
All contemporary accounts suggest that eighteenth century seamen, brutal and violent as they could be under provocation, were hardly lacking in the capacity to organise in support of their claims, and by the standards of the day, to do so peaceably whenever the authorities kept their heads sufficiently to allow mediation to proceed.
Their problem was principally one of continuity; how to cope with a shifting population of mariners irregular both in voyages and habits of life.
During the century, however, there appeared another class of seamen, men who manned the collier brigs which carried coal from the north-east coast to the smoking chimneys of "the great Wen" of London.
By the 1750s they numbered some 20,000, entering the trade from Denmark, Scotland, the Hebrides and the Greenland whale fisheries, short voyage men in a fiercely competitive trade, with good wages to be fought for, self-taught, proud and fiercely argumentative.
Here was better material for combination than the long voyage man.
Moreover, in the interests of trade regulation, thrashed out after many years of conflict between coalowners, merchants, shipowners and government, colliers were loaded in sequence and sailed in convoy, giving even better opportunities than elsewhere for seamen, keel men and others to pressurize their employers by delay.
In 1768 the reactions of the North East men seems to have been as short term as those of other areas.
On 7 April it was reported that,"last Saturday a body of sailors, to the number of 400 to 500 assembled at North Shields…and proceeded from thence to Sunderland with colours flying before them and at the cross there read a paper setting forth their grievances and a demand for immediate redress.
After this they went on board the several ships in that harbour and struck their yards in order to prevent them from proceeding to sea.
On their return to shore they were joined by the sailors of that place with loud huzzes, who together paraded the streets with drums beating and colours flying.
In the afternoon they separated and the former again returned to Shields…
The ships in Shields likewise underwent the same fate as those in Sunderland.
On Sunday all was quiet, but on Monday about 1,500 assembled in Sunderland, broke a great number of windows, destroyed the lights and inner works of the assembly room and broke to pieces the two figures over the gateway of the entrance thereof representing a mendicant sailor and charity.
Trade Union Beginnings
Almost imperceptibly the mood of the men began to change in the 1790s in favour of more continuous combination.
In 1793, after five more strikes and heavy attention from the hated press gang at the beginning of the war with France, the seamen of the north east  appealed to the seamen of the whole nation to form a national association against the press.
Thus, claims Matthew Swainston, "the seamen were among the first, if not the first, of any class of working men to think in national terms" .
More significant, having demonstrated their contempt for charity, they began to develop their own benefit clubs for mutual protection, among them the "Sailors' Fund" founded at South Shields in 1798 and intended to aid "those that shall suffer by shipwreck or capture or be afflicted with any sickness, accidental misfortune, infirmity or old age" .
Such clubs may have contributed to the desire for respectability of many seamen.
 "The burial regulations and provision of mourning" , notes Stephen Jones, "make it plain that many a coasting man did not want to go to his maker like his deep-sea brother, sliding down a plank in a canvas sack with the last stitch through his nose" .
But they were undoubtedly also, as was common at the time, a cover for trade combination.
While the Combination Laws of 1799 and 1800, enacted as a response to a fear of the spread of revolution from the continent, had been notoriously ineffective, prudence remained the order of the day even after their repeal in 1824, and it remained convenient to take advantage of friendly society legislation.
Among the more ambitious of such friendly societies was the Seamen's Loyal Standard Association founded in North Shields in October 1824.
Evidence that the Loyal Standard had trade union aspirations is conclusive.
In this it had little success, though it did cause some alarm to the authorities and to shipowners, some of whom recognised that accumulated benefits could be an effective way of retaining membership.
 "The dangerous feature of these unions" , wrote one such shipowner, "is that they really are benevolent societies and as such will necessarily accumulate funds, giving their members a contingent interest in those funds and therefore if a man should wish to retire from them as combinations, he is held by interest in them and consequently they must always be in operation" .
The intention of the Loyal Standard was overtly to co-ordinate the activities of a number of seamen's organisations, established about the north-east coast with almost identical rules, and to administer a superannuation fund on the one hand and payments on shipwreck, sickness and death on the other.
The same shipowner had no doubt about its additional, and more important purpose and declared in evidence to the committee on the repeal of the Combination Acts: "They are first of all ostensibly, and I doubt not really, a society united for the purposes for which benevolent societies are usually united.
But combination for the purpose of raising their wages and, as we have found from their actions, of dictation to the ship owners and masters of ships".
Nor did it escape the notice of other critics of the Association that a handbill, lengthily entitled "A Dialogue between Tom and Harry on the Duties of Seamen and the Just and Equitable Rewards for their Services" , was in practice nothing  more or less than a statement of union policy on bargaining with shipowners and published in this form only to avoid the appearance that the Standard was more than an innocent friendly society.
The Association has a modest place in the labour history of the nation in addition to that of the seamen.
For in June 1825 Henry Woodruffe and Thomas Hodson, clerks respectively at South Shields and Sunderland, gave evidence to the Select Committee on the Combination Laws.
They made no bones about the Standard's intention to establish minimum rates and to deal with its members' grievances on such issues as ballast-heaving while at sea.
Nor were their questioners less than frank in referring to it as a "union" .
But both Woodruffe and Hodson denied strongly that the Association was in any sense a secret society, that it sought to discipline members in breach of rules, to dictate terms to shipowners or to enforce a closed shop.
If such things occurred, they did so outside the knowledge of the Association.
Hodson admitted that, prior to giving evidence to the Committee, he had had no fewer than twenty meetings with Francis Place, the radical tailor of Charing Cross Road.
The 1824 Act repealing the Combination Laws had, as politicians and trade unionists were very well aware, been "smuggled through" the House by Place and the Radical MP Joseph Hume by dint of persistent lobbying and political manipulation.
The Prime Minister and the Lord Chancellor later in the year protested with apparent truthfulness that they had been quite unaware that it had been passed at all!.
Nevertheless, it had put an end to the unlawfulness of combinations.
The Select Committee, packed by the government with its own supporters, was now expected by Huskisson, President of the Board of Trade, to approve a Bill drafted by the shipowning interest which would have made the organising of trade unions, and even friendly societies, virtually impossible.
Coached by Place, representatives of the Loyal Standard and a few other workmen's organisations, were instructed how to claim attendance at the Committee and to present the reasonable face of trade unionism.
They did so to good effect, for a new Act while nominally re-establishing the general common law prohibitions on combinations, specifically excepted from prosecution associations designed to regulate wages and hours of labour.
Among those to express their gratitude to Francis Place were the seamen of Tyne and Wear who, Place records, "sent me a handsome silver vase, paid for by a penny-a-week subscription" .
The Loyal Standard emerges from history as the epitome of the moderation which its leaders sought to convey to a hostile Select Committee.
1825 was a year of disturbances in the north east.
Trade was booming and there was dissatisfaction about pay, ballast-heaving, and mast-stripping and keel-scraping without remuneration.
Strikes broke out accompanied by bribery and intimidation of blacklegs and the employers combined to resist the "encroachments of the seamen" , attempting to establish an employer dominated union at North Shields.
Ultimately, the Riot Act was read and a number of people were shot dead at North Sands.
The Standard did its best to promote restraint in a worsening situation.
It ultimately failed and the shipowners emerged victorious, offering only to take on an extra man on each ship to reduce unemployment.
While the reputation of such men as Woodruffe seems to have emerged unscathed, the union activities of the Loyal Standard thereafter declined rapidly.
In 1826 and 1827 it seems to have retained some trade union functions, including support for litigation on behalf of its members.
By 1830, however, membership had more than halved and it was thought prudent to change the rules to limit its functions more closely to those of a conventional benefit society, thereby earning the support of some local shipowners and a personage no less elevated than His Grace the Duke of Northumberland.
As such it continued in existence until 1897 when it was formally wound up.
The next move towards national organisation for seamen also arose on the north east coast, though as a result of a very different impetus.
The prouder and more articulate seaman had seen his pay and status in continuous decline from 1815 when, at the, end of the Napoleonic wars, "the government, without the least consideration for those who had battled on the ocean in defence of their king and country, disbanded the Fleets and cast adrift some thousands of Seamen suddenly to find employment in the merchant service" .
Wages always fell, never rose; those in the coasting trade from £pound10 to £pound2 15s a voyage, so far that "there was a prospect of Seamen sailing ships for their mere food" .
His sense of outrage increased when, in 1850 Parliament passed an Act "for Improving the conditions of Masters, Mates and Seamen and maintaining Discipline in the Merchant Service" .
The Act had its origins in the growing antipathy of the public to the condition of British ships and the reputation of the men who sailed them.
In 1831 the Rothesay Castle, a passenger-steamship bound from Liverpool to Beaumaris on the Isle of Anglesey foundered with the loss of a hundred men, women and children.
It had neither the lifeboat provided for in Act of Parliament nor lifebelts for the passengers.
There were, one shipowner protested, quite enough encumbrances on vessels without these precautions.
Uproar in the press forced a Committee of Inquiry which recommended stronger ships.
Nothing was done.
Attention turned to other causes of disaster and among these identified the quality of masters and officers who were required to pass no test of competency except, ironically, when they were carrying slaves.
James Ballingall, manager of the London and Kirkaldy Shipping Company and a former seaman, made it his business to advertise weaknesses of naval architecture as well as crewing and a Select Committee of 1836 found British ships to be ill constructed and badly maintained and  their masters and officers frequently drunken and incompetent.
Again, nothing was done, though heartrending stories of shipwrecks and even of cannibalism on crippled vessels continued to assail the public.
A further Committee in 1846 did get some results.
Deckloading regulations were tightened up, surveys of passenger ships were made compulsory and all iron ships of over 100 tons required to have two bulkheads.
The payment of seamen's wages only when the owner had been paid for the freight carried, on the  ancient maxim that "freights are the mother of wages" , was discontinued and payment required on the basis of service, whether freight was carried or not.
Further evidence accumulated on the ignorance and brutality of masters and the drunkenness of both officers and men.
A good master could find a good crew, but many good men found no commissions since inferior men were cheaper.
English vessels were unpopular among shippers because they were judged to be incompetently run.
They were a discredit to a country in which trade was, moreover, still encumbered by the Navigation Acts which ensured preference for British shipping.
An Act of 1849 repealed the Navigation Laws, enabling foreign ships to import into British possessions in Asia, Africa and America and to carry the goods of any nation into Britain itself, though the masters and three-quarters of the crew of British vessels were to remain British and the coasting trade was to remain in British hands, at least for the time being.
The Mercantile Marine Act 1850 was seen by the government as dealing with the other side of the problem — that of raising the standard of British seamen and seamanship and of protecting the seamen themselves from the tyranny of their officers and the  depredations of the shipowners.
It was much influenced by evidence on the poor quality of the men employed in the merchant service provided by British consuls in all parts of the world.
Vessels trading to India, the West Indies and other distant ports were generally reported on as well officered, but the conduct of officers and men operating in most other parts of the world was nothing less than disgraceful.
Many masters of the latter group were scarcely able to sign their names and behaved in a brutal fashion to their crews.
Some were quite capable of mistaking the lights of France for those of England!
As a consequence, foreign ships were often chartered in preference to British.
One consul reported that he was frequently ashamed to own such incompetent workers as his countrymen.
The Act seemed to the authorities, in short, to be the "Seaman's Charter" .
Examinations for certificates of competency were instituted for all masters and mates of foreign-going ships and were subject to withdrawal if they proved incompetent or unfit to perform their duties.
Local Marine Boards were set up in all main ports and a Shipping Master appointed by each to take administrative responsibility for masters' and mates' examinations and the business of engaging and discharging seamen under pain of penalty  for "crimping" and other similar offences.
Though the making of contracts with crews had been required of shipowners and masters for more than a century, these had, it seems, been corrupted by the inclusion of conditions which even the courts regarded as outrageous.
The Act therefore laid down a "statement of particulars" to be included in any contract — the nature and length of the voyage, the time to be on board, the capacity in which the seaman was to serve, the amount of wages and scale of provisions to be provided and any disciplinary rules or penalties to be applied while on board — thus anticipating by 122 years the detailing of terms universally required by the Contracts of Employment Act 1972.
The 1850 Act was regarded with horror by the shipowners who saw the observance of petty regulations added to the loss of their rights to carry freight in British bottoms.
In the north-east there was a similar response from the men, though for different reasons.
At a large protest meeting in Sunderland following the coming into force of the Act on 1 January 1851, they made their objections clear.
The subjection of seamen to Marine Boards in the north-east, where crimping was less in evidence than in London or Liverpool, was to treat them like "a parcel of Mexican slaves" .
Even more obnoxious were the charges to be made at Shipping Offices at each engagement and discharge and the disciplinary regulations which the government had appended to the Act.
For short voyage men payment by seamen of 1/ on each occasion (and larger sums for stewards, carpenters and mates) was especially hard, while the twenty-two offences for which a seaman might be logged and fined by masters seemed, although such a system already existed, the thin end of the wedge of regimentation.
Thousands are said to have signed a Memorial to the Board of Trade abhorring the notion of the Shipping Offices, of "oppressive taxation inasmuch as British seamen are ticketed and numbered like slaves" and complaining "of an unconstitutional violation of the rights and liberties of freeborn Englishmen…to which no other class of Englishmen is subjected" .
So much for the "Seaman's Charter" !
The Penny Union
 "It is strange" , said The Times, "how obstinate men can be in face of measures designed for their own good" .
Strange, indeed!
For out of the agitation there came the Seamen's United Protection Society, formed in North Shields, but quickly developing branch associations on the east coast as far afield as Aberdeen and Dundee in one direction and Yarmouth in the other, about twenty in all.
The north-east seamen were concerned about pay also.
A strike took place involving 8,000 to 10,000, spreading from North Shields to London and Liverpool.
 "The trouble resembled a miniature Mutiny on the Nore" .
The "Penny Union" , known as such from the amount of its  weekly subscription, flourished.
The employers conceded the claim for higher wages, and the union went on to express the men's dissatisfaction with the 1850 Act.
A Captain Beechey, sent by the newly established Marine Department of the Board of Trade to discuss their grievances and explain the Act had some difficulty in convincing his audience that Shipping Officers were intended to be the seamen's friends, and that the Register Ticket, far from being a "badge of slavery" , gave them advantages.
Neither the men of the Tyne nor of Hull were impressed.
Engagement through the Offices was, they claimed, nothing more than legal crimpage, and the Register Ticket could be bought at many lodging houses.
A deputation was sent to the Board of Trade and a Memorial introduced into the House of Commons by J.T.Wawn, MP for South Shields and by the indefatigable Joseph Hume.
The men carried the day.
The operation of the twenty-two disciplinary offences was suspended and concessions were made on the fees for signing on and off.
The union claimed great achievements; "Register Tickets or Seamen's Passports abolished, forced payments to the Merchant Seamen's Fund gone the same road; coal whipping (i.e. the discharge of relatively small amounts of coal at minor ports which on the Thames was the job of" eight licensed coal-whippers, who are all able bodied men, with one basket-man to every vessel ") by Seamen in the Thames has received its death blow; the coasting trade has been relieved from the officiousness of a Shipping Master; small stores, or payments instead, has been allowed; WAGES have RISEN, and so have FREIGHTS; ships sailed by members of the society are better manned; and lastly, the improvements in the law have helped slightly to ameliorate the condition of Seamen as a class" .
The Seamen's United lasted for less than a decade.
Havelock Wilson regarded its collapse as a direct consequence of shipowner hostility but the true situation was certainly more complex than this.
Whether he originated the union or not, its inspiration seemed to have been Thomas Moore, a former naval officer who campaigned tirelessly for the rights of seamen, and who became its honorary president.
Moore is said to have been a pioneer in producing a periodical for seamen, the Mariners' Journal, which was published briefly between 185I and 1854, and to have advocated the first system of paid shore based officials to look after the interests of their members while they were at sea.
From his writings it seems that he was also well aware that effective organisation depended in the final analysis on adequate control of the labour market for seamen.
Any possibility of this, he concluded, was ruled out by the Merchant Shipping Act 1854 which finally brought to an end the provisions of the Navigation Acts,(already repealed in other respects in 1849) that all seamen on coasting vessels, and three-quarters of crews on ships in foreign trade, were to be British.
 "When a master may discharge his crew abroad on some frivolous  pretext, and is empowered to ship as many foreigners as he pleases, God help the poor sailor." 
Other circumstances were undermining the specific advantages of the north-east coast for trade union organisation.
Until the 1840s the supply of coal from the area to London was tightly and effectively controlled as a virtual monopoly.
The opening of the Great Northern Railway with a direct line from London to the Nottingham, Derby and Yorkshire coalfields brought this situation to an end and gravely damaged the bargaining power of the north-east colliers and seamen.
Local Seamen's Societies
These factors probably explain the falling off of trade union activity among seamen in the north-east and elsewhere in the 1860s and early 1870s.
With the collapse of the Seamen's United all thoughts of a national organisation became no more than a pipe dream.
Some local societies which had previously formed branches of that organisation may have survived as benefit clubs but nothing of substance is known about these, nor about such non-affiliated organisations as the Liverpool based British Mariner's Association which in 1857 was to be found at 6, Columbian Buildings at that port.
Some new ventures employed the rhetoric of trade unionism, among them the Liverpool Seamen's Protective Society formed in 1866.
 "Every branch of the working classes in this town" , a preamble to its rules declared,"has sought protection in combination — every class but one.
Taken in connection with the fact that Liverpool is the greatest seaport in the world, that one alone should remain a disorganised prey to designing knaves is one of the strange and unaccountable anomalies which frequently escape notice for a long time but only to be ultimately felt with greater force and overcome with greater resolution".
Whether or not all such bodies were bona fide trade unions seems to be questionable.
A Liverpool Seamen's Protection Society claiming 2,800 members was represented at the Trades Union Congresses of 1874 and 1875 but fell under suspicion.
It had employer approval as a means of supplying efficient seamen and appeared to be run by boarding house keepers in the employer interest, though it conducted at least one successful strike and at one point attempted to extend its influence by sending a delegate to Southampton.
Indeed, the type of man who organised local seamen's societies in the 1870s 1880s and 1890s was often such as to give them a bad name.
It was hard for the active trade unionist of the day to believe that W.P.Lind could combine the secretaryship of the London Seamen's Protection Society with his role as  Superintendent Registrar for the Port of London or that his organisation, with large numbers of members on its books but only a handful paying contributions, was not actually in the hands of the shipping interests.
The president of Lind's society confessed as much to  Thomas Brassey: "We are the very antipodes of trade unions, although forced to be enrolled under the Trade Union Act.
Strikes are our abhorrence and the first principle laid down is that the owner's property is the first care of the member of the society to see to'.
After attending the annual meeting of the Trades Union Congress for a number of years Lind was eventually declared ineligible to take part in the proceedings in 1881.
Beneath the respectable front of many local organisations there had developed only too frequently, as the men of the north-east had earlier predicted, a form of legalised crimping operated between Board of Trade staff at Mercantile Marine Offices and boarding house keepers who were only too happy to supply seamen at a profit to themselves.
As for those localised unions with no such connections, it was not an uncommon experience for the organiser to decamp with the members' subscriptions.
J.
B.Butcher, the general secretary of one of the most stable and better run of the local seamen's organisations of the time, made no bones about his own experience.
 "I have been connected with different unions for this last twenty years" , he declared to the Royal Commission on Labour in 1892, "but I am sorry to state that they have been formed for the benefit of one man, for he has generally cleared out with the funds" .
A few local unions of an unquestionably bona fide description were founded and survived despite the difficulties of finding competent and incorruptible leaders who could adequately represent the interests of an ill-educated and frequently itinerant membership which was more often than not at sea.
A Port of Grimsby Stokers' and Sailors' Amalgamated Society registered as a trade union in 1872 and lasted until 1895, though nothing more is known about it.
A Marine Firemen's Union was already in existence in Hull when the Grimsby society accepted formal registration in 1872 and was later opened to deckhands.
Maladministration took its toll, and fifteen years later it amalgamated with another Hull organisation, the Hull Seamen's Mutual Association (1881) to form the Hull Seamen and Marine Firemen's Mutual Association led by that self same staid and stable personality J.B.Butcher who continued to lead the union until his retirement in 1912.
Havelock Wilson later paid tribute to Butcher, "a kind of silent man but nevertheless a thinker…who could put up a fight all the same" .
In organising from Hull he had the advantage that his members were short voyage men, mostly employed on weekly boats.
His situation was not in this respect dissimilar from that of the leaders of the North of England Sailors and Seagoing Firemen's Friendly Association, which had been formed at Sunderland in 1879 by John Beresford and was commonly known as the "Sunderland Union" .
Butcher and the Sunderland leadership were alike in other respects.
They were disillusioned with the protection afforded to seamen by legislation; they had limited financial resources and  preferred peaceful negotiation with the shipowners to strikes which they could ill afford and they saw no future in attempts to organise seamen on a national scale.
Tiny as their organisations were, their influence was slight.
Butcher's union had about 300 members for most of the 1880s; under his successors, Beresford and Friend, membership fluctuated from about 70 to 200.
Of the two unions, that in Hull was undoubtedly the more stable.
In the eyes of a deckhand in his twenties who joined the "Sunderland Union" in the days of John Beresford and who was already a member of the Australian Seamen's Union, it seemed little more than a "miscellaneous collection of beards and whiskers" including "old greybeards of sixty, seventy and eighty years of age, with little idea of how to conduct business" , who "reflected the pessimistic outlook of their leaders, supposing that everything was wrong and that nothing could be put right" .
Within a few years that same young man had determined that things could be put right and that he was the man to do it.
 "Young as I was" , he wrote later, "I had a feeling that I was destined to work for big changes and improvements in the lives of men of the sea" .
His name was Joseph Havelock Wilson, the year was 1887 and he made clear his ambition by grandiosely entitling his new organisation the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland.
HAVELOCK WILSON AND THE NEW UNIONISM 1887–1894
"The stevedores and the sailors formed the backbone of the strike.
Throughout the whole of the time they had no demands to make on the masters.
They were actuated by entirely unselfish motives and their training in trade union work made them invaluable in the most important work — picketing at the entrances to the docks".
H. Champion, The Great Dock Strike in London, Swan and Sonnenshein, 1890.
The Wilson Paradox
Havelock Wilson's later reputation in the trade union movement as a "bosses" man ", an imperialist, an anti-democrat riding roughshod over his members' wishes and a betrayer of the miners' cause during the 1926 General Strike diverges strangely from his earlier image as a militant, a rabble-rouser, a fearless advocate of the seafarer," stumping the country agitating, organising and inciting ", and as an advocate, even an originator, of the" new unionism"which shook the trade union establishment to its foundations in the late 1880s and early 1890s.
The contrast is extraordinary, even bizarre.
Was it the same Wilson, reacting differently to different circumstances?
Or did Wilson, plagued by his physical disabilities and frustrated in his political and industrial life after the collapse of his first efforts at organisation in 1894, gradually become a different man?
Origins and Inspiration
Joseph Havelock Wilson was born in Sunderland, the son of a foreman draper.
His father died when he was three years old, leaving his mother to support and bring up seven children, providing for her family by opening a greengrocer's shop and later a modest boarding house.
At nine he was employed by an ironmonger at 2s 6d a week and  nine months later as a printer's devil on the weekly Sunderland Herald at 45 6d.
Later his mother apprenticed him to a lithographic printer.
But Wilson, as he later averred, "could hear the roaring of the sea" .
With a friend he ran away and after some short voyages was bound apprentice to a Mr. Sanderson, the owner of a sailing ship, the Elizabeth Ann.
For the next eleven years he shipped out on various vessels as boy steward, able seaman or boatswain-second mate and sometimes as cook.
His wife, Janie, whom he married in 1879, abetted by her mother, persuaded him after three years of matrimony during which he was in the coasting trade, to settle permanently ashore, helping him to open, first a "cook-shop" and then a larger business in Sunderland which became known as "Wilson's Temperance Hotel and Dining Rooms" .
Thus his financial independence to pursue his trade union work was underwritten.
Wilson's decision to found his new union on his own north-east coast was not lacking in rationality.
Weak though its labour organisation may have been in the 1880s, it had a longer tradition of trade unionism among seamen than any other part of the country.
Wilson's years at sea, his parentage in seagoing families and his long standing contacts in the area qualified him to develop his interests, involvement and ideas of trade unionism.
What could be better than to do so on familiar home ground?
By 1887, however, he had tried the existing Sunderland Union and found it wanting.
In Wilson's eyes the condition of the British seaman was scarcely better than it had been half a century earlier.
He was equally a prey to "harpies and crimps" , the latter now, as he and other trade unionists claimed, paid by the Government.
"At every Mercantile Marine Office there were what was known as the outdoor staff, or Board of Trade messengers.
The duty of these men was to run messages, superintend the gathering up of crews, and, after signing-on, escort the men to their ships, muster them on board, and provide any substitutes if required".
Such men were paid from twenty to thirty shillings per week, but in practice made exceedingly high wages.
"A system of bribing had sprung up.
Seamen, after receiving their pay would slip into the hand of the door messenger sums varying between half-a-crown and a sovereign, with the confidential whisper "don't forget me when I am ready to sign on in a week or two's time" .
Messengers would then, when making up numbers for ships' crews, ignore the crowd of men outside, "sneak out and deliberately proceed to a boarding house and obtain the required number of men" .
To all this, Wilson believed, was added the swamping of the industry with cheap foreign labour which had also lowered the quality of British seamen applying for jobs, thereby providing the shipowners with an excuse to prefer the foreigner.
On this subject he felt particularly strongly.
 "Officers had instructions from their employers that no English need apply and that the best chance a man could have to get employment would be that he could not speak the English  language; then he was sure to get a situation" .
Wilson's gloom at the lot of the seamen was shared by the "Sailor's Friend" , Samuel Plimsoll.
As MP for Derby from 1868 to 1880 Plimsoll had for years attacked the shipowning interest and the government which supported it hip and thigh on the unnecessary loss of life and property at sea, attracting great publicity in 1875 by being ordered to retire from the House of Commons following a particularly violent denunciation of their callous and self-interested behaviour.
In the following year he had succeeded in attracting so much public attention that the government was obliged to hurry through parliament a new Merchant Shipping Act setting a fixed load line for ships — the "Plimsoll Line" .
By the 1880s his time was being spent, in a private capacity, inveighing in pamphlets and on platforms on the scandals which were evident in the administration of merchant shipping legislation and demanding further reforms.
Rumour had it that it was he who brought it to the attention of Chamberlain, who became President of the Board of Trade at the same time as Plimsoll left the House, that numbers of lives lost at sea, after falling as a result of the Load Line Act, were now again on the increase.
Prosecutions for offences defined under the Merchant Shipping Acts had almost uniformly failed, and shipowners had escaped altogether from the provisions of the Employers' Liability Act 1880 in which employers had been made responsible for insuring employees against the risks of their calling.
Despairing in his heart that anything further could be done to improve the conditions of seafarers, Plimsoll nevertheless continued to work without respite to promote the cause in which he so passionately believed, and did so until illness forced him out of the public scene.
Wilson became acquainted with Plimsoll in the 1880s and was, he claimed, a frequent visitor to his house in Park Lane.
How could his enthusiasm not have been aroused by so inspiring a personality?
Vigorous and undiplomatic language was no stranger to a seaman, but from Plimsoll Wilson also learned how to approach and tackle both the law and its promotion in parliament as well as the pamphleteering which preceded change.
His confidence in trade unionism was his own contribution.
 "By combination" , Wilson affirmed, "all reforms and improvements within reason could be secured and I preached this doctrine on every possible occasion" .
His first recorded public speech, condemning the shipowners at a mass meeting on the Sunderland Town Moor for their resistance to the extension of the Employers' Liability Act to mariners, was reported in the Sunderland Echo for 31 December 1880.
Before turning to the foundation of his own union he attempted to transform the Sunderland Union into a national organisation, speaking from 1885 with authority as its president.
First he sought to use it to spread the gospel of trade unionism elsewhere in the north-east and eventually persuaded it to establish branches at Middlesbrough, Hartlepool, Seaham Harbour and in North and  South Shields.
Then he attempted to bring together a number of small seamen's societies by organising a conference at the Scottish port of Leith.
All to no avail.
While the seamen's leaders freely admitted that a national union was the right thing, they also declared that it could not be done.
In the seven years between 1880 and 1887 Wilson's education in trade unionism had, however, proceeded apace.
The Sunderland Union had elected him as its delegate to the local trades council.
Here he met the most notable trade unionists of the area, some of them with national reputations.
There was William Foreman, a pioneer of the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, Alexander Wilkie, the general secretary of the Associated Society of Shipwrights and former MP for Dundee, and there were John Wilson and William Crawford of the Durham Miners, both Members of Parliament for divisions of the County Palatine in the 1880s, not to mention one of the most respected leaders of his day, Robert Knight of the Boilermakers to whom we owe the present day Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions.
From them and from a local solicitor, Thomas Watson Brown, he learned much about trade union administration and the drafting of trade union rules; they also, he claimed, fed his ambition to lead a national seamen's union, initially at the cost of some domestic disharmony, his wife and his mother-in-law accusing him of neglecting his own restaurant business and resenting the time he spent with his own visitors, particularly "old long-faced Brown" the lawyer.
The Foundation of the Union
The decision to fulfil this ambition by abandoning the old organisation and founding a wholly new one was not lightly taken.
The break came when Wilson's carefully nurtured branches outside Sunderland came under threat.
Finding that the Middlesbrough, Shields and Seaham branches had been accumulating funds, the Sunderland officials demanded that any surplus cash should be handed over to them at head office, threatening, according to Wilson's account, "drastic action" if they failed to do so.
The response was immediate.
Each branch resolved to secede and go it alone.
He made a last effort to persuade the Sunderland Society to adopt the rules of a national union which he had spent some twelve months in preparing.
His appeal failed.
On the spot he declared his intention of doing what they had refused to do.
A national union there would be, come what may.
Wilson canvassed the seamen who were in port and exacted from them an undertaking to attend the inaugural meeting of the new union to be held in Sunderland in July 1887.
Alas for the promises of Jack ashore!
Apart from himself, "only one man turned up — Frank Foley by name and I enrolled Foley as a member after I had enrolled myself, so that there were then two members of the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union of Great Britain" .
A further meeting a week later produced more promising results with an attendance of twelve seamen who paid one shilling each as their first contribution.
Pace Wilson's own more dramatic account, it seems that the decision to establish the union was not formally taken until a meeting on 18 August 1887 at which forty men were present.
A pro tem committee of nine, with a Mr. Stewart as president and Wilson as treasurer, held a meeting eight days later at which the union's rules were agreed, including provisions that all members should report their arrivals and departures on voyages with fines for non-compliance and that they should be issued with contribution cards, rule books and privilege tickets as soon as convenient.
Wilson, now also designated as general secretary, was instructed to take premises in Prospect Row, Sunderland, for a reading room, smoke room and office and have the necessary work done to make them usable for these purposes.
The new union was on its way.
Wilson made good use of what he had learned about publicity from his relationship with Plimsoll.
For some years he had made a practice of writing to government departments about the grievances of seamen, addressing these also to prominent persons and sending copies to the press.
The London Daily Telegraph of 25 August 1887, under the heading "A Sailors' Association" chose to deal at length with the birth of the union, praising its objects, but predicting its early demise: "The North Country" , the article read,"was always the nursery of the famous and best seamen and it is here that we find Jack hard at work originating a fine scheme.
What he proposes bears the high-sounding and quarter-deck defying title of the "National Amalgamated Sailors and Firemen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland" .
Here is a pretty device to decorate a banner withal, and who knows but that the bunting may yet cast its shadow upon the representative body of shellbacks lurching along in some typical procession of industry.
What the sailor has in view for his proposed union is this.
First, to improve the condition of all seafaring men.
Next, to make advances to seamen, at no interest, on the security of their wages and allotment notes; also to endeavour to obtain reasonable hours and fair wages.
To maintain members who have fallen into ill repute with shipowners, to provide remedy for wages and salvage and maintenance on shore for members detained from sea during litigation.
The union will also try to provide a better class of men for the Merchant Service, and will see that crews join their ship punctually and in a sober  condition; it will help shipwrecked mariners; it will provide assistance to members travelling in search of work; it will establish a sick benefit and a burial fund.
There is nothing that is not laudable and praiseworthy in this scheme.
The sailors have local institutions, but, from causes not unconjecturable, they do not appear to help forward the cause of seafarers.
Unhappily the difficulty that besets the establishment of such a society as that contemplated by the Sunderland men is the same as that which practically neutralises the efforts of the existing small unions.
First, sailors are a very scattered people.
They are home for a week or a month; the rest of the time they are wandering about the world.
When a man's vote is wanted, he is in China; when enquiries are made as to an overdue subscription, it is found that the member was last heard of in a shipwreck off New Guinea.
A letter requesting his attendance on Monday reaches him two years afterwards.
Confederations formed of fugitive men must needs lack the vitality found in co-operations whose meetings are regularly attended.
Shipmasters long ago found that their societies are never likely to help them owing to the inevitable scattering of members and the indifference which distance begets.
Sailors who start a National Union will discover this for themselves.
Yet another difficulty.
Jack is proverbially a heedless man.
People who do not care so long as the passing hour is comfortable and cheerful are not likely to exhibit much of a front when they call themselves a union.
The despair of Jack's friends has always been that he will not give himself any trouble.
We must take the sailor as he is.
Seeing this, it is to be feared that Sunderland's excellent project of a National Union for mariners will come to nothing."
Wilson had already gone too far to be deterred by such friendly, if condescending, realism.
By the end of 1887 he had begun to extend his operations to other ports in the north east and claimed to have enrolled about 200 members.
In the autumn of the following year branches were opened at Cardiff by John Gardner of the Cardiff Trades Council and at Newport by Albert Kenny, who also extended his organising activities to Dublin, Cork and Whitehaven.
By December 1888 Wilson, "speaking roughly, and as near as I can judge" , thought the union might have about 7,000 to 8,000 members and, in addition to Cardiff noted branches at Hull, Glasgow and Liverpool.
There followed the annus mirabilis of 1889 during which, on Wilson's later estimate, 130,000 members were enrolled in branches at 45 ports, a number representing, net of officers, engineers, cooks and stewards, "almost the whole of the seamen in the British mercantile marine" , though, he added with unusual candour, "it is true that they are not all paying up at the present time" , partly, it seems, because of the union's policy of issuing "privilege tickets" involving no entry money or contributions until members could afford to pay.
Allowing for turnover, Wilson could claim over 60,000 members by the end of 1889 and 75,000 in September of the following year.
Though these figures were certainly exaggerated the achievement was still remarkable.
Wilson himself was involved in much of the early organising.
In July 1888, the Executive Committee resolved that branches should be opened at North Shields, South Shields, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough and Blyth "as soon as ever the Secretary thinks it advisable to do so" .
Wilson's autobiography contains a vivid account of his experiences and his successes in this heartland of the union, which includes his first meeting with Walter Runciman, a shipowner in a small way in South Shields, whose name and that of his son, will appear again in this history.
Generally, however, it was the policy of the union to appoint "delegates" from Sunderland or elsewhere to do this initial work.
At Glasgow the delegate was Maurice Darby, a Salvationist and "rather a good speaker" , at Cardiff a Mr.Logan and at Liverpool William Nicholson, in Wilson's words "a good union man, but nervous and bashful" .
Wilson's role was to follow up organising efforts which seemed to be failing and to exercise control when things seemed likely to get out of hand.
Early Problems
It was far from plain sailing.
Hull fell to the lot of George Reid from Glasgow as organising delegate.
Here Butcher's union put up a spirited resistance against the "adventurer from Sunderland, doing his utmost to cause a separation or division, by endeavouring to form a rival association" .
Reid was repulsed after a bitter inter-union struggle, was charged and found guilty of disorderly conduct and eventually ejected from his office as branch secretary.
The NAS&FU branch collapsed.
Wilson journeyed to Hull but failed to heal the breach.
Though his union did not entirely disappear in Hull it took many years to recover.
George Reid's problem arose from the adoption of overtly militant tactics in a port in which there existed a tradition of co-operation and harmony between an existing local seamen's organisation and local shipowners, encouraging its members to reject locally acceptable wage and conditions settlements and exhorting them to stop ships from  leaving Hull with crews paid less than the NAS&FU demanded.
Despite Wilson's inclination to adopt what he considered to be a conciliatory approach to the shipowners he found himself, whether pioneering new branches or giving support to the work of the union's organizing delegates, in the role of agitator.
Strikes followed his progress around the nation's seagoing communities, the union in Sunderland being cast in the role of a mere spectator.
After a visit by Wilson in November 1888 the Liverpool seamen, led by the"diffident' William Nicholson, stopped work on 20 December and remained out until 18 February 1889.
An uneasy truce prevailed until June 1889 when the men struck once more until 13 July.
They continued for some five years a guerilla war against the employers.
A similar unrest followed his departure from Glasgow after an intensive effort to recruit members and an exercise in stimulating recruitment in the Bristol Channel ports, while all around the country seamen became more and more aggressive, especially about crewing with non-unionists.
Much of this Wilson was inclined to blame on the difficulties of getting suitable men to act as local delegates or secretaries and on the impatience of the seamen.
 "When I was dealing with the men personally I generally got them to see matters from my point of view, but unfortunately I could not stay in any one port for any length of time; my subordinates did not have the same control over men as I did" .
Even he, however, confessed that it was difficult to control men who had not been accustomed to organization, whose "idea was that once a union was formed everything should be put right in a few hours" .
Enthusiasm to join the union knew no bounds; the expectation of the new members knew no limits.
It was a heady brew.
The New Unionism
Historians recognize a number of periods in labour history in which the urge among particular types of employees to organize has become compelling.
Among dock, river and waterside workers such a movement took place in a number of ports in the 1870s and culminated in the great Liverpool dock strike of 1879.
Nevertheless, a second movement which erupted at the end of the 1880s was wholly unexpected.
In particular the five week dock strike in London in 1889, which became the symbol of the "new unionism" in all its brash aggressiveness, took the world by surprise "as" something quite new, upsetting all men's calculations".
The role of the 1889 conflict in London in originating the new unionism has often been exaggerated.
Though its effects were remarkable enough, it could hardly have been the progenitor of the wave of organisation which had initially affected the primary port areas of Britain outside London — particularly Liverpool, Cardiff and Glasgow — in the late autumn of the previous year.
The situation is  described by Taplin;"The revival of trade during the closing years of the 1880s brought a dramatic change in the attitude of unskilled workers throughout the country.
The privations of the middle 'eighties had built upon the sullen resentment that was characteristic of the unskilled.
Given the right conditions they could flare up at any time.
Although the London unemployed had been the most vociferous during the depression years they had achieved very little.
It was provincial workers who exploded into action as trade revived.
In Liverpool from late December 1888 the waterfront was seething with discontent, three major strikes took place, permanent unions emerged, the employers combined to oppose them and the traditional relationships between employers and employees were lastingly shattered".
Nor did the London dock strike necessarily foreshadow the style of trade unionism which many formally "unskilled" workers of the time might have wished to adopt.
Neither the idea of "one big union" to guarantee the unskilled against blacklegging nor the notion of a closed shop and bargaining strength based on numbers alone was particularly attractive to those groups which felt that, given a little organization, they had sufficient acquired and not easily replaceable skill to bargain for themselves.
Neither the stevedores, the lightermen, the coal trimmers nor the seamen easily accepted the possibility that they might be submerged under an advancing tide of labourers more unskilled than themselves.
For this reason among others the organizational theories of the founders of the general unions of 1889 bore little fruit until after 1911 when urges towards revolutionary amalgamation, industrial unionism or the more general form of the later Transport and General Workers began to give the ideals of Thorne, Mann and Tillett some kind of practical reality.
The "new unionism" as preached by the leaders of the London dock strike was strong on rhetoric but weak on appreciation of the facts.
It was not the general labourers but the seamen and other groups which could be made to believe in their immediate bargaining power which led the new militancy from the winter, not of 1889, but of 1888.
And it was sectional organisations such as these which best survived the vicissitudes of the next twenty years, though Wilson's own creation was bankrupt by 1894 and was only subsequently revived with difficulty.
John Burnett, the Labour Correspondent to the Board of Trade, and a former general secretary of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, made a shrewd appraisal of the role of the NAS&FU in his 1889 Report on Strikes and Lockouts.
 "This movement (i.e. the new unionism), if it did not originate among the  sailors and firemen who run our merchant marine, had its first really important manifestation among that body" .
The story of the London dock strike which began on 14 August 1889 and ended in the so-called Mansion House Agreement on the following 14 September has often been told.
Havelock Wilson was inclined to play down his involvement in the affair.
He took no part in the London Strike Committee.
He was a comparative stranger to the London men, hardly committed to the same extent as local leaders such as Ben Tillett, John Burns, Tom Mann and Tom Walsh, his own union's delegate.
He found them a quarrelsome lot, patronizing though kind to a provincial, giving him opportunities to address large crowds, but leaving him time to attend to the new NAS&FU branches which developed as a result of the strike.
He needed no reminder that it was his own union which had prospered in many British ports while Tillett's Tea Operatives' Union established in July 1887 at about the same time as his own had failed even to develop any wider organization in the Port of London itself.
Tillett's Tea Operatives had only been spurred into action by the activities of an outspoken gas stoker named Will Thorne who had succeeded in organizing the men at the great Beckton gasworks in East Ham into forming a Gas Workers' Union in May 1889.
This indirectly inspired the Victoria and Albert dockers to discuss setting up a rival organization to Tillett's and led to a united campaign against the employers later in the month.
Ben Tillett, Tom McCarthy and Tom Mann, general secretary, organizer and president respectively of an enlarged Dockers' Union became the original strike leaders, with John Burns coming later on to the scene.
Tom Walsh was, however, a speaker at the original Victoria and Albert Docks' meeting and the sailors and firemen came out early in the strike in sympathy with the dockers.
They were highly valued for their experience of picketing and organizing processions.
Tom Mann believed that they made the best pickets of all.
No detailed record of their activities has survived, but since the essence of the action was to prevent the entry of blacklegs, their work was central to the success of the strike.
In addition to the oratory provided by Havelock Wilson, the NAS&FU also made a contribution of £pound100 to strike funds and encouraged various branches of the Seamen's Union throughout Australia to donate over £pound1,000.
It emerged from the London dock strike, "the greatest struggle between capital and labour that this generation has seen" , with an augmented status in the labour movement, a reputation for militancy and a foothold in the Port of London in which organising success had hitherto eluded it.
It may have been a sign of things to come that though the strike led to a long lasting respect between Havelock Wilson and Tom Mann, no such relationship developed with Ben Tillett, who in his recollections of the strike refrains from making mention of Wilson at all.
The Shipowners' Response
The shipowners, thought Wilson, originally regarded his union with a certain mild contempt.
 "Having seen so many such unions started in the past, they knew that the new union would disappear in the same way as the others" , and good humouredly laughed Wilson's overtures out of court.
Powell in his history of the Shipping Federation presents the situation rather differently.
A Steamship Owners' Mutual Protection and Indemnity Association had been formed as early as 1874 which later became part of a North of England Protecting and Indemnity Association, and as early as 1878 shipowners of the north-east were complaining of the "tyrannical" attempts of a "dictatorial body of unionists" ' to impose demands on the industry, establishing in 1885 a Central Association of Shipowners of Sunderland, Glasgow and Newcastle to put their views to the Royal Commission of 1886 on Chamberlain's proposed Shipping Bill.
The foundation of the NAS&FU and its recruiting activities, followed by wage demands, strikes, blacking of ships and the picketing of shipping offices increased their concern.
Shipowners were accustomed to a bad press, a bad reception in parliament and unsympathetic public opinion; the added threat from a militant seamen's organization was too much to be tolerated.
Wilson became the bête noir of the shipowners.
There were, of course, shipowners who had sympathy with the problems of seamen and who were inclined towards the union cause.
The majority, however, were adamantly opposed to anything which weakened their absolute control over their crews and were prepared to take any action which would ensure that this was upheld, the most effective method being the recruitment of non-union crews which were prepared to sail at lower rates and under worse conditions than union men.
On these rested the employers' capacity to break any strike, while the union's strength lay in its capacity to "picket out" the vessels and shipping offices concerned and to dry up the supply of blacklegs by intercepting the trains on which they arrived and by organizing the ports from which they had been recruited.
It was to this latter end that Wilson's journeyings were largely devoted, while the emphasis of his argument was that acceptance of the union's position, far from creating a tyranny of trade unionism, would lead to greater discrimination in recruitment and to higher standards of seamanship and greater efficiency which would be greatly to the advantage of the shipowners themselves.
Failing success in negotiation, however, the struggle had to be carried on by any means possible.
Havelock Wilson records the tactics of both sides in Liverpool in June and July 1889: "I saw some of the principal owners at the beginning and  endeavoured to have all questions settled on conciliatory lines.
Many of the owners were sympathetic but the majority, I regret to say, were not so inclined.
Thousands of blacklegs were procured from all parts of the country.
Fishermen from Yarmouth were imported in hundreds to act as deck hands.
The firemen's department was filled with men from inland towns or anywhere from whence they could be obtained.
The owners decided to have a depot ship to house strike breakers.
So they fitted up one of their own liners, The Atlas, for the accommodation of blacklegs.
These men were landed at different places and conveyed to the depot ship.
The crimps were of course very active and I was told at the time that they would be paid as much as two pounds for every man whom they recruited.
On one occasion I got together twelve of the most prominent crimps; they were a soulless and cold blooded lot.
I endeavoured to impress upon them that the cause I was fighting for was that of women and children.
At this they laughed and sneered.
All the time the men were clamouring outside.
I knew perfectly well that if ever that crowd got hold of them none of them would have been left to tell the tale and took immediate steps for them to escape by the windows at the rear of the premises.
We were having demonstrations every day.
As we marched along the docks we gathered up the men until we were some two or three thousand strong.
There was a great sprinkling of naval reserve men and ex-army men present and everything was done with military precision.
After the fourth week I saw, however, that we were doomed to failure because the supply of strike breakers was inexhaustible.
Many exciting adventures befell me in capturing these men.
I would be informed by telegram that two or three hundred men were leaving Yarmouth by certain trains for Liverpool.
I would take the train down the line where they would have to change at some junction and plead with them the cause of the Liverpool seamen.
By these means I captured as many as fifty in a batch.
However, those in charge of the employers' side soon learnt of this, and special trains were engaged, with all the doors of the carriages locked.
Special instructions were given to stationmasters that should the trains stop at any station no one was to be allowed to board them."
For their part, the employers saw solidarity as their greatest problem.
Not all shipowners found it equally easy to collect non-union crews, while the requirements of the merchant service and differences between the trade undertaken by various shipowners led to variations in willingness or pressing need to resist union demands and to sink their differences against what they regarded as unwarranted union attacks upon their commercial interests.
There were differences between sail and steam, between tramp and liner shipping and between passenger and cargo services.
Tramps were slow, footloose and irregular; liner services emphasized speed and regularity and delay could be ruinous, especially where government subsidies depended on the fulfilment of contracts to transport mail.
In particular, the London owners saw their position as different from those of other ports and remained indifferent to the idea of a nationwide employers' organization devoted to stemming the rising tide of trade unionism among seamen, and without London support any such project was unlikely to succeed.
At the beginning of 1890 shipowners, except those in the north-east, where a "North East Coast Association of Shipowners" was said not to lack "exuberant vitality" , tended, according to a journal of the time, to act as "the pliant instruments of each other 's destruction" .
Even in Liverpool, which had some eighty years experience of organization to protect the shipowning interest in parliament, there was"an utter and lamentable want of cohesion among employers' on matters affecting labour.
This was probably an exaggeration.
In 1889 the NAS&FU's instruction to its members not to sign on with any company until all Liverpool shipowners had acceded to its demands stiffened up the resolution of the thirteen principal lines affected.
The use of The Atlas as described by Wilson, represented an alliance between them, albeit temporary, which was quite effective enough to bring the NAS&FU's best efforts to naught.
By February 1890, this temporary arrangement had extended its coverage and become permanent with the establishment of an Employers' Labour Association representing thirty of the principal steamship owners and twenty master stevedores and porters who together employed some three-fifths of the seamen and dockers in the port.
It was a foregone conclusion that despite the reluctance of important "friendly" shipowners such as Alfred Holt and R.P.Houston to join, the ELA would prevail against the seamen and dockers.
When the men were starved out at the beginning of April 1890 and the union had capitulated, the organisation celebrated its triumph by refusing to take back men who wore the union "button" and required those who were re-employed to sign "The Document" , undertaking to work harmoniously with non-unionists and imported labour.
So powerful did the Association feel itself to be that it declined to amalgamate into a nationally representative Shipping Federation which came into being in September 1890, though it allowed its  individual members to join if they wished and developed a working arrangement with it.Indeed the separatism of the Mersey shipowners lasted until 1967 when they eventually merged into a British Shipping Federation, though not under the title "Employers' Labour Association" .
The ELA itself seems quickly to have degenerated into a "free labour" organization supplying non-union men during disputes but in abeyance between whiles, and to have suffered from secessions by the liner companies which reverted to independent behaviour on labour matters.
In 1903 it was deserted by the master stevedores, who formed their own association and in 1913 a new organization came into being, the Employers' Association of the Port of Liverpool, which stood aloof from the National Maritime Board until it was reconstituted after the first world war.
Both the ELA and the new Shipping Federation, however, saw themselves as responding to the same trade union incursions into their members' prerogatives.
In the case of the latter, the last straw in Wilson's continuing agitation and "one of the greatest blunders the union ever made" , thought Walter Runciman,"was the despotic effort to make the officers and engineers join a union.
The shipowners properly fought this monstrous suggestion to the finish".
If the memoirs of a Mr. J. Stanley Todd are to be believed, the employers first became aware of such a plan as a result of a chance encounter between himself and the union's solicitor, presumably the "long-faced" Thomas Watson Brown, on the ferry between North and South Shields.
Thus alerted, a sub-committee of the North of England Protecting and Indemnity Association met on the following morning and resolved that the danger could only be met by "a central organization of owners for the purpose of protecting their interests against the unreasonable demands and actions of trade unions or combinations affecting such interests" .
It was quickly followed by a similar resolution from the London General Shipowners' Society.
A national conference of some 50 shipowners and local shipowners' associations held in London on 19 August 1890 gave its approval to the proposal and such was the urgency with which the employers regarded the situation, that less than a month elapsed before the Shipping Federation Ltd. was established.
Havelock Wilson was not unwilling to accept the responsibility for having united the employers in this fashion even to the extent of acknowledging his rashness in so doing.
The situation which prompted it was not, however, entirely of his own making.
In 1889 a newly formed officers' union, the Certificated Officers' Union of Great Britain and Ireland, had asked for assistance from the NAS&FU in developing its organisation in return for an agreement that its members would refuse to employ non-union members.
It also suggested that Wilson should become its general manager.
Wilson was quick to see how provocative such a development would be to the shipowners and  refused to accept the post, though he confessed to have been "foolish enough to have allowed myself to be nominated and elected as honorary general manager, which meant that I was lending my name to an organization over which I had no control" .
Later he denied having ever attended committee meetings of the Officers' Union, or indeed having done more than establish four branches for them at Glasgow, Leith, Liverpool and Hull before resigning in September 189I.
But the damage was done.
An instruction was issued by the Seamen's Union that members were not to engage on ships whose captain and officers were not members of the Certificated Officers' Union and any doubts among the majority of shipowners that a national organisation of employers was necessary to protect their interests disappeared.
Wilson had sown the wind; he was now to reap the whirlwind.
The object of the Federation was nothing less than the destruction of his organisation by any means at its disposal and with whatever violence was necessary to achieve that end.
Its instruments were the"Ticket' and the strikebreaker.
Any seaman holding a Federation Ticket pledged, in return for preference in hiring by Federation members, to work with non-union men; for Is he might have a "parchment ticket" which entitled him to injury and other benefits.
"No man shall be allowed to work anywhere without a certificate from the Masters' Union and no man allowed to take passage on any steamer to leave this country unless he produces his certificate.
It may be said that this is tyranny.
The idea is crude, but as to tyranny, that practised by the men through their unions is tyranny, and, if something is not done to counteract them, the tyranny will become greater.
Strikes in whichever port they took place, were crushed with unparalleled ruthlessness.
It was industrial war.
The owners were determined to get their ships to sea, come what may.
 "The ships must sail" .
 "Free labour" , supplied by the Federation or by Free Labour Associations, was the answer.
Not content with a single ship to house strikebreakers, the Federation had three permanently available, a hulk, the Lady Jocelyn, and two passenger steamers, the Paris and the Ella, with a tug, the Talisman, together with motor launches, ready to transport "free crews" wherever they might be required.
These vessels were supplemented by chartered ships if necessary.
By hook or by crook crews, competent or not, were got on to striking ships, by force if by no other method; and the union men retorted in kind.
Wilson's organisation was poorly equipped to sustain such an onslaught.
Before the end of 1891 there had been strikes against free labour at Aberdeen, Plymouth, Liverpool, Shields, Newcastle, Leith, Hull, Glasgow, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough and Swansea, all of which resulted in a weakening of the union.
During an unsuccessful strike in Cardiff, Wilson was imprisoned for six weeks for "unlawful assembly and riot" , discovering during his imprisonment a talent for picking oakum.
By the end of the year, the shipping trade was badly depressed  and he was forced to confess, despite his brave words in public, that "the power of the union had practically been destroyed" .
But the unequal struggle continued.
In late 1892 the union was defeated in Bristol.
The seamen and dockers were defeated again in 1893 in a vicious dispute in Hull.
Wilson's prestige began to slide.
 "He has thundered in vain," declared The Times.
 "He has done so so often and in so many places that neither employers, nor agitators, nor his sailors pay much attention to his words" .
The Union Fades Away
Nor was the failure of militancy the only problem with which Wilson was faced.
His claim of 75,000 members in September 1890 was reduced to 40,000 at the end of the year, with 60,000 in "financial" membership, i.e. including those who had paid entrance fees.
At the end of 1891, using the same basis, membership was approximately 27,000 and 32,000.
The Board of Trade's official figure for 1892 was 20,000 and for 1893, 15,000 but for the latter year it may actually have been less, little more than 12,000.
Wilson, speaking at an Annual Conference almost a quarter of a century later summarised the experience of 1887–1894."1887 was a fairly good year.
1888 was a better.
1889 was a better one still; as a matter of fact in that year we reached, perhaps, the zenith of our power.
1890 was a good year, but a very stormy one.
We had an idea at that time that it was absolutely impossible for us to be defeated.
A good many members and officials not only said so, but acted in that manner.
1891 began to tell the tale.
In 1892 we were in desperate struggles.
In 1893 we were about bankrupt; and from 1893 onwards we were in a chronic state of bankruptcy.
My colleague Mr. Cathery and myself had an idea it was a proper way to live!".
The situation was not unique to the seamen.
After early victories, the new unionism was in rapid retreat by 1891 and had been routed by, 1892–1893.
Tillett's Dockers reached a membership peak of 57,000 in 1890.
Thereafter the path was all downhill: 30,000 in 1891, 23,000 in 1892,14,000 in 1893, stabilizing thereafter at 9,000–10,000, with financial consequences to match.
The bubble had burst.
The problems of all the new unions were much the same.
Initial public sympathy for the movement evaporated under the threat of mass picketing and disorder.
The employers, initially taken by surprise at the pace of developments, regained their second wind.
Without traditions of relationships such as those which existed between masters and unions in skilled trades, there response, as in shipping, was violent and uncompromising.
The leaders of the new organisations also found it difficult to cope with the speed of growth of their organisations.
Officials could hardly be trained overnight; administrative procedures were at best improvised.
The burdens of organising, public speaking  and reacting to rapidly changing circumstances were so great that few of those responsible for the new unionism could lay claim to being efficient administrators.
The question remains to what extent Wilson himself was a contributing factor to the debacle.
He himself gave various explanations for the failure of an organization which was, after all, peculiarly his own, both in origin, structure and policy.
In, his autobiography he is critical of the quality of his local officials who, under pressures from their members, came to be seen as "relieving officers coming to the assistance of every seaman who is down and out" whether their hard luck stories were true or not.
Branches became preoccupied with the craze for expensive banners and on spending money on burying deceased members with full union honours.
Such situations arose, he admitted, partly from his own failure to centralise union finance.
The new unionists, he discovered, were wrong in supposing that funds mattered less in the class struggle than the unity and solidarity of the workers and the Seamen were at a disadvantage compared with other unions in having, because of the nature of their occupation, to appoint and pay so many full-time officials.
Once employed, they became difficult to dismiss either for reasons of inefficiency or economy, not only because they felt that they had acquired a vested interest in the job, but also because they "possessed information which would have been very useful to the union's opponents" .
His own militancy, he confessed, labelled him to his opponents as "a dangerous person who must be put out of business" .
This, and the free labour conflict conducted by the Shipping Federation, troubled him less, however, than the Federation's malicious attempts to destroy his credibility and that of the union by maligning his character and labelling him a criminal.
His conviction at Cardiff was, he believed, the Federation's doing.
Against Fairplay, the employers' journal, he bore a particular resentment, not least because it exploited his weakness for litigation and extravagant publications to rebut the statements of his enemies.
The Price of Experience
As Wilson recalled, his first experience of the courts occurred in April 1889 when he was fined five pounds and costs at Sunderland for having attempted to persuade two seamen to desert from the ss Edmonsley, an incident which Fairplay reported with glee.
 "The gentlemen who sat on the bench were more or less connected with the shipping trade, and the law had been somewhat strained to obtain the conviction" .
Three further cases followed in 1890.
In the first Wilson was found guilty of slander against the Co-operative Wholesale Society which was awarded £pound150 damages and costs.
In the second Arthur Abbott, a former NAS&FU branch secretary at Greenock, was found guilty at  Durham Assizes of libelling Wilson in a pamphlet which he had published and was given a prison sentence.
In the third, an associate of Abbott's, a Jerome Hornsby, was at the Central Criminal Court in London also found guilty of libel, though the court accepted his plea that, in merely showing the pamphlet to a colleague, he had distributed it without malice.
Once begun, the law suits involving the union, either as claimant or defendant became, a torrent.
In 1889 the legal costs of the union were some £pound800, in 1890 £pound6,202 and in 1891 £pound4,930, enormous sums in present day terms.
Wilson later admitted that so far as the shipowners were concerned,"It was blow given and blow returned.
I confess that I ladled it out as liberally as anybody.
There is only one man in this country who runs me close on litigation and that is Horatio Bottomley.
I think I would have to give the biscuit to him because one day I was down at the bankruptcy court and I discovered that he had 130 petitions on the file and I don't think mine reached 100!
 "In the year 1889" , he wrote forty years later,"I made one of the fatal mistakes of my life.
It was when I got into the Law Courts and began a long series of litigation lasting twenty five years".
He never spoke a truer word; upholding the honour of the union and his own reputation was a worthy enough objective, but it was also ruinously expensive and very largely self defeating.
There is, as the British public commonly believes, no smoke without fire.
On the handling of the union's finances, Wilson's enemies attacked him with equal vituperation.
Why were there no financial records for 1887 and 1888?
Why did the union have no bank account until January 1889?
What had happened to the enormous sum of £pound72,356 put into the union's coffers in 1890?
What had the members seen for their entrance fees and contributions when it could be shown that in that year they received some £pound9,000 in benefit while over £pound32,000 went into the management of the union?
What was there to show for the union's militancy when no-one could recall a single dispute in which it had been successful?
Money was simply being wasted.
It had been spent on a luxurious London office, on a stationery account of over £pound1,500 and on extraordinary payments to all manner of persons.
Over £pound1,100 had been paid to strikers in Denmark, £pound 1,000 towards a dispute in Australia [it cost £pound16 14s 6d to remit that amount!]and a further £pound1,000 to dock porters, coal trimmers and gas stokers.
There was even a sum of £pound50 paid to, of all people, sausage skin manufacturers!
Wilson, his enemies suggested, had been as reckless with money as he had been in organising strikes which brought no advantage to his members.
Wilson was hard put to rebut all these complaints, admitting that his management of funds had been bad, though as a result of inexperience rather than dishonesty.
"The root of the matter lay in our ignorance and lack of experience.
We were ordinary seafaring men and founding  and running a national union was, to say the least, a job for which we had had no training.
I had no personal control over branch funds, but had to bear the brunt of the attack.
It was always Havelock Wilson who was misapplying the funds.
It was a very irritating position to be in".
Never in the rest of his career was he wholly free from accusations of financial mismanagement.
But worse was to come than the criticisms laid against him in 189I.
In 1892, the union's expenditure exceeded its income and reserves for the first time.
The figure was almost £pound500.
By 1893, despite economies which almost halved its expenditure, it was getting deeper and deeper in debt.
Writs were coming in from every direction.
Following a legal dispute, the Allan Line Shipping Company, the Evening News and Post and the Shipping Gazette started bankruptcy proceedings against Wilson.
His furniture was seized by the bailiffs and he was reduced to a demeaning game of hide and seek with process servers which eventually ended when they caught up with him in Belfast.
Fortunately his friends repurchased his goods and chattels and presented them to his wife; they also paid off what he owed.
Meanwhile he began to suspect that the Shipping Federation was buying up the union's debts.
Of these there were plenty.
Its returns to the Registrar of Friendly Societies for the year 1893 showed a deficit of £pound2,243.
"We realized that for a well-known trade union to be sued by its creditors and compulsorily wound up would have a very damaging effect upon the movement.
So we decided to anticipate our enemies and in 1894 the National Amalgamated Sailors and Firemen's Union went into voluntary liquidation".
SALVAGE AND LANDFALL 1894–1911
"From 1894 to 1911 it was pretty hard graft.
I do not know that I am sorry for that.
It sharpened our wits; made us better union men and brighter.
We learned in that time who our friends were.
When 1911 came I often marvel to myself in the name of Heaven how it was done".
J.Havelock Wilson, Presidential Address, Annual Conference National Sailors' and Firemen's Union, September 1916.
 "The Shipping Federation proved utterly incapable of helping its clients, and having dictated conditions for over twenty years, in a single day lost all its power" .
Tom Mann, Memoirs, Labour Publishing Co. 1923
From Hostility to Accord
On 17 November 1911 the Executive Council of the Shipping Federation met and resolved: "That the recognition of the Seamen's Union should be based upon freedom of contract and the employment of union or non-union seamen and firemen, free from interference of one with the other" .
Superficially such a resolution might appear to have been no more than a minimum concession by the Federation in response to the seamen's involvement in a wave of strikes by transport workers which had reverberated around the ports of Britain in the previous summer — an undertaking that it would withdraw its "ticket" if the union would do the same, so that neither side would attempt to control the supply of seamen and free labour disputes would cease.
In practice, it proved to  be more than a mere truce after two decades of mutual and unbridled hostility.
Over the next ten years it opened the doors to the development of relations between Wilson's union and the shipowners so cordial and mutually supportive that his enemies in the labour movement could express ironic astonishment that he had ever had "any special connection with the Seamen at all" .
Even as early as 1916 Wilson's satisfaction was unbounded.
In practice, he claimed at the union's Annual Dinner, the shipowners had conceded that their free labour policy was no longer workable.
While hundreds of men were passing through the union's offices, those of the Shipping Federation were dirty and virtually abandoned; "not a living soul in many of them throughout the country" .
In many ports, joint meetings of shipowners and men were being held for the discussion of grievances.
On the north east coast and in London and Cardiff the union was formally recognized by the Owners.
The Federation itself had met the union's national officials and treated them with courtesy.
Shipowners had accepted an invitation to the Annual Dinner and one had purchased and presented to the union, without charge, a fine convalescent home for sailors at Limpsfield.
 "Who would have thought that, without cringing, the Sailors' and Firemen's Union could have created such a splendid feeling among employers!" 
Even Wilson himself was not clear how the miracle had been worked.
The Union Reborn
Twenty-two years earlier, in 1894, and even as late as the spring of 1911, the situation could hardly have seemed less promising.
Whether anything at all had been salvaged out of the wreck of the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union was still questionable.
The hostility of the shipowners raged unabated and Collison's recently formed National Free Labour Association could claim to have available no fewer than 28,000 potential strikebreakers.
The threat from the employers was paralleled by that from disgruntled seamen or former agents of the union who felt that they had personal grievances against Wilson or cherished ambitions to establish seamen's organizations of their own.
The Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies received a notification of the dissolution of the National Amalgamated Sailors and Firemen's Union with effect from 31 December 1894.
Exactly how the union was wound up is not clear.
There was evidently no recourse to Rule XXII under which a vote of "five-sixths of the whole of the financial members" was required.
The Sixth Annual General Meeting of the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union was held, as would normally have been expected, at the end of October 1894 in a mood of retrenchment and with threats from Wilson, now designated general president, and Robert McBride, recently created general secretary, that they would no longer tolerate "the underhand and carping pettiness of branch officials" and their "present lax and disorderly method of conducting the business of the union" and would resign if the situation did not improve.
But there was no suggestion that the union itself might be disbanded.
A month later on 1 December 1894 Fairplay noted a rumour that the Seamen's Union had dissolved itself.
Ned Cathery, in his first report as general secretary of the new National Sailors' and Firemen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland gave the date of its formation as 26 November 1894 at a gathering of the union's most loyal supporters at the Wade Arms in Poplar.
Mogridge prefers a more light-hearted but chronologically inaccurate version of events.
 "One summer's morning in 1894 the National Amalgamated Sailors' and Firemen's Union was wound up; its leaders then adjourned for lunch and a drink, re-entering the building in the afternoon to start a new union under a slightly different name" .
Exactly how the liquidation of the Amalgamated Union was handled and what was salvaged from the wreck we have no means of knowing.
No account of the situation beyond the bare notice of dissolution was given to the Chief Registrar and Wilson carefully abstained from registering his new organization in order to avoid the obligation of revealing financial and membership information which might be exploited by his opponents.
Perhaps he left his previous London headquarters at 182 Camberwell New Road in something of a hurry, for a new base was quickly found at 9 Jeremiah Street, Poplar, the offices of the Green's Home branch of the old union, at the rent of 95 a week, "starting afresh with the loan of two chairs and a table, sixpence worth of writing paper and six penny stamps for establishing communications with friends in other ports" .
The union had already moved from its fine premises in Buckingham Street, Strandon 22 September 1894 as an economy measure and eventually found a more permanent home, along with the Green's Home branch, at the Maritime Hall, West India Dock Road, London E. where it remained until Head Office was moved to St.George's Hall, Westminster Bridge Road, London S.E. in May 1921.
How many effective branches and how much paying membership survived the collapse of 1893–1894 we do not know.
Edmund Cathery, who immediately replaced McBride as general secretary recorded that in September 1894 there were 20 branches in England, none in Ireland and three in Wales, but confessed that "a large proportion of these were non-paying branches and a continual drain on the union" .
By the end of 1895 the new union had received a total income of £pound4,596 8s.9d.
Assuming that income per member was about the same as in 1893, the membership at the end of 1895 was about 4,700.
By September 1896 the union claimed 24 branches in England, 3 in Ireland, 7 in Scotland, 5 in Wales and one each in Belgium, Holland and Germany; also a representative in New York.
The  additional organising effort, however, brought in extra resources of no more than £pound394, and could hardly have amounted to more than 450 paying members, suggesting a total membership of less than 5,200.
In the absence of other evidence it is not unreasonable to assume that numbers of this order persisted into the early 1900s.
The Board of Trade, which began to make estimates in 1906, gave 7,000 for that year, 9,000 for 1907 and 1908, 10,000 for 1909 and 12,000 for 1910.
Since over the period numbers of seamen eligible for membership was on average about 90,000, the union's achievement was not impressive.
Times were indeed hard.
The new union began nevertheless with some advantages.
Of these perhaps the greatest was that at a stroke all the feckless local officials of whom Wilson complained so bitterly had been removed.
Financially the slate had been wiped clean.
Wilson, whose own competence left something to be desired but who had learned from experience, had already centralised the finances which he had accused branches of the old union of frittering away.
The new general secretary, Ned Cathery, was an experienced and trusted colleague, having joined the union in September 1887 at the age of 35.
As president, Wilson was freed from many day-to-day duties.
He was also given authority to appoint full-time organisers who remained responsible to him.
The lay membership of the Executive Committee was reduced from twenty to eight, partly to take into account the smaller size of the union and partly to economise in travelling from distant ports.
Within a few years the organisation was divided by decision of Annual Conference into seven districts, each covering between two and seven branches and each electing one representative to the Executive, except London, which was given two.
The Conference also opened a special fund in the branches "for the purpose of fixing and maintaining telephones in each branch office for the use and benefit of members" .
On paper the organisation looked sound enough.
In practice the union's problems were very far from over.
It continued to exist, as Wilson later admitted, in a state of bankruptcy as chronic as that which had beset his earlier organisation.
Full-time local officials still remained essential to the union.
Staffing was therefore prohibitively expensive, absorbing on average more than 90 per cent of contribution income.
Nor were officials much better at collecting and handing over monies from branch level than their predecessors.
In March 1898 Leslie Johnson, the general treasurer, reported to an emergency meeting of the Executive Committee that the union was roughly £pound1,600 in debt and that the Glasgow, Dublin, Cork, Swansea, Aberdeen and Ardrossan branches had been closed with wages owing to twelve or more branch officials.
Head Office rent was nearly three months overdue, the rates were in arrears, the staff had not been paid and the general president was stranded in New York for lack of funds.
Somehow, after calls for the resignation of the general secretary had been rejected because of support from his old shipmates on the north east coast, the union managed to take out a loan and to survive.
But it was often touch and go.
Branches remained unstable.
At various times between 1894 and 1911 some fifty branches existed.
In most years there were between thirty-three and thirty-five, only eleven of which had a continuous existence over the whole period.
Six branches, usually including South Shields, Cardiff and Barry, accounted for more than half of the union's funds and year by year the phenomenon of the "non-paying" branch continued, nine out of thirty-two in the bad year 1906, two out of twenty-nine in the good year 1899.
Rivals and Breakaways
Despite the wholesale purge of local secretaries, the shortage of good officials remained a problem.
Wilson had almost as many difficulties with the new generation as with the old.
Equally serious was the union's old bugbear of rapid membership turnover in all ports except those without substantial interests in the coasting trade.
Nor did the reinforcement of Havelock Wilson's powers in the new union, or his patrician and domineering style of running it, make allies out of the more independently minded of the local leadership, while his attempts at centralised financial control left him open to frequent accusations of mismanagement.
Given their short time in port, members continued to be disappointed when instant success eluded them.
For all these reasons recruitment continued to be affected by newly founded organisations or breakaways in one port or another.
Some organisations, whether registered with the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies or not, were easily recognisable and criticised as being jointly managed by shipowners and therefore employer dominated.
Others were the creation of boarding masters and boarding house keepers suspected of crimping and, after 1890, of supplying "free labour" to the Shipping Federation.
Both types were brought to the attention of the Royal Commission on Labour in 1891 and 1892.
Wilson had little fear of the representative bodies in which employers were involved, rightly believing that "a society composed of shipowners and sailors will not work well" .
Some forms of the second genus were apparently more difficult for the trade union movement to identify, one of these being that created in 1872 by William Paterson Lind, Superintendent Registrar for the Port of London, as the London Seamen's Mutual Protection Society, later known as the Amalgamate British Seamen's Protection Society.
In Liverpool, where it had a branch, it was condemned as an organisation "whose administration is in the hands of boarding masters and which fails to inspire the respect of the labouring community" .
It was nevertheless accepted for a number of years by the Trades Union Congress, which admitted it as  an affiliated organisation until 1881, when it was declared ineligible.
Lind later admitted openly to being an official of the Shipping Federation which, he declared, had an entirely undeserved reputation for "union smashing" .
William Graffunder, an expatriate German and the promoter of an organisation in Cardiff which he registered as the Amalgamated Seamen's and Tradesmen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland in September 1890, likewise made no bones about its connection with the Shipping Federation in the supply of "free labour" , though he denied being its official.
In the climate of violence generated by the Federation neither his union, nor any other established with a similar purpose, seems to have remained in operation for more than two or three years.
Lind confessed in 1891 to the Royal Commission that"unfortunately the new unionism has swallowed up our members.
They were all treated as blacklegs".
Graffunder's Seamen's and Tradesmen's Union ceased to exist in August 1893 and others of like kind met a similar fate.
We know mostly of registered organisations.
Of these there were the International Federation of Stewards, Seamen and Firemen (1890-?), the National Independent Seamen's and Firemen's Association in Liverpool (1892–1895), the National Seamen's Protection and Benefit Society of Great Britain and Ireland in Cardiff (1903–1905) and the National Boarding Masters' and Seamen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland 1904–1907).
The International Federation and the National Independent have most interest in the present narrative, since Arthur Abbott was an official of the first and Jerome Hornsby managing secretary of the second.
Wilson claimed before the Royal Commission In 1892 that both unions were bogus and financed by the Shipping Federation, which they denied.
Of greater concern to Havelock Wilson and the NSFU was the appearance of rival organisations of an essentially bona fide character which enjoyed support either in a particular location or among particular classes of seamen.
Some of these splinter unions were also short lived.
A tiny Leith Marine Stokers' Union was formed in July 1893 but disappeared three years later "on grounds of scarcity of members" .
A breakaway by Liverpool members of the NSFU in 1899 to form a Mersey Firemen, Engineroom and Stokehold Workers' Union was more serious.
It claimed a membership of 3,500 in 1901, mostly among seamen working on ocean liners.
By 1902 its leaders were apparently on reasonably good terms with Wilson, but the breach was never completely healed and in 1903 it merged with James Sexton's National Union of Dock Labourers taking 750 members with it, mostly, it seems, seamen on river craft.
A similar breakaway led by David Clement, the South Shields secretary of Wilson's union from 1889 to 1901, produced another new organisation, the National Seamen's Federated Union with a nucleus of its membership drawn from NSFU north east coast branches.
Clement wrote a pamphlet giving his reasons for the split  and accusing Wilson of mismanagement, irresponsible militancy and the encouragement of foreign seamen into Britain, presumably because of his refusal to accept a rule which would debar them from membership.
Initially Clement claimed a membership of 1,000, but this was officially recorded as no more than 700, declining to 430 in 1902 before the union's dissolution in the following year.
Exactly how many rival organisations were established during this period we do not know.
Wilson claimed that at least 30 were promoted by the Shipping Federation alone.
Some, like the Scottish Sailors' and Firemen's Union, of which only a single item of evidence remains, appears to have had friendly relations with the National Sailors and Firemen.
Others became a very real danger.
Wilson's membership was always strongest among deck hands and weakest among catering staff and fishermen.
In order to make clear his claim to the organisation of all groups of seafarers, the title of the Sailors and Firemen was briefly changed in 1899 to"National Union of Sailors, Firemen, Fishermen, Cooks and Stewards' and special organising campaigns undertaken.
These were not successful in establishing any durable organisation for these separate interest groups.
Fishermen, who had their own local unions, defied national organisation until the emergence in 1919 of a sectional National Union of British Fishermen which three years later became a founder society of Bevin's Transport and General Workers' amalgamation.
Captain Edward Tupper made attempts to organise at various fishing ports from April 1910, and claimed a fishing membership of 5,000 for the NSFU in 1919 which appears not to have survived the post-war depression.
Except for a brief success for Wilson in London and Southampton, cooks and stewards seem to have been stimulated by his recruiting drive to set up their own organisation rather than to join the NSFU.
Cotter, Lewis and Shinwell
The early history of this development is obscure.
In 1905 there appeared in Cardiff an unregistered union noted by the Board of Trade as the "British Stewards, Cooks, Butchers and Bakers" which had three branches in 1907 and a membership of a little over 2,000.
This organisation then disappears from the records, but in 1912 we find a "Cooks and Stewards Society of British Cargo Steamers" claiming a membership of 2,619.
This organisation had a journal, The Cabin, which identified it as a union "to promote good feeling between the men and the owners" .
It was still in existence in 1914.
Whether the "British Stewards" and the "Cooks and Stewards' Society" were the same organisation operating under different titles is not clear.
But it seems that neither had any connection with a much more notable and wholly bona fide development, the National Union of Ships' Stewards, Cooks, Butchers and Bakers which appeared in Liverpool in 1909 under the  charismatic leadership of Joe Cotter, known as "Explosive Joe" , who, it has been claimed, had been fired by the Cunard Line for agitating against the influx of continental cooks and stewards on to British ships.
The story of his being sacked from Cunard for his trade union activities seems to be untrue.
The Marine Caterer for October 1911 records that "foreign labour having been introduced into Cunard, Mr Cotter, among others was put out of the Mauritania" and that in 1909 he asked the assistance of the Liverpool Trades Council to organise seagoing stewards.
Cotter seems to have enjoyed a fitfully co-operative relationship with Wilson until 1921, when the NSFU seceded from the National Transport Workers' Federation.
He then merged his organisation with the British Seafarers to form the Amalgamated Marine Workers' Union, enjoying a brief relationship with its leaders Lewis and Shinwell until 1925 when he abandoned them and threw in his lot with Wilson as an official of the NSFU.
His subsequent relations with Wilson are noted in Chapter 5 of this history.
Within a year Cotter's union was accepted by the Board of Trade as having more than 3,600 members and within two he was claiming 15,000, mostly in Liverpool but also in Southampton, though a more likely figure was about 9,000.
In 1912 he also established himself in London and Cardiff.
Cotter's erratic career had a close bearing upon the later history of the Sailors and Firemen.
So did that of Emanuel Shinwell, the son of a Jewish tailor of Polish origin, who had been born in London's East End, but whose family later settled in Glasgow.
In 1911 Shinwell, after varied experience in a number of industries, became through the good offices of the highly influential Glasgow Trades Council, of which he was vice-chairman, a voluntary official of Wilson's union, though he had no personal knowledge of seagoing or of the sea.
Shinwell, however, was formally offered, and accepted, the post of paid assistant to Albert French, whom Wilson had sent to Glasgow to be secretary of the Glasgow branch.
He almost immediately led a breakaway of members into a Scottish Sailors' and Firemen's Union at a wage of £pound2 a week and made common cause with Alderman "Tommy" Lewis, who had already led a similar breakaway in Southampton to form the British Seafarers' Union with which Shinwell's union merged.
The enmity which ensued between the NSFU and the Amalgamated Marine Workers continued until 1927 when Wilson finally forced the latter out of existence.
The complaints raised by Shinwell and Lewis in justification for their breakaways related mainly to Wilson's style of leadership and to his management of the union.
Lewis's branch resolved not to remit funds to London Head Office until a full investigation of its financial affairs had been carried out and, when this proposal was accepted and undertaken on behalf of the Executive Committee and reforms proposed and instituted, refused to accept these and severed its  connection with Wilson's organisation.
In this case the sequence of events is fully documented in a series of fifty letters between the parties which were subsequently published.
The story of Shinwell's defection is more difficult to establish with accuracy.
He himself later gave two reasons.
The first was that during the dispute of 14 June to 5 August 1911, Wilson undercut an agreement which he had made with the Clyde shipowners for a minimum of £pound5 10s a month by "temporarily patching up his bitter quarrel with the Shipping Federation and simultaneously accepting an all-round payment of £pound5 a month" which the shipowners were eventually forced to increase to the Glasgow level as standard.
This version of the story is almost certainly inaccurate since settlements during the strike were made, not nationally but port by port, at different rates, though this does not rule out some other contingent disagreement between Shinwell and Wilson.
Secondly Shinwell claimed that his local policy of organising shore workers as well as seamen was vetoed by Wilson and that this was a subject of an investigation from head office by Wilson's lieutenants Captain Tupper and Father Charles Hopkins which resulted in his dismissal and that of the branch committee.
An alternative version is that the visit of Tupper and Hopkins resulted from an accusation by Shinwell that French, the branch secretary, had misappropriated funds.
Shinwell regarded Tupper as a charlatan.
For Hopkins, "an old crony of Wilson's and a newcomer, a volunteer" sky pilot "who clad himself in semi-clerical, semi-nautical garb consisting of a discreet black habit with a seaman's jersey and a gold crucifix" , he evidently had nothing but contempt.
Shinwell's remarks did less than justice to both men who, in their own fashion, had a genuine concern for the welfare of seamen and their organisation.
In one sense Lewis and Shinwell were simply more aggravated and tougher manifestations of Wilson's old problem of selecting, or being free to select, the right people to develop and run the union's local organisation and of retaining control over their activities.
For their part it seems likely that his errors and omissions were welcomed by Lewis and Shinwell as an excuse for breaking away from a situation and a personality they disliked in order to establish their own unions in their own communities
Given the personalities involved and problems of handling union funds, conflicts of this kind were inevitable.
Shinwell had been heard to declare that "he held the seamen of the Clyde in the hollow of his hand" and that English ports were also dissatisfied with Wilson's autocratic methods and ready to break away if he did not tell them what he had done with their money.
Wilson's reputation for careless financial control haunted him everywhere.
On the Glasgow issue, however, Shinwell exaggerated his own influence.
The Scottish Seamen's Union, originally claimed to have 1,000 members, lost support so rapidly that it survived for no more than two months.
Merger with the  Southampton based British Seafarers was not merely a convenience, but a necessity, and Wilson, writing in his journal The Seaman exulted that "Shinwell's patched up old derelict has run bow against the rock of the Sailors' and Firemen's Union and ignominiously gone to the bottom" Later he gave his own version of how Shinwell had flattered the susceptible French into leaving to him the day-today business of the Glasgow branch and poisoned the minds of the members against him.
He had then sought to usurp him by demanding an EC inquiry into French's affairs and by getting himself, though contrary to Rule as a non-sailor, elected as Delegate to the 1911 Annual General Meeting with a demand that he should be made Glasgow secretary in French's place, only breaking away when he was not permitted to attend.
Wilson also had decided views on Tommy Lewis, "the man who almost destroyed the Great Seamen's Movement in 1911" .
Lewis, he concluded, had seen the money rolling into the Southampton branch as Wilson's efforts had brought negotiations with the employers in that port to a satisfactory conclusion.
£pound1, 000 had seemed to him a pretty sum on which to"have a union of his own, manipulated by himself, despite the fact that in refusing to hand over the money to Head Office, he was bringing great hardship to the men in other ports still on strike, and to their families.
There was confirmation from Cathery, not only that this was true, but that, in the absence of Wilson in America, everything possible had been done to meet the complaints of the Southampton Branch.
In a letter to Hopkins on the Southampton situation dated 10 August 1911, he wrote "all the reforms the Southampton people are asking for we discussed at the Executive Meeting before the strike took place and we were all agreed that certain alterations had to take place, but when women and children are starving in one port and there is money locked up in Southampton I think it is one of the most cruel tragedies imaginable" .
Cathery also added: "Lewis and Cannon (the branch secretary) came down to the Central Office and I let [them]see all the books, cheque book, bank passbook etc.; in fact all they wanted to see.
I also told them about the financial statement we had issued and afterwards received a letter asking if I would send on a financial statement, which I did".
The statement was, it seems, for the year 1909.
Wilson was much preoccupied by the need to keep the financial position of the union concealed from the shipowners.
The Southampton branch refused to send delegates to the Annual General Meeting at which its complaints were to be discussed and addressed a letter to the meeting in which the branch committee advised Southampton members to secede from the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union in order to establish a local and independent society.
The branch was left in no doubt that any breakaway would be boycotted by the trade union movement.
On 28  September 1911 Hermann Jochade, secretary of the International Transport Workers' Federation in a letter to its secretary Arthur Cannon expressed his surprise at the branch's actions, and noted"I have myself investigated the workings of the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union, as I have done with other unions connected with the International Transport Workers' Federation in Great Britain, and have pleasure in stating and testifying that the Seamen's Union is one of the best organised and conducted of all unions I have made enquiries into.
As secretary of the Federation, it will be my duty to report the facts to its Central Council and I shall, advise them that it will be their duty to issue an order to all Seamen's unions throughout the world and the dockers and other transport workers that they must refuse to recognise the members of any local union of seamen which may be established at the Port of Southampton or elsewhere.
I therefore trust that your Committee will seriously consider the action they propose to take."
But the die was already cast.
Drama on the Clyde
Invective flowed from the pens of all parties and violence from their partizans so long as the feud between the Sailors and Firemen and the Seafarers continued.
There were moments of high drama and even tragedy, all sensationally recorded in the journals of the protagonists, The Seaman and The British Seafarer.
Wilson had little choice but to take legal action to recover his union's funds and property from both Southampton and Glasgow, though without success.
An action begun in Glasgow for possession of the books, papers and effects was turned down on the grounds that the Sailors' and Firemen's Union was not registered in Scotland and that the complaint had therefore been raised "without title or authority" , though these effects were, claimed Shinwell, later handed over "for the sake of peace and quiet" .
Shinwell was publicly accused by Wilson of misappropriation of funds and "traitorously" passing these on to the Shipping Federation.
Shinwell sued, claiming also that Wilson had declared him unworthy of trust and unfit to hold office in a trade union.
He received £pound50 damages and costs, a total estimated at over £pound650.
The allegations and the outcome of the action were reported with glee in The British Seafarer but substantially unreported in The Seaman.
True drama erupted, however, in August 1913, when the much beleaguered NSFU Glasgow branch secretary, Albert French, was charged "that on 18 June 1913, in Clyde Place, Glasgow, he did discharge a magazine pistol loaded with ball cartridge at James Martin, sometime resident at 75, Finnieston Street, Glasgow, and now deceased, and did shoot him and murder him" .
The incident which gave rise to the charge is indicative of the high, and often explosive, tension which existed between the NSFU and  breakaway BSU men in Glasgow.
On 14 June 1913 the ss Columba was moored on the Clyde and manned by members of the BSU on whose behalf a claim had been submitted for a rise of 2s 6d a week.
The owners refused to pay, sacked the BSU members and engaged a new crew who were members of the NSFU, whereupon the BSU declared the ship black and picketed her on her return from Loch Fyne.
The NSFU found it necessary to escort its men from the vessel through the BSU pickets, with their branch secretary French at their head, while the BSU men, led by Shinwell, were determined not to let them pass.
In the general melee, French became separated from his members and was confronted by Shinwell who was surrounded by his own supporters.
He was subjected to threats and abuse and believing himself in danger of attack, drew a pistol in order to keep his opponents at a distance.
The safety catch was not applied, the pistol went off and James Martin was fatally wounded.
French maintained that he thought that the safety catch was on and that he had been struck a blow on the back of the head which had caused him to stagger and pull the trigger.
The jury accepted his version of events and he was acquitted.
He had evidently been in fear of his life and purchased the weapon for that reason, since he had already been attacked on two previous occasions.
Few punches were pulled in this war of the unions.
Each side claimed that the other employed thugs to intimidate it.
Shinwell believed to his dying day that it was he who had been the intended target of French's bullet.
From the transcript of the trial proceedings this seems to be unlikely, but no further testimony is now available to confirm or contradict the evidence.
Neither the seamen nor their leaders, Shinwell admitted, had heard of the Queensberry rules; "they had one common characteristic, a belief that toughness and a bellicose attitude were as good a rule of life as any and while many seamen were of a friendly disposition and hated trouble, some would attack from the rear and use a razor or a broken bottle" .
Wilson and the Shipowners
Most shipowners of the day had not, since the foundation of the Shipping Federation some two decades earlier, moved from the contention that it was an entirely defensive combination, devoted only to the principle of freedom of contract and to securing that those who accepted its ticket would work with other crew members, whether unionised or not.
It followed that any conflict in the industry was solely the result of mindless agitation and that the men were simply the dupes of their unscrupulous leaders.
Simple requests for such increases were the least of the shipowners' concerns, while on shipboard conditions there could be no cause for complaint because of the "army of government  officials who were there to keep them up to the mark" .
The problem lay in those who had been described by "counsel in a recent action as vile and dangerous incendiaries" .
 "The unrest of which we hear so much as a new disease exists chiefly in the minds of the agitators" , chief among whom was Havelock Wilson himself but also his associates, especially Edward Tupper, "a fraudulent imposter who, while pretending to be an enemy of Capital, was in reality a bankrupt company promoter" .
How could one be expected even to talk to such fellows, much less to enter into negotiation with them?
The bland self-satisfaction of the shipowners and their refusal to accept the need for reforms of any kind had been familiar enough to Samuel Plimsoll and other friends of the merchant seamen and exposed in the House of Commons for upwards of half a century.
Their hatred of Wilson and their determination to undermine him had become legendary and earned him support in unexpected places.
Some of those who believed that his first bankruptcy had been engineered by the Shipping Federation had come to his rescue at the eleventh hour.
They included parliamentary sympathisers of all parties.
The second bankruptcy proceedings brought against him, in I906, were instituted by a man named Scott, claimed by Wilson to be a Shipping Federation official, He was again saved by his parliamentary friends and trade union allies in an indemnity committee which found that the debts which were alleged were in no way personal.
In a third serving of a bankruptcy notice in 1911, Wilson claimed not only that the Federation had inspired the plaintiff, a seaman called Nielsen, to take the action, but that they had moved the plaintiff from place to place so that he could not be found, making it impossible to discharge the union's debt to him.
For the most part other trade union leaders of the day accepted that the Federation was an active agent in stirring up trouble for Wilson.
 "With the aid of clever lawyers" , wrote Tom Mann in his memoirs, "the shipowners did their best to make Havelock Wilson a bankrupt" .
Indeed, he added, "in the whole history of the trade union movement in Britain there is no case of such systematic and venomous persecution as that to which Wilson was subjected by the shipowners of this country" .
Others, although sympathetic, were hard put to explain his lack of caution in pursuing hopeless cases through the courts and providing the Federation with such ample material with which to plot his downfall.
Intrigue and treachery, especially from former officials, were advertised in public as besetting him from all sides.
To Abbott and Hornsby were added the names of Captain Lawrence, with whom Wilson had been associated in the formation of the Certificated Officers' Union, Maurice Darby, the originator of the first Glasgow branch who was alleged to have gone over to the Shipping Federation in 1890, Robert Pleasance, former secretary of the Tower Hill branch who had been expelled from the union in the same year, and a  Thomas Carey, an official of the NSFU discharged for unsatisfactory conduct in 1911 who, Wilson claimed, immediately became involved with the Federation and, while still in its pay, assisted Lewis in setting up the British Seafarers' Union.
Shinwell, of course, had little patience with such assertions, though he later conceded that running the finances of the Sailors and Firemen was far from easy.
James Sexton, a more sympathetic observer, admitted both rashness and an element of farce.
In his "titanic struggle with the Shipping Federation, Wilson was utterly reckless in his statements, with the result that writs for libel were showered upon him and often we helped him escape being served with those most unpleasing documents by giving him a" leg up "over the backyard wall" .
In this respect Wilson seems to have learned nothing from the earlier failure of the NAS&FU.
Legal charges against the reconstituted union formed an even greater part of its expenses than before, though some of these were due, not to the process of charge and counter charge involving the Federation, but to test cases brought by the union on the application of the Merchant Shipping Acts.
The weakness of the union was evident during this period for all to see.
There were some minor successes in cases of illegal imprisonment of seamen, standards of accommodation for lascars and compensation for sickness and injury, but for the most part the Shipping Federation reigned supreme, "by turns supercilious and vindictive" , providing ample funds for blackleg labour and even, during the parliamentary session of 1906 during which the Merchant Shipping Bill was being considered "turning a corner of the Committee Room into a private bureau of their own from whence they assiduously prompted and coached those shipowners in the Committee who were hostile to Mr. Lloyd George's proposals" .
The confidence of the Federation was well founded in its victories over the union, in its membership and in its resources.
In 1905 its general manager and Wilson's arch opponent, Cuthbert Laws, could claim thirty-six operational registry offices at the principal ports of the kingdom, a capacity to move free labour anywhere as required, equipment and stores to maintain 5,000 men, nine-tenths of UK seagoing tonnage in membership and an invested capital of almost £200 mn.
Outside the political arena, where the spirit of Samuel Plimsoll could from time to time be induced to prevail, Wilson could claim few successes.
Wage Rates and Foreign Seamen
In 1894, the year of the reconstituted Sailors' and Firemen's Union, monthly rates for ABs on steam vessels were lower than at any time since 1888.
Except on North America voyages, and despite falling unemployment and rising real wages in the country as a whole, seamen's wages rose little for some years.
In part this was due to the  weakness of the unions and the strength of the Federation.
Small groups of men at Bristol or Glasgow might succeed in obtaining advances in wages; more often than not their efforts were countered by the employers and it was noted by the Board of Trade that disputes ended when "crews were obtained elsewhere" or "seamen were replaced by others at a reduced rate" .
 "Until foreign wages are the same as British wages, any extra demands on British employers mean loss of trade" .
In 1899, supported by the outbreak of the Boer War and the boom which followed, the situation looked more promising and Wilson made an effort to go on to the offensive, addressing a circular to leading shipowners asking for a conference to consider four points: a uniform rate of wages for vessels engaged in similar trades; the supply of articles of agreement some time before men actually signed on; the establishment of a manning scale, and the improvement of the provisioning of merchant vessels.
The circular was ignored and Wilson demanded a uniform £pound6 minimum monthly rate for sailors and firemen on steamships and a £pound4 minimum for ABs on sailing ships, threatening a national strike if the demand was not met.
In sixteen ports employers bought themselves out of trouble with increases for 2,500 seamen of between 5s and 15s a month, but few men came out in support of the national rate except at Liverpool and on the Tyne and the employers then mounted a counter attack, enforcing decreases of equivalent amounts on the north east coast and in Cardiff, Glasgow and Liverpool between October 1899 and January 1900, using strike-breaking tactics where necessary.
In the early 1900s Wilson made sporadic efforts to recruit and raise the level of seamen's wages, port by port.
But the union was too weak and the employers too powerful for much to be achieved.
While seamen's wages increased on average between 1896 and 1910 by between 7% and 8%, money wages of workers in general increased by about 1 0%.
The public impression was that seamen had become substantially worse off during a period in which real wages fell by at least 4%.
In 1911, the nation's leading economic journal noted: "the money wages of seamen in many ports have not altered for twenty or thirty years.
Wages in other industries have meantime risen steadily".
Whatever the truth may be, it seems certain that for the decade 1900 to 1910 the Sailors' and Firemen's Union had little impact upon the living standards of its members on British ships.
It may have been a consciousness of the inevitability of stalemate or gradual decline on the wages front at home which led Wilson to divert much of his attention the international scene.
International Organisation
Following his experience of the 1880s, Wilson's initial approach to the problem of foreign seamen was to regard them as a danger to his  union, both in providing cheap labour and in posing a threat to its policy of restricting the manning of ships to its own members.
Entrance fees to foreigners with less than two years service on British ships were in 1889 set at £pound20 with the obvious intention of making the cost of membership prohibitive.
As the Shipping Federation got into gear in supplying "free labour" , the emphasis quickly changed to encouraging rather than discouraging foreign seamen recruitment and entrance fees were reduced.
By 1891 Wilson claimed 20,000 foreign members, a figure which, if accurate, was remarkable indeed.
Such a number represented about one-half of the NAS&FU's likely membership at the time and some two-thirds of all the foreigners sailing on British ships.
Wilson's claim in 1902 that 40 per cent of NFSU members were foreign was illustrative of his conviction that only by protecting foreigners could he also protect British nationals.
To this he added a determination that existing regulations which restricted the number and quality of foreign seamen employed on British ships should he enforced and strengthened, drawing attention to the abuse whereby shipowners discharged British seamen at foreign ports and hired cheaper foreign crews to replace them and to the need to repeal the Indian Merchant Shipping Act which permitted owners to employ lascars on worse terms than British seamen.
His approach had become a severely practical one.
 "There was once upon a time" , he declared in 1901,"when I was foolish enough to believe that the foreigners were the great curse of the British seamen.
I have got past that stage many, many years ago, and I believe that a foreigner has equally as much right to live in the world as a Britisher.
The only point is that I want that foreigner not to undersell my labour and I want him to be as competent to do the work as well as I would do it myself.
Such a policy implied that it would be advantageous to the British seaman for foreigners also to become organised.
Such thoughts dated from the support given in 1889 to the Danish seamen's strike.
"We recognised the importance of bringing the wages of foreign seamen on an equality with our own, as that would be a direct encouragement for the foreign sailor to remain on his own country's ships.
It will also enable the British shipowner to compete more favourably with his foreign rivals as it is evident that if the English shipowner pays £pound4.15s a month whereas the foreign shipowners for the same class of labour pays only £pound2.10s a month, he must be better able to compete and members must therefore recognise the importance of the International Movement".
Encouraged by an invitation from some Dutch seamen, the NAS&FU began in 1890 to open branches in foreign ports, partly to recruit foreign seamen engaged on British ships and partly to represent British seamen discharged abroad.
In the Annual Report for that year such branches were reported at Aarhus and Copenhagen in Denmark, Bremerhaven and Hamburg in Germany, Christiana in Norway, Gothenburg, and Malmo in Sweden, and  Rotterdam in Holland.
In the following year Malta and Constantinople were added to the number.
Wilson recognised the problems, admitting that though the list might be impressive, very little real progress had been made.
"There are great difficulties in the way.
The laws of the continental countries are despotic in their character and press severely on the workers.
In Germany we have had great difficulties in opening branches as our representatives are threatened with expulsion and in Denmark one of our organisers was actually expelled by an order of the Secretary of State of that country".
The International Transport Workers' Federation
All foreign branches seem to have been closed for financial reasons in 1891–1892, but Wilson, after the refloating of the union in 1894, persisted in his international endeavours, establishing new branches in Hamburg, Rotterdam and Antwerp in the following year and an agency in New York, and accepting the logic of the shipowners' often repeated argument that British claims to higher pay would be more convincing if foreign rates were brought up to British levels.
It was this challenge which seems to have led him in 1896 to call a meeting in Bride Street, London, of a few carefully chosen colleagues which resulted in the establishment of the International Federation of Ship, Dock and River Workers which was renamed in 1898 the International Transport Workers' Federation.
Present at the Bride Street meeting were Wilson, Tom Mann, Ben Tillett and Charles Lindley, a former sailor out of Sunderland and familiar of Havelock Wilson and his family who was at that time attempting to organise seamen in Sweden.
The objects of the new organisation were, in line with Wilson's thinking, essentially practical.
It was to work for the complete organisation of all ship, dock and river workers in order to raise their wages and improve their working conditions.
It also aimed to "establish, so far as may be possible, a uniform rate of pay for the same class of worker in all ports and to establish a recognised working day and other regulations in the ports of the world" .
"Shipowners and other firms connected with port work had repeatedly complained that the men in British ports were enforcing claims altogether in excess of what was paid for similar work in continental ports.
There was some truth in this and the dockers and seamen were endeavouring, by extending organisation, to level matters.
For Tom Mann, who became the ITF's first president, the organisation came to have an additional aim with which Wilson had little sympathy — that of advancing the cause of international socialism.
Its initial tasks, however, were to ensure that the pioneering work already carried out by the NAS&FU in organising continental  branches was consolidated into indigenous unions and to develop European solidarity to a point at which common strike action would be feasible.
Mann considered these objective to be so important that in January 1897 he gave up the secretaryship of the Independent Labour Party which he had held since 1894 to devote himself to the continental agitation, especially in Rotterdam, Antwerp and Hamburg, which had been started in the previous year.
At that time, of course, there were no passport or visa requirements, though the authorities were inclined to be uncooperative.
The original forays of Mann and Wilson into Rotterdam and Antwerp achieved much organisation but alerted the Belgian authorities to the situation.
ITF delegates were arrested on landing at Antwerp, among them Ben Tillett, who was put in gaol in far from comfortable conditions.
Mann, though in possession of an official permit to hold meetings on trade unionism in Hamburg, was nevertheless put on a boat back to England; on returning six weeks later, he was again expelled and various activists served short periods in prison.
Nevertheless the movement made progress and was extended to France, Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and later to Spain.
International trade unionism was a difficult road to travel, both in principle and in practice.
How much power should the central authority of the ITF possess in deciding the tactics of individual countries?
How was the growing movement of "free labour" between countries to be controlled?
Having complained for many years about blacklegs from the continent, Wilson and his colleagues found themselves, in the early 1900s faced by a reverse flow, foreign agents, assisted in some cases by the Shipping Federation, recruiting British workers to break dock strikes in Antwerp in 1906 and 1908, a seamen's strike in Hamburg in 1906 and a Swedish miners' and dockers' strike in Sweden in 1908.
Such a flow proved to be uncontrollable by either trade union or parliamentary action.
By 1907 ITF activity was regarded by the shipowners as sufficiently serious to justify the setting up of an International Shipping Federation "to combat the growing forces of socialism and aggressive trade unionism" , but in reality it had made little progress in establishing international standards and the British market for seamen was still being substantially undercut by lower rates of pay of foreign labour.
Showdown with the Shipowners: The Strike of 1911
It seems clear that at some point during this period Wilson determined to precipitate a showdown with the shipowners.
He opened his campaign in the United States in 1909, addressing meetings of seamen in New York, Philadelphia, New Orleans and along the Great Lakes.
In part his object, especially in New York, was to recruit seamen from British ships into the union, a device which Joe Cotter, for one, regarded with admiration since as a result membership of the NSFU  "went up by leaps and bounds" But he was also testing out the reaction of the men to the notion of an international strike, a theme he pursued at dozens of meetings in the United Kingdom in the following year, thirty such meetings being held in London alone.
Resolutions calling for an international strike were passed unanimously at every meeting and there was similar enthusiasm in Liverpool, Cardiff, Glasgow, Belfast, Hull, the north east coast and from mass meetings in Antwerp, Dunkerque, Amsterdam, in Denmark and in Norway, all addressed by a team of NSFU speakers, including Wilson, Cathery and Hopkins.
Wives and mothers of British seamen were reported as incensed, not only by the low pay of their menfolk, but also by the medical examination to which they were subjected on signing on, "mauled about and handled as though they were a piece of New Zealand mutton" .
In the first edition of a new series of the monthly journal, The Seaman, the union claimed that over 150,000 seamen of all nationalities had, during the previous twelve months, voted unanimously for international action "on the same day and at the same hour, until their unions receive proper recognition, establish the right of collective bargaining and uniform rates of wages and conditions of labour on all ships" .
The Shipping Federation appears not to have been unduly alarmed by the possibility of international action.
While it was aware of the threat of a general strike of seamen in May 1911, it saw little support for this outside the United Kingdom and the United States, where Andrew Furuseth, president of the International Seamen's Union and a close ally of Wilson's, had taken a leading part in the agitation for an international dispute.
As for the UK situation, the Shipping Federation had plenty of free labour, while the union had no funds and would think itself fortunate if it could keep the men out for a week or two.
Where the claim which the Sailors and Firemen had made to shipowners in the previous July was concerned, Havelock Wilson already knew the Federation's response.
It was not prepared to make any concession at all.
There could be no negotiations with an unrepresentative body like the Sailors' Union.
The claim was for a conciliation board, a national minimum rate of wages, a manning scale for stokehold, deck and galley, the abolition of medical examinations by a doctors privately appointed by the Shipping Federation offices, the right of seamen to a portion of their wages while in port and to have a representative present while signing on, the fixing of working hours and overtime rates and improved forecastle accommodation.
On 28 July 1920 one hundred members of parliament, together with union officials, had met as a deputation to the president of the Board of Trade to enlist his help on the conciliation board aspect of the claim.
This had been forthcoming, but the Executive Council of the Shipping Federation had been unable to entertain the proposal from an  organisation to which, it claimed, not more than one per cent of seamen belonged.
The Shipping Federation was well informed on everything but the date of the proposed strike, which was set for I4 June 1911.
How and why this particular date was set and by whom is by no means clear.
In 1910, Tom Mann came back from Australia, where he had been engaged in political and trade union campaigning for the previous nine years.
On his return he made common cause with Ben Tillett and others to establish a National Transport Workers' Federation which had its first conference on 1 June 1911.
Almost certainly it took no decision that the seamen should strike two weeks later.
Most likely the decision came from Wilson himself though it was also claimed by Joe Cotter.
After public meetings in London, Cardiff Bristol, Southampton, Hull, Glasgow, Grimsby, Dublin and Manchester, flags were issued by the union bearing the inscription: War Is Now Declared: Seamen Strike Hard and Strike for Liberty on 14th June 1911.
Some seven days before the due date a decision was taken by the National Transport Workers' Federation not to take part.
Wilson was almost on his own, confidently predicting the success of a strike in which the leaders of few other unions believed.
Robert Williams, later General Secretary of the ITF, regarded it as "a gambler's last chance" .
It was far from easy to predict that the seamen would repeat the role which they had assumed in I887 as the prime movers in a wave of industrial unrest almost as notable in labour history as the period encompassing the Great London Dock Strike and the three years that followed.
Harry Gosling, secretary of the Lightermen and president of the NTWF, looking back some 15 years after the event, had no doubt however: "It was J.Havelock Wilson who actually set fire to the heather.
The blaze spread quickly.
At one moment we were all saying more or less volubly that he could not possibly succeed; the next we found ourselves travelling along behind him".
In Southampton seamen aboard the Olympic jumped the gun by walking off the liner on 9 June following a stoppage by coal bunkerers and trimmers working on the same ship some days earlier.
Cotter and Mann, having resolved to announce the stoppage in Liverpool at 8 p.m.on the 14th., found their hand forced by the men on the Empress of Britain who walked off at midday, compelling them to "go along the Dock Road at dinner time giving the signal and proclaiming the strike" .
The movement moved round the ports of Britain like wildfire and at each, beginning with Southampton, the owners made concessions which served to encourage the strikers elsewhere and weaken the determination of the employers.
To almost everybody's surprise, dockers began everywhere to come out in sympathy.
On 16 June, Goole, Glasgow, the rest of Southampton and Newcastle were affected; on the 19th, Hull: on the 20th, Liverpool and Manchester, most of them in a reasonably peaceful manner.
Liverpool and Cardiff  were notable exceptions.
In Liverpool the tensions generated resulted in the deployment of extra imported police who, at a demonstration on 13 August, charged the crowd on what became known as "Bloody Sunday" an incident which is remembered to this day.
Wilson, Mann and Tupper were all present.
The former was escorted to safety in the North Western Hotel; the latter ran for it into another hotel, The Stork.
"Mounted troops pursued some of the crowd through Christian Street and the women threw from the windows all they could lay hands on.
Crazed with battle, they lighted fires in the streets.
It was mad! mad"!
Cardiff was the first port to which Tupper was temporarily assigned in May 1911 as Havelock Wilson's roving representative "to begin the campaign which was to end in the big strike" .
Whatever the views of Shinwell and others about the lies which he had told about his previous career, he was evidently unsurpassed as a demagogue and agitator.
No trick, as he gleefully recounted himself was too low or devious to ensure the required result, though he might boast of being the "King of the Bristol Channel" .
But he was far from the political revolutionary which many observers thought him to be and as adapt at cooling the passions of the men as he was at arousing them.
Above all he had conceived a mission to "clean up Cardiff" by "fighting The System" by which the "slimily cunning oddments of humanity" , the boarding house keepers, the cafe owners, the Red Lamp proprietors, even the laundrymen, battened on the sailors and their families The Achilles Heel of "The System" was, he concluded, the Chinese element in the port, especially when Chinese seamen were brought in from outside and used as blacklegs by the employers.
Rumours were put about during the strike that shipowners were threatening to import Chinese labour to man their vessels.
Condemnation in public meetings was followed by further rumour that the notorious Lady Jocelyn was being filled by strike breaking Chinese.
Local youths wrecked all but one of the town's Chinese laundries and a "bit of a riot" ensued which led to Tupper's arrest for disturbing the peace.
He was acquitted, but not before the dockers and other waterfront workers had entered the dispute in support of the seamen and victory over the employers had been won.
Faced by such determination and by the solidarity shown by workers in the ports of the entire kingdom, the National Transport Workers' Federation sloughed off its doubts at a conference on 28 June and swung in behind Wilson and Cotter.
Within two weeks of unprecedented activity, even the ill organised London dockers had achieved a major victory on recognition and wages and conditions.
In total, between 3 June 1911 and the end of that year 270,000 workers concerned with docks and shipping were estimated to have been directly involved in disputes, of which a substantial proportion were seamen.
Even Ben Tillett, who was seldom known to  praise, or even to acknowledge, the work of Havelock Wilson, felt obliged to comment on his "energetic service given to the movement" .
So far as the seamen were concerned, the impossible had been achieved.
Within the two weeks confidently predicted by Havelock Wilson company after company and local shipowner association after association made its peace with advances in wages and on 28 June some 100 shipowners met in London and decided, among other things, on the standardisation of the local rates which were accepted over the next few days.
Recognition for collective bargaining was quite a different question.
In Liverpool, all seafarers — seamen, firemen, donkeymen, greasers and similar grades who were the backbone of the NSFU and catering staff and shore gangs who were joining Cotter's union — received 105 a week increase, abolition of the medical examination and the right to wear the button of the appropriate recognised union.
They gained also the establishment of a Joint Committee, the consequence of the attitudes of a new type of employer of the calibre of Sir Alfred Booth and Lawrence Holt.
The Cardiff agreement of 22 July 1911 contained the even more specific statement "that the signing of this agreement shall constitute recognition of the National Sailors and Firemen's Union of Great Britain and Ireland" .
But many shipowners and the Federation itself remained bitterly opposed.
In an effort to expedite the recognition issue, the secretary of the  Teesside branch of the NSFU had while the dispute was still at its height, been instructed to raise the question with the North of England Steamship Owners, the association with which the union had the closest informal relations.
The response was conventional.
There could be no dealings with an unregistered union.
Whereupon, records the historian of the Shipping Federation, "Havelock Wilson paid a visit to the Tyne and announced publicly that if" the Association was prepared to recognise the union he would register it forthwith".
He also reminded the Association that the registration procedure would take time and invited it to nominate three north country shipowners to visit the London head office of the union, inspect all books and documents relating to membership and funds in order to satisfy themselves that it was a bona fide organisation.
This was done.
The committee eschewed comment on the administration of the union, but concluded that the nucleus of a bona fide organisation existed and recommended recognition, subject to the union being registered.
This report was accepted by the Tyne District and considered at a meeting of the Executive Council of the Shipping Federation on 17 November 1911, where the views of the North of England Association carried the day and it was resolved "that the recognition of the Seamen's Union should be based upon freedom of contract and the employment of union and/or non-union seamen and firemen, free from interference of one  with the other" .
In the meantime the NSFU had been accepted as a registered trade union by the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies in the previous October.
In a formal sense at least, the long period in the wilderness was over.
THE WAR AND THE NATIONAL MARITIME BOARD
 "The fight in 1911 was started by Havelock Wilson, who afterwards became and continued to be until the day of his death, the very model of an industrial peacemaker" .
James Sexton, Sir James Sexton: Agitator, Faber and Faber, 1936
"This same Mr. Wilson is now a very distinguished gentleman.
He is now J.Havelock Wilson, CBE.
He has no stern fights with the Shipping Federation now.
His fights are with the Russian Democracy and the British Labour Party".
Martin Eden, Saviours of the Empire, Reformers' Bookstall, Glasgow,[1919?]
The Aftermath of 1911
No-one understood more clearly in November 1911 than Havelock Wilson that although the strike victory of that year represented a major gain to the union, the Shipping Federation's abandonment of "the Ticket" was a reluctant one and that his battle against the managerial prerogatives claimed by the shipowners in manning their vessels and paying their crews was far from over.
From the very beginning of his career as a trade union official he had envisaged that the ideal situation would be one in which neither employer nor union attempted to dominate the employment situation, but in which both sides met on a conciliation board and jointly regulated the terms and conditions under which seamen followed their vocation and perhaps even the rates at which freight and passengers were transported.
For a man born in the north-east, where the tradition and practice of the  joint board was strong, such sentiments were hardly surprising, though they were usually received by shipowners either with amusement at their naivety or with anger at their effrontery.
Wilson nevertheless persisted, asserting his belief that mutual aggression was not the answer.
"My aim was to secure collective bargaining between employees' and employers' representatives and for this both strong union and strong employer organisations were necessary.
Wilson's formal proposal in 1910 for a conciliation board for the shipping industry had been no idle gesture.
It had substantial parliamentary support as the deputation of 28th July showed.
Moreover it had been enthusiastically received by the President of the Board of Trade, Mr Sydney Buxton, on whose friendship and support Wilson believed that he could rely.
Buxton was not a man to be deterred by the shipowners' protestations that the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union was not only unrepresentative of seamen but would fail "to command support in the event of a decision of a conciliation board which did not secure the immediate approval of the persons affected" .
The employers were told in no uncertain terms that "when a favourable opportunity presented itself, he would" submit his proposition anew".
Against this background the terms of settlement of the 1911 strike indicated no more than a truce in the battle for the control of the supply of labour in the industry.
There was no guarantee that it would lead to a new deal for the industry nor that, even as a compromise, it would hold against the tensions of a situation in which one side at least seemed determined to continue on a collision course.
Looking back it may appear surprising that the militancy of the seamen in 1911 had compelled the Federation to alter its stance at all, so impregnable had its position appeared to be.
One factor was certainly the speed and comprehensiveness with which the withdrawal of labour developed.
Wilson had for some time claimed to the International Transport Workers' Federation that the Shipping Federation would crumble if the fight could be carried to every port at one and the same time.
He was proved right.
The employers and their allies confessed to having been overwhelmed.
Could it also have been that the extent of available free labour resources had been exaggerated?
There had been no major showdown for 20 years.
William Ellis, a former agent of the Free Labour Association, contested the truth of statements made by William Collison, "The Apostle of Free Labour" , both on the number of workmen available for strike breaking and on the number of "pitched battles with aggressive trade unions" which the Association had fought.
The machinery of employer reaction may have been rustier than it seemed to be.
Even more important, governmental attitudes had changed.
These now favoured partnership rather than hostility between capital and labour.
Lloyd George, President of the Board of Trade from 1906 to 1908 had shown much sympathy for trade unions faced by intransigent employers; his  immediate successor, Winston Churchill, was more ambivalent but, even Tillett conceded, "patient, courteous and at pains to try to resolve problems" .
Collison noted the change with alarm and some disgust.
 "In my Opinion there can be no doubt that the chief underlying cause of the serious and widespread unrest lies in the fact that the strikers believed that they had the sympathy of the government" .
As a practical expression of this sympathy "the Port of London Authority at once conceded the demands of the strikers, and absolutely refused to give any facilities for housing, feeding and protecting the Free Labourers inside the Docks in the exercise of their right to continue at their work" .
Systematic strike breaking in Britain was not at an end.
It had greater success in the year 1912 which followed, but the writing was on the wall.
A major strike breaking phase in industrial relations history was for practical purposes almost over.
1912 was also a year in which Havelock Wilson implemented a fateful decision by his union not to support a repetition of the strategy of a national stoppage which had served him and the transport unions so well twelve months earlier.
All in all, it was still impossible to predict that, within six years of the 1911 national transport stoppage, Wilson's vision of a joint union-Shipping Federation board would be imposed on the industry and that within nine years it would have been accepted voluntarily by the Federation as the normal and accepted method of conducting business with Wilson and his colleagues.
But the process of change, when seriously embarked upon, was indeed swift.
This was in part the result of the great European war which broke out in 1914.
In part it was a consequence of the determination of Liberal politicians to encourage trade unionism and the development of machinery for the joint and peaceful resolution of industrial disputes.
Shipowners were eventually compelled to concede to the force of circumstances what they had been unwilling to concede either to reason or to industrial muscle.
By 1920, in the establishment of the peacetime National Maritime Board, Wilson had achieved everything which he had ever expected or desired in the building of relationships with the employers.
His object attained, the remaining nine years of his life brought to a head many problems between himself and the labour movement which had been latent since his first incursion into a very different labour scene in 1887.
Wilson and the National Transport Strike 1912
January 1912 opened with a proposal by Wilson to the Shipping Federation that there should be a joint conference with the union in the following March.
In an interview with the press he seemed prepared to allow the employers time to see the logic of the situation but added a threat of sanctions to come.
"When we have exhausted all means of diplomacy, the Executive Committee will fix a date when the  seaman will take a vacation.
If no settlement is reached the shipowners will be faced with the same difficulties that confronted them in 1911".
Wilson's initiative was rejected.
For the moment there was no follow up.
He and his wife were about to undertake a trip to America and Australia, which in the event developed into something of a busman's holiday as he was persuaded, perhaps not against his will, to address numerous meetings of trade unionists on the West Coast of the United States and elsewhere.
He had become a celebrity.
Public attention had become difficult to avoid but both he and Mrs Wilson were badly in need of rest.
Incessant organising and campaigning over a quarter of a century of turbulent activity had taken their toll.
During the run up to the 1911 strike Wilson had been advised by his doctors to take three months rest but had been determined to "remain on the bridge and direct the fight" .
From the previous year he had been so badly affected by osteoarthritis that his mobility had become very restricted.
On his return in July 1912 he found his membership once more embroiled in a stoppage.
The port was London, where the seamen had come out in sympathy with the dockers.
Of even greater concern, a national transport strike had been declared and there were demands upon the union to give it support.
The story was a complex one.
The London dockers were restless.
 "There exists today" , admitted Ben Tillett,"a tendency for the men to down tools at what they deem justifiable provocation.
While we admire this spirit of revolt, it is not always actuated by wisdom".
The agreements struck after the stoppage of the previous year had left many loose ends which were causing trouble among stevedores, carters and lightermen.
Eventually an issue affecting the latter brought matters to a head.
An elderly man named John Thomas, who was still a member of the Association of Foremen Lightermen but who had not worked in that capacity for some two years and who was now a watchman, was approached to join Harry Gosling's Amalgamated Society of Watermen, Lightermen and Watchmen of the River Thames.
He refused.
The men working with him then walked out and demanded that the firm concerned, the Mercantile Lighterage Company, should order him to join.
The company also demurred.
The matter was then reported to the Association of Master Lightermen and Barge Owners which arranged for other firms to do the work.
Trade union members in these companies then blacked it.
They were discharged by their employers and the dispute spread, the union alleging that its agreement with the Association of 19 August 1911 provided that only foremen were exempted from holding a Transport Workers' Federation card, which the employers denied.
By 23 May the Federation had called for a complete stoppage of all port transport workers in London and on the river Medway, including, of course, seamen.
Maintaining some 4,000 of its London members on strike at the cost of about £1,000 a week constituted a serious drain upon the NSFU's  slender resources.
By early June the failure of an inquiry by Sir Edward Clark and of a group of ministers headed by Lloyd George to persuade the employers to agree to recognise the Federation and to negotiate with it on a joint board, began to bring nearer the prospect that the Transport Workers' Federation National Executive would implement a recommendation by its Annual Conference that unless the joint board proposal was accepted a national strike would be declared.
On 7 June an emergency meeting of the NSFU Executive was held at which Father Charles Hopkins, standing in for the absent Havelock Wilson, pointed out the disastrous financial effects which participation in such a stoppage might have on the union and the peril in which it might stand in respect of its hard won provincial settlements.
The Executive resolved that the Transport Workers' Federation should be informed that a national strike "would be detrimental to all concerned" , but that if such a call was made the union would hold a ballot before striking.
The call went out from a meeting of the National Transport Workers' Federation Executive on 10 June, Edmund Cathery, in Wilson's continued absence, declaring that his union would not be bound by it.
An NSFU ballot was held, giving a majority of 3,678 to 2,137 against a national strike.
Nothing daunted, Havelock Wilson, having just returned from his foreign travels, accompanied by Tom Mann, recently released from gaol following a term of imprisonment for inciting troops to mutiny, set off to visit four or five provincial ports, not only to appeal for funds for the London men, but also to persuade workers at these ports to join in and make the strike a national one.
More than goodwill was involved, for, outside London, some two-thirds of the Federation's affiliated membership was in two unions, Wilson's NSFU and Sexton's Liverpool based National Union of Dock Labourers.
Wilson progressed no further than Hull.
Within days he was back in London, reporting to his Executive that the strike was hopeless and that the members should be got back to work.
A minority of ports had responded to the NTWF strike call, mostly Tillett's own members at Manchester, Southampton, Swansea and Bristol.
Even these returned to work within a few days.
Most workers, including those at Liverpool, seemed to be reasonably well satisfied with the settlements arrived at in 1911.
At a public meeting in Barking Town Hall Wilson repeated the message to a wider audience, advising all the strikers in London to return to work, denouncing a prayer offered up on Tower Hill by the fiery Ben Tillett for the death of Lord Devonport, the Chairman of the Port of London Authority, assuring the men present that a just settlement could be achieved and declaring his intention of ordering his 4,000 London members back to their jobs.
Sir George Askwith, the Board of Trade's Chief Industrial Commissioner, quickly persuaded Devonport to meet Harry Gosling and Harry Orbell, an influential  official of the London Dockers, who were representative of both the executive of the Transport Workers' Federation and the workers' side of the Port of London Authority and to assure them that existing agreements would be maintained.
By 23 July 19,000 men were back at work and on 27 July the strike committee ordered an immediate resumption.
There is no doubt that in his appraisal of the provincial situation in 1912, Wilson was right.
1n 1911 the ports had been prepared by a period of intensive propaganda for strike action and a "spontaneous" movement for a withdrawal of labour had followed.
In 1912 there had been no such preparation, merely a demand for solidarity which seemed unlikely to succeed.
At Hull a mass meeting had voted unanimously for caution: "for a national strike if necessary, after ports consulted and a conference called to decide" .
No sense of urgency or enthusiasm here, just as there had been no promise of support in the seamen's ballot of the previous June.
While any possibility of support from the provincial men might have had quickly evaporated, the resolution of the Port of London Authority and its allies had become stronger than ever.
There was no hesitation in the use of free labour and no inclination to make concessions of any kind.
The unions could not control blacklegs over the length of the Thames and their funds were running out.
Tillett was convinced that despite its attempts to mediate, the government had been helping the employers.
 "The strike" , he claimed, "revealed that Churchill had prepared to organise transport with the aid of military police, and naval ratings" .
In the Liberal cabinet the majority was against allowing the PLA and Lord Devonport to be coerced by the Transport Workers Federation into a settlement; Lloyd George and Haldane would have preferred a minimum wage for all dock workers and disliked Devonport's intransigence, but were outvoted.
The situation might or might not have been different had other ports come out resolutely in favour of the London men.
At best it seems, a national strike would have developed into a bitter war of attrition which the unions, with their meagre resources, could only have lost.
Trade union post mortems are not always notable for their unanimity.
The leaders of the unions on strike reacted in different ways.
Gosling and Tillett appear to have wanted to limit the strike to London, though on tactics the latter blew, hot and cold.
Gosling was inclined to be philosophical at the strike's failure, simply regarding it as "a fiasco which showed with brutal clearness how weak our young organisation still was" .
Tillett was, predictably, less resigned, accusing Wilson and Sexton, who had also been unwilling to commit his Liverpool Dockers to the strike, of a "failure to respect authority or discipline" .
No trade union leader seems to have been very confident that a national stoppage would be a success.
Characteristically, Tupper was devastated by failure, both for himself and his employer.
 "It was  one of my bitterest hours to see our leader, only just home, having to throw up the sponge in front of the men he lived for" .
In the provinces, the fiasco left scarcely a ripple.
In 1913 the membership of the Dock, Wharf Riverside and General Labourers Union rose from 40,000 to 48,000, the Sailors and Firemen from 71,000 to almost 83,000 and the Dock Labourers from 44,000 to 52,000; only the smaller London societies lost, and then by comparatively low numbers.
Nevertheless in London the abortive strike was accompanied by great bitterness, much of it directed at Wilson who had been bold enough to speak the unpalatable truth in difficult circumstances.
There was indeed, much hardship on the London docks, especially among the older employees formerly in permanent employment who lost their jobs and pensions by striking and who were now reduced to the status of casual labourers.
 "Scores of men are in a worse plight than they have been for thirty-seven years past" , admitted Harry Orbell,"The pawnshops are glutted.
There is nothing left to pawn in hundreds of homes.
Wages of five shillings a week are common.
Large families eke out an existence for six days a week on a few loaves and margarine.
Hordes of children scramble every day in the gutters for food discarded from the street stalls".
Many believed that it was Havelock Wilson who had betrayed them.
Among them were those who were convinced that he had secretly been in league with the employers.
The Transition to Constitutionalism
From the dockers' defeat of 1912 a more cautious and statesmanlike Havelock Wilson began to emerge.
He was not alone.
Opinion among trade union leaders generally had begun to run strongly against sympathy strikes.
In 1913 this tendency was reinforced by the activities of James Larkin, a Liverpool born Irishman who had served his apprenticeship as an active trade unionist and full-time official with James Sexton's National Union of Dock Labourers but who, resenting any control exercised from its Liverpool headquarters, had set up his own Irish Transport and General Workers' Union in December 1908.
In the role of general secretary of the ITGWU Larkin proved to be a difficult colleague and drove union leaders on the mainland into less militant positions than they might otherwise have adopted.
As the champion of the unskilled workers of Ireland, patriot and prophet of revolutionary socialism, Larkin claimed both independence of and support from all and sundry in the trade union world.
In March 1913, profiting from Wilson's 1911 victory, Larking embarked on a fifteen week dispute with the City of Dublin Steamship Packet Company, bringing this to a successful conclusion and becoming in his biographer's words, "the virtual dictator of the port of Dublin" , and the possessor of a profitable joint agreement with the shipowners arrived at on 26 May which included a no-strike clause.
Early in June this was breached when Larkin's men refused to handle "tainted" goods.
Larkin then washed his hands of the peace obligation, thus starting a new battle with the employers which threatened civil war with the capitalist class as a whole.
Initially, he had much sympathy from the British trade union movement, funds pouring in from the mainland, including almost £pound94,000 collected by the Trades Union Congress.
By early November however, as the Dublin lock-out attacks against leaders of the trade unions and the Labour Party who seemed to be obstructing his plans for a general strike, not only in Dublin, but throughout Great Britain, vilifying them as "serpents whom I shall allow to raise their foul heads and spit out their poison no longer" and as having "neither soul to be saved nor body to be kicked" Almost overnight, support for Larkin turned into denunciation of his reckless methods and of his policy of attempting to bleed British unions of funds in support of sympathy strikes which seemed destined either to fail or to lead to unwanted revolution.
British trade union leaders were, it seemed, being called upon to pay the piper when they were not even being allowed to call the tune.
Even Tillett, regarded by many as the British equivalent of Larkin in language and syndicalist beliefs and whose attacks upon more conventional trade union officials twenty years earlier had not been unlike Larkin's, saw the writing on the wall.
At an extraordinary meeting of the Trades Union Congress at the Albert Hall on 9 December 1913 he was prompted to move a motion condemning "the unfair attacks which had been made upon British trade union officials" and affirming "their ability to negotiate an honourable settlement if assured of the effective support of all who are concerned in the Dublin dispute" .
The motion was carried.
To most, if not all, British trade union leaders it seemed to be suicide to follow Larkin's "fiery cross" into a confrontation with the state in circumstances in which it was clear that their members would not follow them; why should they make such a sacrifice for Larkin when they had been unwilling to do so only a year earlier for the London dockers?
Havelock Wilson who had, of course, been among those leaders to whom Larkin's vituperation had been particularly directed, reserved his regrets for the oppressed people of Ireland whose cause had been so ill served by the "blunders and follies" of Larkin who "had such a splendid case, but made such a sorry mess of it, doing everything he ought not to have done and nothing that he ought to" and bringing, by his defeat, comfort to the Irish employers who had nothing good to be said for them at all .
As for revolution, "The men who have been entrusted with the stewardship, the fortunes and the destinies of the trade union movement have too sound a conception of their great responsibilities to allow themselves to be stampeded into hare-brained  enterprises at the bidding of any madcap missionary of reckless revolt." 
"Whenever one section of labour was defeated, there was a weakening of all.
But it was not good, or right, to be dragged into every dispute that might be brought about by erratic proceedings on the part of others.
Though determined as ever he had more wisdom and caution than he had years ago.
Leaders must use sound judgment and, if necessary, part from those who were inclined to involve them in disputes that were not only calculated to bring defeat but to weaken and endanger the position held at the present time".
Wilson's move towards constitutional respectability was characteristic of those trade union leaders who by I913 had growing memberships to protect and maintain.
Nor was he alone in favouring closer relations with employers through joint boards of conciliation and arbitration.
The idea itself went back at least to the 1850s when such boards had been set up in shipbuilding on the Wear and for the silk trade in Macclesfield.
Better known, however, and models for the country, were those established in the Nottingham hosiery trade in 1860 and by the ironmaster David Dale in the iron trade of the North of England in 1869.
Essentially, their form was one of a council composed of an equal number of representatives of employers and organised workmen, sometimes with an independent chairman and normally with inbuilt arbitration in case of disputes.
Not all joint boards were successful; nor, as a form of negotiating machinery, did they commend themselves to every, or even most, industries.
But they were undoubtedly a constructive way of bringing labour and capital together to resolve their problems peacefully in an atmosphere of mutual recognition and compromise.For this reason, given that employers and governments were willing to accept that trade unions had a function and that they had come to stay, they appeared to the Labour Department of the Board of Trade as its functions developed in the early years of the twentieth century, to be especially useful in dealing with some of the conflicts between labour and capital in which it increasingly became involved.
With the advent of Lloyd George, who as President of the Board proved to be no mean performer at the art of conciliation, the policy of promoting "permanent machinery" , industry by industry, for the settlement of disputes began to move into top gear, if only for the reason that no alternative policy seemed to be available.
Between the build-up to the national railway dispute in 1907 and the end of 1909 no fewer than sixty-seven new boards were established, not including those set up as part of the settlement of the rail strike itself.
Early exponents of the "new unionism" and the more fundamental of the syndicalists had no love for the device of the joint board.
Their determination was to confront their oppressors and overturn their prerogatives rather than a sharing of power, even by mutual agreement.
And, if as they believed, final authority lay with their  members, how could they compromise this by hobnobbing with capital on their behalf?
Circumstances alter cases.
In the 1912 London dock strike, the Transport Workers' Federation had been willing enough to agree to a joint board and but for Lord Devonport's stubborn resistance this might have been achieved.
Even that erratic genius Jim Larkin, in one of his less militant moods, had recommended in an "open letter to the people" published in the Irish Worker the establishment of conciliation boards in the four main sectors of Irish industry.
Seeing the tide running in his direction, Havelock Wilson renewed his campaign in a series of meetings of sailors and firemen all over the country, declaring that a majority of the shipowners of the United Kingdom were favourable to a National Board and that "it will come if the seamen are united and demand it" .
Demand it they did, on Friday 13 December 1912 at South Shields, at Leith on the following Sunday, at Liverpool a week later, at Newport, West Hartlepool and in the Port of London.
Wilson could never be said to lack optimism.
Though there were shipowners who accepted the principle of a national conciliation board, its establishment seemed to most to be a step too quick and too far.
Without question its most enthusiastic supporter was Sir Walter Runciman, whose ear, and whose confidence and friendship, Wilson had first gained in 1887, and who had in the interim become a considerable steamship owner and a source of radical thinking within the Shipping Federation.
Runciman had sympathisers within the Federation in favour of a more liberal approach which, he believed, would bring a ready response from Wilson, but they were in a minority to those dominated by the formidable George A. and Cuthbert Laws, father and son, whose implacable anti-union line prevailed for more than a quarter of a century.
Runciman was not deterred.
 "I frequently pleaded with the federated owners to make peace with Wilson and many were inclined to do so, but the weight of prejudice clung to the Federation as a whole and the Executive Committee refused to recognise him, although we were wasting hundreds of thousands of pounds in fighting him" .
Instead, in 1912, the shipowners tried a new tack.
The settlements of 1911 had, explicitly or implicitly, opened up channels between local officials of the union and local shipowner associations so that a number of recognised, if not always strictly negotiated and agreed, rates and conditions now existed in different ports which, for the purposes of comparison, the NSFU had now  committed to paper.
The possibility of one association being played off against another was obvious.
To avoid both this and the possibility of being forced into national level negotiation with Wilson, the Federation Council at a meeting held on 29 November 1912, resolved "that the state of the shipping trade warrants a substantial increase in the wages of seamen all round the coast from January 1st. next, and that meetings of the district committees to give effect to this resolution  be held forthwith" .
Runciman made no bones about his position.
In a speech at the launch of the ss Trevethoe in February 1913 he took the opportunity publicly to declare that he was in favour of a conciliation board, and that he was not alone in this conviction.
 "I have advocated this for a long time" , he declared,"and now I see that some of the shipowners are inclined to agree to it.
I believe that we would get on better with our men; we would have less friction and less legislation if we were to meet them round the table and discuss mutual affairs with them in a suitable manner.
They would want a lot; there is no reason that we should give them everything they ask for.
But I am sure that we should get on better if we were to come to some terms with them".
Another sympathizer was Lord Furness, a self-made man from the very bottom of the ladder, whom the NSFU recalled "as a great shipowner who was never averse to the claims of justice and fair play, always approachable in any difficulty, from whom a case reasonably stated never failed to obtain a patient hearing and who was never spoiling for a fight" .
The Seaman saw some hope in the Federation's novel policy of giving a voluntary increase.
"It may be the beginning of a saner and less aggressive course of action than the one hitherto pursued towards the men of the Mercantile Marine.
Whatever else it may betoken, it is clear for the time being that Mr Laws will not be asked to put on his war-paint and go a-hunting for scalps".
A softening of attitudes was one thing; achievement of the union's objective was another.
The seamen had good reason to suppose that the arguments on the employers' side for resisting negotiations at national level were weakening.
It could, for example, no longer be claimed that it was unrepresentative of the men.
With a membership recorded by the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies as more than 71,000, at least two-thirds of eligible British born seamen were organised by the union and national negotiating machinery seemed within reach.
The Federation was now compelled to change its ground and argue the National Union was only one of several organisations claiming to organise merchant seamen.
Undoubtedly the greatest obstacle was the fear of the shipowners that they would lose the right which they cherished so dearly, to select whatever crews they thought fit.
Treading almost on the heels of this conviction was the bogey of Havelock Wilson himself for whom many employers harboured feelings "perilously near hatred" .
To such men it was unthinkable to meet such a fellow face to face and across a table on equal terms even though it might no longer be diplomatic for an official of the Federation to admit this in public.
In the event, for at least a few years to come, no such necessity arose.
For the shipowners ploy in offering a substantial wage increase and in leaving the amount to be resolved port by port and company by company had the desired effect.
Though there were  complaints in some places that 1 January 1913 came and went with no settlement in sight and though seamen on weekly boats in Hull were aggrieved at receiving less than their colleagues elsewhere, 2s.6d increases on weekly wages and 10s on monthly were fairly readily conceded, more in some places.
These took the steam out of the demand for a national conciliation board and a standard wage, at least for the time being, and there were some advances in the establishment of local machinery.
Cathery was called upon to negotiate with the employers to settle a Wage dispute at Leith.
Wilson himself had the satisfaction of securing a permanent Joint Conference for the future settlement of wages at Hull and Goole and Tupper obtained the first negotiated settlement at Aberdeen.
In June 1913 the Union made the situation clear by issuing a booklet of eighty-five pages entitled Official Wages and Overtime List for all the Ports of the United Kingdom, the Continent and Australia on British Ships.
This showed it to have formal negotiating agreements at ten of the principal ports of England, Scotland and Wales and at three in Ireland, and to have ad hoc local wage agreements at substantially all the rest.
The logic of an overall national agreement could almost be left to speak for itself though the conciliation board campaign itself was not formally abandoned until the outbreak of war in August 1914, when the union immediately declared a truce in all its disputes with the Federation.
Meanwhile another issue had arisen which absorbed a great deal of its energy, that of Asiatic, and particularly Chinese, seamen.
Lascars and Chinamen
Objections to the manning of British ships by Chinese and Lascar crews was not a new issue between British seamen and their employers.
Traditionally Asiatics had been employed east of Suez and hired on "Asiatic Articles of Agreement" , a practice which seems to have been generally acceptable since it involved sailing chiefly in Indian and Far Eastern waters.
Almost  imperceptibly the practice began of signing them on for voyages to Britain, Europe and North America so that the numbers of Chinamen and Lascars on ships based in these areas gradually increased and with it the Chinese, Indian and half-caste population of such ports as Cardiff and Liverpool.
Prejudice, such as that exploited by Tupper in Cardiff in 1911, became mixed with self concern — the belief that Asiatic crews would work for lower wages and in worse conditions than British, and so undercut the union's effort to improve both in the British seaman's interests.
Battle lines had been drawn up, if on a modest scale, over the framing of the Merchant Shipping Act (Amendment) Bill in 1906.
Were Lascars and Chinamen to benefit from the improvements in food, accommodation, repatriation etc. which it provided for British seamen?
Since an object of the Bill was to reduce foreign competition by forcing  other countries to conform to British standards, at least when trading in British ports, the answer appeared to be "yes" .
Lascars were in any case British subjects, and ought, Wilson contended, to enjoy conditions in common with British seamen generally except in the tropics.
But what of foreigners who could not speak English?
For the sake of safety and obedience to orders, ought they to be employed at all?
In the end the Act provided for lower accommodation requirements for Lascars than for other British subjects on British ships and for a "language test" for non-British subjects.
And still the number of Chinese in United Kingdom ports continued to grow.
By 1908 Wilson noted that the 1,000 or so Chinese seamen shipped at United Kingdom ports in 1905 had increased by 1907 to 5,000 and a deputation of 40 seamen was organised to wait upon Winston Churchill, then President of the Board of Trade.
He was sympathetic, "I do not intend" , he declared, "so far as I have any power, to allow the increase of Chinese seamen in the United Kingdom ports to be continued" .
But still the numbers grew.
In 1910 there were 5,954 engagements of Chinese seamen on British foreign-going ships at British ports; in 1912 there were 7,450 and in 1913 9,286.
By 1914 the number of Chinese boarding houses was reckoned over the previous few years to have increased by stages from 13 to 300 to 400.
Language tests had been carried out in the breach rather than the observance.
Worst still, there were examples in which whole white deck crews were being replaced by Chinamen, especially by the Canadian Pacific Railway Company, which claimed that they were more satisfactory, seldom going ashore and therefore seldom "going on the spree" .
The union suspected that the real reason for preferring Asiatics was that they were cheaper and ate less.
Joe Cotter complained that some 50 per cent of men taking classes in British ports with a view to becoming ships' cooks early in 1914 were Chinamen.
Presumably they were expected also to save money for the shipowners.
Increasingly British crews refused to sail with Chinese seamen and stories were circulated to counter the laudatory accounts of the shipowners of the exemplary conduct of the Chinese, giving instances of mutinies and knifings of officers.
Wilson denied strongly that the reason for the campaign against the "Yellow Peril" was that seamen had little else to complain about.
If the Asiatic invasion went on, declared J.O'Connor Kessack, with wholehearted approval from the union"white seamen are doomed.
They cannot compete with a handful of rice and 8d per day.
The standard of life is in danger, and the white man must either fight the evil influence or go under and carry white civilisation with him.
The man who talks equality in this respect is not a Socialist; he is simply crazy and beyond hope".
A series of mass meetings, supported by the Cooks and Stewards, the Hull Seamen, the Dockers, the Railwaymen and the International Transport Workers Federation, where Wilson had secured an anti-Asiatic resolution at the London meeting in August 1913, demanded the complete exclusion of Chinese labour from British ships.
 "Go on bringing in your Chinamen" , declared Havelock Wilson,"and before many months are over, by heavens I prophesy that 1914 will eclipse the great upheaval of 1911.
When the time is ripe the mandate will go forward that the men will refuse to load and unload, to supply coal or cargo to any ship in a British port where a Lascar or a Chinaman is on board".
The anti-Asiatic campaign was formally terminated, like that for a conciliation board, by the outbreak of the war.
But it refused to lie down.
Wartime conditions brought renewed pressures from shipowners to employ more and more Chinamen.
Lloyd George might think that in beating Wilson over the space requirements of Asiatics in the debate over the Merchant Shipping Act in 1906 he was delivering the working classes from their unworthy prejudices against foreign seamen, but the seamen thought that they knew better.
In their eyes the Asiatic was a menace to British livelihoods, for behind him stood the reality of the unscrupulous shipowner, of whom anything, however disreputable, could be believed.
And, as Wilson continued to point out, the seaman despite his best efforts and those of the union, was still much below his proper status.
 "A good deal more patient organising, much strenuous effort and many further victories over the forces of organised wealth will be necessary before seamen can be said to have achieved that measure of justice which is his due" .
He was determined to remain the seaman's champion.
But he was also a patriot.
The war came first, though anti-Chinese sentiment flared up periodically as the numbers of Chinese engaged in British ports continued to rise to 8,182 in 1914 and 14,224 in 1915, increased by the diversion to the west of ships normally operating east of Suez.
Understandably there was continued suspicion that their lower levels of pay would be used by the shipowners to "stabilise" wages for the period of the war and after.
Could they, moreover, be trusted?
 "Who are these law-breaking Chinese [In Limehouse]who carry on opium dens, gambling dens and disorderly houses" but potential German spies?
Tupper, robust in his comment as always, regarded the "employment of cheap Chinese labour as an act of treachery towards the British Nation which was fighting for its life" .
The Chinese, even if they were not spies, were certainly not-be trusted, for they were evidently too cowardly to be relied on as stokers to get up sufficient steam to escape German U-boats, which should serve as a warning to "yellow-loving shipowners." 
At the Trades Union Congress in 1916 Wilson moved a motion, which was carried unanimously, that the government should repatriate all Chinese who could not prove their British nationality and that no Chinese should be signed on British ships west of the Suez Canal.
It was with great satisfaction that in June 1918 The Seaman could report that at Southampton a case in which British seamen had  refused, by prior arrangement, to sail with Chinese, was dismissed by the local magistrates.
The Outbreak of War and Chivalry of the Sea
War against Germany was declared on 4 August 1914.
Clear as it might be that this was no time to continue old feuds with the shipowners, to lower one's guard against them was too much to be expected.
After more than a year of "the war to end wars" Wilson was still pressing the need for the accumulation of a strike fund of such a size that when the war was over, the union "would be able to put up such a fight that their opponents would never be able to withstand" .
It was not until the middle of 1916 that he felt sufficiently confident to offer an olive branch to the employers.
On 28 July of that year there appeared in The Seaman a leading article headed "Shall We Shake Hands" , making no apology for the conflicts of the past, but offering to the Federation, as one powerful organisation to another, the hand of friendship provided that it was willing to set aside its "preposterous contention" that all seamen should carry a Federation ticket and further suggesting a joint board along the lines operated for many years by the Durham miners.
But still the employers resisted, and it was not until August 1917 that discontent among seamen led the government to establish joint meetings between the Ministry of Shipping, the NSFU and the Shipping Federation, with the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Shipping, Sir Leo Chiozza Money as chairman, from which there evolved in the following November a joint "National Maritime Marine Board" , of the kind which Wilson had long advocated, which within a few weeks referred to itself as the National Maritime Board.
Behind the creation stood the familiar figure of Lloyd George who in the previous December had formed a coalition with himself as Prime Minister to replace the previous government of Herbert Asquith which had become discredited by criticisms of its conduct of the war.
The effect of the war was, as in many other industries, to force government, employers and unions in shipping to face and to solve as best they could, many problems of relationships and jurisdictions which had been simmering, and from time to time erupting, for many years.
When, on the outbreak of war, the unions, including the Sailors and Firemen, had declared an industrial truce and suspended all current strike actions, no-one had any conception of what the struggle with Germany might imply.
There had been no war in Europe between Britain and any continental power since the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo a century earlier, when the scale and power of armaments had been puny by comparison to those available in the early 1900s.
Patriotism was easily aroused, not least among the seamen.
Most trade union leaders favoured the war, among them Havelock  Wilson, and it was easy for the more romantic to suppose that, now there was a common enemy, all other conflicts would be shelved "for the duration" which would not, as most supposed, be a long one.
Captain Tupper, calling off a strike of fishermen in which he was engaged in August 1914 declared simply that "our fight was not with the employers but with another force which had attacked all that was ours" .
Both he and Wilson threw themselves enthusiastically into recruiting, for which the latter was made a Commander of the British Empire in 1917.
Nor, from the beginning of the indiscriminate sinking of British merchant ships by U-boats, could there be the slightest doubt among seamen who the enemy was; but adjustment was difficult, and bread and butter questions such as pay and conditions of work were aggravated and complicated by wartime inflation, by manpower shortages and by excessive profits made by shipowners who grew even richer and more demanding out of the sweat and blood of their merchant crews.
Politicians and administrators were ill-equipped to handle the problems of working men caught up in bloody enterprise for which they were not responsible.
It was small wonder that anti-war and pacifist groups flourished in the labour movement of the time, though rarely among seamen and, it seems, hardly at all among their leaders, though initially "hating the Hun" was far from easy, for German seamen had long been colleagues and comrades, not only aboard ship, but also in organisations affiliated to the International Transport Workers' Federation.
In the first year of the war Havelock Wilson repeatedly stressed the cooperation which had existed between the German merchant marine and the NSFU, cast doubt on stories of German atrocities and sought to play down the extremes of anti-German hysteria which had broken out.
 "He was convinced" , wrote Tupper, "that the German man-in-the-street was participating in this senseless and savage struggle because the Prussian system forced him to; the ordinary subject of the Kaiser might be misled into believing his cause just — but he could not conceive it possible that the German sailormen who had been part of our Merchant Service could have anything but hatred for this catastrophe" .
In such circumstances what could Wilson do but offer help to the 5,000 or more German seamen taken ashore from British, German and other vessels on the outbreak of war who were unemployed, destitute and ultimately destined for internment camps?
His solution was that the Chivalry of the Sea demanded that the union itself would take responsibility.
Alton Abbey, offered for the purpose by Father Hopkins could provide accommodation for about 200 German seamen, but this was insufficient.
The union therefore purchased Eastcote, some seven miles from Northampton and remote from any prohibited area, for £pound2500 and housed and fed many of the remainder, very largely at its own expense; there was no wire and there were no guards, the men being put on their honour not to escape.
They  had their own hospital and rations of beer, cigarettes and tobacco.
In an extravagant gesture Wilson, the one-time ship's cook, took a turn in the"galley' and boasted that Eastcote was the best camp in the United Kingdom.
Alas for good intentions!
Tupper tells the story that for the evening following that most notorious of all war crimes  committed between 1914 and 1918, the torpedoing and sinking by a German U-boat of the unarmed liner Lusitania, with 702 seamen and over 1,000 passengers, including women and children on board, on 7 May 1915, a concert had been arranged at Eastcote, with artistes from London and Northampton.
On hearing of the atrocity Wilson thought it his duty to cancel the concert and to call together the 800 German seamen to explain what had happened and to share with them his horror at the deed.
He was received in silence and, as he left the meeting, was followed by a mighty roar of exultation and the strains of the "Watch on the Rhine" and "Deutschland über Alles" .
 "His face" , wrote Edward Tupper, "always pain-racked and wan, looked ghastly under the moon" .
 "Ted" , he said,"I never would believe it before.
I always thought we were at war with the Pan-Prussian Military Party.
Now I know we are at war with the German People".
In detail the story may be questionable; its consequences were not.
Eastcote was handed over to the military and the German seamen, after a temporary stay at the Alexandra Palace, were condemned to live behind barbed wire and fixed bayonets; Alton Abbey had already been closed.
Wilson was understandably sensitive about publicising his error.
To the Annual Conference of the union in September 1915 he reported that "the Government had commandeered the Camp" , and that, when they eventually handed it back, reinstated as agricultural land, which he doubted that they ever would, compensation and rent paid or payable would ensure that "the maintenance of aliens at Eastcote would have cost the Union not a single farthing" and provide a useful start to its programme of Homes for Seamen.
[Cheers]
Wilson the Patriot
As the war continued and the death toll at sea mounted, Wilson's patriotism, his sense of outrage at the methods by the German government to break the Allied blockade and the strength of his anti-German sentiments grew until they became almost pathological.
In August 1917 he organised an international conference in London of representatives of all seamen, both officers and men, "of all nations except those of the enemy" which resolved that German seafarers were equally responsible with the German authorities for their "inhuman conduct of submarine warfare" and demanded both reparations and a boycott of German seamen themselves when the war was over.
Six weeks later a great demonstration in the Royal Albert Hall demanded  the establishment of a Merchant Seamen's League to put the boycott into effect and "to assist them in maintaining their benevolent institutions for the aged and infirm" A short time ago, he declared in 1918, he had received a document from four leading German trade unionists attempting to justify the U-boat campaign by arguing that "only a campaign of frightfulness against the British and neutral vessels trading to ports in the United Kingdom and the starving of the people of the British Isles would bring the war to a speedy close" .
 "But could there be more cold blooded murder" than the indiscriminate sinking of merchant ships which had already cost 14,000 British seamen their lives?
Nor was this the only attempt at German self-justification.
Hopkins refers to a German seamen's manifesto of March 1917, "with its impudent assertion that, apart from a few" isolated mistakes "U-boat warfare had been conducted with respect for human and humane principles" .
Cathery reflected all Wilson's sentiments on the treatment of Germans when the war was over in an election address to the people of Bootle, where he was a parliamentary candidate.
"I shall stand first and foremost for the exercise of a complete and thorough boycott of the Germans as the cruellest slaughterers of innocent lives on the high seas that the world has ever known.
Seamen have been attacked in cold blood; women and children compelled to cross the seas have been foully murdered without warning or provocation.
The seamen are therefore determined that they will have nothing to do with Germans of any description until the Germans have made full reparation for the cruel murders committed and the lives lost on the high seas from submarine action".
The seamen, like others, had discovered that war may start as a crusade, but inevitably ends as a business.
The war was also a business in which it was apparently no easier than in peace to obtain just treatment for seaman, whatever hardships they might be suffering.
It was hardly surprising that after an initial period of cooperation and even of euphoria, unrest and discontent, mingled with weariness of a conflict which became ever more bloody and apparently endless, began to grow.
Early developments seemed promising.
Within a week of the outbreak of war the co-operation of the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union was sought over the manning of merchant vessels requisitioned or chartered by the Admiralty and an agreement arrived at jointly with the Board of Trade.
The Admiralty agreed in respect of all such vessels to authorise a flat rate increase of £pound1 a month for all seamen over and above the wages set out in the union's official wage book for 1913; the NSFU agreed to "use its utmost endeavour to furnish men required at such rates" .
Sailors were not expected to undertake more than their normal duties on board ship; should they, however, be injured as a consequence of "warlike operations" , they would be entitled to a pension or gratuity, and should they lose their lives, dependent  relatives would be granted compensation.
To crown it all, the hand of Sir George Askwith, who chaired the conference, in which the union was represented by Cathery, Hopkins and Tom Chambers, the union's general treasurer, could be seen in a provision that "In order that all questions which arise may be settled with the utmost promptitude, a Board of Arbitration has been appointed upon which the Mercantile Marine profession, both officers and men will be represented" .
Most seamen in trading ships as well as those in the vessels which performed the remarkable feat of transporting the whole of the British Expeditionary Force, together with horses, guns and full equipment to France by September 1914, profited from the £pound1 increase, while the union threw its full weight behind its undertaking to maintain the supply of seamen.
This was no minor commitment; nor was it treated as such.
Within 48 hours of the outbreak of war no fewer than 8,000 seamen joined the colours.
In the spring of 1915 Prime Minister Asquith declared to the House of Commons that the continued enlistment of British sailors, the internment of enemy aliens and the recall of allied seamen to their own countries had reduced the maritime labour force to 85 per cent of its pre-war strength.
The union did everything possible to convince the government that this had done no more than mop up previously persistent unemployment in the industry and to persuade its members to join their ships, and to do so on time, so that their departures should not be delayed.
"Stopping a ship for even an hour or two — a matter upon which the winning of a battle might depend — might mean the loss of the lives of some of their brave fellows on land or on the sea.
Any man who hindered the Admiralty work would have it hot and heavy".
The union had made an agreement and it would abide by it.
 "SEAMEN" , the union's journal cried, "DO YOUR DUTY!" .
Those who delayed, deserted or refused to obey lawful commands were no better than traitors.
In thirteenth century Venice, such men would have been flogged and branded on the forehead, while a law of the Hanseatic League in the fifteenth and sixteenth century had provided that any sailor who deserted the master of his ship in time of danger would have had his ears slit!
 "Not" , The Seaman added in mitigation, "that such punishment would be justifiable now" !
On 4 August 1914 few expected the war to last long — a matter of weeks, perhaps, or months at the longest.
Wages apart, other benefits from the Admiralty Agreement were slow in coming.
The Board of Arbitration provided for under its terms was lost sight of.
The promised War Risk Compensation Scheme did not appear until 19 February 1915 and their Lordships seemed to have forgotten altogether that under the Merchant Shipping Act the moment a ship became a total wreck, from whatever cause, the wages of its crew ceased to be paid, leaving both sailors and their dependents in "an unenviable position" .
Two years elapsed before, as a matter of right, torpedoed seamen became entitled to "one month's wages, or wages up to the date of arrival in the United Kingdom, whichever is the greater" , and also compensation for lost effects.
Even then, the problem of seamen finding themselves disqualified for petty reasons remained an aggravating one.
Worst of all, seamen rapidly came to the conclusion that the service and suffering to which the union had committed them in the name of Britain and the Empire did not extend to the shipowners, and especially not to those who were fortunate enough to escape requisitioning of their vessels by the government.
In the first full year of the war freight charges increased, according to destination, by amounts varying between 75 and 230 per cent.
Owners, although required to pay 50 percent of surplus profits towards the cost of the war, retained nevertheless a 575 per cent increase on 1913 profits on average.
 "Already" , complained The Seaman after six months of fighting,"the poor people of this country are beginning to feel the effects of the greedy shipowners' demands.
The price of bread is rising, and so is the price of meat — all commodities which are necessary for the people's welfare".
And what excuse is given by the Shipowners' Federation?
 "I would say" , said Mr Brett, its secretary,"that shipowners are doing well just now, but not that they are making a lot of money.
They have had two bad years, and now they are recouping themselves".
 "Recouping themselves" , noted the union, "at the expense of the poor" .
Showdown over Conscription
Perhaps the seamen, with the advantage of the 10s increase at the beginning of 1913 and the £poundl increase of the Admiralty Agreement, were better off than many others in the early months of the war.
But there was worse to come as retail prices continued to rise and real wages to fall and as some shipowners, taking advantage of the union's declaration of industrial truce, resisted increases in earnings and "fought the union tooth and nail for every penny" .
The NSFU "urged its members to assist the government in every possible way and has in numerous cases been the means of healing differences and preventing stoppages" .
It encouraged the owners to voluntary arbitration, but rarely with success.
But for the Munitions of War Act of July 1915 which enabled the Board of Trade if necessary to impose arbitrated settlements on unwilling employers, the union's policy of patriotic co-operation must surely have failed and within a month of the passing of that Act the waters were muddied by another development which the union considered to be even more sinister — the demand from the "Reptile press represented by the Daily Mail, Times and associate journals" , for conscription.
The issue of conscription was a particularly tender one for the union, for it had for some time been under pressure from the Admiralty over breaches of the  obligation of seamen, nominally enforced by the Board of Trade, that sailors should be on board their ships on time and hence not delay sailings.
Transports, were, the Admiralty declared, frequently held up by drunken and indisciplined seamen, to the detriment of the war effort, and seriously proposed that all men in the mercantile marine should he conscripted into the Royal Naval Reserve under naval discipline.
Not only did this appear to be a slur on the patriotism of seamen; it also revived memories of the press gang and the imposition of fixed rates of pay without right to complain in any "starvation ship" with a  money-worshipping owner.
 "It was an insult," thundered Tupper, "to the service which had turned England into the British Empire, an incredible stupidity which would halve the mariner's loyalty automatically" .
Wilson redoubled his efforts to appeal to erring members "not to be traitors" .
 "It has been dinned into the ears of our members without hesitation or scruple, and we repeat with the greatest force at our command that seamen, to whatever class they may belong, are false to themselves, to their cause and to their country in taking any course that may, even in the smallest degree, weaken the hands of those responsible for the conduct of the present campaign against the most ignoble foe that it has ever become Britain's duty to tackle" .
But to conscription, the answer was "No" !
The Merchant Shipping Acts were discipline enough.
If more was wanted, the Defence of the Realm Act should be invoked to impose penalties for failures to join after signing on and drinking facilities at dock gates removed or greatly restricted.
Not satisfied, the Admiralty pressed the issue to the Cabinet and Wilson and Tupper were summoned to appear before a committee of Coalition Ministers, with Balfour in the chair, supported by Sir Edward Carson, Dr Macnamara and Arthur Henderson and faced by the proposal that the time had come for merchant seamen to be conscripted for national service.
If Edward Tupper is to be believed, Wilson first faced Carson and then Tupper himself"You know Sir Edward that you cannot do this.
I would refer you to the Act dealing with press-gangs "; and then," Tupper, what will you do if this thing is forced upon us?"
To which Tupper replied, "Go out and declare a national strike of seamen, in spite of the war" .
 "Tupper" , declared Wilson,"you know I am a patriot.
But there is no more to be said.
We will leave room and work out our own salvation.
Good day, gentlemen.
You will hear soon of Tupper and Wilson.
Perhaps you will be putting us in jail!"
And so the matter ended.
But not quite.
In 1916 the Admiralty proposed that crews of commandeered or hired transports should, as in other wartime industries, be engaged "for the period of the war" .
The union pointed out that under the Merchant Shipping Act, the loss of a ship terminated a seaman's contract and that newcomers would expect the wages which they had previously enjoyed; since these varied from port to port and ship to ship, domestic  peace on board would be unlikely.
Finally, the Admiralty formulated a scheme of its own, the "Sunhill Scheme" , launched in June 1916.
Under this rates of pay of mercantile marine ratings on commissioned Fleet Auxiliaries were standardized, the Admiralty having the right to transfer the men from one Auxiliary to another, reserves being kept at Portsmouth with ss Sunhill as their parent ship.
Despite the lure of an increase of 10s in pay, the scheme proved unworkable.
The union, not having been consulted, did not cooperate in supplying recruits; many men refused to transfer and the reserve never reached its anticipated size.
Lloyd George and the National Maritime Board
It was in circumstances of unrest in the merchant service that the Asquith government fell and a new coalition was formed by Lloyd George in December 1916.
There had been, as the usually mild mannered Hopkins averred, "a considerable amount of mishandling and provocation by certain very stupid persons" .
While the cost of living continued to soar, wage increases remained difficult to obtain; shipowners continued to hanker after the employment of cheap Chinese labour and extracted record profits, while the U-boat campaign raged unabated.
Seamen felt themselves constantly under attack from the press, particularly that presided over by Lord Northcliffe, who had given up the conscription campaign, but continued to blacken the character of merchant sailors and firemen, while in other circles they were being lauded for their valour by no less a person than Admiral Sir John Jellicoe himself.
Some fifty successful local wage claims apart, and despite Wilson's optimism in his Presidential Address at the Annual Conference of the union in September 1916, seamen might have been forgiven for concluding that patriotism had done very little for their cause.
During 1917 the situation in some respects became worse.
On 6 April the USA declared war on Germany and on the following 8 May a conference was held between the US Shipping Board, the US Steamship Owners and the US International Seamen's Union which resulted in what became known as the "Atlantic Agreement" which laid down manning levels, wages and bonuses.
The latter were set at 90 dollars, or £pound18 a month for able seamen and firemen.
The equivalent wage for the same ratings sailing out of the north east coast were £pound10 for Britishers and £pound6 for Chinamen, out of the Bristol Channel and London £pound9 and £pound6.10s and out of Liverpool £pound8.10s and £pound6.
The Atlantic Agreement called "upon the Seamen of all the world for service…to demonstrate practical appreciation of freedom won" , and the American Shipping Act of 1915 had established for seamen on foreign ships a "a right to quit" while in US ports from March 1916.
British seamen in the US deserted in droves, alarming the new British  government and bringing about a revived dialogue not only on seamen's complaints about the inadequacy of British pay, the constantly recurring problems of loss of wages and effects when torpedoed and the inroad made by railway fares when they were paid off from diverted ships, but also on the dangerous state of mind of seamen who were incensed by the conviction that they were constantly subject to neglect, mishandling and coercion.
The situation continued to deteriorate.
By July 1917 over one-third of the seamen on US merchant vessels were British and many of the British seamen concerned were being prosecuted in British courts for desertion.
Some were imprisoned with hard labour, others escaped by agreeing to enlist in the Royal Navy for the duration of the war and all were fined or required to forfeit or make recompense of wages to the companies from whose ships they had originally deserted.
 "It was" , the chairman of the Bench declared in one instance, "a case of profiteering" .
Such incidents were highly embarrassing to the union, and it was a relief on some occasions to record that the offenders were not members, but had been supplied by the Shipping Federation.
In August 1917 the war losses concession of the Board of Trade did something to take the edge off a rapidly deteriorating situation and Wilson's preoccupation with the Labour Party pacifists and the Merchant Seamen's League tended to keep such matters off the pages of The Seaman.
A tiny crack in the ice of formal relations with the Shipping Federation had appeared in June 1917, when, arising out of an ad hoc conference attended by both parties on their own initiative on the limited issue of overtime in port on weekly vessels, a suggestion by the union that a Standing Central Joint Committee and appropriate District Committees might be set up to deal with this particular question, and possibly others, was referred by the representatives of the shipowners to their main body for consideration.
This conference Father Hopkins later declared, he marked with a "red cross" in his diary.
But the definitive change came on I August 1917, when the Ministry of Shipping, which had been established by Lloyd George when he became Prime Minister in December 1916, invited both the union and the Federation to confer with government representatives on the supply of seamen, wage difficulties and on other problems which were causing waste and delay to shipping.
As in the railway dispute of 1907 and the London docks affair of 1910, Lloyd George had evidently concluded that he had reached the end of the line.
The Sunhill Scheme had been a failure; existing machinery had not settled the wage issue; nor had coercion put an end to desertions, while the seamen had concluded that their reasonableness and patriotism were being exploited.
The time had come to take matters in hand.
There was still delay.
The union supported the idea of a national wage for seafarers, determined by and supervised by a National or  London Joint Committee of the parties concerned and corresponding Local Joint Committees but proposed that labour should be supplied by the National Sailors' and Firemen's Union.
The shipowners rejected the second proposition.
Meanwhile the inter-departmental Mercantile Marine Conciliation Committee, which had originally recommended the 1 August Ministry of Shipping initiative, but on which neither the owners nor the union were represented, attempted to keep the peace by bi-lateral negotiation with the two sides and with the independent local Liverpool Shipowners.
The role of the Committee was a difficult one.
As the union saw the position, the essence of the immediate situation lay in pay and settlement of this issue was urgent.
While the Conciliation Committee fiddled, a conflagration threatened at Liverpool which promised to set all Britain's ports alight.
Three times in the latter part of September 1917 the Committee was warned by the union of the danger of delay in setting adequate and standard rates of wages for all seamen; three times on the advice of the Liverpool Shipowners it temporised.
The owners evidently believed that the union was exaggerating the seriousness of the Liverpool situation in order to extract the best possible terms.
By 1 October it was almost too late.
The prospective crew of the Belgic had refused to sign on unless seamen were paid a minimum rate of £pound12 and firemen £pound12.10s with proportionate increases for petty officers and a consolidation of bonuses.
The prospective crew of the Adriatic followed suit and a general upheaval outside the union's control seemed to be a real possibility.
Meanwhile the situation between the government, the union and the Shipowners' Federation had proceeded almost to the point of agreement in principle on a National Maritime Board and a proposal from Havelock Wilson that a single source of supply of seamen should be under the joint control of the Federation and the union, though formal acceptance and drafting problems remained; so did the Liverpool revolt.
Here, the Conciliation Committee had rejected the union's advice on an acceptable settlement and the Ministry of Shipping's offer was turned down by the men after a ballot vote.
Eventually, it was agreed and confirmed at a mass meeting held at the Stadium in Liverpool on 6 October that the seaman's wage on all foreign-going ships should be raised to £pound11 and the fireman's to £pound11 10s and that the national wage board should determine a national port wage within four weeks, the award to be paid retrospectively.
The men agreed to do their utmost to prevent desertion at American ports.
The immediate strike threat was over and the union had demonstrated its ability to control the men; the formal establishment of the National Maritime Board remained.
The formation of a National Maritime Board was announced on 23 November 1917 and standard wages for seamen announced six days later, recommending to the Shipping Controller £pound11 10s a month for  able seamen and £pound12 for firemen, with proportionate increases for petty officers and seamen on weekly articles, backdated to 6 October.
The Board's role was defined as the prevention and adjustment of disputes, the establishment of standard wages and the regulation of employment.
Its chairman, vice-chairman and secretary were appointed by the Controller of Shipping and each group of men sailors and firemen, engineers, deck officers and cooks and stewards — represented by their appropriate organisations, with the exception of local organisations and the British Seafarers' Union, though the latter was given a "due proportion" of representatives on the passenger line panels of the Southampton and Glasgow District Boards.
At the port level, the constitution provided for Port Consultants appointed by the union and the Federation whose duties were to ensure an adequate supply of labour, enabling boats to sail without delay.
They were to act as the first stage in settling disputes, and there would be "no stoppage of work until any difference or dispute had been referred to them or if necessary to the District or National Board as circumstances may require" .
In the final resort matters in disagreement were to be referred to the Shipping Controller, though his decision was not binding unless agreed by both sides.
The Great War came to an end on 11 November 1918.
 "We are the Victors — The Germans are the Vanquished" , read the headline in The Seaman.
In the Peace Procession which assembled on 19 July 1919, 300 union members marched behind their banner.
On the one side of this were portraits of Wilson, Cathery, Chambers and Plimsoll.
On the other was an illustration of the Lusitania which"brought home to the spectators a realisation of Germany's wicked crime.
This was the first time in history that a trade union banner had been borne aloft in a great military and naval display.
It represented men who, despite untold difficulties and disasters, remained loyal to King and Country throughout the war, in the face of death itself.
Even more remarkable was the change which the war had wrought in the relations between the union and the Shipping Federation and that which had developed between Havelock Wilson and the labour movement.