

You don't need to be against that wall Tom.
Ooh 
Make sure you've got lots of space because you know what you're like, you need lots of space don't you, for yourselves?
Nice and comfortable.
Now P C   knows  that I've got this smashing class.
And they are a really nice class P C 
Are they?
We don't know the gentleman's name with the tape recorder
This gentleman is Tony 
Tony.
Tony.
Tony.
Shall we say hallo?
Hallo Tony.
Hallo.
Right, now then.
So this is a very  special  project now, okay?
Really special, and you are going to do your bit and you know P C  well enough to do your bit.
Okay?
Mm.
Right Tony's come here and he's gonna tape recorder everything that's says, that is said, your voice, my voice, so we want it all nice  and properly done because er they're all gonna make a special project out of it, reference to spoken word and the written word so you must ask your questions nice and clearly, yeah?
Yeah.
You've all got questions, yeah?
Yeah.
Because we've got twenty five minutes  but twenty five minutes can either drag or can fly by.
Let's see if we can make the twenty five minutes fly by, yes?
Oh these are a nosy lot aren't you?
Eh?
Good.
Alright then.
Ready to start?
Yeah.
Right, let's go.
First question.
How do you train a  a police dog?
How do you train a police dog.
Right.
Before you can become a police er dog handler
Yeah.
you have to do two years in the police force anyway, you then have to show some kind of application towards it.
You are then  go on a course  and you are selected.
If you are selected to go on another course, you are introduced to your dog.
That's down in er Kent somewhere, I've forgotten where it is but it's down in Kent.
While you're there you have thirteen weeks down there, which is like three months, with th with the dog.
If you pass the course down there with your dog, yeah?
You are then sent back to your force which is a which will be the Essex Police because I'm a member of the Essex Police.
Alright?
You then work with your dog the whole time and all the time you're working with your dog, naturally enough, it's a young dog, so you're being tested and evaluated the whole time, so your training continues.
But initially you have to show a skill, or some kind of application, to be a dog trainer.
You go away for thirteen weeks on a course with the dog, you're introduced to the dog you're gonna work with, yeah?
Yeah.
And if you pass that test you go back to your police force and you are evaluated and having tests all the time.
Well that's how they train them, they train them in  er what they call public order work, in the case of chasing people and all that, they also have tracking and all kinds of things, okay?
Mm.
Is that i does that answer your  question?
Yeah.
Alright.
How many of you have seen policemen wor 
 
Shh shh
have you seen policemen working with dogs?
Yeah.
Would you
What do you think?
What do you tell P C  that you've seen?
What did you see?
I've seen   What did you see Nigel?
I suppose erm I went to this club, went to this club with erm dogs showing erm tracking down  er 
Tracking people down?
Yeah, tracking people
Burglars.
Burglars, yeah.
Was you, was er everyone in this class here when a gentleman by the name of erm Steve  brought his dog here?
Yeah.
Oh  that's when we saw  
Do you remember?
Yeah.
Yeah well what class are you in now?
Mr 
Now what, what, how long, how many years have you been here, this class?
Er three years.
Five.
Five.
Five years?
Yeah  
You may have been in they may been in the infants when 
Ooh think 
Who can remember that police dog coming here?
Yeah?
Well he's still working but cos that dog's a lot older, and a lot more grumpier
they can't take the dog to the schools any more.
He's not so, he doesn't like it coming to schools any more.
He's a, he's a bit like an old man now, slightly bit grumpy.
Well I hope I've answered that question.
Next question.
How do you become a policeman?
How do you become a policeman, right.
I can only pass comment on when I went through my training because it's all changed.
Right, what happened was I sent away a letter  to the Essex Police Force.
They sent me a reply back and I sat an exam.
The exam  had basic maths, basic English in, which I passed.
I then was sent a letter telling me that I'd passed this exam, I then had what's known as a medical to check that I was okay, there was no, I had no faults or injuries or health problems.
I then did a physical which they made me run a mile and a half, did press ups, sit ups, which I passed.
I then had to go and have an interview which I passed.
After the intervoo intervoo 
I'm sorry 
Interview.
Thank you, the in after the interview  I  went back to Chelmsford where is the headquarters of the Essex Police Force  and had to do a course for two weeks.
After I did the course for two weeks I went down to a place in Ashford  and I was in Ashford for twelve weeks, came back to Chelmsford, did another two weeks and then I was released as what's known as probationer constable, a probationer constable.
At that time you had to stay with your tutor constable who looked after you for twelve weeks.
You went out and about for twelve weeks with your tutor constable, if you like, they call it puppy walking  he was the highly trained policeman and I was the new policeman, I was with him for twelve weeks.
After twelve weeks they decided I was okay,okay, you're allowed to go out and work on your own.
And that was how I was trained and that way I was trained seven and a half years ago, it has now all changed again.
I don't know the full system but you are being evaluated and tested the whole time.
But the testing period  the testing period is two years.
Within that two years, any time within that two years  you can basically be given the sack  for not coming up to the grade or not coming up to scratch or sometimes they prolong your pr probation for another six months so instead of being a probationer constable for two years  you're a probationer constable for two and a half years.
Yeah?
Yeah, thank you.
Understand that?
But within that probation period you can sort of like get dismissed for any time quite easily.
Does that answer your question?
Yeah.
Hope it does.
Yes?
What is it like being a policeman?
What's it like being a policeman?
Great fun.
Great fun, I really enjoy it.
Do you know why I enjoy it?
Because it's not boring.
Every day is different.
Like teaching.
Like teaching.
Every day is different, that's what makes it interesting.
Because from the age of  seventeen to twenty nine I worked on building sites, and that got boring so I changed and I changed and became a policeman, and I ca became a policeman when I was twenty nine and a half  and it's, I've enjoyed it ever since cos every day  is interesting, every day is different, every day is unusual.
Right?
Does that answer your question?
Right.
What is it like in court?
What is it like in court.
Right there are two kinds of courts that policemen, well there's several kinds of court, but the main courts that policemen go to are a magistrate's court  where there is what's known as, they are magistrates or JPs, Justice of the Peace, and they sit there  and you have to give evidence.
That's quite scary.
But the really scary place is what's known as a crown court where you have to give evidence at crown court.
Have you seen the judge with his wig on?
Yeah 
And the twelve jury?
And they're all staring at you and when you're in the docks giving evidence, it is very very frightening.
I've done it now about four times and I am still scared when I do it.
When I've gone to crown court I am still petrified, that is really, really scary cos everyone in the room is hanging on your every word and if you make a mistake  you start to sweat, your hands go clammy  not very nice.
Does that answer your question?
What made you want to be a policeman.
What made I wanted to be a policeman?
Right, what made we want to be, I wanted to be a policeman when I was very young but never had the courage to do it.
So when I got older and wiser I thought I'll give that a go and I've enjoyed it ever since.
And now I look back on the years I wasted on the building sites  and I should've become a policeman ea a lot earlier cos it's great fun.
But perhaps you can, perhaps you can kno knock up jobs around the house for your wife and perhaps you can build houses.
 
I'm not that good, I'm no D I Y freak, even now.
Yes, your question?
Erm what kind of erm equipment do you use when, when erm you've been reported a, a robbery?
Alright, what kind of equipment does a policeman wear, right.
I didn't bring any of it with me but everyone's seen the tall hat haven't they?
Yes.
That's what's known as the custodial hat, that's one, that's one 
 
Shh shh  shh
Yeah?
There's the flat cap that I use in the car, yeah?
You've all seen that.
You've seen the mac, you've seen the yellow  florry jacket, the fluorescent jacket 
 
that's another piece of equipment.
My truncheon.
My radio, the radio I carry with me and the radio that's in the car.
Boots, trousers  signs as well.
Who's seen, who's seen police signs out the back of police cars that says  slow down, danger?
Yes,c or another sign that they put up by the side of the road is  was you passing this spot  this time last week  did you see anything.
That's in case there'd been a nasty accident, say there was an accident outside  the school today, yes?
Tomorrow they'll try and put up a sign to ask anyone who was passing if they saw the accident, yeah?
We carry all kinds of equipment, our radio.
We carry a little small radio that's the local one so anyone in Harlow carrying a radio would be able to talk  to Harlow police station, yeah?
But there's also a radio in the police cars that you can talk all the way over in Chelmsford which is twenty two, twenty three miles away, so you can t talk to someone in what the Essex Police call their information room, that's another piece of equipment.
Another piece of equipment we've got is a pocket notebook, we write down everything we do.
When I go back to the police station I'll write today that I've been at Harlowbury School all day doing a school visit and a school talk to different classes.
That's my pocket notebook and I keep it up to date, that's another piece of equipment I use.
Another piece of equipment I use is my boots, my shoes, my trousers, my clever truncheon pocket, it's a long thin pocket which I can put the truncheon in and it hides away.
I didn't bring it here cos I'm not allowed to hurt my knee  yeah?
All bits, other bits of equipment as well, you've got  sometimes in the back of police cars you've got  brooms and shovels to clear the mess up off the road, yeah have you seen a policeman clearing up the road, saving people 
Yeah, yeah.
driving over it and getting glass in their tyres?
Yeah?
All kinds of equipment.
Different every day cos everything is different all the time, it keeps changing.
Does that answer your question?
Great.
At the back young man.
Er what was your first idea of what you was gonna be when you grow up in the first place?
What was my first idea when, when I was little?
Yeah.
I wanted to join the army would you believe but I thought  
 
I want to join the army.
I wanted to
I want to but I might change.
You might change, exactly, like I did.
My brother's joined the army.
Oh.
I might join the ar I wanted to join the army first, yeah, and then I changed my mind.
Well I think I changed 
Do you wanna be a policeman Oliver?
Do you?
My brother's a policeman 
Yeah a lot of people a lot of people wanna be policemen.
I do too.
But they change their minds they change, they become good at something else.
Lot of, a lot of er  lot of people always will change their 
Like a road worker.
Like a road worker, anything couldn't they?
Yes I know I'm joining the army.
You wanna join the army do you?
Good for you.
Cos  
 
Beg your pardon?
Got it down  on a piece of paper .
Oh have you?
What's your question?
Erm why do you have to be strong to be a policeman?
You don't have to be strong to be a policeman.
You don't have to that's er that's not totally true.
You've just gotta have your wits about you that's all.
Gotta be erm, not clever, not brainy, I think you've got to have common sense.
The greatest a astribut attribute to be a policeman is to have common sense.
What's common sense, you lot?
Think about it, what's common sense?
Think.
Er like if you're really dumb  common sense  get er
No see
no no no, you could be very very clever  very very clever and have absolutely no common sense, you might be, still be a very clever person, be brilliant at maths  but have absolutely no common sense.
You might not ha know how  
 
when someone says to you er thirty five pence please for a newspaper, you might not have the common sense to realize
You haven't got it.
You haven't got it, exactly.
You must have common sense, that's most important.
Next question.
What is it like in the police station?
What's it like in the police station, right.
Has, does anyone watch The Bill?
Yeah.
My dad does.
Right well
Shh shh  Have you s watched The Bill, do you watch them when they're inside the police station?
It's all 
Yeah.
it's all hustle and bustle isn't it?
And then someone has a conversation with someone else  and then someone else has a conversation with someone else  and if a man was to walk right the way through the police station he has about five or six conversations, and by the time he gets to the other end of the police station he's forgotten the first conversation.
It's like Miss, when she walks from  the staff office to here, she could have four conversations and when she gets here she thinks  what was the first conversation about again?
It's like that, it's a little bit like  it's a little bit like The Bill because there's about four or five different conversations.
Alright?
Next question.
Yes young man.
What was it like when you had your police dog?
I have never had a police dog.
I've never had, never been on er the special course.
A lot of people like it  because basically th er when you look after a police dog it becomes your pet as well, you take it home with you and you take it to work with you, and the u you'll have a police dog for sort of like its working life of seven to eight years, so basically you're gonna have him for seven to eight years and he becomes a fa like a family pet.
I've never been on the course so I've never had a police dog.
Yes?
Why do you want to be a policeman?
Why did I want to be a policeman.
I don't know really.
I always, I always, when I first wanted er when I was at school I always wanted to join the army  and then I changed my mind and then I wanted to join the police force.
And then I forgot about the idea and I just drifted into something else.
Then it, then I saw an advert in the local paper and I thought yeah, I'll do that, I'll try and become a policeman.
I sent away and passed the exams and I became a policeman, but I always wanted to become a policeman when I, from about eighteen or nineteen  it's just that I drifted the wrong way.
Yes?
What is it like in jail?
What's it like in jail.
I've never been in jail and I never wanna find out what it's like in jail but if you actually ever go to the police station, Harlow police station, they sometimes let people up there and do tours, no one likes being left in the cell  cos when the door closes it's very very small and it's very claustrophobic, and it's not very nice.
So if I, I wouldn't, my answer to that is never go to jail cos it's, you're losing your freedom aren't you?
You can't go down to the shops, you can't go round your mum's, you can't go to your auntie's, you're losing your freedom.
And even in just the police station, in the small holding cells they have, it's not very nice.
I personally would not like to be held in a c in a prison.
I'm not that way inclined, I like to go for a walk and have the fresh air on me and everything.
Yes?
Where do you er keep all your, all the erm equipment that you take with you?
Right.
I we've all got lockers, you know like you've got a locker here for your books and everything?
Yeah.
We've all got a big long  locker where we put all our different coats in and our boots and all our other equipment like a long thing 
I've seen it on The Bill.
That's it, yes, like the lockers they use on The Bill, yes, that's, very similar to that, that's where, and you, and what, it's what's known as  erm the locker room or the cha 
Yeah that's, that's right, yes.
Your question?
Well do you run after people?
Have I run after people.
Yes I do.
At the moment I couldn't cos I've got a bad knee but I have run after people and caught people, yes.
Because I'm getting a bit old I have a tendency to get out of breath.
But I have run after people, yes.
Yes young man?
Why do policemen, why do policemen need dogs?
Why do they need dogs, because their dogs
their smell.
They track down drugs.
The class has an answered it for you, the class has answered it.
They can track people down, they're very good
They're not supposed to bite you see, they're supposed to chase and bark at someone and hold them there by barking and hope right that the police will turn up.
That's the idea.
Shh shh shh shh
No you ma don't make it free for all.
And because they smell along the floor.
That's right,the their, their nose is very 
 
Shh
their nose is very sensitive and I, if someone wa if someone walks across grass, yeah?
Where the shoe touches the grass it crushes the grass and releases juices and smells from the grass.
Me and you can't smell it but the dog
Can.
can, the dog can.
Cos he's got something in his nose so he can smell anything.
He's got very  he's very sensitive cells in his nose because, cos a dog used to be a hunting dog, and goes back to being a wolf, they used to track their prey to eat so they've still got that ability and we haven't, but a dog has, it can smell.
Next question, at the back.
Erm do you erm drive after people and stop them from driving fast?
I certainly do yes, but the ma the majority of that is done by traffic police, by traffic police.
We do  we, the ordinary shift  does that but usually that's traffic police  who do it.
How many people have you caught?
How many people have I caught, I couldn't tell you cos I've never kept a record.
I've got one friend who has written down in a diary  every person he's ever re arrested, I don't do that, I just, I, I can't be bothered to write it all down.
Too long, waste too much time.
Yes?
Do you have to be there for a certain amount of time?
That's all down  if you're talking about jail, prison, that's all down to the m remember I went, talking to you about the court?
That's all down to the magist 
court?
To the courts, to the magistrates, remember that man, the judge, it's all down to him and the jury, it's not down to the police.
It's wh that's everyone goes to court because it's  it's down to the er ju what they call the judicial system to work it out what it is.
My mother used to be in 
Did she?
Good for her.
Well done.
Yes?
Have you any,ev , have you ever put anyone in jail before?
Have I ever put anyone in jail, right, when you mean jail do you mean the police station or prison?
Prison.
Prison.
Prison, right.
To actually get someone to prison is exceptionally hard.
To get what they call, big word, custodial sentence, to actually give someone a custodial sentence is exceptionally hard.
I personally, in all the cases I've dealt with, which is seven and a half years, have only ever really gone to magistrates court but I've got two cases going to crown court soon, but it's exceptionally hard and to answer your question, I actually have never fou never got anyone to go to prison yet.
Alright?
Yes?
Do you er like are you one of those people like if you hear about a death
Mhm?
are you one of those people who go to the house of erm  if a member of the family's dead?
You mean like if say, terrible thing to say, if someone in the family dies, do you mean if I'm the person who goes and tells the relatives, the mum and dad or anything like, yeah 
Yeah.
I've done that and that isn't very nice.
I went, I had to tell a lady that her husband had died er about two Christmases ago, two days before Christmas.
Her husband died in a car accident and I had to go and tell his wife.
It must have been before, after my birthday then.
Oh probably then.
just before Christmas then.
Yes?
If erm  a lady, if erm a wife is on fire and it was just a wife living in the house
Mm?
erm would erm  if you'd known about it would erm you go and tell the firemen or would the firemen just find out 
Of course.
theirselves?
Of course,i er sometimes people phone up the Fire Brigade and the Fire Brigade get to the fire
First.
fire first, sometimes the police, if it's a really serious fire, get there first but the real professionals when it comes to a fire are the Fire Brigade.
So if the lady was on fire, you'd leave it basically to the Fire Brigade, obviously if you could help the lady, get a ladder up to the window to get her out of the room or something like that, you would do that, you would help in any way you can, but the real experts are the Fire Brigade so we leave all the er real technical stuff to the Fire Brigade.
My br erm my step-brother erm lived in a flat and, and the flat got on fire and they had to climb out the window and jump out 
Not very nice.
Not very nice.
and the lady  catched him.
Yeah?
It's not very nice because everyone thinks a fire is flames but the really dangerous thing is smoke and you literally can't breathe in the smoke.
I've been to a fire where there was a huge black cloud coming out of a, a flat
That's what happened to me 
and it was and you couldn't get near it because the heat of the fire was so strong and the smell of the  of the smoke was overpow you literally couldn't get near it and everyone had to come away.
Yes?
Well how do you know that someone's burgling something?
How do you know that someone's burgled something.
Sometimes they phone you up.
Sometimes, yes.
But you're talking about people who actually do it are you?
Yeah.
Right.
Sometimes they leave their fingerprints there so they get what's known as the Scenes of Crime Officer or what they call  like all po well like all forces  
But what if they've got gloves on?
Difficult.
There might be a, there might be a security camera there that catches them coming in.
There might be a witness next door.
There might be footprints.
There might be footprints, there could be anything, several things and the all those type of things is what helps the police to try and catch the people
Now what I was thinking was erm  you know, what I wondered was, shall we do er a circular game and, get yourselves into a circle quickly
Shh shh come on, quick now.
because we always do a lo we always collects words in our classes
Oh yeah?
we're good at collected words
Police words 
Shh shh.
Right so that's what I thought, we could s collect some police words now, alright?
And we've gotta go around and you have to think of one word to do with police until we stop until we run out of them.
Oh I know one.
Police 
Right.
Okay?
Right I'll just see who's looking smart to start.
So I hope you've all thought of one word, right, if somebody else has said it before you you've gotta think quick and think of something else.
Right?
Who shall I start with?
Som oh P C  can choose.
Mm mm mm mm mm  you.
Truncheon.
Gun.
Hat.
Coat.
Boots.
Trousers
What are those things on your shoulders?
Epaulettes.
Epaulettes, good girl.
Erm coats.
Said that.
Said that.
Erm 
  

Right, car.
Police siren.
Handcuffs.
Handcuffs, there's a  word isn't it?
Murderer.
Urgh  
 
Jail.
Jail.
Er burglary.
Burglary.
Er come back to Andrew shall we?
Nigel 
Court.
Court.
Boots.
We've had that.
Had that.
Another police word.
Dog.
We've had that.
Shh
Tie.
Tie?
Right.
A really nasty word, right
Officer
Officer, that's a good word.
Car keys.
Car keys.
Pad.
Pad.
If you can't think of one, pass, alright?
Cos we've run out of 
Miss I've got one.
Go on, back again.
Shh shh shh
Pass if you can't think of one.
Socks.
Socks.
That's not really a police word is it?
Shield.
Oh a shield, yes.
Er that thing he's got on his  the number thing.
Oh his number.
Collar numbers.
Well done.
Collar numbers.
Right.
Shirt.
A shirt right, okay, but really good words now from some of the things he's told us like going to 
Court.
We've had that.
Right we need some more words.
I know one
 

Erm hat
Hat, well
Shh shh shh shh 
A really good word, come on, some, some criminal words  
 

Policeman
Eh?
Policeman.
Two two two four.
Oh right!
Skill.
Oh a skill, that's a good one.
Police station.
Police station, nobody's said that.
Right.
Can't hear it.
gas mask  
Gas mask.
Oh gas mask.
Judge.
Judge.
Judge, judge.
Any more?
Nicked, well that's a good word, I like that, go on.
Nicked, you're nicked.
Any more now?
Cos you've all   twice.
Stole.
Stole.
Truncheon.
Truncheon.
Fire Brigade.
Fire Brigade.
Fireman, we're on to firemen now, what, why do policemen, what do policemen go to the houses for?
They go to tell about
A crime.
Crimes and
Murder.
Murderer.
Murders and
We've said that.
Pardon?
Car crash.
Oh car crashes 
Burglaries.
burglaries.
I said that.
Stab.
Stabbings
We've had burglaries.
Deaths.
The handprints and the
Oh handprints and fingerprints
Blood.
Urgh
Blood
Oh clues, good boy.
Kidnapped.
Kidnapped, that's a good one.
Guns.
Guns.
Had that.
Papers.
Oh loads of papers
Caught in the act!
That's a good one.
Police car.
Erm
David's got one.
What kind of policemen are there?
Officers.
Yeah, what kind?
Er Miss, Miss.
Officers
Traffic police.
traffic police
Er C I D
C I D
Well done.
Train policemen.
Oh yes.
 
Yes they look after the trains.
Railway police they're called aren't they?
Oh The Bill.
Miss I know!
Ah yeah!
Hands down, hands down because erm  we've got to go and change to another class now to
Miss, I've got one.
 
Shh shh shh shh Hands down, hands down.
Right.
Thank you very much for asking so many questions, thank you for all the words at the end, they'll come in useful.
I've got one.
They're not actually in a conversation but we always do that sort of thing anyway.
  
Could do couldn't you?
Right all sit down show me how quiet er how quietly you can sit.
Right.
Thank you very much for asking all the questions and thank you very much for working so hard for Tony.
Thank you.
Right, we'll say thank you P C  and thank you Tony.
Thank you P C  and Tony.
You're welcome and thank you  
 
Thank you.
and  they're a nice lot aren't they P C ?
 
Not bad, there's one or two characters but
on, on, on the whole they're not too bad, yeah
Well
hard workers.
they're all characters, they're great.
Stand up   shh  Hey , come back.
I remember saying two words 
Go and sit down again and
Stand up.
sit down again the lot of you.
Why?
Because I said  stand up quietly.
Right now we've got to, I'll send Andrew who's, who's a sensible boy, he can open the door quietly for you.
And then you can go back and get a reading book out cos we haven't had reading  
say walkie-talkie 
Yeah that's okay, that's a good, yeah you can say
 

What, what would you say, what would you say, what is the proper word then for 
Police what?
What's the proper word for nick 
 
nicking someone as you keep saying?
Arrest.
You arrest someone.
Are you allowed to say alcohol?
Yeah if you wanna say alcohol, yes.
Right.
Right, right  yeah that's, that's okay, that's a good word, yeah.
Shh shh shh.
Right this gentleman here is Tony and he's recording this lesson 
 
he's recording this lesson, okay?
He wants to hear everyone use words.
I'm gonna be talking, Miss is gonna be talking, but you're gonna be talking.
We, he wants us to hea hear  the words spoken, spoken words, yeah?
So he wants to hear people talk.
But he doesn't wanna hear everyone have a free for all, if you've got something to say, well say it.
Put your hand up.
Yeah.
Well done.
What are we talking about, what's the subject?
Is it, is it
Space.
Well  yes in actual fact our topic at the moment is weather and space.
Weather and space.
How we gonna fit that in with 
   
Right you can ask  
aliens.
But we were sort of,begin to look at 
Aliens .
What do I know about aliens?
weather in other countries and that's why I think  
Right okay then we'll talk about 
Oh!
Actually, saying that, sorry, we did  start talking about the F B I.
The F B I, right, the F B I who er the F B I, who knows what the F  B  I stands for?
What d 
 
Wanna say goodbye?
What does the F B I stand for?
Federal Bureau of Investigations.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, right, where is  or where do, the F B I work?
Think about it and no shouting out.
Where do the F B I work?
What country?
Think about it.
I know.
America.
Good lad, America.
Who knows where their headquarters is?
Where's their headquarters?
New York.
New York, is it?
Shh  who's calling out?
Wanna say goodbye?
Fast 
 
becoming a pain.
You can join him outside if you want.
Go.
Washington C, Washington D C.
Close enough.
Do you know the actual name of the town where the headquarters is?
I know .
Police station.
No, police station!
Er 
No.
Hands , it's a place called  Quantick 
 Quantick 
 Quantick okay?
Erm ou the man who runs Harlow Police Station, Chief Superintendent Mick , went there about eight weeks ago, to the headquarters of the F B I.
The F B I was set up to fight criminals in America.
What is the famous boss, or the old famous boss, of the F B I?
He's
I know.
he's, he died a little while ago.
John F Kennedy.
John F Kennedy?
No no no no no.
The famous boss of the F B I was, let's all say it, J Edgar Hoover.
J Edgar Hoover.
And he was set up to fight crime  federal crime  in America, right?
So let's work out where the federal crime comes in.
At the bottom there's America and America is divided up into states, the states of America, right?
And within the states, each state, there are towns  areas, whatever and 
Villages.
Villag anything at all, certain areas, and they are divided up into small  police forces within a state, yeah?
The small police forces are covered by what's known as the state police, so you've got  the town police, or the county police  then you've got the state police and you've also got what's known as the highway police, the state highway police, yeah?
And above them you've got the F B I which means the F B I could come to your state and they would control all the police work, but they could go to another state, whereas all the state police could only work within one state.
Have I explained that
Mhm
have I explained that properly?
Mm.
Have I explained that properly one and all?
Yes.
Right, right.
So there's the  the top police, the F B I  the state police  and the local county police, yeah?
You've missed the highway
And, and the highway police are up there with the state police, they can go anywhere within the state, yeah?
Mm.
F B I  state police  and at the bottom county police, yeah, understand that?
Yeah.
Which are you?
Which am I?
I'm another one here down at the bottom, I'm a county police 
County police.
because England hasn't got an F B I.
It doesn't need one, there's not many crimes.
America has got Pardon?
Not many crimes in Harlow, in er England.
 
There isn't many crimes in England?
Not as much as America.
Wake up!
Right, there's no F B I, no F B I, there isn't a F B I in England right?
There isn't an F B I in England because  there isn't a state police.
France have got a state police, and I've forgotten what they're called, C R S, they are what's known as the C R S and they are ri riot police and they go anywhere in the country.
England hasn't got it, England hasn't got  what they would call a national police force.
We have got all the little ones, the county police forces.
If anyone was to take on the role of the state police it would be the Metropolitan Police Force who have got experts  and if say something happened in Manchester like  an I R A bombers  left some bombs in Manchester, experts from the Metropolitan Police would go to Manchester to help out, they're what's known as the Anti-Terrorist Squad
Oh yeah.
but they are still Metropolitan Police officers.
Make sense?
Mhm.
Understand that?
Mhm.
Have I explained that?
Everyone understand that?
Yes.
Okay then.
What else do you wanna know?
Anything else?
Perhaps you could tell P C  some of the things to do with the investigation that were in the programme,
 
what, sorry go on Craig, yeah?
There was a fire at Mr  's store and they called it arson.
Well done, that's a good word, when we use our little circle of words you can use that word, yeah?
Just the one.
take over a  they call it copyright infringement.
Copyright infringement.
Copyright infringement is someone 
they've learnt something this morning  
Yes.
Copyright infringement, good one.
It, that's used in what's known as fraud, yeah?
The computer fraud is becoming a big business, yeah?
Good word.
What other questions?anyone s go on then.
courage 
There's another word for copyright infringement.
What's that?
Bootlegging.
Bootlegging.
Bootlegging, yes.
Bootlegging.
Do you know bootlegging as well there's another one, you see the tapes in machines, yeah?
Someone will take  where is it?
There isn't one in there.
Someone will take a microphone  to a concert and you'll hear, say a band, any band you wanna think of, say what er who shall we say?
Genesis.
 
Take That.
Take That, we'll say Take That, a man sits 
 
he takes a tape in and he  records
the whole concert.
He then got it there, he then takes that tape and plays another tape  he makes a?
Records it all.
Bootleg.
He makes a bootleg.
Right.
 
It doesn't come out very well though all the time.
No it doesn't come out all the time  very well.
Why are you an expert on mm mm mm?
No.
All you've gotta do is  
Right it's a bootleg it's a bootleg, that's it, it's a good word, bootleg.
But it, but that would be a fraud because you're, you're 
Yeah?
That'd be a fraud, a kind of fraud, yeah?
Great word.
Anything else you've learnt in th on your course?
Bootlegging was a long time ago when er the people wasn't allowed to 
Bootlegging's still happening now, it still goes on now, and it still causes the music industry  lots to lose, lots and lots of money, lots and lots of money.
Any other questions?
Any other questions, come on think about it?
What were the children doing in the programme?
Investigating  
 
Oh yeah they were investigating 
Investigating.
That's what police officers do, they investigate crimes, they investigate crimes.
The federals.
What's known as the uniform branch turn up to investigate a crime, I hope you're all listening 
 
Yeah, the uni er the uniform branch turn up to investigate a crime and if they find fingerprints they will get what's known as a scenes of crime officer  to take the fingerprints off  the wall, yeah?
But they'll also get
the C I D, they'll get a detective to come along and help investigate the crime, so we investigate the crimes like you did on your computer course, yeah?
We do our own investigations, yeah?
Happy with that?
Mm.
Erm  on this film I saw when they was getting the fingerprints they had this sort of like little cloth in a bag and they sort of 
That's right, yes.
Because e if you all look at your fingerprints now, you're looking at, no one else in the world has got fingerprints like you've got.
They are all individual, no one 's got the same fingerprints that you've got.
They're not the same, can you see there's little circles, little whirls, little loops, little arches
No.
yeah?
You have a look, everything is different.
No one in the world has got fingerprints like you've got because we are all different.
Right?
Right I think we'll have  working now cos I'm drying up quickly.
First word, use a good, a good police word.
I know.
Gun.
Shh.
Gun, yeah.
Court.
Court, well done.
Handcuffs.
Handcuffs.
Prison.
Prison.
 
 
Pardon?
Drinking?
Drink driving, that's good enough.
Arson.
Arson.
Jail.
Jail.
Keys.
Keys.
Fingerprints.
Fingerprints.
What did I call that person who comes  
 
what did I call it?
Shh!
Something I can't remember 
Can't remember?
Alright then.
Crikey.
Speak up loud, you've gotta be  speak up loud and clear.
No.
Uniform.
Uniform.
Uniform.
Detective.
Detective, well done.
Crime.
Crime, well done.
Copyright infringement.
Copyright infringement.
Bars.
Bars.
F I B.
F I B?
F B I.
F B I.
  
walkie talkie.
Sierra oscar?
That's a call sign, sierra oscar, what does, okay then, sierra oscar, what does it stand for?
I dunno, a car.
What is it , a car, yeah, but why?
What are they using when they call that out?
Sierra oscar 
C erm to  
 
Mayday.
Shh shh shh shh.
No no no it's a special, it's a special
I know!
it's a special language  yeah?
Right what's your name?
Craig.
Craig?
Craig, your name is charlie romeo alpha india golf.
No I'm not.
What is your second name?
, well how do you spell it?
 

Hold on,that is charlie oscar november 
 

yankee  alpha  romeo  delta.
That's, that's the alphabet you're using, and you're using, you said sierra oscar.
So that, what they're saying is sierra stands for S, oscar stands for O.
It's a way of remembering complicated   
 
a way of remembering index numbers, your name, because if someone goes to you S O  it's quite easy to forget it, but if someone said sierra oscar, an hour later you'd go what was that? what was that?
I can't remem oh sierra oscar, I've remembered.
It's a way of re making things  
 
I knew it cos I've watched The Bill.
Well yeah, exactly.
Next question?
D I, D C I
D C I, yeah I'll give you that one, detective chief inspector, ooh and who do you know who's a detective chief inspector?
Assault.
Ass assault, well done.
Arrest.
Arrest, well done, good word.
Offices.
Offices, yeah, we all need offices.
Murder.
Murder, good word.
Bootlegging.
Bootlegging, well done, we've all gone round  
I haven't 
Oh!
Go on, a word from you.
jacket.
Jasper Carrott, he's supposed to  
 

Shh shh.
fingerprints did they?
Fingerprints, yeah.
They're not walkie talkies, they're a radio.
We've got two kinds of radio, we have one radio we carry ourselves
Yeah.
which is for local and one in the car which is county wide, which can cover the whole of Essex, yeah?
Not on them little boxes.
Not on them little ones, no, you have to have special adaptors to make those little ones go everywhere.
Yes?
Hold on a second 
 
shh.
If you, if you arrest someone for murder would you say suspicion of first degree murder?
No.
Right that's, that's, you see you're getting
the American stuff but  when you're arrested you are always arrested on suspicion  because in this country you are innocent until a cou a court proves you're i er guilty, yeah?
I can't arrest you and say guilty cos you have to go to court, so you would always be arrested on suspicion of murder.
Cos if you went to court and you was innocent and you got off, that's it.
The police only enforce the law, they can't make the law work, the people who make the law work are the judiciary.
I said, did I say that right?
Judiciary, yeah, big word of the day, judiciary.
You are always arrested on suspicion, a suspicion of something, yeah?
And someone will say I'm arresting you on suspicion of murder  
Erm  if you see the murder happen can you say  erm that  you are guilty?
No.
I can give evidence that I s right  for, say, we'll go back to his, his er idea, suspicion of murder, I can say I saw him take a hammer  and whack him, split his head open, he dropped down dead.
I could give evidence on that, yeah?
But I still can't make him guilty.
Only a judge and a jury can make him  guilty.
That's why police officers have to go to magistrate's courts, and crown courts, to give evidence.
But it is the magistrate or, or a er a crown court judge and jury who make him guilty.
I can only give evidence and if they don't believe my evidence, he's innocent.
If they believe mine  evidence, he's guilty.
Yeah?
What?
Erm in America I think it is erm they carry them black th they're black erm  things  
Poles.
they carry around w they carry around with them.
Truncheon.
Like a truncheon?
Yeah.
Right they're called  a pacifier.
They're, they're like  a long stick with a handle on them aren't they?
Yeah.
There is an i there is an idea afoot to bring them to this country, to let policemen, cos the policeman's truncheon is only short   use them someone has to be close but these pacifiers can be a offensive weapon and a defensive weapon.
Yeah?
But that's gonna take about five or six years to come to frui fruition because all the er chief constables are talking about it and if anything works slowly it's chief constables.
They're called a pacifier and you can sort of like use them to strike and to defend yourself with them yeah?
Are you allowed to use bulletproof jackets.
Are you allowed to use bulletproof jackets, yes.
I wouldn't use a bulletproof, well  in certain circumstances I might, but I'm not trained to carry a firearm so I wouldn't use a  I, hopefully, I won't get selected to go into a house where I need to wear a bulletproof uniform.
You have to go on special courses to carry guns
What  the army?
in this  No it's a special, it's a different tactic.
In the army they fire bullets and they have their big powerful bullets and the idea is  that the bullet  comes through her, travels across, goes through her and goes into him so there's
one, two, three casualties so it will take four people to carry her, four people to carry her, four people to carry him, that is sixteen, that is, altogether, twelve plus three, fifteen people we've taken out of the battle, yeah?
Whereas a police  bullets  they wanna hit her and stay in here.
Because what's the point of hitting her, coming through her, travelling half a mile
You might hit another
and kill a innocent person.
And we don't want that to happen, and we have different kinds of bullets that hit her and stay there.
Oh like them er put out ones what, like the darts?
Totally different.
Totally different.
We just want it to stay there, different calibre, different power  and different altogether.
We don't, we just want 
 
the guilty person shot, we don't want the guilty person shot, come out  hit the innocent person.
Yeah?
Cos we would be in trouble.
Yeah?
Agree?
Have they just got Colt revolvers?
Well  you're watching the Americans again.
You've been watching the Americans, they, cos the Americans, why do American police officers carry guns?
Self defence.
No.
Self defence, but there is something important that allows American police officers to carry their guns 
 
It's not crime, it's got nothing to do with crime, it's got nothing to do with cowboys and indians
it's got nothing to do with self defence.
Cos you can, cos er other people can buy guns in America.
He has his moments.
Yeah!
He has his moments doesn't he?
Yes there is something ticking away in there.
Right.
 
Under the c under the constitution of America, big word, constitution of America, it is written into the constitution of America  all, I think it goes, all  militia men  militia men and men can bear arms for their country which basically reads they can defend their country, they can have a gun in their house to defend their country.
But what it meant is it got read, written into the constitution, it meant that everyone can buy a gun.
So if everyone's got a gun
What even a ten year old kid?
Well we've, think about it, common sense.
The policeman's gotta carry the gun because if everyone else in the country has a gun, the policeman needs a gun.
Yeah?
Makes sense.
Because it's written into the constitution that all men can bear arms to defend the country.
So everyone goes out, buys a gun and when a policeman says why have you got that gun?
Er if there's a war I'm gonna defend my country with that gun.
It's a load of rubbish but everyone does it, everyone carries a gun.
But there was, but each state 
 
has different legislation, yeah?
Each state has, in some states you can be eighteen  and carry a gun but in another state you've gotta be twenty one, they make all different laws.
That's why it's very very hard to get rid of the guns in America, cos there's so many about.
Yeah?
Do they just carry hand guns?
They can carry hand guns, they can carry rifles they can 
Machine guns.
Machine guns  cos  
  
Think about it.
Be, use common sense, you're not er you're not that daft to say bazookas.
 

Yeah?
And who, who has seen certain films where someone just walks into it, shows his driving licence and he buys a gun, yeah?
No, I've seen Terminator, he does.
 
I knew he was gonna say  I knew you was gonna get Terminator in the convers , he said it out there didn't he?
Sooner or later he's gonna get Terminator in the conversation.
Yeah.
Shh shh.
Shh shh.
Yes okay then use, use a bad, use a bad example, yes did you see Terminator when Arnold  Schwarzeneger walks into the shop , yeah?
Did you see him 
bullet out and k kills a man.
Yeah, he, he 
 
it was literally b literally like going up to the shop and buying a newspaper.
All he has to do is show he's over a certain age  can prove who he is, you can buy a gun.
It is that easy.
You just buy a machine gun.
  
That is the reason, that is why, the reason why all police officers in America carry guns.
It's not that they need them, it's because they know everyone else has got them.
Yeah?
They need  
 
And here's, here's, hold on a minute here's, here's something else here's a statistic, in America  in America, when a policeman, every time a policeman fires his gun  and I'm not talking about one or two I'm talking everyone, it's a statistic, you all know what statistics is I hope?
Statistics.
Every time a policeman in America, every four times  a policeman in America, that could be a policeman in New York, a policeman in Los Angeles, a policeman in Boston and a policeman in Seattle  yeah?
Or Chicago.
Within  Well whatever, yeah.
Right?
Shh.
Of those four usually shoots  the person they er  the person they shoot, yeah?
The person they're after shooting.
The other  
Punch him.
 

You say that  you say that but can I punch you?
Yeah.
Hold on a second   here's one, can I punch you?
  
Think about it,com are you with us?
Cooee!
Are you with  can I punch you, can I punch you?
No.
Can I punch Miss?
Yeah.
Yeah.
 
I can punch Miss can I?
  
Shh shh shh think about it.
Hold on, no no no, calm down.
Think about it.
Need to get through me first.
Eh?
Can I do it?
Think about it, it's a game we're playing, think about it.
Yeah?
Can I go up and punch Miss?
Yeah.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
Who says yes?
Who says yes?
Who says no?
You're both right and you're both wrong.
 
Because, because she's done nothing.
Shh shh.
Keep going, keep going, you're a his moments doesn't he?
He does have moments.
 
Shh.
She's done nothing, she's done nothing to hurt you.
Keep going.
some reason.
Keep, shh shh shh, keep going.
She's not guilty.
You're, you're on the right lines, you're on the right lines.
She has done?
Nothing
Nothing wrong.
Yeah.
Right, if she's done nothing wrong  if er if she's done nothing 
 

Shh
Can you answer this question?
Oh right.
Right.
If she's done nothing wrong, right?
And I walk up and punch her  what, what, what have I done, think about it, what have I done?
Think about it.
Assault.
Think about it.
Without shouting out, you're right, I've assaulted her.
Was that assault on her  justified?
She's done, she's 
though?
Shh shh, she's done nothing, she's done nothing wrong and I've assaulted her  was the assault justified?
She's done nothing wrong.
No.
She  
  
Is it justified?
No.
Right.
Fair enough.
I, when I ass when a policeman  assaults someone it has got to be  justified.
Yes, right then, same thing 
 
Miss comes at me  with a knife and she attempts to stab me and she means it, she wants to stab me and she means it
So you can
Shh shh shh.
I then defend myself and assault Miss, I assault Miss, yeah?
She's trying her hardest to stab me, and I assault her.
Is the assault justified?
Yes.
Who agrees with him?
Yes.
Me.
You're right, yeah, it has to be justified.
If I just walk across, you're sitting there, and just kick someone  is it justified?
No.
I've got no right to do it, I break the law like anyone else.
Yeah?
I break the law like anyone else.
You can be put in jail.
I can be put in jail, yeah.
Exactly the same.
When I assault someone it has to be  justified.
Yeah?
Pardon?
Right.
Let's go one rou round again, we've had enough words, we'll go the other way  good police word, go
Police dog.
Police dog.
You've gotta speak up loud.
yeah.
Uniform.
Jerseys.
Body.
Police lady.
Lock.
Erm  erm  number.
Account.
Sierra oscar.
Good word.
Police horse.
Good girl, yeah,
Guilty.
Go again?
Guns.
Bootlegging.
Police car.
Court.
Policeman.
Jail.
Prisoner.
Court.
County police.
Homicide.
What's a homicide?
What is it?
I knew you'd ask me that .
Okay then, shh shh shh.
Hold on a second, she's used the word homicide
I know what that is.
Shh shh shh shh  it's th that is the correct word for what word?
Burglary.
Shh shh shh
No.
Homicide.
Homicide is the proper word  for the word I want one of you to come up with.
Shh shh shh.
It starts with M.
Murder.
Murder.
The proper word is homicide.
Alright?
Where were we?
We've got to do this.
We've finished.
We've got to do this.
Law enforcement.
Law enforcement, what a good way to end the conversation.
Right  if I can get the video  there is a video somewhere in the police station that shows a lot of different police forces, but it's finding it.
It may be too old it's, I think it's about twenty years old
and we may not be able to show it to you.
But if I can find it 
I've got a video that's over twenty years old.
I'll bring it back, but otherwise  good word.
So right, the one thing, without calling out, if I assault someone, and that is punch them,kich kick them, hit them, do anything
Murder them.
Shh!
There's about five people you can get really to dislike in this class isn't there?
Right.
If I assault someone  and it is not justified, not justified, can I be arrested?
Yes.
Oh  I'm impressed.
You've actually learnt something, hands down  hands down.
It's three o'clock.
Yeah well we're gonna stay here cos we've got quarter of an hour and if you want to listen to this that's fine, but if you wanna carry on 
Yes alright.
whatever you want to do, but it's not worth doing anything else other than we're going to play a few games  but they're 
Yes!
word games.
Okay ?
Miss we haven't done our spelling test.
Oh well we could have a spelling test instead.
No   
Right can you just move back a little bit more so I can actually  
 

Right  facing this way  Simon can you turn round as well please, Robert  Right the first game very easy, I'm going to point to somebody, we're going to go through the alphabet, they're going to give me the name of an animal.
Oh.
When we get to  the ones that we say are awkward  alright, we'll er let you think of  erm a way out, okay?
Mm
We've come across it before and there's sometimes there is a little way out so let's see if you can just think of it, so let's start with Craig  and we'll go  anti-clockwise.
So starting with A
Er  animal.
Right, do we accept that?
No.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No.
 
not an animal
  
Er who, well we can't have everybody shouting out.
I've got one.
Who accepts animal?
Who thinks that's  a good answer?
It could be any animal.
Who does not accept it?
Right
It could be any animals.
okay we'll start again with Craig  and  A.
Er  
erm
I've got one Miss.
 
Anteater 
we've given you two goes, turn round.
Miss, Miss, Miss 
Turn round.
No we're still on A really, we haven't got one for A yet.
 

Right, shh!
Alli alligator.
Right.
Er shush  we need to be very quiet, we don't want 
Bull.
Bull, right.
Cat.
Cat.
Erm dog.
Dog.
Elephant.
Elephant.
I know!
Hurry up otherwise we have to turn you round.
 

No?
Erm  I
I 
Indian elephant.
That's what I said, excellent, that's a crafty way of getting out of it, good.
 

J
Right, too long 
jaguar 
turn round.
Oh J, J erm  
 

I know one.
I want the rest of you thinking.
Jaguar.
Good girl.
Er elephant.
Er well 
Try again.
She got one, we're looking at you Hazel.
Oh er koala.
Yes, right, koala.
L.
L.
Er  leopard 
you get lots of help from everybody else.
Monkey.
Oh!
N, N. 
I know it.
Turn round, come on.
Good girl.
What did she say?
Nice cat.
Erm  penguin.
Koala bear.
 

You can go on to R alright, cos we've actually 
Shh.
Shh.
Can we have everybody sitting up Peter cos  
 

Rabbit.
Good girl.
Snake.
Right.
T 
Tarantula.
 

an animal, turn round.
U. 
Er shh
I know Miss, a teddy bear.
  

James , James 
Don't know.
I think you'd better go next door, you've been warned enough this afternoon.
I know Miss.
Unicorn.
Good boy.
Ah I was gonna say unicorn.
V?
V, I know.
A very 
Good girl .
Erm 
Good.
Er I don't know if I can give xylophone cat, it's a good erm
A cat that can play a xylophone .
X-ray erm fish.
X-ray fish, very good, okay.
What do you mean by that?
There's a fish called an X-ray fish.
Yeah I know er
Sit up cos we're lounging around and it's still not time yet.
Right, this time it's going to be carrying on from, where did we get to X 
Y 
Y, yes.
Keep going then till we finish the alphabet then we'll do food.
Yellow ostrich.
Good.
Z, zebra.
Right, food we're on to now  
 
My favourite, good.
Erm 
Bolognaise.
I'm out Miss.
Oh right.
You're out?
You should be turned round, that would help us.
Hannah, we're on C.
C erm 
I know!
Er er
Celery.
Rick!
Out!
Chinese.
Good girl.
Dog food.
  

We'll give you another chance, I don't think we can actually, well  
 

Shh shh shh shh.
Think, think of something else.
Hurry up otherwise
There isn't one.
Right, turn round.
Yes there is.
D, are you out are you ?
If I hear anybody else call out they can go next door.
Where are we up to?
F.
No she's out and she's out.
Oh, fish.
jam.
G!
Oh
You're out.
Oh, what are we doing?
G
G
Oh G.
Erm golden egg.
Right.
 

fish.
 

A heavy fish I'd of said.
Alright we'll be kind to you, H I 
Shh
Right, you need to hurry up.
Ink.
 

Oh ink.
You can't eat ink.
Right too long.
I we're on.
Ice.
Ice.
Out.
Nathan will you sit up so I can see whether you're in or out.
In.
Right, J.
Miss can we come back in?
J jam.
Right, Natalie, K.
Erm 
Shh, shh shh.
I'm asking Natalie at the moment.
Good girl.
Sorry?
I know!
Erm
Too long.
Lemon.
Good girl.
Simon
No, you're out.
Mrs  Jamie's out and he's not 
James, shh, I'm trying to listen to Steven.
Hurry up otherwise you're out.
Erm  
No, too long.
Matthew's out, Hannah it's you.
Nuts.
Good girl.
Orange.
Good girl.
I'm out.
You're out are you?
Right erm
Q  Too long
Gherkin.
Quail, yes you can eat, yeah, quail.
What did she say?
Quail.
Right,you in?
Yeah.
good girl.
Erm tea.
Tea yes, Craig are you out?
You we're on to.
Right you're out.
Hannah, U
Erm 
What's she on?
Er 
No, Hazel?
U
Erm
 Ucky stuff?
 Ucky stuff, no.
No that's 
There isn't.
There is.
No I can't hear.
Shh shh.
U, U.
No.
Right we'll keep going round till somebody's got a U.
I know 
Is everybody out then?
Yogurt.
I got one Miss.
Everybody out?
Yogurt.
That's Y.
   
Everybody close in  again.
Right, now, I don't want anybody calling out, listen 
 
very carefully, you two boys move back  
 
Abby.
What?
You need to listen very carefully.
You do not call out, you do not lay around on the floor.
If you get the right answer  you may go and get dressed and do not d ti disappear until the bell goes.
Dressed.
And put your shoes on, get your coat  
 
Er Miss  's got a few bits for people there so could you make sure they get  there's some football letters to be given out I think .
So nobody actually goes until the bell goes, but you need to be listening Matthew because you don't know what you've got to take to the party yet.
Oh, ah, ooh!
Right.
So I am going to go this way round, right, and I'm going to take some  doughnuts.
I'm going to a party and I'm going to take a monkey.
You can't go.
I'm going to a party and I'm gonna take a 
You can't go.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take some monkey nuts.
You can't go.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take an elephant.
You can't go.
Going to the party  and I'm going to take  an apple.
You can't go.
A tick-tock.
You can't go.
Erm  er
Too long
I'm gonna take a Veronica.
A what?
Veronica.
A Veronica?
Yeah, it's a flower.
Oh I thought you said a running car then.
Igloo
An igloo, no.
Knickers.
Knickers, no.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take  ice.
No.
Er I'm going to the party and I'm going to take ice cream.
No.
I'm going to the party and I'm going to take an apple.
No.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take a
I know what it is.
cat.
No.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take a nut.
No.
A goat.
No.
Gonna take er  knife.
No.
A lemon.
No.
 
you can come back in a minute and see if it's what you think.
I know what it is.
A apple?
No.
Ice cream.
No.
No.
No.
Nuts?
No.
I shall take some dates.
I'm going to the party, I'm gonna take  some  
No.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take  
Take care now.
No.
An elephant?
No.
Shh shh.
Sorry?
Elephant, no.
Teeth.
Teeth?
No.
An ostrich, no.
An orange.
An orange, no.
Erm an elephant.
No.
No.
take an elephant.
An elephant, no.
No.
Igloo.
No.
Ice?
No.
Apple?
No.
No.
Apple.
No.
 
I said apple.
I mean elephant.
 

Miss I mean elephant.
  
No?
Right,
No don't t don't tell them.
But I thi if it's what I think it is
Yes?
then I re erm I think that 
Er let's see if you think you know what it is.
What would Steven take?
Erm  an elephant?
No.
So you were lucky, so you don't know.
Right.
What did she say Miss?
I'm gonna take erm  I'm gonna take my dentist.
Oh I know what it is!
Shh 
A monkey.
A monkey, no.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take 
No.
I'm going to the party and I'm gonna take  a hat.
You can go.
What she say?
Oh!
So what you gonna take?
Alphabet.
Alphabet, no.
I'm gonna take  a zebra.
Zebra, no.
Er lemon.
Lemon, no.
Lemon.
No .
It's worth trying, could, just because she can't take a lemon it doesn't mean you can't take a lemon,
 

I know it.
Shh.
Apple.
Apple, no.
Rabbit.
Rabbit, no.
Igloo.
No.
What is it Hannah?
I know, I know what it is.
a cat.
No.
It's a chicken.
You can go.
Is it erm 
Yes Jamie, excellent, you can have a point for your team.
Elephant.
No.
  
Right we're going to pick  people then who are sitting up nice  
 
which won't be all those people that crawled in front of me.
Hazel, you may go  and  
Oh that!
What it actually was was the, the initial of the person sitting next to you.
Oh!