

not his hair, not other things about him, obvious  things about him.
His colour.
What colour was he?
Erm white.
Good lad.
He was white.
Obvious things about him again that you might forget, obvious things.
He had a moustache.
He had a moustache, yes, but I'm talking about really obvious things that we might forget.
Policemen would remember but you might forget, obvious thing  he was white 
Slim.
Good girl.
He was slim.
And we have done this before haven't we?
Yeah he was slim, what else was he?
Was he  right at the back.
Quite tall.
He was quite tall.
Obvious things about him you forget, right?
He was white  slim and quite tall, yeah?
Then you can give him the clothes, right  I want the clothes.
Erm dark  no light brown leather jacket.
Light brown leather jacket, we'll see in a minute on the video 
He had black jeans on and white
Cords.
shoes.
Black jeans and white cords, we'll see if you're right, it's gonna be on in a minute.
Black shades.
Black shades, when do you mean black shades, like mirror shades yeah?
Yeah.
Right, well done.
Erm he was in his thirties.
He was in his thirties, I would put him in his early thirties, yeah, I'd say he was younger than me.
Yeah 
He had brown hair.
He had brown, see if you're right in a minute.
See if you're right.
He had a moustache.
He had a moustache, yes.
He had a blue car and
He had a blue car, stop it there, I'll  stop it there, he had a blue car.
What is important about the car?
You've gotta remember.
Oh !
Yeah, what have you got to remember about the car?
Registration.
Good girl, the registration number, yeah we had  before  once or twice.
Right all hands down  and no guesses, no guesses, what was  the number?
Oh!
Oh!
No guesses, what was the number?
There you go my man.
M J B three six seven X.
Is he right or is he wrong?
Right.
Who says he's right?
Who says he's wrong?
Top of the class, well done.
M J B three six seven X.
Cos I've caught you out on that before, yeah.
What else do you remember about the man?
He had a deep voice.
He had a deep voice, yeah.
I think we've got all of it haven't we?
But the important points, what?
His shoes were like plimsoll  .
His shoes were like plimsolls, fair enough, yeah, we'll   But the impoi important things to remember, if you can, was his car  his number plate, yeah?
He was white  he was slim and he was a tall man.
Yeah?
Very important.
Okay you may not have ever seen him, he may just have been sitting in the car, then remember his colour  maybe his moustache  and then the type of car he had.
Can anyone, top of the class, what kind of car was it?
Oh!
Shh shh shh.
What type of car was it?
Volkswagen.
Volkswagen what?
Polo?
No, you're guessing.
  

It was a hatchback.
It was a hatchback.
You're gonna see it again  
No it's not it's the other one innit?
It was blue.
Blue, yes, blue.
If you didn't see it, it's a tricky one but  there's a good way, we've brought up a good point as well, if we look at the car  when the car comes up, who said Polo?
Cos it's not a Polo, it's a Jetta, it's the one with the boot but if you can't remember what it is  you can either, did you know the difference between a car with a boot and a car with a hatchback?
Do you know the difference?
Do you know the difference?
If you don't say, say you don't know the difference and I'll explain.
I don't.
You don't?
A hatchback is where all the back comes up here like a Fiesta  yeah?
And where  a boot is where only the booty bit comes out the, the, the glass window doesn't come up as well.
Understand that?
Yeah?
Yeah.
A hatchback is where it all comes up and it all swings up, the whole back swings up doesn't it?
What's that, like a  Ford Fiesta?
A little, little Peugeot
A Sierra.
No, a Sierra, a Sierra  the whole lot comes up, yes, but they've now changed to a Sapphire and the Sapphire is just the boot, yeah?
So you can explain, if you don't remember the car  remember if it was a hatchback or a boot.
It comes in handy,know  a blue car and I think it has a boot, I can't tell you the type of, don't make it up, if you don't kn know, don't make it up.
White, slim, early thirties, very tall man, yeah?
Very.
Would you have said he was slim or very slim?
Slim.
I thought he was very slim actually.
I'll go with you, I'd say he was very slim, he was a very slim man.
Thank you 
No it's not being horrible to anyone, skinny wasn't he?
Yeah?
. We'll see how well we got on and how we didn't.
See what we've got.
Whitey type trainers, plimsolls, yeah that's close enough innit?
Who said black trousers?
Are they black?
No, grey.
Grey  you could say they were dark, if you didn't know for definite you could say they were dark trousers.
If you don't know don't make it up, don't guess.
Who said moustache?
Well done.
yeah?
The glasses, well done.
Whitey type, I don't know what they are  casual shoes.
M J B three six seven X, well done.
It's a Jetta, a V W Jetta.
Right, when you start  your holiday  been coming here now years and years and years and every year I show you that video, you know that video off by heart, you should do  so when you play, play safe, that's all I'm saying, play safe.
Enjoy yourself  but play safe.
If someone approaches you  and you don't know them, someone you don't know  is a stranger.
Did you see how nice the man was when he started to talk to Jason  oh I'll go and help you  how friendly he was  he was conning him, he was tricking.
Just remember play safe, someone you don't know is a stranger, yeah?
Now I've frightened you, all have a nice holiday, but play safe.
Yeah?
Will you do that for me?
Yeah.
Good stuff.
I'll see you later.
Take care.
Thank you.
You're getting too good, I've gotta che 