

Part III
TWELVE
A biting November wind whipped through the canyon of the street and caught at Katherine's coat, depositing an array of candy wrappers and subway tickets at her feet.
She clutched her school satchel more closely to her, holding it like a shield against the elements.
One more block and she could hop on to the bus which would take her to Grand Central Station.
No one had seen her.
No one would, she promised herself.
Only her friend Antonia knew where she was headed and she could be trusted to keep a secret.
The bus appeared just as Katherine turned the corner and she leapt on to it confidently.
Everything was working according to plan.
She would be at the station just in time to catch the train.
Her teacher wouldn't worry, since she had alerted her that she was going to be away and promised to bring a note on her return.
That meant she had a good eight hours' start before anyone need even think about her absence.
And by that time she would be safely in Boston.
Katherine sat back in the warmth of her seat and watched Central Park give way to the shops and office towers of midtown Manhattan.
At the age of thirteen Katherine Jardine was an adept New Yorker.
She could manoeuvre her way round streets and crowds and subway lines with the ease of a native.
There was no trace of the foreign in her speech, except perhaps in the greater clarity with which she enunciated her sentences.
She was also an adept liar.
It was not something she liked to do or resorted to very often.
But when she did, it was always performed with complete aplomb and without the slightest trace of hesitation or reddening of cheeks.
She lied out of expedience.
As she had done to her teacher yesterday.
As she would do tomorrow, if she needed to, to realize her plans.
And her plans now were very clearly set in her mind.
She was running away from home.
And she was determined not to return.
Katherine queued at the ticket counter and proclaimed her destination in a clear voice.
The clerk looked at her oddly as she took her purse out of her school satchel and carefully counted out the exact money.
‘Isn't Boston a long way for a kid like you to be going?’ he asked.
She looked at him directly with her cool grey eyes.
‘I'm going to meet my family,’ she said quietly.
‘They're waiting for me at the station.’
The attendant was suspicious, but cowed.
There was already something about Katherine's face that made questions an imposition.
Tall for her age, she held her shoulders straight, her head, with its abundant sheen of hair, high.
She had a composure well beyond her years.
And her beauty was already more than a promise.
Of all this Katherine was only dimly aware.
For beneath her apparent self-possession, there was a driving urgency.
Over the last months, she had realized that she had to leave home or something terrible would happen.
She couldn't quite locate the nature of that terror, she didn't know exactly what evil it was that would occur, but she felt it tangibly.
It was there as soon as she passed through the doors of their East Side brownstone.
It circled round her as she moved through the house and sometimes it settled in the look of pure hatred that emanated from her mother's eyes when they rested on her.
Katherine sat back in the train's cushioned seats and as it pulled away from the platform, she breathed a sigh of relief The first part of her plan had been safely accomplished.
She had tried to talk to her father about her fears.
But Pappy, who was always so willing to engage with her for hours and talk about school work or play chess, only patted her on the shoulder and fobbed her off with platitudes when the question of her mother came up.
‘Your mother is a little depressed at the moment.
It will pass.’
Or, ‘Don't worry, Kat, it will all get better soon.’
Well, now that she was no longer there, he would have to pay attention; would know that she had been serious.
Or would he?
Katherine stirred nervously in her seat.
He had been so absent-minded of late, so preoccupied with his work, his writing, the morality of being an expert witness.
She still  didn't understand what he meant by all that, no matter how much he explained.
All that she knew was that he was increasingly away from home, at meetings, conferences.
And that left her solely in her mother's power.
Katherine shivered and drew her coat more tightly round her.
She tried to think of something more pleasant.
The hills now, through which the train was winding its way, were pretty.
Katherine rummaged in her satchel.
She had brought almost nothing with her — two pairs of knickers, stockings, a toothbrush, two books.
More would have made her flight obvious.
She drew out a book.
The photograph she always used as a bookmark fluttered out of it.
She looked at the picture.
Yes, that had been the happiest time of her life.
The crossing.
Pappy and a dark little girl who was herself leaning against a lifeboat.
She was almost six then.
Mother and Leo had been seasick for the duration of the crossing and had lain inert on deck-chairs.
Pappy and she, on the other hand, had had a whale of a time.
She could still remember it all intensely: the swimming pool in which she had learnt to do a dog-paddle; the ring game; the endless stretch of blue ocean; the vast liner as big as a city through which she and Pappy had wandered endlessly.
Then the excitement of the New York skyline seen from a distance, its jutting towers like a giant's cardboard cut-outs poking into a blue sky.
After that, it had all changed.
She couldn't remember the details, only the sense of confusion that everything was different — the language, the schools she had been sent to one after another.
And Pappy was always busy.
Still, there was Leo.
They had grown very close.
He had helped her.
And then Leo had left for university.
That was when the evil had grown.
Katherine glanced at her small watch.
Only a few hours and she would be with him again.
Pappy had given her that watch.
He had given her so many things, beautiful things, little surprising things when he came back from trips.
Some of the most treasured had disappeared or been broken.
That was when she had begun to recognize the evil.
She remembered the moment distinctly.
She was ten.
She had come home from school with Antonia.
Thankfully, her mother wasn't in and Doreen, the maid, had plied them with milk and biscuits.
Then they had gone to Katherine's room.
Instantly Katherine had realized something was wrong.
The doll, Angelina, her favourite Venetian doll, with the masked porcelain face and carnival gown, the one Pappy had brought her.
She was gone.
Katherine looked round the room.
No, she was nowhere.
She dashed out to Doreen and asked her where the doll was.
‘Ah, I'm sorry, honey.
Angelina got broken.
Your mother said she fell off the shelf and smashed.
I picked up the pieces myself.
I'm sorry, honey.’
Doreen turned her broad kindly face away and busied herself with dinner preparations.
‘Where is she, Doreen?’
Katherine asked in a low voice.
‘I'm sure I can fix her.’
Doreen shook her head.
‘No, you can't, honey.
Your mom's gone and thrown her down the incinerator.
I told her you might want the pieces and the beautiful dress, but she just said you were too big for dolls anyway.’
Katherine's eyes filled with tears and she rushed to her room.
‘She hates me, Antonia.
She hates me,’ she said in a steely voice.
‘Who?
Doreen?’
Antonia asked incredulously.
‘No, my mother,’ Katherine said bluntly.
She hid her face.
Not that she could explain it in so many words, but Katherine had long since stopped trying to win her mother's love.
There had been too many occasions on which she had tried to please, hoped for hugs or even smiles, times when she had practised the piano and cleaned her room assiduously, only to be met by jibes, or slaps, or worse still, beatings.
She went through phases when she felt intensely guilty, as if there were something that she couldn't quite locate that she had done to provoke her mother's wrath.
At other times, she sensed that whatever she did, it made no difference.
It was her very presence that was at fault.
If her mother was intent on finding something wrong, she would.
Then, the lashings would follow; the strap on her bottom; the ruler over her palms; the stinging slaps.
Katherine bore it.
She was trapped.
If she told her father, then as soon as he was away there would be a worse incident.
Now she hoped only for her mother's indifference.
When she was home with her, Katherine walked softly, spoke almost not at all, kept to her room.
Anything to prevent an incidence of temper.
At dinner on the night when her doll had been broken, however, Katherine was too upset to pretend to be invisible.
They were sitting as they always did when her father was home, in the large airy dining room which looked out on the stone patio where in the summer clematis bloomed white and purple.
Katherine knew each of those stones, each of those flowers intimately-so often had she concentrated on them so as not to cry or react to her mother's jibes.
Tonight, as soon as they had sat down, Katherine said to her father, ‘Angelina is broken.
She's gone.’
‘Oh, I'm sorry, Kat.
How did it happen?’
Katherine shrugged and looked directly at her mother.
‘She knows.’
‘So, you're wailing to your father again.
You never stop, do you?’
Sylvie spoke in French, as she normally continued to do in the house, and glared at her daughter.
‘Hush, Sylvie,’ her father interjected.
I'll get you another doll, Kat, next time I'm in Venice.’
‘She's too old for dolls.
And she's got plenty left.
You always spoil her.
If it's not one thing, it's another.’
Sylvie was venomous.
‘You broke her, didn't you?
You did it on purpose.
Because I loved her.’
Katherine leapt out of her chair and dashed from the room.
Behind her, she heard her mother saying adamantly to her father, ‘Elle ment .
She's lying, as usual.’
Then they rowed.
She hated that.
Her mother's endless stream of accusations.
‘I should never have had that brat.
You should never have brought me here.
I hate this stinking, boring country.
Hate it.
Do you hear?’
And then her father, his voice cold, steely.
‘That's enough, Sylvie.
You're working yourself into a state.
Calm yourself.
Leave the child be.’
‘You've always preferred her to me.
You…’
Katherine shut her door quietly, blocking out the sounds.
After such rows, her mother would sometimes stay in her room for days on end or trail round the house like a blind stranger, oblivious to Katherine's existence.
Sometimes, and Katherine didn't know which was worse, she would stamp round and rail, flailing out at Katherine at the slightest excuse.
And so Katherine learned that it was better not to provide an  opportunity for a row.
She tried hard not to complain to her father.
After the incident of the doll, at irregular intervals other objects precious to her had disappeared from her room or been broken in her absence.
She pretended not to notice.
But the sense of a malicious presence at work grew in her.
Then, this autumn it had all become much worse.
Katherine thought she knew the occasion that had sparked it.
It was after her mother had come home from a solitary trip to Rome.
The time without her in the house had been blissfully peaceful.
Nothing, Katherine noted only to herself, had vanished from her room.
And what with Leo home for a part of the holidays, life had been wonderful.
The feeling of joy even persisted until two weeks after Sylvie's return.
Then Leo went back to Harvard.
Katherine was into her third week of term.
She had gone to school in the morning with a slight cough and a sniffle.
By lunchtime she was distinctly unwell and the school nurse told her she had a temperature and sent her home.
She had walked into the house and shouted her usual, I'm back.’
An uncharacteristic silence answered her and Katherine assumed everyone, including Doreen, was out.
She poured herself a glass of orange juice and carried it up the stairs to her room.
When she got to the first landing, her mother's bedroom door suddenly flew open and her mother burst out.
‘What are you doing here?’ she shouted.
Katherine was so surprised she dropped her juice.
Sylvie looked dishevelled.
Behind her through the open door, Katherine saw a man she thought she recognized as the porter.
But she didn't have a chance to look, for her mother's hand struck like lightning across her face.
‘That's for your spying.
And now you'll run and tell your father, won't you?’
Sylvie struck her again with greater force so that Katherine knocked her shoulder hard against the edge of the bannister.
‘And that's for carrying tales.’
Her mother reeked of alcohol.
Katherine held back the tears with difficulty.
She had stopped crying when her mother hit her, partly out of pride, but partly out of spite because she always felt her tears gave her mother pleasure.
‘Nurse sent me  home early.because I'm ill,’ she said in a small voice and walked slowly up the stairs.
That Sunday, Antonia was having a birthday party.
The girls had been plotting it for a month in great excitement.
Antonia had invited some boys.
Katherine had even bought herself a new dress for the occasion out of her own pocket money topped up with a little from the bank account into which her own presents went.
She hated the dresses her mother made her wear, sombre unattractive things in rough heavy wool or dull summer cotton; and she had asked Leo to go shopping with her and help her choose.
They had selected a full-skirted velvet frock in a deep royal blue which set off her auburn hair.
She had worn it twice, once when she had gone out for dinner with her father and Leo and on the night of Sylvie's return from Italy.
But when Katherine came to dress for the party, her dress was nowhere to be found in her wardrobe.
Katherine's heart skipped a beat.
She charged off in search of her mother.
Both her parents were sitting in the living room reading.
‘Maman, have you seen my blue dress?’
Katherine asked in a quiet voice.
‘Mmmm?’
Her mother pretended not to hear her.
‘My blue dress.
I can't find it.’
Her father looked up.
‘She means that pretty velvet dress, Sylvie.
The one she wore for your homecoming.’
‘Ah, yes, that one.
I gave it away when I was clearing up.
It's quite unsuitable for a young girl,’ her mother answered casually.
Katherine's face grew contorted.
Jacob looked on helplessly.
‘I'll buy you another.
Tomorrow,’ he said softly.
‘But it's Antonia's party today.’
This time the tears trickled down Katherine's cheeks.
‘You've plenty of other clothes.’
Her mother's tone was firm.
Two days later, at the bottom of her wardrobe Katherine found a crumpled heap of blue.
She lifted up her dress.
Down the front of it there was a long slash.
She imagined that slash through herself.
That was when the terror had taken a grip on her.
Her father was away.
She trod carefully in the house, trying to keep out of her mother's way.
When he returned, bearing a brand new dress in a rich burgundy shade, she had shown him  the blue one.
She said nothing.
Her eyes spoke for her.
Jacob hugged her.
‘I'll sort it out,’ he said in a tired tone.
That evening she could hear raised voices emanating from her parents' room.
Loud, angry, hideous voices.
She wanted to go and stop them.
Instead, she buried her head under her pillow and cried.
Then, the following week, the essay on Jane Eyre she had been working on for her English class disappeared from her desk.
She had discussed it with her father just a few days back.
She couldn't understand why Rochester kept his wife in the attic.
What kind of madness did she have?
They had talked about it at length over dinner.
Now the essay was gone.
Katherine hugged herself in fear.
That was when the plan of running away had begun to formulate itself in her mind.
She told Antonia about it in a hushed voice the night her friend came to sleep over at her house.
Normally, she preferred to stay over at Antonia's when the occasion arose.
But this time, Antonia's mother had rung to ask whether Antonia might stay at the Jardines'.
They were going to be out late and their help was away.
The girls talked in whispers.
‘She hides my work.
Breaks my things.
She's after me, out to get me.
I know she is.’
‘But why?
‘I don't know why.
I just know I have to get away.
I have to.
‘But where will you go?’
Her mother burst in on them.
‘That's enough from you two.
I know what you're up to.
Antonia, you go and sleep in Leo's room.
I'm not having any nastiness in my house.’
Sylvie's tone would brook no questions.
The girls had looked at each other curiously and Antonia had trailed obediently after the older woman.
The next day, after Antonia had left, Katherine was told that her punishment was that she would have to stay in her room over the entirety of the weekend.
Bread and water would be brought to her.
‘And you're lucky to get that, given what you've been up to,’ Sylvie said coldly.
Angry at the injustice of it all, Katherine was yet relieved to have an excuse to stay out of her mother's way.
She was growing increasingly scared.
She had noticed, over the last weeks, that her mother  had not been wearing her favourite ring.
That incident so many years ago when she had been punished for the supposed loss of the ring was etched indelibly in her mind.
She was terrified of a recurrence of the scene.
Confinement in her room was preferable to a great deal else.
On the day when Katherine came home to find the easel her father had given her collapsed on the floor and the careful copy she had been making of Vermeer's ‘Girl with a Mandolin' splattered with red paint, she made her decision.
But first, she would give her father a final chance.
She had talked to him twice already about wanting to be sent away to school and he had looked at her sadly, saying, ‘But you're too young, Katherine.
And I should miss you.’
She would miss him terribly too, and she hadn't pursued it.
Late that evening she knocked at his study door and tried again.
‘Pappy, I want to go away to school.
I need to go away.
It will make things better.
For you as well.’
‘Yes, Kat.’
Jacob removed the glasses he had taken to wearing.
He looked tired.
‘I think you're right.
I shall start looking into places for next year when you begin high school.
We should talk about the kind of school which would be best for you.’
‘I need to go now ,’ Katherine cut him off.
‘But that's not realistic.’
Katherine took her father's hand and pulled him towards her room.
‘Look,’ she said.
She hadn't cleaned up.
The pots of paint lay splattered all over the carpet.
In the midst of them her own besmirched picture, the broken easel.
‘Come with me.’
There was anger in Jacob's voice and stance as he led her towards Sylvie's bedroom.
Sylvie was stretched out on her bed, a diaphanous negligée fanned out around her.
‘Sylvie.
There is a terrible mess in Katherine's room.
What has got into you?
It's the child's work.’
Sylvie sat up startled.
‘And you think I did that?’ she asked, incredulous.
‘It's her mess.
She always leaves a mess.’
‘She doesn't, Sylvie.
You know she didn't do it,’ Jacob enunciated slowly.
‘And you believe her.’
Sylvie's voice flew off into an upper register.
‘The little tale carrier.
You always believe her.’
Katherine stole away.
She didn't want to hear any more.
In bed, in the dark, she formulated her plans.
She would go to the bank tomorrow at lunchtime and withdraw all her money.
No, perhaps only enough to get her to Boston and a little on top.
Otherwise it might arouse suspicions.
Then, once in Cambridge, she would convince Leo that she had to stay with him: he would listen to her.
She was certain of that.
Then she could go to school in Boston or something.
Her mind beyond the escape itself went blank.
Katherine looked at her watch again.
It was lunchtime and she was suddenly very hungry.
She had been too nervous to eat the evening before and she had skipped breakfast this morning.
She walked towards the restaurant car-a long-legged girl with burnished hair and haunted grey eyes who gripped her school satchel as if it contained her life.
When she got there, all the tables were occupied.
She hesitated and then sat down at the far end of one where a lone man was wholly immersed in a newspaper.
The waiter handed her a menu and she studied it intently, doing her sums all the while.
Everything was far more expensive than she had anticipated.
‘I recommend the sole meunière.
It's the only edible thing on this train,’ a voice instructed her emphatically from across the table.
Without looking up, Katherine gave her order hurriedly to the waiter.
‘I promise you, I'm right,’ the voice intoned again.
‘I travel this route at least once a week.
I hate airplanes.’
At last Katherine glanced at the owner of the voice.
He was an old man, older than her father, with a shock of white hair and long drooping moustaches which sat incongruously with his very correct pin-striped suit.
Under his shaggy brows, there were eyes of a decidedly twinkling blue.
‘So, now you can take that coat off and come and sit opposite me here and put that satchel you're gripping so decisively there.
I'll watch it, don't worry.
No one will steal it.’
He was laughing at her.
Mutely Katherine obeyed his instructions.
‘Yes, now that I can see you better, I can say that you are a decidedly pretty girl, even if the cat has eaten your tongue.’
He grinned gleefully.
‘In Berlin, where I come from, oh yes many  years ago, before those foul Nazis besmirched the country, they would have said of you that you would make a great beauty, a grande dame sans merci .
But that doesn't mean anything to you, does it?’
Katherine heard a distinct cackle.
‘No one in this godforsaken country speaks any languages.’
‘A great lady without mercy,’ Katherine was goaded into responding.
‘Well, well, well.
Not only beautiful, but also clever.
Let me offer you some of my wine, young lady.’
Katherine shook her head emphatically.
‘A little bread then?’
She accepted greedily and bit into a slightly stale roll.
The man watched her.
‘So, now that we are becoming friends, you can tell me your name.’
Katherine was about to reply and then remembered herself.
She bit off her words.
Just then the waiter brought their order and she was saved from having to say anything.
As soon as her plate was on the table, she dug in ravenously.
The old man opposite laughed.
‘It does me good to see a young appetite.’
He nibbled at his food and studied her reflectively.
‘So you are off on an escapade.
No, no, you don't have to tell me.
It's a secret, I know.
And your name is a secret too.’
He lowered his tone in merry complicity.
‘I shall call you Schatzie.
That means sweetheart, my little treasure.
My name is Thomas Sachs.
It's a real name.
See.’
His eyes twinkled and he brought a card out of his wallet and handed it to her.
Katherine read, ‘Thomas Sachs, Sachs Enterprises’.
She handed it back to him.
‘No, no, keep it.
You never know when it might come in useful.
And now that you've finished bolting your food, tell me something about yourself.
Tell me a story.
I'll order you a large ice-cream as a reward.’
Katherine hardly had a repertoire of small-talk.
She scanned her mind, but it was blank of everything except the worry of her escape.
‘Well, tell me about what young girls read then,’ he persisted.
I've just read Jane Eyre .’
At last Katherine had found a subject.
She spoke about the book fluently and with passion, almost forgetting to eat her ice-cream.
Thomas Sachs listened intently and only occasionally interrupted.
‘Yes, it's as I thought,’ he said when she had finished.
‘You are decidedly an intelligent young lady.
Now, if you will excuse an old man his habits, I shall go off and smoke a cigar.
I do not like to pollute the atmosphere for other diners.’
He put out his hand and Katherine shook it.
It was cool and dry.
‘And do not worry about your bill.
It is already taken care of Thank you for keeping me company.’
Katherine just managed to say thank you in return before he walked away.
He was small, wiry, Katherine noticed, and had the light, quick step of a far younger man.
She suddenly realized, as she went back to her seat, that she felt more cheerful.
Thomas Sachs had turned flight into adventure.
When the train reached its destination and Katherine stepped out of the old station, it was already dark and bitterly cold.
Light feathery snowflakes were falling.
She hesitated.
She had intended to take a bus, but in the dark everything looked unfamiliar and slightly forbidding.
She had been here only once before.
The details of getting to the house her brother shared with three other students in Cambridge now seemed more intractable than she had foreseen.
She decided to join the long taxi queue.
It moved slowly and she cursed herself for having forgotten her gloves and scarf.
She thrust her hands into her pockets and stamped her feet on the ground, willing warmth to come into them.
It was then that she heard the word.
‘Schatzie.’
She looked up and saw the high, gleaming shape of a Rolls-Royce double parked beside a taxi.
Thomas Sachs was looking out of the back window.
‘Can I give you a lift anywhere?’
Katherine nodded gratefully.
Decidedly this man was her good angel.
The chauffeur held the door open for her.
‘Just tell Hans your destination.’
Katherine blurted out the memorized address and sat back in the comfortable warmth of the car.
It was vast.
A small bar was open in front of them bearing bottles of whisky and brandy.
Darkened windows separated them from the chauffeur.
‘I take it someone has forgotten to come out and meet you.’
Thomas Sachs tsked under his breath.
I take it too that you  are not a habitué of Boston.’
He didn't wait for her reply.
He flicked a switch and spoke: ‘Hans, the scenic route, please.’
In the light of passing streetlamps, Katherine could feel Thomas Sachs looking at her curiously.
‘Tell me, Schatzie, how old are you?’
‘Sixteen,’ Katherine lied.
She had prepared her new age, if not her name.
‘Mmmn,’ he said reflectively.
‘It's not an insubstantial age, though everyone looks so young to me now.’
He shook his head sadly.
‘Come, come and sit dose to me and keep an old man warm.’
Katherine hesitated.
‘Come, I won't harm you.’
He took her hand and drew her closer.
She leaned lightly against the soft wool of his dark cashmere coat.
He smelled of a lemony cologne.
‘You see, that over there is the celebrated Boston Common.
There are forty-eight acres of it.
And that granite obelisk is the Bunker Hill Monument which you will have learnt about in school.
The people of Boston still take their revolutionary glory seriously.
In the daytime you can come back and look at the Old State House we're coming up to and see the cobblestones which mark the place where blood was shed in the great Boston Massacre.
And that is the glorious Charles River…’
He interrupted himself.
‘You know, Schatzie, the more I look at you, the more you remind me of a certain Titian.
Very fetching, distinctly fetching.’
Dry lips brushed against her cheek.
She didn't pull away.
It felt comforting, like when her father kissed her.
Except for the tickle of the moustache.
Thomas stroked her hair.
‘And now, Schätzchen, I will show you something else that is beautiful.’
His voice seemed to have grown hoarser.
He guided her hand down to his lap.
Katherine felt skin, hot, hard muscle.
She jerked away.
‘Ah, Schatzie, now that is not the way to treat a penis, a beautiful one.
Many women have enjoyed it.
Have said so.
Look.
Please touch it, please, just a little rub there.’
He caressed the tip.
There was a note of urgency in his tone and she could hear his breath.
A streetlight illuminated the car and in its glow, Katherine found her eyes riveted.
She wasn't frightened.
The word penis was not new to her.
She had visited plenty of  museums, seen antique sculpture.
But this strange, hot, bounding, strutting object looked enormous and, yes, comical.
A laugh burst from her throat.
She remembered one of her father's terms: penis envy.
Imagine envying that.
She laughed more loudly, a pure, unadulterated girlish laugh.
The penis shrivelled.
Thomas Sachs looked at her sadly.
He shook his head.
‘Now you see what you have done.
It is a good thing that I am a reasonable man.
Some wouldn't stand for it.
You must be careful with that laugh.
You must be careful altogether and not accept rides from old men with big cars.’
He smiled ruefully.
‘Except this one, of course.
And now we have arrived and I shall make sure that you are properly welcomed.
If you should need anything or wish to see me —’ his eyes suddenly crinkled humorously —‘you have my card.
Now before you go —’ he took her hand again and held it —‘you must tell me your name.
As a special thank you.
I shan't tell it to anyone else.’
Katherine believed him.
She smiled the special smile which was so rare and which lit up her grey eyes.
‘Katherine Jardine,’ she said.
‘And thank you.’
She had, though she didn't realize it, made a friend for life.
The one thing Katherine hadn't bargained for when she executed her well-laid plans was that her brother Leo might not be home when she arrived.
As it was, she was greeted at the door of the ramshackle house by a complete stranger, a young man who looked at her oddly.
He had certainly not been here on the day that she and her parents had briefly visited Leo's quarters.
‘Hello,’ Katherine mumbled clumsily.
‘Is Leo here, Leo Jardine?’
I'm afraid he's out.
Was he expecting you?’
Katherine shook her head.
She stretched a hand out to the gangling youth.
‘I'm Katherine, his sister.
May I come in and wait?’ she blurted out.
The young man stood aside.
Katherine walked in and as she did so heard the smooth engine of the Rolls pulling away.
Nick Stanton examined the young girl, who clasped her  school satchel nervously.
‘Leo may be quite late,’ he said.
‘Past your bedtime.’
‘That's all right.
I'll…
I'll just wait, right here.’
Katherine perched on the edge of an overstuffed sofa.
I've come all the way from New York.’
Nick Stanton gazed at her with an uncustomary scowl.
He was expecting a visit from the young woman he had been wooing assiduously and he had carefully orchestrated the evening so that all his housemates were out and he had the house to himself.
Now he had Leo's baby sister to contend with.
Well, not quite a baby.
He would have to get her to co operate.
He couldn't very well throw her out.
‘Like a drink of some kind?’
Nick asked, trying to think how to begin.
‘Yes, please, if it's not too much trouble.’
Katherine looked round her in some confusion.
She was suddenly close to tears.
All the turmoil of the past weeks pressed down on her now, that she had arrived at her destination: this slightly tawdry student house with its worn second-hand furniture where she was so obviously unwelcome.
She gulped down the proffered glass of Coca-Cola quickly.
Nick cleared his throat.
‘I'd kinda hoped to be alone here tonight.
Do you think you could come back later?’
He saw her face fall and the tears fill her eyes.
‘Or, could you go up to Leo's room and — well, wait there?’ he said in a rush.
‘I'm expecting a friend…’
His voice trailed off.
‘Yes, yes, of course.’
Katherine stood up abruptly.
I won't be any trouble.’
She rushed up the stairs to the top of the house where she knew her brother's room was before Nick had a chance to show her the way.
She dosed the door softly behind her, took off her coat and folded it neatly on the small divan bed and snuggled down in the flowery corner armchair.
Leo's room.
She recognized his intricate paperweight on the desk, his books, the old chess set, the orderly arrangement of things.
She was safe at last.
The tears now streamed down her cheeks.
She was safe.
She dozed.
In her sleep, she saw a body slashed from breast to navel.
It was hers.
Blood slowly coagulated round the edges of the gash.
A youth came in.
Who was it?
She couldn't identify him.
He  was naked.
From between his thighs a vast penis jutted.
It moved imperceptibly towards the wound.
No, a voice shouted.
It came from the slashed body.
Hers.
No, she could see its face now.
It was her mother.
There was a malicious smile on her face.
‘Kat, Kat, wake up.
You're dreaming.’
Katherine's eyes fluttered open.
‘Leo,’ she said in disbelief.
‘Leo.’
She hugged him, held on to him tightly.
Leo returned her embrace a little stiffly.
‘Kat, what on earth are you doing here?’
His consternation was clear.
Leo at the age of twenty-one was a tall, broad-shouldered youth with a shock of golden-blond hair, sea-blue eyes and a slow, steady manner.
And he provided many a Radcliffe girl with ready material for reverie.
He loved his sister, but this love was always overlaid with a trace of anxiety.
Now, he was more than slightly taken aback to find her in his room.
I've run away,’ Katherine said simply.
‘I had to.
There was nowhere else to go.’
‘But Kat, you can't simply run away.
Mom and Dad will be beside themselves with worry.’
‘I had to,’ Katherine repeated.
She studied her brother.
He wasn't taking her seriously.
‘She's going to harm me in some way, Leo.
I know it.
She wants me dead,’ she said slowly.
There was no trace of excitement in her voice, just a statement of cold fact.
Katherine wondered at the words herself as they left her mouth.
Yes, they were true, though she hadn't thought them that way before.
Leo moved away from her and paced the narrow length of the room.
‘You're exaggerating, Kat,’ he murmured.
‘I know Mom gets excited sometimes, slaps you, but not that…’
Even as he spoke, his words sounded hollow to him.
There was a conviction to Katherine, a tremulous sadness about her.
Leo couldn't bear to think what she meant, what she might have been through.
It was always that way.
Even when he saw his mother behaving unpardonably with her, he couldn't quite believe what he witnessed.
It always seemed like a momentary aberration.
Sylvie was so different with him, like another being.
And so he gave Katherine all his protective tenderness, but he  couldn't bring himself to blame his mother, to judge her.
He watched his sister.
‘I want to live here with you,’ Katherine said at last.
‘I won't be any trouble.
I'll help you keep the place clean.
I'll go to school.
There must be one nearby.’
She poured out the details of her fantasy.
‘But Kat, that's not possible.
You must know that.
Look at this place.
Four men.
Four students.
We can't take care of a little girl.
The others wouldn't stand for it,’ Leo added lamely.
‘Now you go to sleep.
I'll use the sofa downstairs.
And in the morning-’ he glanced at his watch —‘we'll ring Dad and sort something out.’
‘No ,’ Katherine said emphatically.
‘No, I'm not going back to that house.’
She looked at her brother, disappointment and fear mingled in her face.
‘If you don't want me here, I'll go somewhere else.
I'm not a child.’
‘But you are, Kat, you are.’
He gave her a tender, persuasive smile.
‘We'll speak to Dad in the morning.
It'll be all right.’
He was placating her, like her father did.
A pat on the back and everything would be fine.
‘He's not there, Leo,’ Katherine said.
She paused for a moment.
I'm afraid of her.
Can't you understand?’
She met his eyes and held them.
Leo felt a chill go through him.
‘At least, let me stay here for a few days.
Don't ring her.
I'll arrange something,’ she said wildly.
‘Let's sleep on it.’
Leo kissed her on the forehead.
‘It's late now.
You've been dreaming.
Everything will be clearer in the morning.
All right?’
He gave her the slowest, steadiest smile he could manage.
A cold grey light made its way round the corners of the curtains and trickled into the room.
Katherine woke from restless sleep and groggily studied her whereabouts.
Then, in a rush, she remembered.
She leapt from the narrow bed.
There was a funny ache at the base of her spine.
The knickers she had gone to sleep in felt wet.
She looked down, saw a streak of red on her legs.
It was on the bed, too.
She groaned.
Not that.
Not that too.
Not now.
Angrily she pulled the sheet from the bed and thrust it in the corner of the room in a tight heap.
She was  dismayed and embarrassed.
Her period.
‘The curse,’ Antonia called it, for she already had hers.
She talked about it gaily, almost with pride.
‘Woman's curse.
For our sins.
Every month, regular as the moon.
A reminder.’
Almost, Katherine sat down on the bed and cried.
She would have to wash the sheet later.
Was there a machine in the house?
She hadn't noticed.
Her mother had sent the curse to her now, to punish her.
With a violent gesture, Katherine pulled her dress over her head, not bothering about the hideous bra her mother had bought her and forced her to wear to bind her small, pointed breasts.
She rushed to the bathroom, washed and stuffed paper into her fresh knickers.
Now to face her brother and his housemates.
She felt depressed.
Nothing was working according to her plan.
Perhaps she ought simply to go home and bolt herself in her room for ever, like Rochester's mad wife.
No.
Then her mother would have won.
Katherine threw her shoulders back and walked slowly down the stairs.
When she reached the bottom, she could hear her brother's voice from the living room.
She took a deep breath, was about to go in when she heard her name.
‘Yes, yes, don't worry, Katherine's here with me.
Yes, I'll bring her back.’
She didn't wait to hear the rest.
In a trice, she had flown up the stairs, grabbed her coat and satchel, and quietly made her way out the door.
Her brother had betrayed her.
Katherine was distraught.
She couldn't quite believe it.
Why hadn't he waited, at least until her father was home?
She wandered aimlessly through the cold morning streets, not sure which way she was going or what direction to take.
She found herself amidst a cluster of shops and saw one announcing ‘Drug Store’.
Remembering her new needs, she embarrassedly asked the man behind the counter for a box of towels.
He wrapped it in a brown paper bag, an object to be hidden.
Katherine found a small restaurant with a soda fountain.
She ordered a glass of milk, gulped it down and then rushed off to the ladies.
She stuffed the remaining towels into her satchel.
Something at last had been accomplished.
But what was she to do next?
A hotel?
She counted her money.
There were almost fifty dollars left.
It would last her for a few days.
Yet would she manage to register in a hotel without  arousing suspicion?
She examined her face in the small mirror.
It looked strange and far too young.
With a sinking feeling, Katherine rearranged the items in her satchel.
A card fluttered out.
Thomas Sachs.
The house, from the road, looked monumental, a colossus of a residence, with gothic spires, hewn out of dark stone.
An ornate iron gate presided over its entrance.
Large dark pines stood like sentinels guarding the sweep of wintry garden.
To Katherine, a New Yorker, used to apartment blocks and intimate brownstones, it was trebly impressive.
Had she felt less desperate, she would have turned back.
But Thomas Sachs was now her only hope.
She pushed the bell at the side of the gate.
It let out a long clang.
No one came.
She waited and then tried the gate.
It was open.
She hurried along the path, past matching stone lions, up a few stairs to the imposing door.
Here, she rang again quickly, before she lost her nerve.
A tall, suited man answered.
‘I have come to see Mr Thomas Sachs,’ Katherine mumbled.
‘He's not expecting me, but I would like to see him.’
‘Whom should I say is calling?’ the man said in an accent she had only ever heard in the movies.
‘Katherine Jardine.’
She hoped Thomas Sachs remembered her name.
She waited in a hall rich in oak panelling.
There was a series of engravings on the wall which caught Katherine's eye: dark, sombre images where clusters of fraught figures seemed to howl.
‘Mr Sachs will see you in the morning room.
Come this way.’
The man's face was expressionless as he took her coat and satchel.
He led her into a large room where a floor-to-ceiling window gave out on a garden dominated by a fountain and a single curving oak, its tracery of branches lavish against the steel grey sky.
The bergère he motioned her to sit on was plumply comfortable.
Katherine waited.
It was a good room, she decided, severe, yet opulent She already had an eye for such things.
The furniture was a trifle heavy for her taste, but its wood gleamed brightly and the deep blue hues of the rugs were softly reassuring.
On the curve of one wall stood a beautiful old grandfather clock, its pendulum swinging rhythmically.
‘So, you approve of my Biedermeier.’
A voice startled her.
Thomas Sachs stood to one side of her, his blue eyes bright beneath the shock of white, swept-back hair.
He was wearing a grey suit with a light polo-neck sweater which made him look younger and at the same time more intimidating than he had the day before.
Katherine nodded.
‘You see, I've come.’
She tried a smile which sat oddly on her worried features.
‘And I'm very pleased that you have,’ he said when she didn't continue.
‘What can I do for you?’ he asked.
Katherine stalled.
She didn't know where to begin.
‘I hope I'm not disturbing you.’
It had suddenly occurred to her that he probably had a family, a wife.
‘Only a little.
The telephone calls can wait and my first meeting is not until lunchtime.’
He examined her shrewdly.
‘But perhaps you might like a little something to eat now, a little hot chocolate and some cinnamon toast.’
Without waiting for her response, he pulled a long cord, gave instructions to the butler and came to sit opposite her.
‘Now, Schätzchen, tell me what is the matter.
Truthfully, please.
I am sure you have not come here to satisfy an old man's whims.’
He gave her a kindly smile and waited.
‘My brother didn't want me to stay with him,’ Katherine blurted out.
I've — I've run away from home you see and…’
Katherine poured out her story with not much sequence but with a great deal of feeling.
She had never spoken to anyone so openly before, not even her father, and when she had finished she trembled a little with the emotion of it.
‘Poor Katherine,’ Thomas Sachs said softly.
‘Come, let us have a little warming drink and then we will think.’
He motioned her to the small round table she hadn't seen being laid out and urged her to drink and eat.
‘Now, Schatzie, how do you think I can help you?’
‘I don't know.’
Katherine shook her head so that the long auburn sheath covered her eyes.
‘Perhaps I can stay here,’ she whispered an entreaty.
‘Tell me truthfully, now.
How old are you?’
Thomas Sachs asked.
Katherine lowered her eyes.
‘Thirteen.
I'm sorry I lied to you yesterday.’
He smiled.
‘Women rarely manage the whole truth about their age, at one end of the spectrum or the other,’ he said.
‘But let us think clearly.
If you were to stay with me, it could only be with your parents’ permission.
No, no, don't interrupt me and look at me with those wild eyes.
You know that is true.
You wouldn't want to have me arrested for abduction or worse crimes.’
He laughed, his face crinkling.
‘Would you?’
Katherine shook her head.
‘But I won't go home,’ she added emphatically.
‘No, not today.
Perhaps not tomorrow.
But in a few days’ time it might look a little different.’
Katherine rose from the little table.
‘Thank you for listening to me.’
She made to leave.
He caught her arm and held it hard.
‘Don't be a stupid girl, Katherine.
Sit down.
Have you got money?
Clothes, stuffed into that little bag of yours?
What shall you do?
Sleep in bus stations?
Be picked up by the police?
Sell that young body of yours?’
Katherine looked shocked.
He laughed.
‘You see.
You have not thought things through properly.
I know that you are serious in your wish to leave home.
It is a wise decision on your part.
You should not be in the same place as your mother.
I shall talk to your father for you.
I have been a good advocate in my time.
We shall find you a school somewhere.’
He patted her hand.
‘For the time being, you shall stay here.
Roberts will fix up a room for you.
Later on today, we shall get you some clothes.
That dress you are wearing is an offence to my eyes.’
He bowed slightly and left her.
Thomas Sachs was as good and as generous as his word.
He was also a shrewd judge of character.
In his nigh on sixty years, he had lost two fortunes and built up a third.
A prosperous publisher in Berlin, he had left that city in 1935, with his paintings, some furniture, and what money he could easily bring with him.
He refused to live under a regime which sanctioned the burning of books; nor, since many of his friends and the writers he published were Jewish — as, indeed, he sometimes  felt himself to be — would he tolerate the government's anti-Semitism.
His wife and two sons, despite his admonishments, had said he was exaggerating the danger of the Nazis.
They said they would follow later, perhaps, once he was set up in America.
Meanwhile they would keep the family firm going in Berlin.
He could do nothing to persuade them to join him and they had left it too late.
Now they were all dead.
In the United States, he had begun by setting up a small press which published German writers in translation, books which kept the Germany he knew alive.
The company had grown, diversified, prospered, taken over other companies.
He was now a rich man.
A rich man who had three loves — women, books, and the satisfaction of having made an unexpectedly canny deal, in that order.
He had never married again, preferring the easy sensuality of mistresses and high, but fleeting, passion.
Too much had been vested in his first family.
Too much lost.
This little Katherine intrigued him.
She had the makings of a passionate woman.
He had liked the way she laughed at him in his old man's vice.
He also liked her spirit.
He would see what he could do for her.
A few days later two men sized each other up none too discreetly in a Park Avenue office.
One paced with long-legged strides behind an impressive desk and every now and then ran a hand through his tangle of salt and pepper hair.
The room, despite its ample proportions, seemed too small for him.
His brow, above piercing dark eyes, was furrowed in concern.
The other sat back in leisurely fashion in a comfortable armchair and elegantly crossed one loose-trousered leg over another.
His blue eyes beneath the shock of white hair bore a trace of irony.
But his face was set in sympathetic lines.
‘Let me get this quite clear.
You say you met my daughter on the train to Boston, that she was running away from home, that she ended up on your doorstep when her brother refused to house her?’
Jacob Jardine eyed the smaller man suspiciously.
He felt like hitting out at him, this kidnapper of his daughter.
as if the movements of violence would eradicate a reality he preferred not to acknowledge and bring the girl back.
But he  controlled himself.
He had sufficient cause to suppose that Thomas was only a messenger, merely the bearer of bad news.
He had come home late the previous evening from a tedious conference to find Sylvie in a strangely seductive mood, a champagne bottle at the ready, her favourite music pulsing through the house.
Only when he had asked her about Katherine had he realized that something was seriously amiss.
Sylvie had told him with a dreamy insouciance that Katherine was away in Boston, staying with a charming man called Thomas Sachs.
And who, Jacob had asked in disbelief, is Thomas Sachs?
Sylvie had shrugged and gestured carelessly towards the telephone.
‘There's a number somewhere over there.’
Jacob had rung instantly and spoken to the man who now sat opposite him.
‘That is correct.
And, as you heard from her own mouth on the telephone this morning, she is fine, though she refuses to come home to you and your wife.’
Thomas Sachs stressed the final word a little.
‘She wouldn't even speak to her when I first rang your home.’
Jacob looked away, out of the window at the stretch of blue winter sky above the uniform roofs of the Park Avenue apartment blocks.
He had been half-afraid something like this might happen.
He hadn't acted quickly enough.
Anger at himself coiled within him.
He turned it momentarily towards the man in front of him.
‘I shall come and fetch her straight away,’ he said brusquely.
‘Come by all means,’ Thomas Sachs said patiently.
‘I can well understand that thinking of your daughter in a stranger's house is not easy.
But —’ and here he turned the whole force of his energetic presence on Jacob —‘I would suggest that you do not attempt to bring her home.
She is too frightened, too tense, like a coiled creature ready to do harm.
To herself or to others.
We have talked a little about it.
And, though I believe she is at heart a sensible girl, she might be driven to do something silly.
At the moment she is quite well, having a little, let's call it, holiday.’
Sachs smiled his irresistible smile.
‘And it makes me quite happy to have a young person with me.’
‘What has Katherine told you?’
Jacob asked, trying to keep his voice calm.
It wasn't that he feared betrayal.
It was simply that the Katherine he saw through Thomas seemed a stranger.
‘Oh.’
Thomas threw off the question lightly.
‘That she doesn't get on with her mother.
That she fears her, when your wife has had a little too much to drink.’
He paused.
Thomas, obedient to codes of privacy, didn't want to overstep the line.
But Jacob's eyes encouraged him.
That she can't communicate with her, particularly when your wife is depressed.’
Thomas was polite, matter-of-fact, as if he was speaking of everyday matters.
But Jacob read what was unspoken.
It grieved him.
He turned away, stared out of the window.
The move to America had never achieved its aims.
It had not helped Sylvie get over Caroline's death.
She had never found a life here, a raison d'être.
She had remained a stranger and her bouts of listless depression had grown along with her drinking.
And she would take no counsel from him.
When he had realized that she was closed to him, he had suggested that she consult an analyst.
To no avail.
However, on the advice of an acquaintance, she had gone to a clinic in Pennsylvania: she retired there periodically now.
They pumped her full of drugs.
Jacob paced the room for a moment.
When he was honest with himself, he had to confess that he had tried to draw brackets around that part of his existence that was Sylvie.
In the normal course of things he was benevolent, but absent: he did not allow himself to be drawn either in anger or in passion.
And when he was drawn, it was usually in rage.
Attempting to keep the semblance of peace, of ordinariness, he had, he now realized, sacrificed Katherine.
He turned back to Sachs, warming to the man because of his evident concern for Katherine.
‘You see all this, Mr Sachs.’
Jacob gestured at the wall of books, at the divan where his patients normally lay.
‘I have read and thought and practised and observed and written for over a quarter of a century, survived a world war, and still I have not been able to provide a home in which my children may be happy.’
Thomas Sachs chuckled.
He had taken in the shelf full of Jacob's own writings, he had paused at the artful photograph of a striking blonde woman who he had no doubt was Jardine's wife.
He knew that he was in the presence of one of the few men he might recognize as an equal, a kindred spirit.
‘That, Dr Jardine, is not challenge many of us can say we have met.
Though at least,’ he added with a hint of grimness, ‘you still have the wherewithal to keep trying.’
Katherine spun round the room and watched the bottle green fabric of her new dress lift and swirl with her.
She caught the effect in the floor-length mirror and smiled.
It was a new kind of smile.
Slightly tentative, it warmed her eyes and elicited response.
The few days she had spent in Thomas Sachs' company had already begun to have an effect on her.
Under his generous tutelage, she was developing a narcissistic interest in herself.
It was a healthy narcissism.
Up until now Katherine's posture of confidence had been an act of will, a daring of elements which might prove as hostile as her mother.
The show of bravura hid a guilty timidity.
Inside her, there lived a small frightened creature she felt was unlovable.
Thomas's eyes forced her to take account of something different in herself and to begin to value it.
He nurtured the young woman in her.
And Katherine began to like this young woman who swirled gracefully in front of the mirror.
He had taken her to Boston's leading department store.
There, with an expert hand, he had picked out an assortment of dresses, skirts and blouses for her to try.
‘But I don't need all this,’ Katherine had protested.
He looked at her sternly.
‘Beauty is not a question of need.
If you are to sit opposite me at table and walk through my house, then I prefer you to look your best, which I know will be very good indeed.’
He lifted out a white silk blouse trimmed with fine lace, felt the fabric and handed it to the sales assistant who stood behind them.
‘We will try this one as well.’
Katherine shook her head mournfully.
‘I won't be able to repay you for years.’
‘Katherine.’
He gave her a fond smile.
‘You have still not realized that I am a very rich man.
I have very few desires left — a fine picture, a good bottle of wine, a visit to the opera.
My payment will be to see you in these clothes.
That will give me far, far more pleasure than my money.
And now run along and try these garments.
And remember, I want each one paraded before me.’
She had dutifully done so and together they had selected an array of clothes in the deep greens and blues, the rich wine shades that Thomas said best set off her porcelain skin and burnished hair.
‘Black will come later.
You are still too young and I shall save myself that delight,’ he had added.
Then he had sent her off to the lingerie department with the assistant, admonishing her to choose the prettiest undergarments.
‘Even if they aren't for my eyes,’ he had added with a twinkle.
‘It is important for a woman to feel beautiful everywhere.’
Finally there had been shoes and a fine pair of leather boots.
Katherine had been as excited as a child on Christmas morning.
She only wished Antonia were there with her to help her think over all the things Thomas said.
As it was she stored his words to mull over in her room.
It was a spacious room on the second floor of the house overlooking the garden.
The furniture was of glowing mahogany, the bedspread a thick white cotton cover of intricate design.
There were always freshly cut flowers in a blue vase on the table.
But what Katherine liked best were the corner shelves which housed three miniature cities, carved out of wood and painted by an expert hand so that they evoked future urban landscapes.
Dream cities, she thought of them as and wondered at them.
On her first evening at Thomas's house, after the shopping spree, she had shyly come down to dinner in one of her new dresses.
She was self-consciously aware of the silk slip, the new bra next to her skin and she had walked stiffly into the room the butler ushered her into.
Thomas, sitting in a deep armchair in front of an open fire, was browsing through the newspaper and he took off his reading glasses to look her over.
‘Very nice, Schatzie,’ he said, his eyes twinkling.
Very nice.
But now you must forget you are wearing new clothes and relax into what I know is your natural grace.’
He motioned her towards the sofa and abruptly began to talk about politics.
‘Have you heard about this new senator everyone is proclaiming as the next President, John F. Kennedy?’
Katherine nodded vaguely.
‘I am going to put my money on him.
He seems to have a slightly democratic, even a socialist cast to his conscience.
In  this country it is only the older, the inherited rich or a few intellectuals who are relaxed enough to think about the unprivileged.
The rest are too busy worrying about holding on to what they have or getting more.’
Katherine looked at him quizzically.
‘But Thomas, would you give away everything you had?’
She gestured at the richly appointed room.
‘And what makes you ask that?’
He looked at her shrewdly.
‘I thought you suggested you were a socialist,’ Katherine said hesitantly.
A booming laugh came.from his wiry frame.
‘Even if I had said I was, which I am not, though I admit to certain sympathies, I can see that you are prey to the usual set of misconceptions.
Socialism does not mean the equal distribution of misery; but simply the desire for a little more wealth, a little more justice all around.’
He laughed again.
Katherine flushed.
Thomas noticed her discomfort.
‘I am not laughing at you, Schatzie.
You are right to speak your thoughts.
I like it when you question me.
You are also right to suggest that I would not like to part with all of this.
Come.’
He took her arm and led her to the dining room, where the gleaming long rectangular table had been impeccably set for two.
The food was exquisitely cooked and discreetly served.
The wine would have delighted a connoisseur.
Thomas Sachs was indubitably a hedonist.
But he was as much a voluptuary of the intellect as of the senses.
He bored easily and though he loved beautiful women of all dimensions and aspects, he had rarely bothered to see them twice if there was not some fire of the spirit or intelligence to intrigue him.
He said as much to Katherine on their second evening together.
She had been asking him about the little wooden cities which adorned the shelves in her room.
He looked pleased.
‘Ah, you have noticed them.
They are by a fine German artist called Feininga.
I have some of his paintings as well.’
He led her into his study where she had never yet been.
Katherine was moved by the delicacy of the paintings, the playful motion of shapes which suggested rather than depicted.
‘But this one, this one is splendid.’
She stopped in front of a small canvas.
‘It's not by the same artist, is it?’
‘Yes, you definitely have an eye, Schätzchen,’ Thomas beamed.
‘That is one of my great favourites.
A Paul Klee.
And to think I almost sold it just before the war to pay for a meal and a tawdry hotel room.’
Katherine looked at him in disbelief.
‘Oh yes, Katherine.
The world changes.
In London, just before the war, almost no one had heard of Paul Klee, although in Germany he had been famous for some years.
I had taken two of his canvases out of the country with me.
I was in transit in London.
By some mix-up, my papers didn't seem to be in order and I had to hold on there until the proper American visa came through.
I hadn't planned that and what funds I had were coming here to the States.
So I was desperate.
I went to the National Gallery and offered to sell the two Paul Klees I had carried with me, to tide me over.
Only one person at that great institution had heard of Klee, a poet and art critic by the name of Herbert Read.
His committee told him he could offer me two guineas for each picture.
I was hungry.
I considered it carefully.
Finally I decided to decline politely and throw myself on the mercy of an acquaintance instead.’
He chuckled.
‘And now these pictures are worth a small fortune and I would part with them even less.
I am glad you appreciate them.’
‘They're exquisite,’ Katherine breathed.
‘So wistful and sad, yet playful.
I like them very much.’
She found herself telling him about the Vermeer she had been painstakingly copying, and then with a shudder of its destruction.
Thomas took her hand in both his and stroked it gently.
‘Schatzie, I am going to pay you what for a man of my years is a great compliment.
The more I see of you, the more I esteem you.
Too often with young women here it is not the case.
You are not only lovely, you also have fire and intelligence.
Do not let anyone stamp either of those out.’
On the Friday Thomas left the house before breakfast.
He had warned her that she would be on her own, with only the butler for company, until Saturday when he returned.
He had given her a book to read, Thomas Mann's Buddenbrooks , which he recommended highly.
It would serve as a substitute  for school.
She also had the run of the library and she could of course go out, as long, he warned her with a sardonic look, as she didn't wander off with strange men.
Katherine remembered this with a smile in the midst of her reading.
The house felt lonely without him, but she realized that the strange feeling she had was one of happiness.
She thought she could stay here for ever in this big solid house where Thomas translated the world for her.
It would all end very soon though now.
Her father would be back in New York on Sunday and Thomas had already carefully explained what he intended to do.
She had stopped being so afraid once she had heard him talking to her mother.
Thomas, she sensed, could convince anyone of anything.
Katherine lay on the white coverlet and read.
Suddenly a thought she had kept in abeyance surfaced in her mind.
In their few days together Thomas had made no reference to that night in the car when he had asked her to touch him, there.
She had somehow forgotten about it too, as if that man in the car were a different person.
But now as she closed her eyes and remembered the scene she felt an old tugging sensation in the pit of her stomach.
Katherine hugged herself.
It was a pleasant sensation.
She was sorry she had laughed at Thomas.
She would ask him about it if she dared, why he had done that, what it meant.
On the Saturday evening she dressed carefully in her favourite of the outfits Thomas had bought her: the white silk shirt with its lace collar and cuffs and a full blue skirt.
Beneath the shirt, the mirror showed her the small fine flowers of her delicate bra could be seen.
Katherine was pleased.
Before the fire in the sitting room, she waited impatiently for Thomas and his approval.
He gave it as soon as he appeared.
‘It does me good to come home to you, Schätzchen.
You are looking more lovely than ever tonight.’
He bowed to her a little formally and then with only a hint of self-mockery kissed her hand.
After the butler had served him a whisky and her a lemonade, Thomas came to sit beside her.
‘And how have you been in my absence, Katherine?’
‘Very well, thank you,’ she replied politely and then with a trace of irony in her voice, added, ‘I finished Buddenbrooks and  walked only in the garden.
There wasn't a single strange man in sight.’
He cocked a shaggy eyebrow.
‘Really?
You astound me.’
She giggled and suddenly in the softly lit room felt brave.
‘Thomas, that night in the car, when you drove me to my brother's, you showed me your…’
She paused, changed her mind.
‘Asked me to touch you.
Why?’
Thomas looked down at his drink.
I thought you might ask me about that some time,’ he murmured.
‘I believed you were older than you are, perhaps a little bit more experienced, because of your bravery in accepting a lift.
No, let us be quite honest.
I hoped both those things.
I desired you and — how shall we put it — I am as they used to say a little bit priapic.’
Katherine looked at him uncomprehendingly.
He shrugged.
‘How can I explain it to one so young?
I like women, Katherine, I like to give them pleasure and to take it.
I am no puritan.
Women excite me and I am not frightened of them.
I respect them.
Sex need not be a big loaded word, burdened with anxieties and fears and emotions.
Sometimes, of course, it is; but sometimes, too, it can be simply pleasure, equally shared.
No —’ he looked into her eyes —‘when you are older we shall talk about it some more.’
‘But now,’ Katherine pressed him, ‘now you don't desire me any more?’
There was a hoarseness to his laugh.
‘Now, Katherine, it is different, though you shouldn't, in your innocence, provoke me too much.’
His eyes played over her blouse and she noticed that his hand around the whisky glass trembled a little.
He stood up.
‘I am not a monster.
And you are a girl, let us even say a young woman, who is a guest in my house.
Very soon, I shall meet your father who is certainly younger than me.
What shall I say to him?
That I have been seducing his daughter?
No, no, that would not do.’
‘But if I were older…’
Something in Katherine drove her to make him more explicit.
‘When you are older, we shall see.
Perhaps we shall talk again.
Now stop behaving like an arch temptress and let us go to table.’
With the dessert, Thomas brought up the topic again of his  own accord.
There was a peculiar sparkle in his eyes.
‘Katherine, I am glad we had that little talk before dinner, even if it made me a trifle nervous.
It was intelligent of you to bring it up.
It is better to speak of such things than keep them hidden.’
He raised his glass to her.
‘Now I shall tell you something which I wish you to remember, even if we do not meet again soon after this week.’
Katherine's spoon tumbled from her hand.
It seemed an impossible thought.
‘Even if I go away to school, I shall want to see you.
Please,’ she added.
He smiled reassuringly.
‘Yes, yes, but listen to what I say.
I have noticed in this puritan America of ours that beautiful women are rarely permitted to be clever.
There is a division of labour.
Silliness is for the beautiful, intelligence for the homely.
It is because the men here are too often afraid of women and seek to control them.
Intelligence would make them more difficult to control.
And to please than, the women dampen their intelligence.
Where I come from, we were taught to prefer the best of everything.
I want you to promise me that you will keep your intelligence as alive and as visible as your beauty.’
His eyes bore more seriousness than she had ever read in them.
‘I promise,’ Katherine said in a small voice, not quite sure what it was she was pledging, though in later years she would have ample occasion to reflect on what he said.
‘And now, for once, we shall both drink to that.’
Thomas Sachs poured her a glass of wine.
‘Kat,ma petite Kat,’ Jacob Jardine paused at the door of Thomas Sachs' gracious living room and looked at his daughter.
She rose and came towards him shyly.
There was something different about her.
Her walk, perhaps.
Her manner.
Her expression.
She looked, yes, the thought troubled him, like a woman.
Then he smiled and opened his arms to her.
She ran into them and pressed her face against his chest.
‘I had to do it,’ she murmured, ‘had to make you believe me.’
He patted her reassuringly.
‘You were right.
I was obtuse.’
Jacob released her and greeted his host and his son, whom he had asked Thomas to invite to this reunion.
As the evening proceeded and conversation unfolded, Jacob was haunted by a  sense of strangeness which he couldn't quite pinpoint.
It was not only that his daughter in this prepossessing dining room seemed an unfamiliar creature, that his son was slightly uncomfortable, and that Thomas with his mercurial wit and ironic eyes felt like a friend recovered from a distant past.
It had more to do with the easy communion between Katherine and Thomas Sachs, the way his eyes sometimes fell on her when she wasn't looking.
That was it, Jacob suddenly thought.
They were like a couple of newly-weds, fondly excited by each other 's company, by the experience of their first dinner party.
The notion shocked him.
The matter of Katherine's school had to be sorted out quickly.
He cleared his throat.
‘Katherine, I spent yesterday ringing round a variety of schools in the New England region.’
Katherine looked at him expectantly.
‘None of them was prepared to take you on in the middle of the semester.
Nor even, without a great deal of fuss, before next September.’
Katherine's face dropped and Thomas was about to intervene when Jacob hushed him.
Then I had an idea which I would like to try out on you.
I spoke to Princesse Mathilde and asked her about the school Violette went to in Switzerland.
It is a proper school, not just a training ground for debutantes.
Princesse Mat says she is certain that they will have you.
She will ring me back about it tomorrow.’
Katherine's features registered her surprise.
She met her father's eyes, then Thomas's.
‘I don't know,’ she said hesitantly.
‘It's very far away.’
Again Jacob prevented the other man from speaking.
‘Yes, but it is a good school.
I could fly over with you at Christmas, or even before.
You could get to know Princesse Mat and Violette again.
They would be like a second family to you.
Their home is not far from the school.
My only worry is that the majority of your classes would be in French.
Do you think you could manage?’
Jacob spoke it as a challenge.
Katherine was torn.
She could see that a simple yes would please her father.
But Switzerland — it was so remote from  everyone.
Yet the alternatives seemed dismally uncertain.
After a moment she looked up from her plate and directly at her father, ‘Yes, Pappy.
I think I can.
Let's give it a try.’
She was rewarded by the pleasure which suffused Jacob's face.
THIRTEEN
On the eve of her departure for Switzerland, Thomas Sachs had given Katherine Jardine a little parcel and a brief, admonitory speech.
‘In here, my dear, you will find the standard guide for innocents abroad.’
His eyes had twinkled.
‘Never forget you are leaving the continent of dreams for the land of memory.
And things there are rarely quite what they seem.’
‘Are they here?’
Katherine had asked.
‘No, no, perhaps not.’
He had grinned devilishly.
‘But then the world has grown smaller since Mr James cruised on his ocean liner.’
When Katherine had opened the parcel, she had found a copy of Henry James's Daisy Miller , but she had been too excited to read.
She had been even more excited as the blue flames whipped from the bulky Boeing's engines and New York's familiar skyline was metamorphosed into a dark sea of twinkling lights.
And now as they descended on Geneva, she pressed her forehead against the pane of the oval window and breathed deeply.
Beneath her, hills grew into majestic mountains and a lake glistened in early morning light.
‘It's wonderful.’
Katherine clutched Jacob's hand.
‘Beautiful.
I'm glad you talked me into it.’
In the month since the decision had been taken that she would come to school here, her feelings had turned from foreboding to anticipation.
One of those weeks had been spent at Thomas's house and then her father had come to fetch her home.
‘Your mother has gone off on a little holiday,’ he had announced vaguely and Katherine had returned to New York and to school.
She was happy to see Antonia again.
The girls had so much to discuss.
And Antonia's enthusiasm about a Swiss school ‘like all those glamorous women in the magazines’ had infected a more cautious Katherine.
‘I shall convince the  parents to let me come and stay with you in the holidays,’ Antonia had promised.
Katherine's mother had come home only the day before they were due to leave.
She had been pale, listless, disaffected and Katherine was stricken by remorse.
Was it her fault?
Had she imagined the violence of the previous months?
No, the pain surfaced in her mind all too readily.
She wiped it away.
Nonetheless, guilt pricked at her.
And Sylvie's pallid face and lustreless eyes as she said goodbye to her daughter stayed imprinted on her memory.
The bustle of passport control and customs clearance over, father and daughter emerged into the pristine arrivals lounge.
A slender grey-suited man instantly walked over to Jacob.
‘Docteur Jardine?
Soyez bienvenu.
La Princesse vous attend chez elle .’
‘Is that the prince?’
Katherine whispered to her father.
Jacob smiled.
No, that's Pierre, the chauffeur.
There hasn't been a prince for some years.
Mathilde doesn't like getting up, too early these days.
We should be at the château just in time for breakfast.’
As they drove through the frosty morning light along the winding borders of the lake and up, up, into the mountains, Jacob chatted to the chauffeur about his wife, Thérèse, about the forecast for skiing conditions, about Pilkou and Martine, the Princesse's dogs.
Katherine was suddenly acutely aware that he sounded boyish, happy.
Though she knew that her father travelled to Switzerland, she had had no idea that he was so well acquainted with the Princesse's household.
Somehow that was a comforting thought.
It made the meeting with the woman, whom she had often heard referred to but whom she remembered meeting only once briefly in New York less daunting.
Soon, as the large Mercedes climbed narrow roads, the magic of the landscape erased all else from Katherine's mind.
Hillside pastures dotted with cows and steep-roofed chalets gave way to dramatic slopes.
Mont Blanc, sixty miles distant, loomed massively present.
And when the château the Princesse had now occupied for over twenty years emerged from amidst snow-clad trees halfway up an escarpment, she felt dizzy with the beauty of it all.
For Katherine the landscape bore none  of the familiarity of a picture postcard.
Everything from the vertiginous slopes to the twin spires of the château which gracefully echoed the greater majesty of the peaks was breathtaking, awesome.
Princesse Mathilde, when she and Frederick had originally taken over the château, had been similarly inspired by its location.
In 1937, she had felt she had had enough of the pernicious course of human history.
And though she had been sensitive to the château's own architectural beauty, she had stripped one entire back portion of the interior in response to the natural environment.
What resulted was a vast room whose span of glass and white walls welcomed the mountains in.
The furnishings were raw in their modernity, leather sofas, thick white rugs over glistening natural wood, pictures whose vibrant abstract shapes echoed the landscape without representing it.
It was in this room that Princesse Mathilde, a dramatic figure in a long black hostess gown, welcomed them.
Her eyes, despite her years, still held their fire and, though her figure had thickened somewhat, to Katherine's young eyes she seemed the very embodiment of the word regal.
Mathilde and Jacob embraced in the manner of old friends and then the older woman held Katherine at arm's length and scrutinized her.
‘Your father didn't warn me quite what a striking young woman you had grown into,’ the Princesse said in English with a wry glint in her eye.
She hugged Katherine.
‘I hope we shall become the best of friends.
You must treat this place as your second home.’
Katherine smiled politely.
Then, as she felt a large paw on her thigh, she unbent a little.
‘Ah yes, Pilkou and Martine don't want to be forgotten.
You must shake hands with them, Katherine.
They have been so well brought up, they put the rest of us to shame.’
The Princesse laughed girlishly.
‘I'm afraid these two, despite their growing girth, are my constant companions.
They're one of the reasons I now make everyone come to me, rather than traipsing round the world.’
She shook her head in self-mockery.
‘Now Mat, you know your notion of a retreat would put most people's social diaries to shame.
Don't give Katherine the wrong idea,’ Jacob intervened playfully.
‘The first lesson on entering this house, Katherine, is that you must take only half of what your father says to me seriously,’ the Princesse responded in kind.
‘But it's time to sit down to breakfast.
I think Cook has outdone herself.
I asked her to prepare everything as it might be in America, so that you would feel at home.
I suspect she imagines you are built like a giant.’
They followed the Princesse into the dining room where a sideboard heaved with food — cereals, fruit, muffins of all description, hot rolls, a jug of freshly squeezed orange juice.
No sooner had Katherine helped herself than a maid appeared with a silver platter heaped with pancakes.
‘You see.’
The Princesse smiled as Katherine gasped.
‘And we must eat as much as possible or she will be deeply insulted.’
While they ate, the Princesse and Jacob began to chat in French.
As Katherine watched them and listened, she was suddenly aware that her father seemed different than he did in New York.
There was a lightness to his gestures, a ready smile on his lips.
He was utterly relaxed, at home.
For the first time it occurred to Katherine as a conscious thought that he might find life with her mother a trial in ways which didn't only concern her.
The notion, now that it was clear, depressed her.
She had been selfish in coming here.
She was abandoning him.
Princesse Mat read her thoughts.
‘Katherine, I haven t yet told you how pleased we all are that you shall be going to school here and be with us at Valois frequently.
I hope it will provide your parents ’ she stressed the word —‘with an excuse to come and visit me more often.’
She stood up and extended a hand to Katherine.
‘But now you probably want to rest.
We have fixed up a room which you can call your own.’
She put all her expressive charm into her smile.
‘Violette has even advised me as to what you might like.
You'll find a pile of novels, a record player, and an assortment of Elvis Presley and Dave Brubeck records…’
She pronounced the names as if they were utterly outlandish.
Jacob chuckled.
‘Princesse Mathilde has always had the aspirations of a fairy godmother.’
Mathilde gazed at Katherine benignly.
The girl looked as if she could do with a fairy godmother, or perhaps just a mother.
Jacob should never have allowed it to go this far.
But then men were never very good at seeing what was in front of their noses.
For all her beauty, Katherine had a wary look about her, as if she couldn't afford to laugh or cry or show any sign of emotion.
She was contained, far too contained for a girl of her age.
She had none of that innocence or boundless enthusiasm that the Princesse always saw as the stamp of the American girl.
This Katherine instead reminded her a little of those refugee children she had housed during the war, ever polite, ever ready to comply, but as old as the world and never altogether of it.
as if at some point in their lives they had decided that the only way to survive was to retreat to a still centre in themselves.
A magically barred inner space, removed from everyday life.
They guarded it superstitiously, for while it remained impenetrable, they felt they could stay alive, whatever the horror of the world outside.
She would have liked to take the girl in her arms and hold her for a long time.
Not privy to the Princesse's thoughts, Katherine smiled.
She had the sense she was inhabiting a dream from which she had no desire to wake.
Everyone was so kind, so good to her.
Everything was so beautiful.
The dream persisted throughout her stay at Valois.
They drove to a point higher up the mountains where the snow was already thick, and Katherine had her first skiing lessons.
The sense of whizzing through the snow with only hills and trees around her made her jubilant.
She loved the speed, the recklessness.
She felt triumphantly free for the first time in her life.
She was grateful that Sylvie had not taken up the Princesse's invitation to join them for the holidays and, a little guiltily, that Leo hadn't either.
Instead of Leo, there was Violette.
Violette, dark-haired, vivacious, instantly installed herself as Katherine's loquacious elder sister.
She fussed, gave advice which she laughingly contradicted the next minute, and talked enthusiastically about the business she had just initiated.
Violette had set up as a paper restorer, an arcane occupation which took precise scientific skill but involved her in outlandish escapades with police and businessmen or lawyers.
Having  worked as a freelance for a while, she had recently opened an office in Geneva.
Over a lavish Christmas dinner which Katherine thought must have taken Cook weeks to prepare, Violette regaled them with tales of bizarre exploits.
She talked as if she had taken on the mantle of Philip Marlowe, a female arch sleuth for whom the teeming underworld held no secrets.
‘So after the fire, Himmelbrau and Strick called me in to see whether I could do something to re-establish their client files — thirty years of legal practice up in smoke.
I set to work with my little bag of magic potions and do you know what I discovered?’
Violette paused to make sure everyone's interest had reached an appropriate pitch.
‘I found as the charred remains came to light that one of their employees, who had left the firm last year, had been embezzling them for years and had set fire to the premises so that no trace could be found of his dirty work.
Now the police never stop ringing me,’ Violette giggled triumphantly.
‘My daughter has a highly developed sense of adventure,’ the Princesse said wryly.
‘I don't know where it comes from.’
‘Yes, you do, Mat,’ Violette countered her.
‘Apart from the tiny genetic component, it has everything to do with Madame Chardin's establishment.
Oh yes, Katherine, the school you are about to go to is a very special sort of place.’
She paused dramatically.
Katherine saw her father exchange a worried look with the Princesse.
‘Don't let Violette provoke you,’ the Princesse laughed.
‘Madame Chardin is a model of academic rectitude.’
‘So she must be.
She has helped to mould our wonderful Violette.’
Jacob looked happily on Violette, gaining reassurance from her presence if not her words.
In any event, he consoled himself, nothing could be worse for Katherine than the situation that had developed at home.
With the exception perhaps, of a continued stay with the dangerously attractive Thomas Sachs.
And Madame Chardin would take Katherine away from both.
‘A model of rectitude Madame Chardin may be, and a dab hand at Latin declensions and trigonometry, but what the girls  get up to is something else,’ Violette countered mysteriously.
What the girls got up to was something Katherine was to learn only gradually.
Her first impression of her new school filled her with trepidation.
It was not the premises themselves.
The school was perched on a hillside at the edge of a little village halfway between Geneva and the Princesse's château.
A pastoral atmosphere prevailed, despite the looming brick of the three-storey structure with its adjoining chapel and outlying houses.
What Katherine found daunting was the ambience within: the large unsmiling woman who sat at a table in the entrance hall and stiffly handed her two sheets of paper, one with a map of the school which showed her own room clearly marked, the other with a long list of instructions printed in four languages, French, German, Italian and English; a smell which mingled disinfectant and scouring soap; the difference in temperature between the stifling main body of the school and the chill of the outlying wing where she found her room.
Pierre, the Princesse's chauffeur, deposited Katherine's bags in the middle of the room, smiled reassuringly and said goodbye.
He would be back in three weeks, he reminded her, to take her home for the weekend.
Every third week, the girls were permitted to have visitors or to leave the premises for the weekend.
In between the school was a world wholly unto itself.
Madame Chardin was an educator with very strict ideas.
She believed that girls needed a fair dose of daily and vigorous exercise.
This was partially accomplished at seven in the morning when the girls ran three times round the school grounds, unless a particularly heavy snowfall made running utterly impossible; and again in a physical education period in the afternoons.
Food was also strictly controlled and no sweets or biscuits were allowed in rooms.
That apart, moral education was high on the agenda, followed with varying degrees of import by botany, languages and academic subjects.
Madame Chardin was a Protestant with distinct Rousseauian leanings, but she had read her Rousseau with an eye to institutions.
‘Natural’ leanings might come first, but these were regulated with the severity of a drill master.
Some of this Katherine gleaned dimly from the set of house  rules she read through three times in a room distinguished only by orderly barrenness.
There were three beds, three cupboards, one desk and no external signs that anyone inhabited the space.
For a girl who before her recent adventure had never been away from home alone for more than a weekend, the prospect which this room and Madame Chardin's rules evoked was a daunting one.
Had Katherine been able to forget the fear her mother instilled in her, she would have wept out of homesickness.
As it was, she thought with longing of Antonia and the informality of her school in New York where teachers could even on occasion be construed as friends.
‘So you're the new girl.’
A voice stirred her from her reverie and Katherine turned to see a tall slim sandy-haired girl enter the room followed by a smaller rounder figure.
The tall girl stretched out her hand.
‘I'm Portia Gaitskell and this is Marie-Hélène Beaumont,’ she said in a French which bore the traces of English.
‘And don't pay too much attention to all that gumph.
She only gives it to us to scare us when we arrive.’
The two girls laughed and Katherine smiled a little warily in response.
‘This is your bed and your cupboard.’
Portia pointed to the bed furthest from the window.
‘You can unpack now or we can show you round the premises first.
‘It is your duty, girls, to make your new colleagues feel at home here,’ ' Portia suddenly said in stentorian tones which made Marie-Hélène burst out in giggles.
‘Portia does an impeccable rendition of Madame Chardin,’ Marie-Hélène said in a softly mellifluous voice.
‘As you'll see.
Here, have some of these.
They'll make you feel right at home.’
Marie-Hélène opened her wardrobe and reached into the pocket of an ample winter coat to bring out a box of truffles.
By the end of that evening, after she had sat through a dinner in the large school refectory, listened to Madame Chardin's opening speech of the term and lain in the dark listening to her new roommates, Katherine did indeed begin to feel if not at home, then at least marginally more comfortable.
As the weeks progressed, the only thing which troubled her was that her new friends had seen so much more of the world than she had.
Granted, Marie-Hélène was a year and Portia  two years older than her.
But it wasn't a question of age.
They had both already seen and lived through so much and they were fearless in the way they connived to break the school rules at every opportunity.
Their intricate scheming spoke of defiance, but also of a love of conspiracy for its own sake, conspiracy prompted by group living within a regimented and closed institution.
As an initial reaction the girls' parents might have been shocked by what they got up to.
On second thoughts, however, they might have reflected that these little conspiratorial activities prepared them quite as adequately for life as the main curriculum.
Portia's father was an ambassador and the family had lived in Nigeria, China and Washington — places where scheming was hardly a novelty.
Marie-Hélène's family were wealthy French industrialists and her summers were spent in a variety of exotic locales, which spurred the girl's fantasies.
Between them the schoolgirls represented a United Nations of wealth and prestige.
Katherine felt young and inexperienced in conversations which spanned the pros and cons of marriage, the intricacies of divorce, the complexities of couture and, most frequently, the vagaries and mysteries of men.
And she was initially awed by the plots which the girls concocted as they sought to shame a particular teacher or fellow pupil, or simply to escape at impermissible hours from the school grounds.
Sometimes she remembered Thomas's parting words to her and thought that perhaps she was indeed something of an innocent.
At first she tended to listen and take in what was said in order to mull over it in the quiet of her own bed.
She wrote long letters home to Antonia in which she translated the other girls' lives in terms that made sense to her.
She also wrote to her brother, whom she had mostly but not altogether forgiven for his betrayal of her to her mother.
And she wrote to her parents, keeping her tone light and giving away little of her present life.
Thomas Sachs received her longest letters and wrote the longest in return.
Their correspondence provided an alternative education for Katherine.
He suggested books she might read and when she had, she wrote to him about them.
The ensuing  exchange over the months turned the whole cast of Balzac's Comédie Humaine into Katherine's familiars and gave her an awareness of greed and ambition, love and betrayal far beyond her years.
Thomas's witty and sometimes acerbic voice became the other side of her inner dialogue.
When it sometimes emerged from her own lips, her teachers or friends would look at her oddly, wondering whether they had heard her correctly.
By June, when the little mountain flowers covered the lush meadows with their brightness, Katherine had adjusted to her new life.
Rarely did dreams of home and her mother come to haunt her.
She lived in the present tense of the school with its totally absorbing pattern of routine and minor rebellion.
Only when the other girls exchanged confidences about their parents and sometimes lambasted them with the particular competitive cruelty adolescents are prone to, did Katherine retreat into silence.
She was still unable to speak about the circumstances which had brought her to Madame Chardin's.
She preferred not to think about it.
With the Princesse, she was still timid.
The woman inspired her with an admiration which made closeness difficult.
Yet Katherine trusted her, as she had never trusted an older woman before.
Sometimes she found certain phrases, certain inflections creeping into her French which she recognized as belonging to the Princesse.
She was pleased to find them.
One day, she had shyly asked the Princesse whether Portia might come and spend a week with her at the beginning of the summer break.
‘Of course’, the Princesse had answered.
‘There is nothing I like more than having the house filled with young people.
Pierre came to pick them up in the long Mercedes and they piled in with all their bags and appurtenances.
Their end-of-term hilarity matched the bright sky and light frolicking tufts of cloud.
Château Valois, when they reached it, looked more beautiful than ever amidst the fresh green of early summer leaves and dappled sunshine.
Even the much-travelled Portia paused in the ripple of her chatter to exclaim her appreciation.
Katherine found herself smiling happily as if the compliment were directed at her own home.
The Princesse came to greet them as soon as they were over  the threshold.
She hugged Katherine and stretched out a welcoming hand to Portia.
Then she said, ‘There's a surprise visitor here for you, Katherine.’
Her voice sounded a little strained, but only Portia caught the odd pitying look she gave Katherine as the girl rushed towards the salon.
Katherine fully expected to fall into her father's arms.
But as she made out the figure who stood darkly outlined against the blaze of the picture window's light, she stopped abruptly short.
The Princesse and Portia looked on as mother and daughter, now almost of an equal height, one blonde, the other dark, took each other in.
A hush descended on the room.
Then Sylvie walked towards Katherine and pecked her lightly on the cheek.
Katherine flinched perceptibly.
‘Hello, Katherine, you're looking very well,’ Sylvie said with a falsetto of enthusiasm which grated on Katherine's ears.
‘It must be Europe.
I've never believed that New York was good for anyone.’
Katherine could find no words.
She stared at her mother as if she were a ghost, a ghost with streaming blonde hair who wore a tightly unmaternal black dress and puffed incessantly at her cigarette.
She glanced anxiously at Portia.
How would she judge this peculiar entity which was her mother?’
Katherine shivered with ugly premonition.
The Princesse stepped in, held the precarious social balance of the group together.
She engaged the girls in a description of their schooldays, made them chat.
Sylvie puffed at her cigarettes, and then in the middle of one of Katherine's sentences abruptly stood up.
‘I've never been very good at school,’ she said in a bored voice.
She sauntered from the room, paused at the door, and turned.
‘Katherine, you'll be pleased to know that I'm only here for a few days.
Then it's off to Rome.’
She gave her daughter a look which combined challenge and malice and then left them.
Katherine sat rigidly in her chair.
Princesse Mathilde chatted on, pretending nothing was amiss.
She was angry at Sylvie.
She had urged her to be kind to Katherine and the woman had promised.
But then Sylvie had never been controllable.
The Princesse sighed and then with a smile urged the girls to go off  and unpack before having a swim.
The pool had just been cleaned and called out for swimmers.
Katherine, as they made their way up the stairs, made no attempt to answer Portia's unspoken question and engage in confidences about her mother.
Beneath her external calm, she raged and felt frightened by turns.
Sylvie was no longer the withdrawn, slightly pitiable figure she had last seen in New York.
She was fuelled by a frenetic energy which spoke to Katherine of danger.
Over the next days, the girls swam, took long walks, talked, and ate Cook's meals which seemed more wonderful than ever after the school's frugal fare.
Katherine tried to enjoy it, tried to forget her mother's stalking presence.
But at every turn it caught up with her, here to laugh belittlingly, there to make a venomous comment, about Katherine's hair, her clothes, her French accent.
Katherine unconsciously reverted to her childhood tactics, withdrew, tried to make herself small, invisible.
The Princesse stepped in to defend her at every turn.
One day Sylvie turned on her.
‘Stop behaving like her mother,’ she said bitingly.
‘You and Jacob have done quite enough together.’
Sylvie paused and then burst out in a shrill laugh, before leaving the room.
It was the Princesse's evident flush which made Katherine begin to speculate.
What was Sylvie implying?
What was the ‘quite enough’ that Mathilde and Jacob had done?
Thomas had warned her that things were never quite what they seemed in this old world.
Could it be that Mathilde and her father had…
She stopped her thoughts.
But they kept returning.
She embroidered on them.
How she would have liked to have Princesse Mat as a mother, Violette as a sister.
Yes, perhaps that was why they were so kind to her.
The thoughts provided her with a refuge from Sylvie.
Towards the end of the week Katherine was called to the telephone.
The voice at the end of the line made her break into smiles.
‘Hello, Schätzchen.
I'm in Geneva.
Shall I take you out?’
‘Thomas!’
Katherine pealed in delight.
‘Yes please.
But wait, I must check with Princesse Mat.’
After a moment, Katherine returned to the phone.
‘Mat says you're to come to dinner tonight and stay over.
Then, if it's all right, my friend Portia and I can drive into Geneva with you tomorrow.’
The familiar chuckle warmed her ear.
‘Anything your heart desires, Schätzchen.
It will be a pleasure.’
‘It will be quite a party, then.’
The Princesse's dark eyes shone when Katherine reported back to her.
‘Like the old days.
My two grandchildren arrive this afternoon with their nanny.
Violette is driving up from Geneva with from what I can make out is her latest beau and two friends.
Then there's Dr Mohr and his wife.
And Sylvie.
I must go and warn Cook about the growing numbers.’
The Princesse moved into action with the energy of a much younger woman.
But before she left the room, she turned back.
‘Katherine.’
She looked into the girl's unreadable grey eyes, appreciating the fineness of her face.
‘Katherine, my dear, you must try not to mind too much about your mother.’
She paused for a moment, seemed to be about to say something else, then changed her mind.
‘I, we all, love you very much.
You know that.’
She held Katherine's gaze, smiled seriously, then with a swirl of skirts hurried away.
For the rest of the day, Katherine felt oddly blessed.
As she clambered over the steep Alpine meadows with Portia, she told her friend for the first time about Thomas and how he had helped her when she had nowhere to go.
She didn't go into the reasons for her running away from home, but she extolled Thomas's role.
‘A veritable knight in shining armour,’ Portia laughed.
‘Come on, let's go back and make ourselves beautiful for him, for the evening.
I'm dying to try out my hairdressing skills and I've got these two absolutely sumptuous dresses which haven't been worn for ages.
You can try them and see which you like.’
The girls hurried back excitedly, then, bathed and scented, they tried on combinations of clothes and hair for effect.
The trouble with you, Katherine Jardine, is that you look too good in anything and everything,’ Portia said wistfully as Katherine slipped into the borrowed blue silk dress with ruched sleeves.
‘If I ever have a man, remind me not to introduce him to you.’
‘The trouble with you, Portia Gaitskell,’ Katherine countered, ‘is that you're too good for any man.
And don't forget it.
But just in case you're intent on finding an admirer tonight, I've decided which way your hair looks best.’
With a few deft strokes of the brush, Katherine gathered up Portia's fine sandy hair into a loop at the back of her head and let its length trail her shoulders.
From a small vase, she took two of the daisies they had picked that afternoon and wound them strategically in Portia's hair.
Portia was delighted with the effect.
She had already had occasion to notice Katherine's skills, skills with arrangement, with colours and shape.
Their room at school, within a few weeks of Katherine arrival, had by a few deft touches and additions acquired a new look.
‘And now you should really wear the white dress.
A proper English rose,’ Katherine suggested in her usual hesitant tones.
‘While you provide the contrast as a proper femme fatale.’
Portia laughed and looked at Katherine's shapely figure swathed in blue silk, the glow of her bare shoulders darkened by the sun.
‘No.’
Katherine met her friend's eyes in the mirror.
‘I look ridiculous decked out like this.’
As ridiculous as my mother, she thought to herself, but said aloud.
‘Not at all how I feel.’
With rapid movements, she slipped out of the revealing dress and pulled a girlish white frock out of the wardrobe.
‘This is much more my style.’
Portia smiled and twisted some daisies through Katherine's thick auburn hair.
They examined themselves in the mirror.
‘Snap,’ Portia said.
‘Two of Madame Chardin's prize ingénues.’
The windows of the Princesse's salon had been thrown open to make it one with the vast slab of a marble terrace.
Here some of the assembled company sat watching the sun set in rosy Technicolor behind a jagged peak.
Katherine and Portia were amongst Violette and her friends, Simone, Yves and Carlo Negri.
While Violette entertained them with stories of increasing complexity, Katherine from beneath lowered lids stole occasional glances at Carlo.
She had never seen anyone quite like him before.
There was a slow sensuous laziness to his movements contradicted by the dangerously hard angles of his face, the flashing darkness of his eyes which no matter how covertly she looked at him seemed to be gazing at her.
He was like a large, beautiful cat, poised and motionless, but prepared to leap.
Katherine was rapt by his magnetism.
It made her feel uncomfortable and strangely vulnerable.
She forced herself to concentrate on Violette's lurid tale, another instalment in her life with the police.
‘Violette is in love with death,’ Carlo suddenly interrupted in a soft but resonant voice.
Violette looked at him defiantly.
‘There speaks the man who drove us here at such breakneck speed that I began to take pity on his poor Ferrari's engine.
We left Simone and Yves behind in a trail of dust just outside Geneva.’
She shook her dark curls woefully.
‘Ah yes, when it comes to that, Violette and I are two of a kind,’ he said with mock mournfulness.
‘These old, old families, you know.
The genes want a rest.’
‘Genes, yes, how they mark one.’
Sylvie sat down next to Carlo, a little too close.
She smoothed her elegantly cut celadon dress.
‘Though I sometimes think Violette is more like me than my own daughter.’
She laughed loudly.
‘You have a sense of adventure, my dear.’
Katherine saw Violette look at Sylvie with frank admiration.
‘But I can't sing like you.
Otherwise I might trade in my detective work for a life on the boards.’
‘Song, yes.
My gift from the gods.
The Dionysian gods.’
She threw Carlo a sultry glance.
‘Why don't you sing for us now?’
Carlo said lazily.
‘Oh, I couldn't.
My voice isn't what it used to be.’
‘Go on, Sylvie.
We'd enjoy it,’ Princesse Mathilde encouraged her.
‘Well, if you like.’
She looked at Carlo again, moved to the piano, ran long fingers over the keys, and then in a low, sultry voice began on a medley of wartime numbers.
Katherine averted her eyes.
She couldn't bear the sight of her mother preening, her squirming body.
She watched Portia to see the effect Sylvie was having, watched Carlo and Violette.
And then suddenly, Sylvie called out to her.
‘Katherine, come here.
Come and accompany me.
You must  still remember some of the numbers you were taught.
A simple one.
Let's start with ‘La vie en rose’.’
Katherine wanted to run.
She hated playing.
She could sense the scene coming, foresee the inevitable criticism, the malicious put-downs.
Her fingers stiffened under the memory of the innumerable raps on the knuckles Sylvie had given her in the past.
‘I didn't know you played,’ Mathilde's warm voice intervened.
‘She doesn't play very well.’
Sylvie's laugh tinkled.
‘But I've tried.
Lord knows, I've tried to teach her.
Come along, Katherine.
Just a little accompaniment.
You can manage that, surely.’
Katherine felt the hush in the room grow ominous in its waiting for her.
Suddenly in that tremulous silence the French voices had left, a fragment of the buried past rose in her like a wave of nausea.
‘You can manage that, Katherine,’ Sylvie said to the gathered guests.
‘Surely at your age you can manage that.
Girls of four don't wet their beds night after night.
Like some untamed beast.
It's disgusting.
The sheets stink.
The mattress.
Disgusting.’
Shame, cloying, dirty, engulfed her.
Katherine's legs trembled, refused to take her weight.
‘I can do ‘La vie en rose’.’
Portia leapt up.
‘Katherine's not in the mood, are you, Kat?’
Katherine shook her head bleakly.
Portia tried a chord, then another.
Sylvie's voice burst upon the room.
Jarring, electric.
Katherine sat tautly at the edge of her chair.
It had been averted.
The scene had been averted.
She closed her eyes for a moment and took a deep breath.
Then from behind her she heard the butler announce, ‘Thomas Sachs’.
Thomas.
Escape.
She could escape.
Katherine leapt up and moved with alacrity towards the hall.
The Princesse was already shaking hands with him and Katherine held back a little.
He cut a striking figure in his dark dinner-jacket, his shock of white hair swept back from his wide forehead, his clear blue eyes alive with irony.
Thomas, how glad she was to have him here.
Glad of his glow of appreciation as his gaze rested on her.
She rushed girlishly into his arms.
‘It is very very good to see you, Schätzchen,’ Thomas said in  a low voice.
He held her by the shoulders and kissed her in continental fashion on the cheeks.
They walked towards the salon together, arm in arm.
As they approached, Sylvie's song beckoned to them, enfolded them.
Suddenly, from the threshold of the room, Katherine saw her mother through Thomas's eyes.
A mother whose eyes and gestures were seductively alive.
A mother in an elegantly cut celadon dress which moved with her body.
A mother whose blonde hair was wound back in a demure knot, but whose lips were pursed in the semblance of a kiss.
The mother she had portrayed to Thomas as a monster of iniquity.
Applause covered that mother as her song ended.
Katherine tensed.
‘You must be Mr Sachs, what a pleasure it is to meet you at last.’
Sylvie moved towards them at once.
‘You've been so kind to poor Katherine and I'm so grateful to you.
She's such a difficult child, you know, always imagining things.’
Sylvie wrapped her hand round Thomas's arm and led him towards a far corner.
Katherine followed in growing horror.
Sylvie's voice was warm with complicity.
It wooed Thomas, complained lightly of a problematic child, while her gestures told him how attractive she found him.
Katherine looked on in confusion.
Thomas seemed to be succumbing to Sylvie's charms as much as to her narrative.
She wanted to intervene, to warn him, but her limbs, her tongue, were frozen.
The dining-room table was sumptuously set with the Princesse's family silver and vast candelabra.
The Princesse presided at one end, while Thomas had been placed as guest of honour at the other.
To his left was Sylvie.
To his right, a nervous, embarrassed Katherine.
Next to Katherine sat Carlo.
The gourmet dinner Cook had prepared tasted like sawdust in Katherine's mouth.
She felt trapped in the web of narrative her mother was spinning about her.
Each time Thomas or Carlo tried to draw her into conversation, the words dried on her lips.
She knew she was behaving like a silly child, the little girl she no longer was.
But she could do nothing, while Sylvie's presence drew everyone like a charm.
The fact that Carlo was sitting next to her, overhearing the conversation, indolently  gazing round the table or raising his glass to sip the delights of the Princesse's cellar, only made things worse.
As a half-eaten plate of delicious boeuf en croûte was lifted away from her, Katherine heard her mother say, ‘And do you know, one day when Katherine was tiny, she stole the engagement ring my husband had given me.’
Sylvie looked with limpid eyes into Thomas's face.
I told Dali about it and he simply chuckled.
‘Quite, quite right,’ he said, ‘little girls have to be jealous of their mothers and of their daddy's affections,’' Sylvie laughed with a silken tone.
‘And it never changes, never.’
Katherine's face had grown contorted.
Thomas's hand, patting her knee reassuringly, did nothing to still her emotions.
‘Sometimes —’ he smiled at Sylvie urbanely —‘I think we inflict the oedipal story on our children and attribute emotions and intentions to them which are more properly our own.
Perhaps we have got things the wrong way round.
Perhaps it is fathers who are jealous of the sons who will soon replace them.
Or mothers who are jealous of their daughters.
While the children are merely innocent mirrors who reflect what we wish to see.’
‘Perhaps,’ Sylvie replied sweetly.
‘But in my case, I can tell you it was quite different.
The ring was merely one instance.’
‘Bitch,’ Katherine mumbled under her breath, not knowing how the word had made its way to her lips.
She rose abruptly from the table.
‘Excuse me, I'm not feeling very well.’
She rushed away before anyone could stop her, rushed too quickly to hear Carlo say, I don't know, I think if I were the beautiful Katherine's mother, I might suffer the occasional twinge of jealousy.’
FOURTEEN
The arched hall of the Palazzo was cool with the marble and stone of centuries.
A coolness unimaginable in the pulsing outdoor heat of that Milan afternoon.
It enveloped Sylvie, chilled the dampness of her forehead, calmed the fever which had brought her here.
For two days she had surreptitiously watched the gateway of the magnificent house from the cover of a plane tree on the other side of the road.
She had observed the Palazzo's comings and goings, trying to sniff from them a sense of the life within.
The clandestine nature of her task, the whiff of danger, filled her with excitement.
It reminded her of another time.
Another Sylvie.
The Sylvie of the underground, the war, its risks.
The charge of being incognito.
She felt as if , at last , after all those American years of stifling tedium and vagueness and oppressive normality, she were again herself.
There, in the secret shade of the plane tree.
Sylvie followed the dark-suited man who had opened the vast polished door to her, trailed past antique busts of senatorial gaze.
In the loggia there was a hushed stillness, broken only by the rampant colour of geraniums pouring through columns from the courtyard beyond.
She was shown into a library of gracious proportions, ushered towards a chair.
From nowhere another dark man appeared, bearing a tray, a jug of Campari and soda, a tall iced glass.
He hovered, moved invisibly into the background.
Sylvie waited.
Let the tranquillity of the Palazzo lull her.
Four years.
It had taken her over four years, but here she was at last.
She remembered the point of origin of her journey distinctly.
She had been in the clinic in Pennsylvania.
It was her third visit there, perhaps her fourth.
It was 1956.
She was forty.
In tangible decline.
The weight of that age sat heavily on her  shoulders, marked her body, tore at her mind.
No one she had loved, no one she considered her own — neither her father, nor her mother, nor her brother, nor her friend Caroline — had reached such a ridiculous age.
An age which, it struck her, had no future.
Jacob hated her going to the clinic, but she went whenever things at home got too difficult.
She liked it there.
Liked it in part because Jacob disapproved.
Liked the plump nurses who wore ordinary clothes and smiled inanely and constantly.
Liked the other patients with their erratic ways.
Liked the doctors who let her say and do anything she pleased.
As long as she didn't drink.
She didn't mind that.
They gave her pills which kept the world at a distance, muted things, let her dream.
Jacob hated the pills.
She liked the grounds too, the little woods, far from the ugly clamour and harsh odours of the city.
That time, a little boy had been there.
A little boy of about eight, small for his age, curly-haired, dark.
He sat in a corner, sat very still.
His only movement was in the tears which crept down his pale cheeks.
For some reason, Sylvie took solace in him.
He reminded her of something, of some repressed part of herself.
She sat near him, not too close, not too far.
She saw how he refused everything.
Food.
Talk.
Attention.
But she knew he was aware of her.
Not too near.
Not too far.
One day he looked up at her, met her eyes.
She waited until he did it again.
Then she went up to him.
‘I'm going for a walk,’ she said.
‘If you'd like to come…’
She let her invitation hang.
He gazed at her hesitantly.
She didn't move.
She waited.
Waited for perhaps five minutes.
Then he nodded.
They walked slowly, silently, in the grounds.
Sylvie took an apple from her pocket.
Bit into it.
Offered it to him.
He looked at it and then, after a moment, bit into it ravenously.
They didn't speak, but the next day and the day after that, the walk was repeated.
On that day, Sylvie asked him his name.
He didn't answer for a while and then, as they made their way round the little lake, he answered, ‘Ivanov.’
Then, changing the intonation, ‘Ivan.’
‘Ivanov,’ Sylvie repeated.
‘Ivan,’ she said again, sniffing the sound.
Something in her leapt and then faded.
‘A nice name,’ she said.
The next day Ivan started to speak to her, haltingly at first, in an English which wasn't quite English, and in disconnected bursts of speech.
He had been in the States for only a few months.
A stray little Hungarian boy, sent away from his strife-torn country by his mother, to a new life in America with adoptive parents who didn't understand him.
Who were doing their best, but couldn't understand him, not only because of the gap of language.
And who, at their wits' end, had sent him here.
Sylvie understood.
Understood the dreams and images that tormented him, the listless refusal of his shrouded days.
He reminded her of little Gabriel, of so many others during the war.
She hugged him to her, stayed by his side, let him speak when he wanted to speak, held him when he cried.
One day while they walked, he asked, ‘Do you already have a little boy like me?’
He pressed her hand, all but beseeched her.
His words set up a buzz in Sylvie's mind.
They whizzed and flew and darted into murky comers.
She gazed at little Ivan, bent down to kiss him.
‘No, not a little one.’
She shook her head.
‘But I wish I did.’
His words brought back another scene.
Her parents' house but not her parents' house.
After the war.
Two women lying in beds, their mouths round with cries.
She floated above them then leapt into one of the bodies.
Her own.
Sylvie in labour.
The nurses barking like hyenas, braying like donkeys.
Noise.
Too much noise.
In the bed next to her, a frail girl.
What was her name?
Hanka.
Hanka pale, screaming.
And a man.
Ivan, of course.
Ivan Makarov.
After that, the memory faded but lay there, in the back of her mind, refusing to leave her alone.
For three more weeks at the clinic, Sylvie kept Ivan company.
She stopped taking the pills.
And while she walked or sat with him, she thought, pondered her life, dredged up scenes, remembered.
When Ivan went home clutching Sylvie's address in his hand, Sylvie left too.
She was suddenly burning with the fire of a new task.
She had forgotten about the obstacle of her immediate  family.
When she returned to New York, she bumped against them with a vengeance.
She would have told Jacob about her new purpose, but she knew he would see it as another sign of her raving, a sign of some new imbalance, and would try to search for causes, try to talk her out of it.
In any case, she hated him, hated him for never making love to her any more.
And she hated Katherine.
Loathed the look of innocent reproach lodged in those cool grey eyes.
Loathed her fearfulness.
Hated that slim body with its perfect skin which always nestled into Jacob's embrace.
Sometimes her loathing was so great that she even forgot her new determination.
At first she thought she might take Leo into her confidence.
The detective agency she had approached had given her no results.
All she had to go on was a name, a place of birth, the suggestion of an address.
They thought she was mad.
Leo, she finally decided, might think the same.
In any case, he was just a boy, engrossed in his new university life.
He might even take against her and she cared for him.
So Sylvie decided she would enlist the Princesse.
Princesse Mat always knew how to go about things.
She had friends in high places everywhere, contacts in embassies.
Sylvie flew to Switzerland.
She didn't tell Princesse Mat the whole story.
In any event, she had begun to like the idea of a secret.
A secret always buoyed her up, gave her a sense of adventure.
She told Princesse Mathilde that she wanted to find the son of her old friend Andrzej Potacki, yes, yes, the Andrzej who had died with the partisans after the war.
The child, she told the Princesse, had been left in the care of a friend of Andrzej's, a Russian.
Yes, it was strange that he was Russian, but history too was strange.
Ivan Makarov was his name.
A certain Ivan Makarov.
Perhaps he was an officer.
Sylvie wanted to find him.
Things were so awful in Poland, in the Soviet Union.
But now it was all opening up a little.
Maybe the child could be located.
Sylvie wanted to see him, to give him things, to help.
The Princesse had looked at her curiously.
But Sylvie had convinced her, vowed her to secrecy.
She knew that the Princesse suspected her of having taken Andrzej as a lover, but that  only made it all the more plausible.
What did she care what the Princesse thought, as long as she helped her.
And the Princesse had helped.
She knew of agencies.
She knew the Polish ambassador, the Soviet ambassador.
It took a long time, so long that Sylvie had almost given up, had gone back to the clinic several times.
And then last summer, there had been word.
They had traced a son of Ivan Makarov to Milan of all places.
He had apparently been adopted by a wealthy industrialist.
In a fever of excitement, Sylvie had flown to Milan.
She had no idea what she would do, but she needed to see the boy.
She had found the Palazzo easily.
But its size, its ostentatious wealth had daunted her.
Sylvie bided her time.
She haunted the gateway of the house, waited for the boy to emerge.
And then, one morning, she saw him.
A slender youth with dark tousled hair and eyes of a stormy blue.
The eyes, she thought, were unmistakable.
She wanted to rush up to him.
But something held her back.
For three days running she returned to the house at the same time.
Behind her dark glasses, she constructed for herself the illusion of security.
One day, she called out, and he turned.
She fled.
She had no idea what to say to him.
She returned to New York.
Here everything was worse.
Katherine's very presence seemed to provoke her at every turn.
She was the incarnation of everything that had gone amiss in Sylvie's own life.
And the girl now flirted outrageously with Jacob, with Leo.
Sylvie's rancour against her became the measure of her universe.
She started to drink again.
She took another lover.
Nothing helped.
And then Katherine was gone.
The relief of it.
Sylvie began to think more clearly.
What did she want?
Things twisted this way and that in her mind.
And then she hit upon a scheme.
Again she enlisted the Princesse's help.
She wanted to write a series of articles, perhaps a book.
It would give her something to do.
A book about the children of the war, displaced children, children who had not been brought up by their natural parents or in their home countries.
Hitler's orphans.
Stalin's orphans.
The Princesse had to help her.
Give her introductions.
She knew all about those refugees.
From the  war.
Last summer when she had gone in search of Andrzej's son, she hadn't been able to bring herself to speak to him.
The articles would provide a way.
Please.
Sylvie had come the closest she had ever been to begging.
The Princesse's eyes were sad.
She had looked at Sylvie for a long time before speaking.
Then she had nodded slowly, and said, ‘Sylvie, you know that you've found yourself an elaborate means of coming to terms with your own childhood.
Just remember that, my dear.
All this is about you.
And there may not be any magical answers out there.’
But the Princesse had written letters, smoothed the way, given her a literary pseudonym.
And here Sylvie was, waiting in the cool hush of the Palazzo.
She sipped her drink.
Sat up straighter.
Remembered herself.
She was a journalist.
She had coached herself in the role, prepared her questions.
She pulled out a notepad from her briefcase, opened the tape-recorder she had brought.
She prided herself on the last.
It was the sign of her new trade.
She wound spools, set up her microphone.
She was only sorry that the brief formal note which had arrived from the Palazzo granting her an interview of no more than ninety minutes' duration had stipulated that photographs would not be permitted.
Sylvie, the actress, rearranged her broad-brimmed hat, crossed one tapering leg over another and smoothed a stocking.
She wanted him to think her attractive, to like her.
And there he was at last, a tall youth in a light summer shirt which showed her how his shoulders were already visibly broadening.
Her breath caught.
She stood.
He came towards her with outstretched hand.
‘How do you do?
I am Alexei Gismondi.’
‘Laura Stirling,’ Sylvie remembered herself.
There was another man with him, a minder, Sylvie thought, perhaps an English tutor.
They made small-talk, about Italy, the weather, New York.
Alexei's English was stilted, but — adequate.
Sylvie, warming to her role, conjured up fantastical pictures of New York days and dangerous nights, brought a laugh to his lips.
Then she explained her purpose.
She wanted a profile of Alexei, his present life, something of his past.
The boy smiled at her, a smile half whimsical, half serious.
Her heart bumped.
He was so like his father.
Alexei Gismondi gazed calmly at this woman.
So this was a New Yorker, he thought.
She must have been very pretty once, so blonde.
He had met very few Americans in his life and his image of New York was a product of films and gialli , the thrillers he loved to read.
It was a world which howled with car chases and teetered between excitement and extinction.
He imagined this woman draped on Humphrey Bogart's arm and walking into a seedy bar.
The picture worked.
He panned towards a piano, saw her saunter over to it.
Sylvie called him back, smiled with wide curling lips, asked him to describe his days.
‘They are exceedingly boring,’ Alexei answered honestly.
Everything was boring compared to his books and the films he swallowed voraciously.
‘I go to school, come home, do my work, have English lessons.
I would be far more interested in hearing you talk some more about New York.’
He looked at her earnestly.
At the age of fourteen, Alexei Gismondi was hardly adept at self-revelation.
Since his move to Italy, he had led a cloistered life in the luxurious Palazzo.
Up until two years ago, he had been tutored at home.
It was his English tutor who had convinced his uncle that films were an excellent way to learn the language.
And so his education in Hitchcock and Huston and Wilder had run parallel to his study of English.
Then his uncle had decided that it was time to send him to school.
He needed the company of other children.
But he had not yet formed any firm friendships.
His uncle's wealth, the chauffeur-driven limousine which brought him to and from school, cut him off as securely as did his own past.
Despite the fact that he had drawn a cord between his previous life and the present one, he was not exactly lonely.
He lived a great deal in his fantasies and he enjoyed these.
He had something of the solitary about him, something of the dreamer, although he had none of the dreamer's physical clumsiness.
All this Sylvie began to learn as she watched his graceful gestures and questioned him.
She provoked him first to talk about his interests, the books he read, the films he watched.
Then gradually, imperceptibly, she led him into the trickier terrain of the past.
‘So the Gismondis are not your parents?’ she asked casually.
‘Oh no, I thought you knew that.
They are my uncle and aunt, on my mother's side.’
Sylvie flinched despite herself.
‘They have adopted me now, of course, so I bear their name, though Lara, my aunt, sadly died two years ago.’
‘And your own mother?’
Sylvie prodded.
Alexei's eyes grew cloudy.
‘She died when I was born,’ he said softly.
‘She was Polish.’
‘I was born in Poland, too,’ Sylvie offered.
‘Oh yes?’
Alexei didn't pursue it.
‘I don't speak Polish.
My father took me to the Soviet Union when I was very small.
We lived in Leningrad, then in Moscow,’ he said proudly.
‘Then…’
His voice trailed off.
Sylvie recognized the look that came momentarily over Alexei's face.
Fear.
The traces of fear.
It was gone as soon as it had come and he re-established his public gaze.
‘But that is all over.
My uncle and aunt had no children.
They adopted me.
They have been very good to me.’
What Alexei didn't tell Sylvie about, what he spoke of to no one, was that last year he had spent with his father.
His memory had grown into a series of fading snapshots.
He could flick the pages of the album at will.
But around the frames of the pictures everything was dark.
Except for that last year, when the blurred skelter of images wouldn't stay in their frames and played about with a kaleidoscopic frenzy.
The emotions of that period still lived within him.
Each section of the album began with a key image.
There was Leningrad, his father in his uniform kneeling by his side and explaining to him how quickly the waters of the Neva flowed, flowed into the Gulf of Finland.
There was Moscow, the great military parade, the pride of the Soviet Union trooping in front of them and his father pointing to a man, not so far from them, a man with a big moustache and dark eyes.
Stalin, his father whispered in pride.
Then came Budapest, the Embassy where people talked in hushed voices.
His father was different then.
Something was  worrying him.
He could smell it on him.
He would rarely stoop down to explain things to Alexei.
And then, in that last year, came the great journey north.
An endless journey in a train towards a landscape which was all snowy vastness.
This was where the pictures refused to stay still.
The blizzards stirred them, made them leap and flurry, like his father's anger.
He saw his father only rarely.
Basha looked after him in the small village.
But each time his father appeared, he looked grimmer.
One day he took Alexei along with him.
It was cold, so cold in the jeep that it was with difficulty that Alexei kept his eyes open.
When he did, he saw rows upon rows of dismal huts; and then a little further, gangs of men walking, walking and falling and still walking.
He saw one man hitting another.
It frightened him.
He wanted to cry, but the tears froze on his face.
His father drove on.
There was the forest.
And there were men chopping at the trees.
Alexei could see their faces.
They were terrible.
Empty.
Like skulls.
He closed his eyes.
His father shouted at him over the noise of the engine, ‘I want you to see, Alexei.
I want you to see.’
When they got back to Basha and the small house, his father embraced him.
‘I want you to remember today, Alexei.
You may not understand now, but I want you to remember.
It is why I am sending you away.’
It was then that Alexei began to cry.
They stood huddled beside the small stove and his father waited for his tears to subside.
‘This is a great country, Alexei.
Never forget that.’
His father lowered his voice.
‘But the revolution has strayed.
Soon, perhaps, it will come right.
Justice is on its side.
But for the moment, it is better that you are further away.
Your permit has come.
You shall visit your aunt and uncle.
It is what your mother would have wished.’
Alexei knew that when his mother's name was invoked, there was no arguing.
He nuzzled against his father.
‘And when shall I see you, Papa?’
His father held him closer, but didn't reply.
Two days later, a Comrade Tulayeva came to fetch him.
From above her vast chest, she looked at him disapprovingly.
He knew instinctively that tears would not be in order, might even prove treacherous.
He never saw his father again.
At the Finnish border, a sturdy man with a dark face and a broad smile waited for him.
He had a thick coat with a fur collar, bright white teeth.
‘I am your uncle Giangiacomo,’ he said to him.
They were the only words Alexei understood until he reached Milan.
‘How old were you when you arrived in Italy?’
The American journalist broke into his thoughts.
‘I had just turned seven,’ Alexei responded calmly.
‘You can see why I remember so little.’
He smiled, glanced at his watch.
What he remembered clearly was his arrival in this house, his sense of confusion, his awe at its size and grandeur.
Why was he being taken to a government building?
Then, his aunt, her long cool fingers tracing his features, stroking his hair.
She smelled strange, like no one he had ever met.
But she could speak a little Russian.
She told him this was home.
She was kind.
Later he recognized that smell.
It was the odour of churches, the sharp lingering sweetness of incense.
Lara took him to the cathedral.
He had never been to a church before.
It was cold, cavernous, darkly littered with pillars.
She knelt before a statue of a woman with a pure face, not unlike her own.
She crossed herself, looked upwards with pleading eyes, then shut them fast.
He had no idea what she was doing.
He learnt soon enough.
Lara went to church every day.
She introduced him to priests, told him stories of saints which frightened him.
Had him confirmed.
She also told him that it was prayer that had brought him to her.
After she died, the renegade thought came into his mind that perhaps it was a surfeit of prayer in those chill damp churches that had killed her.
With her gone, he never went back to church.
He didn't know why these thoughts had come back into his mind now.
Perhaps it was the contrast between this leggy blonde journalist who claimed she was Polish and his aunt, so pale, so retiring.
Alexei rose.
‘Oh, is my time up already?’
Sylvie looked at him in dismay.
‘Why, we hardly seem to have begun.
Perhaps, perhaps you could take a few moments to show me the house, your room, where you work?’
She looked at Alexei with a plea.
The youth nodded graciously.
‘I don't see why not,’ he said despite his minder's disapproving glance.
The man took her aside for a moment.
‘You understand, Miss Stirling, anything you see in this house, anything Alexei may wish to show you, cannot find its way into your article,’ he said in a low voice which carried a note of threat.
Sylvie looked at him in some perplexity.
‘I know, I know you come on the highest recommendation.
Otherwise Signor Gismondi would not have granted you this rare opportunity.
But we do not allow journalists into this house normally.
Signor Gismondi insists on the strictest privacy.’
From behind her she heard Alexei laugh.
‘He has good reason.
Once my uncle allowed a magazine team to do a feature on the interior.
The next week we were burgled.’
The story seemed to delight him.
‘Oh, I wouldn't mention anything specific,’ Sylvie said.
‘It's not my style,’ she added with bravura.
‘It is only Alexei I am interested in.’
The youth grinned, a trifle embarrassed now.
More like a child of his own age.
Sylvie suddenly remembered how uncomfortable in his own skin Leo had been at fourteen.
But Alexei had a poise, a calm.
She wondered where it came from, how deep it went.
She had a moment of pure desire in which she wanted to shout to him that he must come away with her.
Now.
But she only gripped her bag more firmly.
He turned away from her, discomfited at her glance.
Yet polite, so polite.
He gestured for her to precede him through the door.
They walked round the loggia to the other side of the house where Alexei threw open a door on a spacious reception room.
‘We entertain in here.
Though it's been rather quiet since my aunt died.’
Sylvie saw a room of classical proportions, a ceiling painted with the voluptuous splendour of the Baroque, prepossessing marble fireplaces, mirrors, an array of sofas, lamps of the finest porcelain, polished wood.
Splendour.
But she wasn't interested.
Instead, she asked Alexei, ‘Your aunt.
What was she like?’
She gestured around the room, encouraged him.
‘She must have been a woman of great taste.’
Alexei looked a little wistful.
‘Yes,’ he answered hesitantly.
Then as if he had on the spur of the moment decided to take her into his confidence, he added, ‘But she was always a tiny bit sad.
She felt guilty, she once told me.
Guilty that she had been the lucky one.
The one of the three sisters to be sent to Italy, before the war.
She was the eldest, my mother the youngest.
My aunt was the one who went to all the trouble of trying to get me out of the Soviet Union.’
He looked sad, a little boy now.
‘You loved her,’ Sylvie murmured.
Alexei nodded.
‘She was very kind to me.’
‘Have you any photos of her, of yourself?’
Alexei wavered.
His photographs were private.
‘It is getting late, Alexei,’ the minder intervened.
‘Signor Gismondi will soon be home.
You know he likes you at the table punctually.’
‘Oh, but your room, I should so like to see your room.’
Sylvie tried to delay the moment of her departure.
She felt restless, at odds with herself.
The boy showed no more than a formal interest in her.
They walked up a grand staircase, first the minder, then Sylvie, then Alexei.
She thought she could feel his eyes on her legs.
Men's glances were so much more direct here.
Even this boy's.
She swallowed.
Moved more provocatively.
His room gave her a subject.
It was a large room with windows that looked out on grounds.
Inside it was all clutter.
Yellow-backed books everywhere, a shelf full of Russian tomes, then a desk, neater this, with school materials ranged.
At one end, a screen with a home projector, a camera, spools of film, a splicer.
‘You make movies?’
Sylvie asked.
Alexei grinned.
‘Hardly movies.
Just little bits of this and that.
My uncle bought me a camera for my birthday.’
She could see the enthusiasm in his eyes.
‘Would you show me a little bit of this and a little bit of that?
I'd love to see what you've done.’
He held back, but she convinced him.
She realized as he started to load the projector that he probably didn't have many people to talk to.
Sylvie started to chat about films she'd seen recently.
He raved about Hitchcock, about Bogart and Raymond Chandler.
The atmosphere grew easy between them.
While they talked  she glanced at three photographs framed on a shelf.
A blur of fair hair, a delicate face, young.
Hanka, she remembered.
Behind her, standing, a man in a Russian uniform.
Makarov, she thought, though she didn't recognize him.
Then two portraits, distinct, calmly posed.
A burly man.
A slender, frail woman, her eyes filled with longing.
Alexei's family.
Sylvie was confronted by the utter pointlessness of her presence.
Tears rose haphazardly to her eyes as she watched the sequence of silent film Alexei showed her in the now darkened room.
A street, the details of a door, a handle, the grain of the wood.
Then a woman coming through the door.
Her face in close-up, anxious, shadowy, the brow furrowed.
The camera followed the woman along a gravel path.
Feet on pebbles.
Walking quickly.
She could almost hear the crunch they made.
Then grass.
The camera moved up the woman's body to her eyes, searching, searching.
Peering downward.
And then a smile, full lips curling, eyes sparkling.
She bent.
Something glistening through grass.
The woman picked it up.
The camera zoomed in on her hand.
A ring.
Then nothing.
The rattle of the projector.
‘That's as far as I've got with this bit.’
‘Who is the woman?’
Sylvie asked, needing to know.
‘Oh, that's Anna.
She works here.
She let me film her.
She also teaches me French.
She gave me the idea for this footage.
I think it's from some French writer.
A woman loses some jewellery she thinks is real.
But it's not.
It's fake.
It's a complicated story and I've only used elements of it.
There's only so much you can do with a Super B,’ he shrugged.
‘Oh, but you've done it beautifully.
The atmosphere is wonderful.
I want to know what happens next,’ Sylvie enthused.
‘Do you?’
Alexei looked at her sceptically.
‘It's only an exercise.
Not the real thing.
I'd like to do the real thing.’
And there she had it, Sylvie thought.
Her answer.
Alexei was more interested in film than in anything else.
She looked at him.
So distinctly his own person that there was no space for her.
If he had been in a sorry state, if he had needed anything, then she could have helped him, perhaps eventually told him.
As it was, Alexei was a closed case.
Yet she desperately wanted him to acknowledge her, to have  some impact on his contained life.
‘If you ever want to meet anyone in movies —’ she began.
But a knock at the door interrupted them.
A woman's voice, murmuring in Italian.
‘Signor Gismondi is home, Alexei.
He is waiting for you.’
There was a hurried exchange between the boy and the woman Sylvie recognized as Anna.
Then Alexei turned back to her.
‘Perhaps you would like to meet my uncle?’ he said politely.
‘He has asked to see you, since you are still here.’
Sylvie nodded, willing to do anything to prolong her visit.
They went down the stairs again, this time to another room, a smaller reception room.
A barrel-chested man in a well-cut suit stood to greet them, gripped her hand firmly.
He assessed her with shrewd eyes, but his lips smiled.
‘Good evening, Signora Stirling,’ he said in strongly accented tones.
‘I may call you by your pen name, yes?’ he added.
Sylvie had a sense that he was threatening her.
She panicked for a moment, and then seeing the beam on his face, smiled as calmly as she could in response.
Had she really expected that one of Italy's leading industrialists would not check her out before letting her into his house?
What did it matter, she thought.
She had achieved her purpose, at least in part.
‘Of course, the Princesse has told you,’ she murmured.
‘Yes, yes.’
He waved the matter away with a gracious gesture.
Sylvie noticed that despite his short legs, his girth, he had a grace about him and a power.
A tray with crystal glasses was brought.
Cool champagne.
Sylvie drank it with relief.
‘I also know that you speak French, which would suit my poor tongue much better.
But then my son would be left out.
My son has not yet had adequate lessons in French.’
Sylvie looked at him curiously, glanced at Alexei.
Signor Gismondi missed nothing.
‘So Alexei has been referring to me as his uncle?’
He tousled the boy's hair with a friendly gesture.
‘He is stubborn, my Alexei.
Not a bad thing.
He would like to think that his father is still alive.
Though, of course, there is almost no hope.
The poor man disappeared into Stalin's camps, you know.’
He shook his head in disgust.
‘Povero popolo.’
‘Still, eh, we have to concentrate on the future.
Fathers, uncles, what does it matter?’
He focused his gaze on Alexei.
‘You are happy here, eh Alexei?’
The boy nodded, his embarrassment visible only in the slight stiffness of his limbs.
Signor Gismondi glanced at his watch.
Sylvie knew it was her cue.
She rose.
‘A great pleasure to meet you, Signor Gismondi.
And your son.
He is a very fine boy.
Talented,’ she said in even tones which didn't reveal the effort it cost her.
She shook Alexei's hand, held on to it a little, savouring the cool texture.
‘Thank you, Alexei.’
He looked into her eyes dreamily.
He was seeing Lauren Bacall sauntering across a room, shoulders high, slim hips moving.
Imagining Marilyn Monroe, the wide mouth, the perfect teeth.
‘You will, of course, send me a copy of your manuscript before it goes to press.’
Signor Gismondi followed her to the door.
The words were less a request than an order.
Sylvie gazed at him in momentary confusion.
She had forgotten her alibi.
‘Of course, of course .’
She recovered herself, spoke effusively.
‘Though it will take some time.
I have quite a few more interviews to do.’
She smiled, her old dazzling smile, of Sylvie the performer who spoke to men's hearts as well as their groins.
Signor Gismondi was not unsusceptible.
‘I shall look forward to it, whenever it arrives.’
He bowed.
Over the bulwark of his body, Sylvie waved to Alexei.
His eyes were already elsewhere.
She was invisible to him, already forgotten.
Sylvie took her leave.
At the front door of the Palazzo Gismondi, she was handed her tape-recorder, her briefcase.
Her hands trembled.
In the moist warmth of the evening, she leant against the wall which encircled the Palazzo.
She was tired out.
She thought of Alexei, his life, its wealth, its comforts, his family, so substantially lodged in him that nothing could remove them.
And she thought of her tiny incursion into that life.
The life of her son.
She felt as if she had given her last performance.
And now depression tugged at her.
Four years.
It had taken her four years to meet him and within an hour it was all over.
She remembered again the scene she had recalled at the clinic.
The scene that had sent her on her journey.
But this time she knew its ending.
She saw the two women lying in their beds.
She saw the nurses, heard the noise.
In the bed next to her, Hanka, pale, screaming.
Then murmuring, ‘A boy, a boy for Ivan.’
Her child.
No, Sylvie's child.
No, no, Sylvie had a girl, Katherine.
She wanted a girl.
Yes, yes, a girl for Caroline.
A girl for Jacob.
Sylvie floating, choosing between two cots, two babies.
Boy and girl.
A girl for Caroline.
Katherine for Caroline.
A boy for Hanka.
Her son, Sylvie's son for Hanka.
Everything had become clear to her because of that scene.
Her hatred for Katherine, the dismal turn of her life.
Her resentment of Jacob for not recognizing that the daughter he adored was not his.
He should have been able to see it sooner, see it instantly.
Understand why Sylvie couldn't stand the sight of the girl.
He was cleverer than her.
But no, he idolized the girl from the start.
She made him blind.
She could do no wrong in his eyes.
She, it was she, Katherine, who had stolen Jacob away from her.
From the very first, as soon as he had held her, he had had eyes only for her.
Sylvie had brought a cuckoo into her own nest.
And her son?
She had found him, seen him, shivered at the resemblance to Jacob, but he was as distant as he had ever been.
Not some peasant boy she could steal away with the promise of a better life, but a youth sheltered by his wealth, closed to her.
All the excitement that had buoyed her up over these last years drained out of her.
What was there for her now?
Only a return to the barrenness of her life.
A life without Alexei.
A son no sooner found than lost.
A fleeting moment.
Never to return.
Almost like death.
Like Caroline's child.
No sooner had than lost.
Sylvie walked.
The streets were crowded with evening strollers.
Young couples, arm in arm.
Not much older than her son.
Her Alexei.
Laughing.
They didn't see her.
Saw only each other.
Their present.
The future in each other 's eyes.
She wasn't part of  it.
She was invisible to them.
Invisible.
An invisible vessel for voices.
Random sound teeming inside her.
A bleak flat voice surfacing.
‘You understand nothing, Sylvie.
Nothing.
Katherine, my child, my future, died before me.’
Caroline's voice.
Dead.
Burbling empty sound.
‘Get her away from here.
Take her away.
I can't stand the sight of her.’
Papush.
Look, Papush.
Look.
I have a son for you.
Dead.
Dead like you.
Dead babies.
Sylvie walked.
Unfamiliar streets.
Shadowy crowds.
A shadow herself.
She found herself back in her hotel.
The bar.
Yes.
A drink.
She needed a drink.
Everywhere around her, couples, murmuring, gazing into each other 's eyes.
And she, alone.
Invisible.
Sylvie drank.
And then a voice, a real voice, a stranger's voice, addressing her in English.
‘May I join you, signora?’
Sylvie focused.
A young man, looking into her eyes.
Seeing her.
A warm smile, a flash of bright teeth, directed at her.
‘Another drink?’
Sylvie nodded, sat back.
A live voice, chatting.
‘You are a stranger here,sí ?
Alone?
Milan is a beautiful city.
I could show you, show you some attractions.’
The smile again, seeing her.
Admiring.
A young face.
Unlined.
Alive.
A young man's face.
Like Alexei.
She saw Alexei in him.
Sylvie sipped her drink.
Smiled serenely into eyes which saw her.
‘What is your name?’
‘Umberto.’
‘How old are you, Umberto?’
‘Eighteen.’
‘Eighteen,’ Sylvie echoed.
She was still at the convent.
At the convent with Caroline.
The games they played.
With the nuns.
At her parents' house.
The make-up.
The forays into cafés.
Strangers' eyes staring.
That one.
She would have that one.
Sylvie sidling, smiling with red lips.
Their hands, touching her, desiring.
Caroline over her shoulder.
Watching mutely, angrily.
Umberto was stroking her hand.
‘I will take you dancing,sí ?
And then…’
His eyes trailed over her slowly.
‘And then…’
He flicked his tongue over full lips.
Sylvie let him take her arm, floated.
Floated on a young man's arm through the lobby, smiled proudly, a little vainly at the greying assistant manager behind the desk.
‘Che cosa fai in questa casa ?’
A hiss came from the manager.
The arm on Sylvie's stiffened, dropped.
‘I told you not to come in here again.’
The greying man turned to her, his face battling between pity and contempt.
‘You should know, signora,’ he said softly, ‘this young man will charge you for your pleasures.’
Sylvie looked at him uncomprehendingly for a moment.
Then, with a sudden savage gesture, she struck Umberto hard across the face.
He scurried from the hotel.
Sylvie shook.
The manager grinned.
‘E meglio cosí .
Much better.’
A loud self-lacerating laugh broke from Sylvie.
Fool.
She was a fool.
She looked wildly round the lobby.
People staring.
A humiliated fool.
There was nothing, nothing here for her.
She caught the first plane back to New York.
Jacob was kind, solicitous.
But his kiss was not a kiss.
Merely a hollow formality.
He didn't see her either.
Saw only her state.
Was she drinking?
Taking pills?
Was her mind wandering?
That was what his eyes asked, while his mouth spoke hollow questions.
Had it been a good flight?
Had she enjoyed her holiday?
Being patient with a patient.
That's all it was.
Almost, in the midst of the new apartment that she hated as much as he did, though it had been decorated to her own specifications, she said, ‘I have been to see my son.’
That would have made him stop, look at her, see.
But no, he was asking her about Mathilde, about Katherine.
Katherine again.
That's all he cared about.
He had bided his time, not asked her straight away, waited.
Oh, she knew him so well.
His little supposed sensitivities.
But the question had been there all the time.
All he could think about.
All he saw in her was the absence of his daughter.
Almost, she brought it out.
‘She is not your daughter.’
But she didn't.
She could predict his empty stare, the calm voice, soothing her.
‘Sylvie, stop fantasizing.
I know you wish it were so.
But a wish is only a wish.’
She could have pushed it, prodded an old wound.
‘No, not your daughter, someone else's.’
And then?
Then he would shrug, a little stiffly, look away.
‘All so long ago.
So many years.
What does it matter?
Our daughter, nonetheless.’
No, she was more cunning than that.
She had a better way of rupturing that patient impassivity, of making him look at her.
Listen.
Sylvie poured herself another drink, smoothed her dress.
‘That nice man Thomas Sachs was there.
Such a nice man.’
She sat back in her chair, crossed her legs slowly.
Oh yes, he was listening now, four ears in place of two, all his eyes on her.
‘A gentleman.
I think your Katherine is in love with him.’
She laughed.
Jacob leapt up.
‘Why do you say that?’
‘Oh, we women know these things.’
She taunted him, waited for the press of questions.
Teased him with hints, then elaborated details of look and stance and voice as they passed between Katherine and Thomas, conjured up a possible affair, a marriage.
Sylvie laughing, enjoying herself, enjoying his discomfort.
He made love to her that night.
Love in the dark.
Her and not her.
Was it what they used to call love, that cursory groping devoid of excitement?
The next day listlessness overcame her.
She wandered round the empty apartment aimlessly.
The tape-recorder sat there.
She pushed the switch.
Alexei's voice.
Sylvie listened.
Over and over, she listened.
She started to doodle with the tape as accompaniment.
Random scratchings of her pen.
Trapped animals with human bodies.
Birds with frightened eyes.
Mutilated fantastical creatures.
For days she doodled.
One evening Jacob found the pad.
‘You're drawing again, Sylvie.
These are wonderful.’
He bought her paper, inks, pens, charcoal.
Encouraged her, his eyes warm.
Sylvie drew to the accompaniment of voices.
Alexei's voice, one of many.
She no longer had any need to switch the tape on.
Each word, each intonation, lived inside her.
But sometimes, she still did.
And while she drew, one of the many voices inside her set up a repeated chant, ‘What should I do?
What should I do?’
Jacob was excited about the drawings, named them her Bestiary.
She started to tear them up, slowly, deliberately.
Whichever drawing he particularly commented on in the evening was certain to have disappeared by the next day.
He stopped commenting.
One afternoon he came home when she had the tape on.
‘What's that you're listening to, Sylvie?’ he asked.
She looked at him dimly, hardly aware of the voices on the machine.
Then, with a careless gesture, she switched it off.
‘That was you, wasn't it?’
Jacob was curious.
Sylvie sat up straighter.
He was concentrating on her.
The full force of that old gaze.
She smiled.
‘Didn't I tell you?
I'm researching a book.
That was one of the interviews.’
The words came to her lips with no forethought.
She saw his initial scepticism.
‘No, you didn't tell me.’
‘I like my little secrets, you know.’
She laughed, her low, throaty laugh.
‘What is it about?’
Sylvie babbled, saw the scepticism settle into belief.
He'll believe anything if he wants to, one of her voices said.
Anything but the truth.
Perhaps she could try the truth on him now.
‘Jacob,’ she started, but he was already hugging her, congratulating her.
‘A brilliant idea.
A grand idea.
How far have you got with it?’
‘I'm just starting.’
‘Well, you must tell me all about it.
If you want to, that is.’
He was a little wary now.
‘On the way.
We can talk more on the way.
I must shower now.’
She looked at him quizzically.
‘You haven't forgotten, Sylvie?
It's the party tonight.
For my new book.
Leo will be there.’
She had forgotten.
The room in the Fifth Avenue complex was crowded with half-familiar faces.
Analysts, writers, doctors, journalists.
She couldn't remember their names.
She felt dizzy.
It was so long since she had been to a party like this.
She clung to Jacob's arm, saw him spirited away on a tide of compliments.
Loud flattering voices.
Leo.
Thank God, there was Leo.
Her tall, blond son.
She had hardly seen him over the last months.
She hugged him, held on to him.
‘Everything okay, Mom?’
She nodded.
‘And you?’
‘Just fine.
Must find Dad to add my congratulations.
Have you read the new book?’
Sylvie shook her head.
‘Have you?’
‘Most of it.
It's interesting, even if it is by the old man.’
He gave her his lopsided grin.
‘Let's go and find him.’
They wound their way through the crowd.
‘What have you been doing with yourself.’
‘Oh, this and that.
Drawing a little again.
Thinking about doing a book myself.’
‘That's great, Mom.’
He squeezed her hand.
‘Don't let the old man get all the plaudits.’
And that, Sylvie thought, was that.
Everything fine and dandy as long as she was gainfully occupied.
And what if she told Leo now that she wasn't writing a book, wasn't doing anything?
Told him she was thinking about his brother?
A brother he had never known?
A brother whose voice was now lodged firmly inside her?
He would look away, refuse to meet her eyes.
Try to change the subject.
They found themselves trapped in a little group.
A bulky round-faced woman in a huge hat was holding forth in stentorian tones.
‘And that's the trouble with men.’
Her dark eyes bore down on Leo.
‘All of them.
They tell you you'll never have to iron their shirts.
You do it once, twice, as a special gesture, to please them, and then before you know it, they expect it, week in, week out and grump if it doesn't happen.
Surprise transformed into the habit of expectation.
Never give men anything.
Isn't that right, Mrs Jardine?’
Sylvie looked at her blankly.
Saw expectant faces.
Who was this woman?
‘I wouldn't know,’ Sylvie mumbled.
‘I've never ironed a shirt.’
Open mouths.
Laughter.
Sylvie turned away.
‘Good one, Sylvie,’ Leo beamed at her.
‘There's Dad.
Wait till I tell him how you put down that old harridan.’
Put down?
Sylvie gazed at him queerly, thought about what the woman had said.
In essence she agreed with her.
She might never have ironed shirts, but she too had once upon a time brought Jacob little surprises, little presents.
Stories, they had been mostly.
Stories about herself He liked stories best of all.
Stories intrigued him, excited him.
She couldn't remember whether the stories were true or not, but she thought dimly that they had both hoped they were.
Jacob certainly had cared about their truth.
And then, after a time he hadn't.
It wasn't only that he wasn't interested in her any longer.
What had he told her once?
In the world of psychoanalysis there was no distinction between truth and fiction.
Only what was uttered mattered.
And now she was trapped by that.
A glass bowl, enclosing her, with Jacob staring in — smiling, benevolent, disinterested.
Anything she said was only a symptom of her condition.
No truth.
No world outside the bowl.
How could she puncture that glass?
How could she make him see?
Make him feel?
She had to do it.
Make him see the truth about Alexei.
Feel the truth about what she had done.
To him.
For him.
For Caroline.
To them all.
She was tired.
So tired.
So many voices.
In her.
Around her.
She needed to escape.
The following week Sylvie went to the clinic in Pennsylvania.
She breathed easier here.
Nobody bothered her.
Asked anything of her.
And she dreaded the winter holidays.
All that semblance of seasonal good cheer.
That pretence of family life.
It was better here.
She could think her own thoughts.
She stayed.
And stayed.
Took up residence.
Going home only occasionally.
To see Leo.
To see Jacob.
They looked strange to her.
Unreal.
They kept trying to speak to her and yet they didn't see her.
They didn't let her think.
One day when the sticky buds on the trees were at their plumpest and the sun gleamed a promise of summer, Sylvie took her sketch pad down to the little lake in the clinic grounds.
She perched at its edge and let her pen, as was her wont, run automatically over the creamy paper.
Line took on shape and form.
A mermaid with dark, tangled hair.
She spoke in Caroline's voice.
‘It's cool here.
So cool.
So nice.
So quiet.
Only the water ripples.’
Sylvie looked at the lake, the water rippling in the breeze.
Its depths murky, secret.
There was a mermaid there, too.
Just like in her drawing.
She looked again.
A tangle of dark hair.
A woman's body.
A grimace.
Sylvie screamed.
Screamed and screamed again.
An attendant came running.
She pointed, stared.
There was commotion at the clinic.
Everyone was transfixed.
Transfixed by the death.
From the lowliest attendant to the  senior doctor through all the patients.
They could talk of nothing but that.
And even in their silences it was there.
The senior doctor addressed them all in a memorial service.
Sylvie could barely remember the woman who had drowned herself, but through his words she took on the grand status of a tormented romantic.
That was when the idea lodged itself in her.
It brought a smile to her lips.
Made her feel light, buoyant, as airy as those soft spring clouds.
Death had them, had them all by the short and curlies.
Just like after the war.
What had they done, all of them, Jacob, Caroline, all of them, but stare wide-eyed into the face of death?
Medusa's unremitting gaze.
Sylvie laughed.
She sat by the lake and drew and laughed.
A scorpion's body flowed out of her pen, the crushing claws, the segmented middle with its spider's legs, the tail, large with its sting; and between claws and body, a Medusa's head, with cold, unlidded eyes.
She looked at her drawing and was pleased.
Where had she heard that scorpions when threatened by fire stung themselves?
Yes, but the tail kept its sting.
She laughed.
She would fracture that glass bowl which kept her imprisoned once and for all.
Jacob would see her as she was.
They would all see her.
But what was the sting?
Sylvie drew.
A week later, she left the clinic and went home.
Jacob, looking at her, thought she seemed happier than he had seen her in years.
‘It's good to have you back,’ he said.
Sylvie smiled secretly.
‘Is the book going well?’
‘Mmmnn.
In fact, I need to go to Europe to do a little more research.’
‘If you think you're well enough?’
‘Oh, I'm quite well.’
She couldn't stop smiling.
She would see Alexei again.
One last time.
She flew directly to Milan, checked into a hotel, telephoned.
Ah no, the young Signor Gismondi was not in.
He was on holiday.
Would be away for some weeks.
Where?
Where was he?
Sylvie wailed.
Could the lady please identify herself?
He was not at liberty to give Signor Gismondi's whereabouts.
Sylvie hung up.
She started to shake.
She hadn't counted on this.
She couldn't wait.
She wasn't strong enough.
She paced her room, back and forth, back and forth.
And then it came to her.
Of course, Mathilde.
Princesse Mathilde.
She would spend some time with Mathilde.
Wait at Mathilde's.
But Valois wasn't auspicious.
She had forgotten Katherine's aura there.
The Princesse was enchanted with Sylvie's daughter.
Could speak of little else.
Nothing Sylvie said seemed to penetrate her loyalty to that daughter who wasn't hers.
Sylvie drank and babbled.
But Mathilde wasn't seeing her.
Wasn't listening.
Wouldn't hear what she had to say.
She couldn't stay here.
Couldn't.
And Katherine would be coming soon.
No, not that.
Sylvie fled.
It was on the return journey to New York in a plane which seemed motionless, caught in an eternity of blue, that the plan came to her.
It came, as so much did for her now, in the cadences of a disembodied voice.
A voice which ordered the clocks back, which made a nonsense of time.
Time moving back while her body, her life, moved forward.
Just like that, Sylvie twisted the dial on her watch, saw the woman beside her do the same.
They were all doing it, everyone, moving time back, at the simple behest of a voice.
Sylvie stared at her watch, twisted again and again.
And now it was yesterday and the day before that and the day before that.
So simple.
An order from a disembodied voice.
Yes, yes, now she had it.
Her own disembodied voice, speaking.
Speaking the truth.
Moving the clocks back.
Now, she knew what the sting in the tail would be.
They would remember her.
Remember her in years to come.
Sylvie gazed out at the eternity of blue and took a long, deep breath.
She felt strong again.
Calm.
Only the details remained to be arranged.
Yes.
And then she had merely to wait.
To wait for the appropriate moment.
A moment to commemorate Caroline.
Just before Christmas.
Yes.
She smiled serenely.
FIFTEEN
BEYOND the sheltered glaze of Princesse Mathilde's drawing room, the snow fell lazily.
Thick, heavy flakes silently covered the sleeping earth.
The Princesse, looking out, felt old.
As old as the peaks she could see from her window.
She fingered the envelope in her pocket, drew it out, read the brief lines again without seeing.
It wasn't right.
Dying shouldn't be a matter of choice.
Not for the young, the healthy.
The privileged.
Not after all the unnatural deaths these last years had already witnessed.
It disturbed the order of things.
Ruptured lives.
The girl, how would she feel?
And her brother?
And Jacob?
Irritation, unleashed, now flooded through her.
Sylvie had always been selfish.
Selfish in her impulsiveness, in her unthinkingness, in her assumption that the world moved only around her.
And now, selfish in her dying.
Forcing them all to retune their lives to the pitch she set.
The Princesse crumpled the telegram into a tight ball.
Then, with a visible change of heart, she carefully smoothed it out again.
No, she wasn't being fair.
An ironical smile played over her features.
Here she was, sounding, even to her own ears, like a puritanical Swiss burgher, imposing a moral code on Sylvie that had never been hers; forcing her into a mould which was alien to everything that made her Sylvie.
It was Sylvie's unconventionality that had always fascinated them all.
And she had chosen to die as she had lived.
Princesse Mathilde jabbed at a log in the stone fireplace and watched the sparks leap angrily upwards.
She wondered how Jacob was taking it.
He must be distraught, agonized.
She should rush to comfort him.
A little thought pounced on her, took her unawares.
He would be free now.
Perhaps…
She stopped the fantasy in its flow and chastised herself.
Here she was in her sixties and still  dreaming like a schoolgirl about a man.
A man she had had an affair with some thirty years ago.
She corrected the picture.
Not any man.
The only man she had ever wanted.
The only man who had ever wholly captured her imagination in a lifetime of meetings and travel and ceaseless activity.
She glanced at the outlines of her image in the vast window.
People told her she still looked wonderful.
Flatterers.
Time trapped one in a masquerade with costumes of its own choice.
Sometimes when she caught a glimpse of that woman with the drooping lids, the pronounced cheekbones, the crêpey neck in a strange mirror, she didn't recognize her as herself at all.
An old woman who looked, as the flatterers said, remarkable.
But an old woman, nonetheless.
An old woman ridiculous in the presence of desire.
An old woman dreaming.
Musing.
If only all those years ago she had not been so strapped by convention.
But no, she had no regrets.
It could not have been otherwise.
It was not a matter of ‘if only…’, but rather a nostalgia for a different, a parallel plane of existence, a nostalgia for a future she could never have lived.
An old woman made older by the suicide of one whom she still considered a girl.
She wondered if during that last frenetic occasion when she had seen Sylvie there had already been a premonition of the end.
A hint she had been blind to because the very notion of suicide was so antithetical to her own nature.
Sylvie had raved, raved with that undertow of intensity which always made her seem to be speaking the truth.
The Princesse shivered.
Could she have done anything to save her?
Jacob must be asking himself the same questions now.
She imagined him at his desk, his head in his hands.
Jacob filled to the brim with sorrow for the woman whom, despite everything, he had loved.
She could almost write his hurt for him, his wonder at another of Sylvie's acts, trace the workings of his mind as it ferreted out reasons, laid blame at his own doorstep.
And she could hear the tittle-tattle round the world's psychoanalytic tables, the shaking of a hundred eminent heads.
‘Oh, but did you hear?
Yes, suicide.
His own wife.
I always suspected he was improperly analysed.
That old guard.
They never took  proper time over it.’
And on it would go, the dissections, the speculations, the dismantling of Jacob's work.
And Katherine.
With sudden decision, the Princesse pulled the bell cord.
All this musing was simply a way of deflecting the inevitable moment when she had to face her.
The girl wouldn't, couldn't take it well.
Mathilde had planned a party for her, a party to celebrate her sixteenth birthday in a week's time.
Katherine had looked so achingly beautiful when Mathilde had talked about it.
The shyness, the hesitancy, the gratitude, all spoke in that face which drew the eye and held it.
And now?
Princesse Mathilde was a brave woman.
But her present task daunted her.
She remembered the last occasion on which mother and daughter had met.
Well over a year ago now.
She hadn't been privy to the goings on at the opposite end of the table, but she had a distinct, almost tactile memory of the girl fleeing, the usual calm repose of her features fractured.
And then the tremulous silence round the table, ruptured by Sylvie's insouciant laugh.
‘A cup of hot chocolate, my dear?’
The Princesse glanced at Katherine's cheeks, pink from her walk, and gestured her towards a chair.
Katherine smiled, nodded.
The Princesse collected herself.
It was all so difficult.
The girl had settled into her new life now, had begun to relax.
Madame Chardin was pleased with her.
It had taken time but her written French as well as her spoken was now first class.
‘Was it lovely out in the fresh snow?’
Mathilde delayed.
‘Beautiful.’
Katherine breathed happily.
I've been sketching.
Would you like to see?’
She presented her pad to the Princesse.
Mathilde looked, recognized the duster of tall pines, the little bridge, the stream rushing beneath it.
Katherine had drawn it all with snail-like whorls of her pen, a multitude of curving strokes, so that the landscape had a hectic life of its own, at once like and unlike itself.
‘You're getting very good, Katherine.
I think we should perhaps provide you with some extra lessons.’
The girl shrugged.
‘It's not quite right.
You see there, the  light —’ she pointed to a corner of the drawing —‘I couldn't capture it.
It's all too dismal, too heavy.’
Princesse Mathilde paused, waited for hot chocolate to be deposited, sipped.
The girl was always so hard on herself.
‘Katherine, I have to tell you something I would rather not have to say,’ Mathilde plunged in and then hesitated.
The girl looked at her expectantly, wariness gathering in her gaze with each passing second.
‘A telegram arrived this morning.
I'm afraid….
I'm afraid your mother has committed suicide.’
It sounded so blunt, but there was no way to say it delicately.
And the girl had to know.
Katherine sat silently for a long moment, her eyes growing perceptibly wider, the colour draining from her cheeks.
Then abruptly she got up and turned away from the Princesse.
‘Good.
I'm glad.’
A cracked voice broke from her.
A moment later she turned back.
Horror was written on her features.
‘I didn't mean that,’ she mumbled and raced from the room.
Katherine lay on the bed which had become hers and gazed blankly at the ceiling.
The sentence curled round in her head over and over like the whorls of her picture.
‘Your mother has committed suicide.’
Two antithetical emotions pulled at her.
One side of her screamed with delight.
Good, good.
She's dead.
She won't be able to kill me.
The other throbbed guiltily.
I killed her.
I wanted her dead.
Pappy said she was frail.
Unwell.
It's my fault.
Between the two emotions, Katherine was paralysed.
She lay dry-eyed and motionless on the bed and was still lying there when the maid came to ask her if she was packed.
Jacob sat in the plush chair and stared directly ahead.
On the raised dais in front of him lay Sylvie's coffin.
Next to him, on one side, Katherine, her hand resting in his.
On his other, Leo, his face pale.
All around them the solemnity of other faces in mourning.
Mourning.
What did the word mean?
Most of the people here had hardly known Sylvie.
Yet they had come.
Come without immediate invitation.
A great many of them, out of respect for her, for him, for the grief which was meant to inhabit him, but which for the moment, he knew, he only represented.
A community of grief.
It was a strange place, this.
Not a chapel, yet built to resemble one.
Like a theatre set in which they were all spectators of the drama of death.
God was absent, yet the trappings of his churches were in place.
The mock-Gothic arch.
The purples and burgundies.
The pulpit from which he had spoken his set text in memory of Sylvie; and Jacques, his friend Jacques, had evoked in mellifluent French a Sylvie of old.
The hush was there, despite the music he had chosen.
Music to evoke her, music she might have favoured.
Raucous, black.
And Gershwin's ‘Rhapsody’, the one that had started them off on this road together.
Sylvie had no taste for the funerary.
If anything, the Sylvie of old would have preferred a noisy wake, frenetic dancing, a bacchic rite.
But that was impossible here.
He had spent his grief in the day and night he had sat at her bedside.
Gazing at her.
In her death, she was very young.
Young in her frailty, her pallor, her flowing blonde hair.
A mere girl draped in her favourite nightgown of black silk sprawled luxuriantly on white sheets.
A girl playacting.
She had created her own mise-en-scène.
A dusky rose in the bedside vase.
A copy of Baudelaire's Fleurs du mal on the pillow by her side.
A bookmark showed the page:‘J'ai plus de souvenirs que si j'avais mille ans ’—‘I have more memories than if I were a thousand years old.’
And the note.
To him.
Perched on the table beneath a bright green apple and a bottle of pills.
A single word.
‘Assez .’
Enough.
Beneath it, one of her fantastic beasts, a scorpion with a Medusa's head.
He had pondered the drawing, its cold angry gaze, the intricacy of the creature's skeletal limbs.
Her parting gesture, almost a battle cry.
And he had read the poem over and over again, though he knew it well.
Yes, it was pure Sylvie.
It captured her state: the limping weariness of her days, her sense of abandonment.
She was that cemetery abhorred by the moon, that old sphinx, ignored, forgotten by a careless world.
Yet still an enigma.
Her countless memories, her secrets, her store of billets-doux and romances, gone with her.
There had always been men and once he had cared a great deal about that.
He remembered their last jealous scene, all those years ago, in Paris, some time after her return from  Poland, a journey she had always refused to talk about.
He had confronted her.
‘It won't make any difference, Sylvie, but I just want to know whether this child is mine or someone else's.
Andrzej's, perhaps?’
She had looked at him for a long time, at first solemnly and then with mounting anger.
‘What does it matter what I say?
You won't believe me.
Yes.
No.
What does it matter?
You love your suspicion.’
Then raging, she had added, ‘Men, men can never know who their children are.
A B C D or E, any one could be my children's father.’
And, of course, she had been right.
On both counts.
What he had loved about Sylvie had always in part been his inability to pin her down, to capture her.
To know her.
She was the very embodiment of his desire for the unknown, the unknowable, the other.
In death, she had returned to that and returned his desire.
Jacob had sat by her bedside and cried.
He remembered the many faces of Sylvie, the child-woman with the mischievous glance who had stolen apples in the Paris market, the girl he had obsessively trailed, the passionate creature who had boldly come to his flat and pleasured him to the point of pain, the frightened child who pushed him away and clung to him simultaneously.
He remembered the proud, fearless Sylvie of the war years, the seductive Sylvie on her many stages, feeding off her music and the eyes directed at her, and giving back amply in return.
He grieved for what was lost and what had never come to be.
In himself as well as in her.
The maimed Sylvie of the post-war years, receding ever further into a life he couldn't penetrate.
The Sylvie he had failed to help or to come to terms with.
A Sylvie for whom the promise of America with him had not borne fruit.
For whom its freedoms had proved stifling.
A Sylvie who abhorred her ageing image in the mirror.
The cruel Sylvie, the Sylvie of the drinking and drug bouts.
The Sylvie who couldn't contend with motherhood, with the loss of her youth.
He knew that he had failed her.
He had ceased wanting her.
And then ceased trying to erase the distance between them.
He  had stopped caring and replaced feeling with form, the patterned semblance of a twosome, a family life.
Grief gave way to a guilt which gnawed at him.
Her suicide was a reproach.
It was also something else.
He must try to communicate that to the children who were filled with evident self-recrimination, Katherine particularly.
He must try to explain to them that Sylvie's suicide was above all an appropriate finale to her life.
A brave transgressive choice for a woman who felt she had reached her end.
‘Enough.’
She had struggled to shape the messiness of life into a whole, like an artist.
And like an artist, she had chosen the moment, the scene of the full stop.
Sylvie's coffin slid away, swallowed up by flames they couldn't see.
He couldn't link that final event with Sylvie.
It was no longer a part of life.
She lived on in them, in their memories, not in the ashes he knew he would soon be given.
Jacob squeezed Katherine's hand, urged her up.
How tall she had grown, and beautiful.
Almost a woman in her simple black dress beneath the auburn sheen of her hair.
And his son, his golden son, so like his mother.
Sylvie had left him these two.
He had a great deal to be grateful for.
He ushered them to the door.
It was time for leave-takings.
They formed a little row.
The three of them.
The survivors.
Murmured condolences were offered, accepted.
Katherine was trembling.
He caught Princesse Mathilde's eye.
She was already at Katherine's side, embracing her, leading her to a corner.
Mat had a genius for sensitivity.
His debts to her were never-ending and yet she had never once made him feel that he owed her anything.
Her tact always and ever gave him back his freedom.
He would willingly, he suddenly thought, die for her.
The crowd was thinning.
Only a small cluster remained.
Jacob embraced Mat, his daughter, his son, Violette, Jacques.
What remained of his family.
‘Shall we go?’ he said softly.
The long black limousine drove them through the wintry city.
The Princesse had insisted that they gather at the Waldorf  for a light lunch.
Insisted that Katherine's friend, Antonia, join them.
They sat round a quiet corner table.
Food arrived.
Katherine, unable to swallow, listened and watched.
Everyone was talking, reminiscing, laughing.
The laughter shocked her.
Antonia was asking Leo about medical school, hanging on his words.
Katherine half overheard.
She realized that she didn't know this young man who was her brother.
She had rarely seen him outside the context of the family.
Despite the letters, he was a stranger.
They had barely spoken for what seemed like years.
Katherine sat shrouded in silence.
Her mouth wouldn't form syllables, wouldn't open.
It quivered.
She remembered the note she had penned to her mother after their last meeting.
‘You're a vile, stupid woman.
I wish you were dead.’
She had felt wonderful after she had written it, as if at long last rather than simply running away, she had struck a blow for herself.
She had left the note in an addressed envelope on her desk and it had vanished.
Had the maid picked it up, had it posted?
She was too afraid to ask.
And then, back at Madame Chardin's, she had forgotten about it.
‘Don't you want your pâté, Kat?’
Leo asked her for the second time.
Katherine shook her head.
‘I'm ravenous.
They don't feed us at med school.’
He took her plate.
Why wasn't he more upset?
He loved Sylvie, was her favourite.
Leo read her mind.
‘Cheer up, Kat.
Sylvie hated long faces.
She wouldn't have wanted you to be miserable.’
He bit his lip as he said it, for of course in the past Sylvie had often wanted Katherine to be miserable.
He put his arm round her for a moment.
‘Am I being callous?
The way I put it to myself is that Sylvie made a choice.
The people I deal with in the hospital every day aren't usually in a position to make choices.’
He squeezed her shoulder, shrugged.
‘Yes, and forty-six is quite old enough to die,’ Violette murmured.
‘After that, what's a woman good for?’
Katherine's eyes flew to the Princesse.
She hadn't heard.
But  her father had.
There was an odd expression on his face.
He was looking wistfully at the Princesse.
He pecked her lightly on the cheek.
Jacques did the same now, but with exaggerated fervour.
The Princesse, her face glowing, caught Katherine's gaze.
She smiled a benevolent smile.
That night her father sat on the edge of her bed and stroked her hair, as if she were still a little girl.
She asked him, ‘Will you marry Princesse Mathilde now?’
Jacob looked at her in surprise.
‘Why no, it hadn't occurred to me to propose.’
He hesitated, wondered if he should tell her.
But no.
The moment wasn't right.
‘Not that she would have me in any event.’
He laughed the matter away.
Katherine's wide grey eyes quizzed him.
‘Would you like to have the Princesse as a mother?’ he asked her softly.
‘I don't know,’ Katherine mused.
Her glance played over a room which was no longer her own.
‘I've sometimes thought she was perhaps my mother,’ she suddenly said in a rush and then paused, turning the statement into a question.
Jacob forced her eyes to his.
‘No, Katherine,’ he said evenly but with an undertow of insistence.
‘Sylvie was your mother.’
He stroked her hair again, lightened his voice.
‘Though I know the Princesse loves you as if you were her own child.
You are happy in Switzerland with her, aren't you?’ he murmured, hesitated.
‘I wish you had known your mother in her youth, before we moved to New York.
She was quite different.
She…’
Katherine cut him off.
‘I want to come back here.
Come back to live with you in New York.’
The note of determination in her voice was not one Jacob wished to dispute.
And so Katherine moved into the spacious apartment on New York's Upper East Side, overlooking Central Park and a stone's throw from the Metropolitan Museum.
It was the place that Sylvie had insisted on buying once both Katherine and Leo were no longer at home.
For Katherine, the place held no memories, yet she disliked it intensely.
It was so obviously Sylvie's lair.
It reeked of her.
Smelled of her depressions, her  movie queen tastes, from the satin-clad bed refracted in a multitude of mirrors to the living-room chaise-longue where she had lain curled for hours.
She returned to her old school.
Academically, there were no problems.
American history aside, Madame Chardin's had more than adequately prepared her and Katherine set her sights on university, on Columbia, or Radcliffe or Sarah Laurence.
She worked hard and enjoyed it.
She also began to read her father's books, Freud, Jung, Melanie Klein, the psychoanalytic canon, which became the subject of endless conversations between them across a dinner table which most often they shared alone.
She loved these evenings with her father, was constantly aware that Sylvie's absence had the benefit of bringing the two of them closer.
And she treasured that closeness above all else.
She invented a hundred little things to make him happy, to bring a smile to his face.
To obliterate the memory of Sylvie.
In other ways, Katherine's life was less pleasurable.
Her friendship with Antonia apart, she had always been something of a loner and her peers now looked at her slightly askance.
She could read the gossip in their eyes, see the speculations about her absence in Switzerland, her mother's suicide.
They considered her strange, standoffish.
Katherine was indeed aloof, but out of reticence rather than intent.
She was also a little out of step with her schoolmates.
She did not share Antonia's interest in dissecting last week's date and plotting the next.
She had hated the one double date Antonia had talked her into, hated the squirming disaster of the back seat of the car, the searching hands, the prescribed wet goodnight kiss.
Nor did she manage to swoon at the sound of Elvis's voice or at the mention of Big Bopper.
She sometimes thought that Madame Chardin's school had succeeded in turning her, despite herself, into what that portentous lady called a ‘European’.
Increasingly she felt, without putting it into so many words, that all she wanted was to read, to paint, and to make her father into that person she had seen with the Princesse: a light, carefree, witty, happy Jacob.
As the weeks grew into months, a plan took hold of her.
She  would redesign the apartment, transform it so that it became a proper home, a space where friends could come, a place for gatherings, a home like the Princesse's which always hummed.
Katherine took to her plan with her customary thoroughness.
She read interior design magazines, browsed for hours in department stores comparing the textures and colours of fabrics.
She wanted to do sketches, prepare everything, and then surprise Jacob with her scheme.
It was to Thomas that Katherine turned to help.
Thomas, whom she met once every week or two, for dinner, or a trip to the theatre, or, if it was the weekend, a forage round the Upper East Side galleries or a visit to the Whitney or the newly opened Guggenheim Museum.
It was Thomas who had on their many rambles first made her see the city in all its architectural wonder, distinguishing between façades, pointing out detail.
So she told Thomas about her plans, one Saturday in the Russian Tea Rooms.
Told him with great enthusiasm.
‘Already a homemaker,’ he chuckled.
‘A young Jacqueline Kennedy.’
She was aware of his implied criticism.
It confused her.
‘What's wrong with that?’ she asked, bristling a little.
‘Now, now, Schätzchen, you mustn't be so quick to take offence.’
He patted her hand.
If he had chosen to, Thomas might have told her in no uncertain terms what was wrong.
He might have said to her that some time in the middle of the nineteenth century a cult had grown up around the idea of the home.
A safe private oasis far from the madding crowd, a sphere where calm and all the virtues flourished.
A beautiful place over which a feminine angel presided, soothing the weary brows of males tossed in the storms of the big bad world.
He might have told her that in the United States for over a decade now, the journals and magazines and guide-to-life books, aided and abetted by manufacturers, traders, and advertisers, had sung the song of the perfect home and the perfect homemaker.
And that now at last, they had found their perfect heroine, Jacqueline Kennedy.
That most glamorous of all the angels of the hearth, who had come in her little pillbox hat to  preside over the purest and most gracious of all houses, the White House.
He might have told her that she, Katherine, had fallen under the spell of all this, but with a difference.
The difference being that Katherine was doing it all in the name of another who was not her husband, but her father.
As it was, Thomas merely patted her hand and said, ‘This is a very good idea of yours, Schätzchen, and of course I shall help you in any way I can.’
He had no desire to put an old man's damper on her youthful excitement.
He began to take her to antique shops, sought out trade exhibitions of fabrics and contemporary furniture, bought her books on design — on Bauhaus, which brought him back to his own youth, on the Viennese Secession with its decorative flights and insistence on utility.
Katherine was an able and eager pupil.
He loved her eagerness, her hunger for knowledge.
He loved the way her eyes, fixed in an intensity of concentration, widened as he spoke.
Sometimes her beauty so took him by surprise, that he lost the thread of speech.
There was a quiet wistfulness about her, a reticence, a grace which reminded him of one of Leonardo's Madonnas.
She held him completely.
He also worried about her.
Worried about her attachment to her project which he read correctly as not only her desire to make Jacob happy, but to replace and improve upon her mother.
He worried about her lack of friends of her own age, yes, even male friends.
Often, after he had left her at the door of her apartment, he would ridicule himself An old man with a Pygmalion fantasy.
An old man, who had lived too much, striving to create the perfect woman.
It would lead to no good.
Yet she compelled him.
One of the few women who had done so over time without the complement of sexual gratification.
He made no approaches to her of that kind.
Had not done so since that first encounter.
He laughed at himself.
He was like an enamoured father, an old fool.
Too often after he had seen her, he felt restless, driven to correct this unhappy image of himself in the arms of another.
He would ring up one of the women in his  little black book and pay for his excesses.
Thomas had the vitality of a far younger man.
Katherine knew none of this.
All she knew was that she counted on Thomas.
He was one of the still points in her sparsely peopled universe.
She didn't think about it, but in her mental geography, the vivid world consisted of herself and her father at the centre; Thomas and Leo, a short distance away; then a little further, the Princesse and Violette and Portia whom she still corresponded with regularly.
Antonia, as the year pressed on, was gradually dropping off the map.
It was the end of May when Katherine put her plan to Jacob.
Three sketchbooks full of it.
They were sitting opposite each other in their usual places at the rectangular dinner table Katherine always set with tablecloth and candles and fresh flowers.
‘Pappy,’ Katherine began, ‘Pappy, I think we should have the apartment done over.
Look, I've planned it all.’
Her excitement shone in her eyes as she showed him her sketches.
‘These are wonderful, Kat.’
He turned the pages slowly as she evoked her dreamscapes for him.
He saw that through them she was imagining a new life.
A new life filled with friends and dinners and parties.
A new life with him, before the old had been properly buried.
Displacing Sylvie before she had come to terms with her.
He didn't want to destroy her pleasure, but its implications worried him.
She needed to understand what she was doing.
‘Wonderful,’ Jacob murmured.
‘You've worked very hard.’
He looked at her.
‘We'll do it.
We'll get the decorators in and do it.’
Katherine beamed, leapt up and kissed him.
‘Yes.’
He waited until she had sat down again.
‘Yes, we'll expunge Sylvie.
Exorcise her.’
He said it lightly, then added: ‘Because this is what all this is about, isn't it, Katherine?’
Katherine looked away, all her excitement vanishing.
The very mention of Sylvie's name filled her with a rage which was instantly followed by guilt.
It tied her up in knots.
Why had her father brought Sylvie up now?
Why couldn't he just get over her?
‘No, that's not what it's about,’ she murmured.
‘I just  thought it would be nice to have a change.
This place is hideous.’
She looked up at him boldly.
Jacob smiled.
‘I might agree with that.
I'm not particularly thrilled by Sylvie's last exercise in interior decoration.’
He sipped a little wine.
‘But I want us to be clear about what we're doing.
Don't get me wrong.
I don't think there's anything terrible about expunging Sylvie.
We don't live in memorials.’
‘But?’
‘But I want you to understand what you're getting rid of.
I want you to know a little more about your mother, come to terms with her.’
Katherine pushed her chair back brusquely.
‘I think I know quite enough.’
‘Do you, Kat?’
Jacob moved to sit on Sylvie's darkly velvet sofa, urged Katherine to sit next to him.
‘You know, before the war, before you were born, before illness took a grip on her, Sylvie used to love parties, just like the ones you've beep describing to me.
She would sit at the piano and sing.
Electrify us all.’
Katherine played with her hair nervously.
‘I don't want to know, Pappy.
I don't want to think about her.’
Jacob put his arm around her, this daughter of his who was almost a woman.
He smiled.
‘Oscar Wilde once said that children begin by loving their parents; after a time they judge them; rarely, if ever, do they forgive them.
I don't want you to forgive Sylvie.
I just want you to judge her with a fuller picture at your disposal.
For your own sake.’
Katherine's tension erupted.
She pulled away from him.
‘I never loved Sylvie.
You know that.
And I'm fed up with hearing about her.
From you.
From Leo.
Don't I count for anything around here?
You've never loved me, none of you.’
‘That's utter nonsense, Kat, and you know it.’
Jacob's eyes suddenly blazed.
‘What you don't understand is your mother and my loyalty to her.
What you don't know is that she saved my life during the war.’
Katherine hesitated for a moment, stared at her father.
He always took Sylvie's side.
Even now.
Even now that she was dead.
A strange raw voice burst from her.
‘And what you don't  understand, have never understood, is that Sylvie tried to kill me .’
She raced sobbing from the room.
Jacob didn't follow her.
She had to come to terms with his loyalties, whatever the pain it caused her.
Feeding her fantasies was no use.
It would only make for more difficulties later on.
Somehow Katherine had to learn to make a space in herself for Sylvie.
And Sylvie had saved his life.
Saved it in her own inimitable way.
By methods which didn't sit well in peacetime America.
A grim expression furrowed his brow.
Lying, acting, counterfeiting, cheating.
Sylvie's heroisms of war were to Katherine the signs of a bad mother.
How to make her understand?
He would take her to Paris.
Perhaps there he would make her see a little better.
And while they were away, he would allow her little dream to come to fruition.
They would have the decorators in.
The holiday was not a total success.
It wasn't that Katherine wasn't enamoured of Paris.
No city she had ever walked in was half so beautiful.
The winding river, the curve of the bridges, the elegant uniform façades, the glistening and various roofs, the limpid skies, the bright markets with their wares tantalizingly displayed, all spoke to her.
As did the museums which she visited assiduously, as if Thomas, her mentor, was ever at her side offering another pair of eyes.
But she was impatient of their return to the home she had created in endless sketches; impatient too of Jacob's incessant meetings with colleagues, with acolytes who sat transfixed, listening to him as if they were on their knees.
She was slightly wary of him in this city which for him was replete with memories.
She never knew when a walk might lead them past a location which was imprinted with Sylvie's presence.
After an initial resistance, she let him talk on when this happened, but she turned her mind away, only half listening.
She didn't want to know.
Jacob, aware of this, persisted nonetheless.
Not that he could  have stopped himself from remembering.
Paris was his city.
Sylvie's city.
The cobbled streets and the boulevards spoke to him, told him tales he thought he had forgotten.
Princesse Mathilde came to see them for a weekend.
It was the weekend on which Katherine had arranged to fly to London to visit Portia.
Seeing her father with Mathilde briefly, she was again impressed by how happy they always were together.
It made no sense to her, the couplings people chose.
She was tempted somehow to ask the Princesse why her father had not married her instead of Sylvie, but it was not a question which could easily be put.
London was a revelation.
Portia's family house was in one of the Nash terraces overlooking Regent's Park.
The girls walked in the Rose Gardens and caught up on the past months, discussed the future.
Portia had a place at Newnham College in Cambridge.
She tried to persuade Katherine to apply there too.
Katherine demurred.
‘I couldn't be that far away from my father.
He's all alone now.’
Portia giggled.
‘That's the difference between us.
I can't wait to get away from the Aged Ps again.
A full month with them is already too much.’
‘I used to feel that way when my mother was alive,’ Katherine offered.
‘But now, things are different.’
‘Mmmn, mothers,’ Portia grunted.
‘At least yours wasn't a bore.
She had a sense of the dramatic.’
Katherine gave her a strange sideways look.
She returned to Paris, impatient now for the holiday to be over.
They were to spend their last days there with her aunt Nicolette's family in Neuilly where they had just moved.
She hardly knew them, had met them only once, Jacob had reminded her, at her grandmother's funeral in Portugal, before they had left Europe for America.
AU but one of her cousins was now grown up, her uncle dead, and her aunt had decided to come back to France.
Fearful at first of the reunion, Katherine found herself charmed by her aunt, who reminisced comically about Jacob's youthful exploits.
Charmed too by her four cousins, their husbands and wives, all of whom treated her with instant  familiarity, and their children who caroused through the house with unstoppable stamina, much to her aunt's hilarity.
She promised herself that she would keep in touch with them.
She was surprised by the notion which came into her mind: this was the first real family she had ever experienced.
She found herself envying the easy banter between her cousins and aunt, the argumentative informality of mealtimes, the laughter and bustle and hugs.
When they got back to New York, to the new apartment, she would make sure that their home was like that.
A thought dawned in her.
Leo would be coming back to New York now to work in a hospital where he could specialize in tropical medicine.
Perhaps he would move into the apartment.
Yes, she turned the idea over in her mind.
Yes, a home for the three of them.
But Leo, when she put the idea to him, was aghast.
He had grown into a slim blond young man, slightly ashen from his long hospital hours, a little frenzied and erratic in his gestures which spoke of bouts of sleeplessness and an adrenaline-fuelled energy.
‘What, you want me to move in here?
Are you mad?’
They were sitting in Jacob's study and he looked from his sister to his father in amazement.
‘I'd go crazy here.
Why, the two of you are like recluses out of some dated European movie.’
He gestured wildly around the room.
‘Books, books, pictures and books.
That's all I ever get around here.
No, Kat, it's not for me.’
Katherine grew pale.
Jacob smiled.
‘And you know what, Kat?’
Now that he had started, he threw his sister a challenging look and rushed on.
‘You're square, Kat.
Pretty, yes.
But altogether square.
You're turning into an old frump before your time.
Look at you, that little skirt, that little blouse.
Why, I bet you don't even have a pair of jeans.
Why should you?
You're living in the Middle Ages.
This is America, kid.
You hear me?
America.
Not Europe.’
‘I do have a pair of jeans,’ Katherine said bleakly.
Leo stopped in his tracks.
His tone softened.
‘Well, get them on, kid.
Get them on and I'll take you out with me tonight.’
He posed a mute question to Jacob who nodded.
‘Come on, hurry up.’
Katherine rushed off nervously.
Jacob grinned.
His son at least had swallowed America whole.
He didn't disapprove.
He was in fact increasingly proud of him, of his dedication to his work, his plans for working in trouble spots abroad.
And a little fraternal criticism would do Katherine no harm.
Leo took Katherine to the Village.
It was as if in that short distance from the Upper East Side she had crossed a magic dividing line into another country.
The narrow streets swarmed with young people.
The girls' long hair flowing over tight turtle-neck sweaters, eyes darkened against pale skin.
The men, jacketless, their sweaters like the girls'.
Every second door opened on to a cafe or club.
Sound thrust out of them on the milling pavement.
The moan of a sax, earnest voices, the rumble of laughter.
Leo led her into a club.
Small crowded tables, lights so dim the faces were hardly perceptible.
Everywhere the curl of smoke.
On a tiny stage, a black man at a piano, his face impassive beneath an odd hat, his fingers thick yet darting, running lightly, effortlessly over keys.
Rich syncopated sound, cool, playful.
She sat back intrigued.
She had never been to a jazz club before.
Never heard of Thelonius Monk.
She watched her brother.
He was engrossed in the music, his eyes half shut, his body swaying lightly.
Like the others, all of them, in a musical trance.
In the break, a large sandy-haired young man in a black leather jacket came over to their table.
He slapped Leo on the shoulder.
‘Hiya man, what's up?’
His eyes slid over Katherine with a mixture of disdain and interest.
‘Who's the chick?’
Katherine was surprised by the voice.
Low, rumbling, sleepy.
With Portia's accent, but trying to sound like something else.
‘My kid sister,’ she heard Leo say.
‘Ya?
No kidding.
Groovy sister.’
He smiled a flash of white teeth at Katherine and from nowhere pulled up a chair, which he turned back forwards to the table.
He leaned his chin on it and looked intently into Katherine's eyes.
‘Hiya, kid sister, the name's Ted.
Ted Mercer.’
‘You're English, aren't you?’
Katherine asked.
‘How'd you guess?’
The man laughed.
‘And here I thought I'd perfected my American.
I ‘e been trying to get your brother to give me lessons.’
He looked at Leo, but Leo was paying no attention to them.
He was scanning the smoky room, fidgeting a little nervously.
Then he leapt up, waved.
A slender young woman made her way towards their table.
Tight black slacks, black skinny-ribbed top, a length of ash-blonde hair cut with a fringe which met her arched brows.
She kissed Leo lightly on the lips.
‘Didn't think you were coming tonight,’ Katherine heard her murmur.
‘I tried to ring you, Claudia.
Didn't get you.’
‘Can't stay.
I'm meeting Pete.’
Leo held on to her hand.
‘Tomorrow then?’
‘Maybe, ring me.’
She pulled away, smiled at Ted, waved.
Leo sat down, his expression glum.
‘A ball-breaker, that one,’ Ted offered.
‘What do you know about it?’
Leo prickled.
Then, as if he had suddenly remembered Katherine's presence, he turned to her, a little embarrassed.
‘Want to go somewhere else, Kat?’
‘I don't mind,’ Katherine said softly.
‘Whatever you prefer.’
‘Can't blow now, folks.’
Ted decided for them.
‘The man's about to start.’
He turned a comical face on Katherine.
‘Think my American's coming on?’
‘She wouldn't know,’ Leo muttered.
Later, on their way home, Katherine suddenly realized what it was that had been troubling her throughout the evening.
The girl, the girl Leo had kissed, Claudia, she was like Sylvie.
Like Sylvie in the photographs.
The thought depressed her.
Over the coming months, Leo opened her eyes to the other Manhattan, to another America.
He took her, sometimes with Claudia, sometimes with Ted or other friends, to a variety of jazz clubs, to The Five Spot, The Village Vanguard, to cabarets like The Premise where satire thrived, and to poetry performances.
She was disconcerted and then enthralled by Lenny Bruce's spitfire monologues, his explosive mix of four-letter words and Yiddishisms which hit at the gut of hypocrisies.
She warmed to Ginsberg's chanting lines, to a whole panoply of  poets and satirists who launched a full-scale assault on upright and uptight America.
She learnt a look and a posture and a set of adjectives which passed for being hip in the Village.
It wasn't difficult.
And sometimes she thought that whatever Leo said, she nonetheless preferred her quiet evenings with her father or her outings with Thomas.
By the beginning of December, the finishing touches had been put to the apartment.
Katherine, as she walked through the enlarged sweep of the living room with its creamy raw silk textures, its mix of low-slung sofas and older more ornately curved chairs, was radiant with satisfaction.
She saw a new life unfolding.
She saw feet sinking into the thick pile of the new rugs whose abstract patterns evoked the work of contemporary artists.
She saw tantalizing gatherings round the bold rectangle of the dining table.
She envisioned the admiring glances of guests as they noted the sculptural perfection of the two McKintosh chairs poised in the foyer.
She saw the foundations of home.
Jacob, sharing in her delight, thought that he had perhaps been wrong to worry.
They planned a New Year's Eve dinner party, a double celebration of their transformed home and the dawn of the new year.
1963.
A new year without Sylvie, Katherine thought with a mixture of guilt and jubilation.
And so, on the evening of 31 December 1962, Jacob, Katherine and Leo waited in a living room decked in flowers and soft lights for the first guests to arrive.
Katherine in a dress of milky white shantung, simple in its A-line but rich in its texture, a dress which she felt matched the calm of the room they were sitting in.
A dress which enveloped her in an aura of purity.
Jacob, trim in his dinner-jacket, his dark eyes sparkling darker against the greying of his thick hair; Leo, blond, relaxed, despite the effort it had cost him to put on a suit for the occasion.
Guests began to arrive.
The psychoanalytic contingent first.
Dr and Mrs Gross, Dr and Mrs Ellenberg, an old stooped bearded man, Dr Evans, with a deep voice, who chucked  Katherine a little lasciviously under the chin and cackled to himself eccentrically.
Then, a woman Katherine didn't recognize, blonde, statuesque in a sculpted magnetic blue dress which revealed an expanse of creamy throat on which a single jewel radiated.
Jacob held her hand a little lingeringly before he gravely presented her to Katherine and Leo as Dr Camille Briand.
Something in his demeanour made a tremulous question form in Katherine's mind, but it fluttered away at the distinctive sound of Violette's infectious laugh.
Violette, briefly in New York, galvanizing the room with her presence.
Violette, her hair cut short in raffish pixie fashion, so that her eyes looked luminously large.
Violette in a mannish black silk trouser-suit, decorated only with an intricate artist's clasp.
‘And yet another Violette, this time,’ Jacob teased, lifting her off her feet, a note of warm approval in his voice.
‘I'm masquerading, playing fashion games,’ she whispered so they could all hear, ‘unlike ma belle Katherine , who will never feel the need to.
Ça va, petite ?’
She hugged Katherine, then corrected herself, ‘Ma grande , I should say, since you now tower over me.
‘And Leo, my favourite man.’
He kissed her on the cheek, cutting short the second as he spied a new arrival.
‘Claudia, Claudia.’
He called his girlfriend over and held her hand tightly.
‘I can see I've been displaced in Leo's affections.’
Violette pouted wryly.
Both she and Katherine gazed at the girl's openly sensuous movements, the clinging magenta frock, the dramatically outlined eyes against the pale skin, the fall of blonde hair.
‘Well, well, well,’ Violette murmured, ‘a man's taste revealed.’
She caught Katherine's glance and smiled conspiratorially.
Then, with a dramatic gesture, she put a hand to her brow and turned to Jacob.
‘I'd almost forgotten.
I took the liberty of inviting my friend Carlo along.
Carlo Negri — you remember, Katherine.
The madman has just flown in from Rome on a whim, to spend a few days with me here.
It's all right, isn't it, Jacob?
He'll be around in a little while.
He wanted to rest and freshen up before foisting himself on you.’
‘Of course, of course , Violette.’
Jacob smiled.
Katherine read a slight strain in Violette's voice.
She echoed her father's assurance, ensured another place at table.
The room was now alive with people.
Corks popped, glasses tinkled, delicate canapés were served, laughter sounded.
Thomas appeared, dapper in a dinner-jacket.
Blue eyes twinkling.
He surveyed the apartment, surveyed Katherine.
‘Wonderful, Schätzchen, wonderful.
You have done well.
And you look like a blushing bride.
Is the dress a hint?
Do I see a groom?’
He caught her embarrassed flush, the flash of anger in those cool eyes.
‘Now, now, don't tell me that you put on that dress tonight in all naïveté?’ he asked humorously.
‘Let me go and congratulate Jacob.
On the success of the refurbishment, I mean,’ he chuckled, his expression roguish.
‘And then I shall come back.
I have a little present for you.’
He left her just as Carlo Negri was shown in.
It had been over a year since Katherine had seen him and again she was struck by the magnetism of those coal dark eyes, the indolence of his gestures as he took her hand and playfully brought it to his lips.
‘La bellissima Katerina ,’ he murmured.
‘The one woman for whom I might almost leave my roulette table.’
He held her gaze.
Katherine felt pinioned by that look, unable to break through the invisible circle it created around them.
It was at once agreeable and troubling.
‘Ah, Monsieur Negri, a pleasure to see you again.’
Thomas came to her rescue.
‘I was just going to ask Katherine whether she might like to have her slightly belated birthday present before we go to table.’
‘Oh yes, please.’
Thomas went out, came back a moment later with an object draped in blue velvet which he positioned carefully on a low table.
He gestured to Katherine and she slowly lifted the velvet.
A hush fell over the room as the gathered guests looked on.
It was broken by a chorus of ‘Ahs’ as every eye focused on a perfect piece of sculpted oval marble.
‘A Brancusi head.’
Jacob was the first to speak.
‘Thomas, you really shouldn't have.’
Anger tinged the polite comment.
Again Jacob thought he must bring himself to do something about  the increasing hold this man had on Katherine's life.
Yet it was so difficult.
He could find nothing to say against Thomas.
Nothing, except warnings about precisely those things he didn't want Katherine to think about.
‘No, you shouldn't have,’ Katherine echoed, but her hand was drawn to the cool translucent stone, a stark primordial form with its blind but all-seeing eyes intense in their repose.
‘You shouldn't have.’
‘I know I shouldn't have,’ Thomas laughed, ‘but I wanted to.’
‘It's beautiful, achingly beautiful.’
She squeezed his hand.
‘Thank you.’
‘To make you happy, Schätzchen, I would give more than a Brancusi,’ Thomas said softly.
‘I guess there are some benefits to being little Miss Purity 1963,’ a sultry voice intoned behind them.
They turned.
‘We haven't been introduced.’
Claudia, her face bland, her body speaking, stretched out a hand to Thomas.
‘Indeed not.’
Thomas bowed.
Leo flushed, gripped Claudia's arm.
‘Dinner, I think.’
‘Ne t ‘en fais pas .’
Carlo was at Katherine's side.
‘Some of us value a little purity.’
Dusky eyes enveloped her.
He lifted his glass, curled long lips, ‘To Katerina,la madonna del Nuovo York .’
‘Oh these Italians with their madonnas.’
Violette overtook them, groaned.
‘I sometimes think Carlo would be happiest if we could all be reduced to the purity of a primitive ovum, like your Brancusi.’
A dark look passed between them, excluding Katherine.
Food was served.
A warm turbot salad and garlic croutons, pheasant tenderly arranged on wild rice, an array of cheese, crème caramel, each with their own choice wines.
Glasses were filled, and emptied and filled again.
A laughing toast from Jacob to Katherine for having transformed this little corner of Manhattan.
Conversation hummed.
Katherine smiled.
She wondered if that warm glow inside her was what people called happiness.
Later there was music.
Carlo took her hand.
‘Puis-je ?’
He guided her, pressed her close.
His body swayed sinuously  against her, sure, strong, lulling her into rhythmic obedience.
Katherine danced.
Felt the dance's pleasure.
He lifted her chin to look down into her eyes, a dangerous look.
Katherine arched away.
The hand on the small of her spine moved firmly, imprisoned her.
‘Bellissima ,’ a caress in her ear.
Then he was gone.
Other arms around her, Leo's friends, Ted Mercer, old Dr Evans, leering, Thomas, elegant, light on his feet, Jacob, warm, witty, relaxed, whispering, ‘Thank you, Kat.’
A champagne glass in her hand.
Dr Gross booming the countdown.
‘Five, four, three, two, one.’
‘Happy New Year.’
A chorus of voices and corks popping.
Katherine was being kissed.
Carlo, a warm flicker over her lips, the receding harsh planes of a dark face.
Violette's eyes on her, on him.
Sardonic, challenging.
‘Surely big sisters should go first.’
There was something in the way she said it, something in the rapid toss of her head.
But there was no time to ask.
Other lips came, other arms.
‘Happy New Year’.
A new year without Sylvie.
Katherine smiled and smiled.
Soon after midnight, people began to leave.
Violette asked Katherine if she could use her room to freshen up a little.
‘Of course.’
Katherine followed her.
There was something, something she needed to ask.
It was difficult.
She was still slightly in awe of Violette, her worldliness, her sharp tongue.
She watched her at the mirror.
Outlining lips, vivacious eyes.
‘How's Mathilde?’
Katherine began.
‘I miss her.’
‘As energetic as ever.
She's been asked to sit on a human rights commission and now she's full of stories of gruesome tortures in Turkish prisons, of Russian poets locked up in psychiatric wards.’
Violette grinned.
‘It suits Mat to a T.’
‘I think she's wonderful.’
Katherine paused, took a deep breath, looked at Violette's face in the mirror, her own next to it.
‘Violette, is Mat my mother?
I've always thought that maybe…’
She let the sentence hang.
Violette's expressive face in the mirror passed through a variety of emotions.
She turned to Katherine, put her hands on her shoulders.
‘Hasn't Jacob told you?
He said he would tell you.
Tell you now that Sylvie's dead.’
She shook her trim  head with a gesture of impatience.
‘Kat, it's not that Mathilde is your mother.’
She hesitated.
‘It's simply that you and I share a father.’
‘Share a father?’
Katherine echoed, astonishment distorting her features.
Violette nodded.
‘Yes, you're my little sister,’ she looked at Katherine anxiously.
I've known since Frederick, Mat's husband, died.
I was pleased to find out, I must say.
Frederick was always such an old stick.
And Jacob, well…’
She laughed, threw Katherine an enquiring glance.
‘It's wonderful, isn't it?
The idea of Jacob and Mat as lovers.
Oh, a long time ago.
Before Sylvie.’
She turned back to the mirror, made a great show of powdering her nose.
‘A wonderful illicit romance which resulted in me.’
She grimaced comically.
‘It still thrills me to know my queenly mother did something improper at least once.’
Violette stopped herself as she caught the expression on Katherine's face.
‘It isn't so bad, is it, Kat?
Leo wasn't unduly upset.
He guessed ages ago.’
She squeezed Katherine's hand.
‘You were the last, the baby,’ she said softly.
‘I thought Jacob had told you.’
‘He didn't tell me.’
Katherine thought she might cry.
She felt dizzy, confused.
All the still places in her life seemed suddenly to have shifted dramatically.
She had a sense of having been betrayed, cheated, deceived.
‘Don't take it like that, Kat.
It hardly matters any more.
It's ancient history.’
Violette looked at her.
‘Aren't you pleased to have an older sister?’
‘It's not that.
It's not you.
It's just…’
Violette kissed her.
‘Look, we'll talk about it some more.
I'm here for a while, working.
But now I really have to go.
Carlo's waiting.’
She hugged her.
‘Happy New Year, little sister.’
Katherine lay back on her bed, the party forgotten.
Thoughts buzzed through her like swarming bees.
Circles within circles of deceit.
Betrayal.
Jacob had two daughters.
He hadn't told her.
She had always thought of herself as singular, as Jacob's only daughter.
It had sustained her.
But she had only been one of two.
She recalled Jacob's constant praise for Violette, the birthday presents they had bought for her together, his frequent  trips to Switzerland.
She felt a tug of jealousy.
And beneath it, that refrain of betrayal.
No one was to be trusted.
No one was reliable.
Not even Jacob.
Was it one of the reasons Sylvie had hated her?
And was it guilt that had made Jacob so patient of Sylvie's attacks on her?
Confusion pressed on her, mingled with humiliation, consolidated into anger.
Jacob should have told her.
She wasn't a baby.
Katherine rose.
She had to speak to him.
She wanted to shout, ‘Why?
Why didn't you tell me?
How could you not tell me?’
She looked for Jacob.
He wasn't in the living room.
She stole away before anyone could talk to her.
He wasn't in his bedroom either.
She breathed in the cool Japanese atmosphere she had worked to create for him, looked at the slatted chairs, the pale greys, the yellows.
Why?
Why hadn't he told her?
She wanted to sob.
She paused at the door of the study.
There were voices.
Jacob's.
And smooth French-accented tones.
Camille Briand's.
That woman he had danced with.
Katherine shivered, listened.
They were talking about a problem child.
A girl whose mother had died.
A girl who thought she had killed her mother.
Fantasy and reality colliding.
They were talking about her.
Katherine swallowed hard.
How could he?
To that woman.
She pushed open the door without knocking.
There they were sitting next to each other on the sofa.
Something reeked of intimacies exchanged.
‘Kat, come in.’
Jacob's gracious smile.
‘We were just talking about a case of Camille's.’
‘I bet.’
An uncustomary surliness spoke through her.
She closed the door again without saying another word.
Suddenly a memory engulfed her.
Another room.
A stairwell.
Sylvie, in one of her negligees, smacking her hard.
Behind her, in the depths of the bedroom, a man.
Katherine rubbed her cheek where the pain had been.
Parents.
She'd had enough of parents.
She strode back to the living room.
Thomas was still there.
‘Thomas, can I come to Boston with you?’ she asked him abruptly.
‘You mean for a little holiday?’
Lively eyes quizzed her.
She nodded, then shook her head.
‘I mean now.’
He looked at her queerly.
‘I hadn't planned on going back tonight.’
‘Tomorrow then?’
Katherine's tone was insistent.
He met her on it.
‘I'll send Hans round to fetch you.
At one o'clock.’
Katherine gazed out of the window on to the snowy expanse of Thomas's garden, the trees graceful in their white covering, the dim outlines of the vast central sculpture.
She turned and surveyed the room that was always hers when she visited Thomas, its architectural simplicity, the reassuring certainty of the heavy polished wood, the playful cubes and rectangles of the little Feininger villages which she had spent so much time dreaming over in the past.
The crackle of the smooth white sheets, already turned down in readiness on the immaculate bed.
Yes, she realized suddenly, that was it.
She always felt at home here.
More at home than in Manhattan.
She lay down on the bed and tried to think things over.
When she woke with a start, it was already late.
But she felt refreshed.
Full of a dawning sense of purpose.
She showered, quickly slipped on her black wool frock, a string of pearls.
Thomas always preferred formal attire for dinner.
It was an old world custom he adhered to.
He was nursing a drink in the living room and listening to the strains of a Bach cantata when she came down.
‘Better, Schätzchen?’
His eyes surveyed her.
‘Yes, I can see you are better.’
He gestured her towards the velvet armchair opposite him.
They sat quietly, following the contrapuntal intricacies of the music.
When the piece had run its course, Thomas addressed her.
‘And so, Schätzchen, are you finally going to tell me what this visit is all about?’
Katherine looked at him, looked at the intelligence in that strong face, the vivacity of the eyes.
She gave him a slow smile.
‘I will.
But first,’ she laughed, ‘I think I heard you say something about dinner.
I'm starved.’
Thomas groaned.
‘I had forgotten about these young appetites.
Come, Schätzchen, I am sure it is all ready.’
He led her to the dining room where the table shone with the gleam of heavy silver, the intricate curves of candelabra.
No sooner had they sat down than they heard the distant ring of the telephone.
Roberts came to the door.
‘It is Miss Victoria.
She insists that she must speak to you.’
Katherine heard him, despite his soft tones.
‘Yes, yes.’
Thomas folded his napkin neatly again.
‘Excuse me for a moment, Schätzchen.’
When he reappeared and the wine had been served, she asked him, ‘Who is Miss Victoria, Thomas?’
She felt him considering.
‘A friend,’ he said casually.
‘Now, Schätzchen, pay attention to the plate of hors d'oeuvre Roberts is offering you.
I recommend the artichoke hearts.’
‘What kind of friend?’
Katherine pressed him.
‘A ladyfriend.
Does that satisfy you?’
Blue eyes teased her.
Katherine grew suddenly morose, knew it was irrational.
But she persisted.
‘Do you go to bed with her, Thomas, make love to her?’
He put his fork down, looked at her sternly.
‘Katherine, I could say to you, that is none of your business.
But I will be honest with you.’
He held her eyes.
‘Yes, I do go to bed with Victoria on occasion.
I was supposed to see her tonight.
That is why I had to take the call.
Does that satisfy you?’
He watched the emotions play over her young face; the stir of anger, the hint of disappointment and then a smile settled, hesitant, ravishing in its innocence.
‘Thomas.’
She looked down at her hands for a moment and then confronted him.
‘Thomas, will you marry me?’
He gazed at her and after a second burst out laughing.
‘Is it so funny?’ she asked quietly, her hurt in her eyes.
‘No, no, Schätzchen.’
He stilled himself.
‘It is only that I have never been proposed to so abruptly, so boldly before.’
‘But will you, Thomas, now, soon?’
Grey eyes questioned him with the full seriousness of her young being.
He met her seriousness.
‘I will consider your proposal,’ he said slowly.
It was not the answer Katherine had hoped for.
Tears rose in her eyes.
She hid them while Roberts served creamy chicken from a steaming casserole.
Thomas, his voice light, asked for his compliments to be sent to Cook, asked for a little more wine.
He was biding his time.
Surveying Katherine.
She was hurt by his answer.
But what had made the girl propose to him in this way?
It was wholly unexpected.
He would have liked to take her in his arms, to stroke the vivacity of that auburn hair, yes, those full young breasts.
He stopped his imagination.
But there was something more at stake here.
‘Schätzchen.’
He forced her to meet his eyes.
‘You must not be upset.
You cannot simply propose to me with no more reason than the discovery that I happen to sleep with a woman and expect an instant answer.
It must have crossed your imagination before that I make love to women.
I am not dead yet.’
He saw the shadows flutter over her face.
‘No, perhaps it has not crossed your young imagination.
Never mind, that is not what is at issue.
But marriage —’ he paused —‘marriage is a serious proposition.
For you, perhaps even more than for me.’
Katherine pushed her chair clumsily away from the table, stood up.
‘I don't feel very well, Thomas.
Excuse me.’
He didn't care for her, Katherine thought.
Not really.
Not when it came to that.
To what he did with women.
Like her father.
She was just a child.
Unimportant.
A plaything.
An occasional recreation.
He moved quickly after her, took her arm.
‘Come, we shall sit by the fire and talk quietly.’
Despite her resistance, he manoeuvred her into the living room.
Made her sit on the sofa, poured a glass of brandy.
‘If you are old enough to propose to me, then you are old enough for this.’
He tried to lighten the atmosphere.
He took her hand, stroked it softly.
‘Now, Schätzchen, tell me.
What has occasioned all this?
Are you pregnant?
One of those young men you see?’
She pulled away from him, aghast.
‘No, of course not,’ she said adamantly.
‘Well, that, at least, is a relief.’
Thomas smiled.
‘So tell me.’
Katherine gazed into the fire, the leaping flames, let her eyes play over the fine marble hearth, the painting by George Grosz above it, with its hectic planes, its lurid faces, a satirist's black view of life in the metropolis.
She spoke slowly.
‘It's just that I like it here with you.
I like to be with you.
I would like to live with you.’
She turned to him, lips slightly parted, eyes wide, entreating him.
He kissed her.
She gave him soft, warm, innocent lips, unmoving beneath his.
He could have, he knew, urged her into response.
She was passive in his arms, willing, willing him.
But he let her go, only cradling her in the circle of his arm.
‘Tell me, Katherine, tell me.
There is something troubling you.
Something perhaps since I have last seen you.
That man, Carlo?’
Katherine shook her head and relaxed into the fold of his arm.
She looked again into the flames.
‘I've learned that Violette is my sister.
My half-sister,’ she murmured.
‘I see,’ he said softly.
‘But that should be no reason for grieving.
You have always liked the Princesse.
And Violette.’
‘I know,’ Katherine mused, perturbed.
‘But I feel betrayed.
Cheated somehow.
Jacob should have told me.
He treats me like a child.’
She didn't tell him the rest about her father and Camille, or the thoughts that had tormented her that long night.
‘I understand.’
Thomas got up, paced.
‘So you have come to me to make a double betrayal of it.
Tit for tat.
Your father with the Princesse.
You with me.’
He paused, knowing eyes tinged with irritation looked down on her, challenged her.
‘No.’
Katherine leapt up, away from him.
Her face was flushed.
‘It's not like that.’
‘Isn't it, Schätzchen?
Think about it.
You ask me to marry you, perhaps first to seduce you.
No?
Not because you're drawn to me particularly.’
He grasped her arm, made her turn to him.
‘But in order to pay your father back, to teach him a lesson.’
‘That's not true.’
Katherine struggled to free herself from those fingers which gripped her too fiercely, from that intelligence which probed into her.
He pulled her closer to him.
His face was on a level with  hers, his pupils were strange, bright.
‘So you want to be a woman, Schätzchen?’ he murmured.
Katherine, fraught, stood rigidly against him.
Suddenly he laughed, a little harshly, let her go.
‘No, Schätzchen.
This is not the spirit in which one becomes a woman.’
He turned away from her, poured himself a drink.
She stood where he had left her, gazing into the flames.
She felt humiliated.
The eyes on her back were laughing at her, judging her.
Thomas sipped his brandy.
He could smell her fear.
It was no good.
The moment was all wrong.
He could take her upstairs now, try slowly to elicit some response from that virginal body.
Show her what she thought she wanted.
She wouldn't protest.
But she didn't want him.
Not now.
Not ever, perhaps.
It was all some impulsive reaction to her father.
And he, he who was used to the subtle caresses of experienced women, did he want the responsibility of that fearful flesh?
His eyes strayed over her, that long elegant body, the beautiful head, waiflike now, somehow lost.
‘Katherine, it's no good.
Not yet.
You're still a child,’ he said softly, as evenly as he could.
‘Tomorrow, you will go home.
To Jacob.
Try to understand him a little.
Youth is so unforgiving.
So impatient of human frailty.’
She said nothing, wouldn't face him.
‘And perhaps you shouldn't play with these things, Schätzchen.
Not just yet.
Not until you're older.’
She wanted to hit him for saying that to her.
A child, always a child, powerless, humiliated.
Her eyes blazed at him as she fled to her room.
The next day she insisted on leaving.
Saying goodbye to her at the station, Thomas looked at her sternly.
‘You mustn't take all this too much to heart, Schätzchen.
You're troubled now.
And sex is always a little problematic at first.
In a little while, we shall sit and laugh over it.’
He squeezed her hand.
‘And reconsider your proposal.’
He smiled.
As she turned away from the limousine, the last thing Katherine felt like doing was laughing.
Resentment burrowed inside her.
She was irritated, indignant.
They all treated her like a  child.
A child to be cajoled, lied to, patted.
But she was seventeen.
In other cultures women of seventeen had families, worked.
She had had enough of these old people who looked down at her from their height of years, who always knew what was best for her.
Well they didn't know what was best for her.
Didn't know what was best for themselves half the time.
Look at her father.
No sooner one woman in the grave whom he had cheated on, a woman who had been miserable enough to kill herself, than he was in bed with another.
Another cold blonde bitch.
Katherine tried the word and liked it.
The bitch and he were probably in bed making another child together.
Jacob was in fact at the Plaza Hotel dining with Violette.
‘You should have told her.’
Violette fingered the heavy pendant round her neck and raised eyes at him that both accused and laughed.
‘It should have been you.
Not me.’
‘I know,’ Jacob sighed.
‘She hasn't spoken to me since.
Simply left a note to say she'd gone off with Thomas.
Wasn't sure when she would be back.
God knows what the two of them are up to together.’
He shook his head slowly, poured Violette a glass of wine.
‘It's so difficult with Kat.
She's so sensitive.
Runs back to her lair, if I so much as breathe about the past.
Not like you.’
He smiled a slow admiring smile at Violette.
‘How are you, my vagrant daughter?’
‘Your thick-skinned vagrant daughter is not at her very best.’
Violette rolled her eyes.
‘And are you going to confess your sins to your analyst daddy?’
Jacob matched her tone, but he was aware that Violette was troubled, had been aware since her arrival.
‘What would you say if I told you I was pregnant?’
He looked at her attentively.
‘I don't know.
I might ask you if you were pleased.
I might ask you who the father was.
I might ask you if you were contemplating marriage.
I might jump up and clap my hands.
I might hope to be a better grandfather than I'd been a father.’
He stopped and met her eyes.
‘Tell me, Violette.
What do you want me to say?’
‘I want you to tell me I'm a silly ass for letting it happen.’
‘Et voila .
You're a silly ass for letting it happen.’
He paused.
‘You don't want the man?’
‘Want is hardly the problem.
He's an addiction.
I've thought of replacing him with heroin.
Breaking the habit would be easier.’
She smiled her roguish smile.
‘The problem is we're no good for each other.
It's like a race.
Who can do the worst, the most exciting things to whom.
And first.
It takes a lot of imagination.’
Her eyes grew stormy.
She took out a cigarette, lit it slowly, brooded.
‘You see, we're totally alike and totally unsuited.
If we got married, we'd kill each other.’
She hesitated.
‘And I don't want a child.
And he doesn't know.’
There was a gravity in her face he had never seen there before.
‘Ma pauvre Violette .’
He knew, without having to ask, who the man in question was.
Instead he asked, ‘And why do you have this particular addiction?
Why this craving for stimulus?
Perhaps if you had a child…’
He let the sentence hang.
She finished it for him.
‘I'd die of boredom instead.
Life is short, Jacob.
I like to pack my minutes.’
‘And so you try to make it shorter.’
She looked at him for a moment and burst out laughing.
‘Are you offering that as an interpretation?’
Jacob shook his head sadly.
‘You know I've never been able to combine being a father with analysis.
Just look at the three of you.’
She kissed him.
‘You're the best father I've ever had.
And the three of us are fine.
Just remember that.’
‘I'll try.’
Jacob grinned, grew serious again.
‘And you…
No, I won't moralize.
You know I'll back you up in whatever you do.’
‘I know, Jacob.’
She looked at her watch, rose.
‘But I'm convinced the stimulus is better than the boredom.
My very own tender trap.’
Jacob helped her with her coat.
He had a sudden sense that Violette had more of Sylvie in her than Sylvie's own daughter.
Sylvie, tempered with Mathilde's quick wits and humour.
He sighed.
That mysterious female continent.
Still a mystery after all these years.
Katherine, as she wandered restlessly round the Manhattan apartment, felt as trapped as Violette.
For the first time since she had moved back into the house, she knew she couldn't  face an evening with Jacob.
She was angry, seething.
She poured herself an uncustomary drink, and grimacing, swallowed it down in two gulps.
Then, with relief, she remembered.
There was a gathering at Ted's tonight.
He had mentioned it to her at the party.
She liked Ted.
He was a big burly man who made her feel comfortable.
Though he drank too much and when he did, his American accent slipped and the BBC tones came through.
He told scathing stories about his life at Oxford, about his home in Yorkshire, stories in which the humour dipped into anger the more he drank.
Sometimes the rancour in these stories frightened her.
She wondered what his lectures were like, but she had never taken up his invitation to come to CCNY and listen.
Yes, she would go to Ted's, Katherine determined.
She slipped into her Village gear, a black ribbed dress, fishnet tights, pale lipstick, boots.
Her reflection dissatisfied her.
She still looked like a child.
Kid sister, Katherine.
Indignantly, she forced the dress down over one shoulder, leaving it bare; piled her hair up loosely on top of her head.
Looked at herself again.
Jewellery, that's what she needed.
With sudden grim resolve, she pulled a large box out of the bottom of her cupboard.
Sylvie's jewellery.
She had never used it before.
She fingered glittering necklaces, gold and silver chains, bracelets, beads, brooches, earrings.
Tentatively she tried a few and then, with something like exasperation, chose heavy bangles, a choker with ruby-red stones and matching pendant earrings.
A different Katherine looked out at her from the mirror.
That Katherine smiled with her lips open.
Ted's apartment was in the East Village, an assortment of dank rooms almost devoid of furniture but with a variety of rugs and cushions and mattresses scattered around the floor.
In most of them now music throbbed, thick white candles flickered and couples danced or sat in little intent circles and chatted above the din.
Katherine could smell the high sweet scent of marijuana.
In the last room, there was a pocket of quiet.
Ted was declaiming to a small hushed group.
Long sonorous lines of verse.
She had known that he wrote poetry, but she had never  read or heard any of it before.
She listened attentively.
An incantatory rage came from him.
Images of men, crushed together.
Underground.
In a mine.
A wail.
A rush of rich metaphor.
The mine became one of the circles of Dante's Inferno , a London tube, a heaving labyrinth.
He was good, Katherine thought.
Very good.
When he reached the end, she went up to him, shyly told him how much she liked what she had heard.
He embraced her, thick heavy arms crushing her, the smell of alcohol.
‘Thanks, kid.
And where's your big brother?’
Katherine shrugged.
I've come on my own.’
‘Really?’
A shaggy eyebrow rose.
‘Really.’
‘And your glass?
Where's your glass?’
He placed one in her hand, poured thick red wine.
‘To poetry and all that rubbish.’
He clicked her glass with his, smirked, and drank to the bottom.
‘And now I'll show you how poets dance.’
He took her into the next room, performed a little pantomime of swivelling hips and stormy eyes, then wrapped his arm around her.
I'm not very good at this,’ he murmured in her ear.
‘Now, Brian, Brian here is a whizz of a dancer.’
He motioned her towards another man, made the briefest of introductions and set them off.
Brian smiled.
‘Gotta do what the big man says.’
Katherine danced.
There were any number of nameless partners, telling her she was a cute chick, trying to fondle her.
On occasion, she would meet Ted's eyes, and he would wink, and nod his head encouragingly.
Still the kid sister to him, she thought dismally.
She looked round for Leo, but he was nowhere to be seen.
She hadn't spoken to him since New Year's Eve, since Violette had told her.
And suddenly she wanted to see him, to tell him she knew.
Katherine meandered through smoky rooms.
Couples, everywhere now, their arms around each other.
The last of the bedrooms was dark, empty.
She was about to turn around, when she heard a low moan.
And then, she saw him in the corner of the dim room.
He was kissing Claudia, his body straining against hers, his hands cleaving her bottom.
Katherine stifled her cry, turned guiltily away, but Claudia's laugh stopped her.
‘And here comes kid sister, right on time.
Daddy's little girl, seventeen going on forty-five.’
She examined Katherine brashly from luminous blue eyes, laughed again.
Then she ran her fingers through Leo's hair, challenging him with her look.
‘Next time you want to get your cock into me, Leo, why don't you leave kid sister at home?’
She flounced away from him, past Katherine and out of the room.
Leo looked at Katherine mutely, but his eyes accused her.
‘Sorry,’ she murmured.
And before she could stop herself she blurted out, ‘She's just like Sylvie, isn't she?’
She looked at Claudia's receding form, the blonde hair, the narrow swinging hips, with distaste.
‘And what's wrong with that?’
Leo turned on her.
‘If only you were a little more like her, you'd be a lot less of a drag.’
Katherine's mouth dropped.
‘Yes, Daddy's girl.’
Irritation covered his face.
‘Claudia's right.
But you know something, that darling father of ours was mad about Sylvie.
Have you looked at those photographs of her from the Paris days?
She was breathtaking.
I don't blame him.
They weren't even married when I was conceived.
He couldn't keep his hands off her.’
Katherine had a sudden desire to vomit.
This too, on top of everything else.
She felt the ground giving way beneath her feet.
She scanned Leo's angry face helplessly.
But her silence seemed only to goad him.
‘You should go and get laid,’ he muttered and left her.
Right, Katherine thought, that does it.
She marched furiously back towards the front room, poured herself a glass of wine and downed it quickly.
She scanned the dancers, saw Claudia moving vampishly against another man, Ted.
as if an unknown force were compelling her, Katherine strode towards the woman, pulled her away from her partner.
‘Ball-breaker,’ she said loudly, so loudly that everyone around them turned.
Then, with a resounding smack, she slapped Claudia's face.
Leo, watching from the comer of the room, dropped his glass in amazement at Katherine's unexpected wildness.
Then he froze, saw as if in slow motion Claudia raising her arm, hitting out.
At empty air.
Ted had pulled Katherine away, was navigating her towards the other end of the room.
‘Do  something about that little twerp,’ Claudia was hissing at him.
He put his arm around her absently.
‘It's okay.
Ted's lecturing her.’
He led Claudia away, looked back to wave to Ted and saw in astonishment that Katherine was planting a kiss very firmly on his lips.
‘Leo told me to get laid,’ Katherine was saying to Ted.
She looked seriously into his eyes as they danced.
‘By me?’
She pressed closer to him, let her hips move as she had seen Claudia's do.
‘Me, huh?
The man definitely has taste,’ Ted quipped.
He eyed her curiously.
‘Are you sure, kid sister?
Have you ever done this before?’
Katherine recoiled.
‘I am not a kid.
And I've had enough of being a sister.
Anyone's sister.
Or daughter.’
Ted stroked her hair, slowly pulled out the combs which she had used to keep it up.
‘Hard growing up, isn't it?’ he murmured.
She put her head in his shoulder.
They danced, After a while, he asked her, ‘And have you done this before, Katherine?’
Deep-set eyes quizzed her in the candlelight.
Katherine shook her head, hid her face again in his shoulder.
‘But I want to,’ she mumbled.
He led her to the far room where she had found Leo.
‘You stay here and think it over quietly —’ he put another glass of wine in her hand —‘and I'll go and see if I can get rid of the remaining folks.’
He ruffled her hair and grinned.
Katherine looked around her.
This was Ted's bedroom, she realized.
There was a small desk, strewn with books and papers.
She glanced at them, saw some lines of poetry.
She picked up a leather-bound volume.
Shakespeare.
The Sonnets.
She rifled through pages.
Drank.
Then, remembering herself, she slipped off her dress and went to lie on the bed.
She closed her eyes.
The room reeled and she opened them again, tried to focus on the book, waited.
The apartment grew quiet.
And then Ted came in.
He looked huge as he gazed down on her.
‘Not much on, I see.’
Katherine put her hand out to him.
Tried to make her eyes look sultry, the way she had seen women do in films.
As he bent to her, she thought she heard him murmur, ‘Well, well, well.
My present from Leo.’
He kissed her.
A tongue probing, dry.
Hands on her back, firm, strong, rubbing.
It wasn't unpleasant.
She closed her eyes.
She saw Leo with Claudia, his arms round her, straining.
She arched against Ted.
A man's body, she told herself.
She wouldn't be a child anymore, wouldn't.
She remembered Thomas, all those years ago, in the car, his swollen member, his eyes bright, dilated.
Her laugh.
It came to her lips now, as she peeked at Ted.
He was putting a condom on, milky plastic stretching.
She stifled the laugh, kissed him.
He lay beside her, hands caressing her, one leg astride her, rubbing, stroking.
Her eyes seemed to be on the ceiling, watching them.
And then his voice, taut, low, drowning them out, intoning, ‘Listen Katherine, listen:
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action; and till action, lust
Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust…’
She had never heard the sonnet.
She listened, listened to the rise and fall of his voice in her ear, a rumbling incantation which made her almost oblivious to the movement of his body.
The words covered the hot ache inside her, the sense of an object that didn't belong, ripping, invading.
‘Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight;
Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
Past reason hated…’
His voice grew louder as he reached the crescendo, words labouring against breath.
‘All this the world well knows; yet none knows so well:
To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.’
The last word was a caustic rasp.
And then nothing for a few moments, until his voice came again and he lifted himself from her.
‘And there you are, young lady.
The bloody deed is done.’
She followed the direction of his eyes and saw the bloodied sheet.
‘I hope Leo is pleased,’ he murmured.
‘And me.’
‘Oh yes.
And you.’
He looked her strangely.
‘But what you don't understand is that it's Leo I'm doing it for.’
He laughed oddly, then stroked her hair.
‘You're a sweet girl, Katherine.’
In the taxi, on the way home, Katherine didn't know whether she should be jubilant or in tears.
She consoled herself.
If that was all that separated her from childhood, it wasn't much.
A few lunges.
A little blood.
Not much.
What was all the fuss about?
Would Leo be able to tell the difference?
Her father?
Would anyone know?
It didn't matter.
She knew.
Knew that she was no longer a child.
Katherine gazed out at the empty Manhattan streets.
She had liked the sonnet.