

Pistols at Dawn
Pondering the moment when the Sex Pistols became the most notorious pop group in the world, and the word ‘punk’ first entered the popular vocabulary as a synonym for delinquency and devilment, future historians will possibly set their clocks at 5.30 on the afternoon of 1 December 1976.
It was then that the four members of the Sex Pistols were taken, well-lubricated, from the hospitality suite of Thames Television to face interrogation by Bill Grundy on the popular teatime magazine programme, Today.
Grundy, a commentator known for his bilious disposition, had that afternoon returned from a lunch at Punch magazine and was himself feeling no pain.
So it was that an otherwise desultory exchange, from opposite ends of the universe, was suddenly enlivened by the discovery of common ground when Grundy observed, ‘You're more drunk than I am.’
In the words of a newspaper account the following day, Grundy then asked ‘a spiky-haired youth’ to repeat a four-letter word he had used off camera.
The youth obliged, adding a further string of expletives, just for good measure.
Four-letter words had been uttered on television before, but never so fulsomely, so splenetically, and  never at teatime.
History was being made.
Out in viewerland, an irate lorry-driver put his boot through his television set to prevent contamination of his eight-year-old son.
Viewers jammed the Thames Television switchboard; Fleet Street pundits and leader writers reached for their pencils.
In his home at Denbigh Terrace, Richard Branson flicked off the television, breathed deeply on the tangible aroma of excitement in the air and allowed a broad smile to crease his face.
His judgement was, after all, perfectly sound.
Only a few hours earlier, Branson had telephoned Leslie Hill, the managing director of EMI Records, with a proposition.
‘If you want to get rid of the Sex Pistols,’ he said, ‘I'll take them off your hands.’
Hill declined to speak to Branson.
Within the affluent premises of EMI, Virgin were referred to scornfully as ‘The Earls Court Hippies’, and hardly worthy of a managing director's time.
‘Mr Hill,’ a secretary tartly informed Branson, ‘is quite happy with the Sex Pistols, thank you very much.’
At seven a.m. the following morning, contemplating newspaper headlines which screamed ‘The Filth and the Fury’, and with the clamour of shareholders ringing in his ears, Leslie Hill personally telephoned Branson at home with a simple request, ‘Can we talk?’
When Branson arrived at Hill's office at EMI later that day, he found a man desperate to rid himself of an embarrassment.
After only a few minutes' discussion, Hill and Branson agreed a transfer of the Sex Pistols' contract from EMI to Virgin, conditional, of course, on the agreement of the group's manager, Malcolm McLaren.
McLaren was then ushered in from an adjoining office.
Branson took him in at a glance.
At thirty-two, Malcolm McLaren was seven years older than Branson, yet he looked only the same age, possibly even younger: a short and wiry figure dressed in pointed boots, black jeans and a tight-fitting suit jacket of Italianate design.
The shock of red hair, the puckish, mobile face and preternaturally bright eyes set in an expression of mocking amusement all conspired to lend Malcolm McLaren a Mephistophelean air.
He and Branson looked at each other with the candour of two people who know they are utterly different, but for one shared resolution.
Not to be beaten.
Do a deal?
McLaren was the spirit of expansive bonhomie.
Of course, Richard; of course .
Fine by me, and the boys will be thrilled…
He reversed out of the office, pumping Branson's hand.
‘And we'll be in your office this afternoon to discuss it further…’
Branson did not see Malcolm McLaren for another five months, by which time association with the Sex Pistols carried with it the whiff of high treason…
To the majority of British people, the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of Queen Elizabeth's ascendancy to the throne, on 5 June 1977, offered a brief respite from the prevailing air of national gloom, a rare opportunity for celebration in a Britain beset with economic and social uncertainties.
The lighting of one hundred beacons, from Jersey to the Shetland Isles, the street parties and special events and the climactic procession by the Queen along a processional route lined by one million people waving Union Jacks under a murky grey sky — all of this implied an  attempt to reclaim something permanent and enduring a sense of national pride — which had been systematically eroded by Britain's loss of standing as a world power, and by some dark and mysterious incoming tide which carried with it the flotsam of unemployment, inflation, rising crime and social decay.
The second Elizabethan Age had slumped into depression.
In 1976, unemployment in Britain passed the one-million mark for the first time since the Second World War.
In 1977, it stood at 1,250,600.
The number of working days lost through industrial stoppages continued to rise and productivity to fall.
Even the police argued for ‘the right to strike’.
In a final, ironic comment on what commentators now referred to as ‘the British disease’, television coverage of the national celebration was severely disrupted by a dispute over technicians' pay.
The most visible victims of shrinking job opportunities were the young.
And the young were demanding, once again, that the world pay attention.
To those at home in Jubilee week, fiddling exasperatedly with their television sets, the spectacle of their children mutilating themselves with safety-pins and chains, dressing in the black plastic sacks normally reserved for household refuse and generally conforming to all the stereotypes of what the popular press had identified as the ‘punk-rock’ phenomenon, was a symptom of some imponderable national malaise, and the harbinger of an awful future.
The pitched battles fought each Saturday afternoon in the Kings Road between punks and teddy-boys — the curators of Fifties sartorial and musical style — seemed a tragi-comic parody of the forces of conservatism against the forces of chaos and impending change.
It was a battle  that was also being fought out in pop music.
The spontaneity, excitement and vigour which had attended pop music's greatest flowerings — in the mid-Fifties and again in the mid-Sixties — had, once again, evaporated; the market-place was now the sole arbiter of style.
Music had became increasingly splintered — into the overbearing pomposity of progressive rock, the mannered gestures and the Tin Pan Alley hokum of glam-rock, the increasingly leaden beat of disco.
Rock's superstars now deigned to appear only in vast stadia, remote from their audience, dependent on banks of amplifiers and lights.
Pop music had temporarily forgotten its role of addressing a young audience about its own concerns, and instead entered one of its periodic fits of mawkishness and middle-aged retrenchment, personified in the superstar of the moment — a gargantuan, bearded figure, shrouded in kaftans, precariously balanced on tiny slippers and warbling in an implausible soprano.
By the end of 1976, Demis Roussos had sold more records in Britain than any other solo artist, including David Bowie and Elton John.
Pop music was desperate for something: the arrival of punk brought a rude vigour which perfectly fused a musical style, a cultural statement and a political and social crisis.
That the Sex Pistols, as the principal standard-bearers of punk, should, by the time of the Silver Jubilee, have assumed the dimensions of a national menace, owed much to the manipulative skills of Malcolm McLaren.
The son of a Scottish father who deserted the family home at an early age and a Jewish mother, McLaren was brought up in the middle-class London suburb of Edgware.
Imaginative and headstrong, he became an art student, throwing himself wholeheartedly  into all the extracurricular activities of the day, including, in 1968, organising a student occupation of his art college in Croydon with a friend, Jamie Reid.
As students, McLaren and Reid became enamoured of Situationism, a philosophy spawned in the late Fifties by a group of European artists and intellectuals which advocated the overthrow of capitalism by shock, scandal and pranks.
Situationism argued that society is a ‘spectacle’, a false projection which masks our alienation from our true selves; it is ‘culture’ which supplies the spectacle, obscuring the reality of exploitation.
Spectacle, it was argued, must be fought with spectacle.
A typical idea abroad in Paris was to protest against the Vietnam War by floating oriental corpses, borrowed from the morgue, down the Seine with copious amounts of red dye.
The true poverty, it was argued, was poverty of the imagination.
The Situationists styled themselves as ‘intellectual terrorists’, and their ideas and slogans became central to the student uprising in Paris in 1968.
Malcolm McLaren enjoyed being an art student.
So much so that he spent fully eight years in a succession of colleges before throwing himself on the tender mercies of the world.
In 1972 he opened a shop in the Kings Road, at first selling teddy-boy schmutter, much later, in premises renamed Sex, rubber and leather bondage clothing.
His clothes business brought him increasingly into contact with the rock music world, and in 1974 McLaren moved briefly to New York where he managed the prototype glam-trash group, the New York Dolls.
The partnership was not a success, and is best remembered for McLaren's ploy of persuading the group to perform onstage with a hammer and sickle banner, offending even their deeply buried atavistic feelings of patriotism.
But whilst in New York McLaren also took note of new groups like Television and Richard Hell and the Voidoids, whose spiky crew cut and ripped and torn T-shirts and jeans, clumsily held together with safety-pins, struck McLaren as the epitome of Bohemian urban guerrilla chic.
McLaren returned to London, convinced that fashion, music and the iconography of pop culture offered the perfect medium for spectacle, subversion and profit.
Now he put together his own group from the bored teenagers who frequented his shop and invited his old art-school colleague Jamie Reid to join the plot.
In truth, almost any quartet of disgruntled teenagers, of the barest musical competence, artfully encouraged to belch, pull faces and make rude gestures would have fitted the bill, but fate decreed in the Sex Pistols a particularly exquisite chemistry of individuals.
There was John Lydon, rechristened Johnny Rotten, a hunched Irish boy with a complexion like used tissue paper, a vituperative turn of phrase and a sneer made in heaven; and Steve Jones and Paul Cook, two likely lads rich with the authentic aroma of the Job Centre and remand home.
The original bass-player, Glen Matlock, a chirrupy lad with dangerous aspirations to musical prowess, was quickly dropped; in his place came the infinitely more satisfactory John Ritchie, a.k.a.
Sid Vicious — a simple-minded soul with no ideology save revenge, careering through life like a bad accident looking for somewhere to happen.
Together this mixture of lumpen proletarian resentment and art-school manipulation lit the fuse for the first major explosion in pop music — and pop culture — for ten years.
Under McLaren's tutelage, the Pistols began playing  at private parties and the occasional pub, then regularly at the 100 Club in Oxford Street, building up an excitable following and a reputation for contrived mayhem.
Soon, other groups were following in their wake: the Clash, the Damned, X-Ray Spex, Siouxsie and the Banshees.
At the so-called Punk Festival at the 100 Club in September 1976, a girl was struck in the eye by a flying splinter of glass.
The Pistols were already banned from most established London venues; punk rock's reputation for violence was now beyond redemption.
Malcolm McLaren got short shrift when he first called on Virgin records in the summer of 1976, one stop among many in his search for a recording contract for his new protégés.
Virgin were in a period of acute stagnation, desperately in need of a change.
What nobody at Virgin knew was quite what form that change should take.
The policy of artistic worthiness which had been pursued since Tubular Bells , three years before, had produced progressively diminishing returns.
In fact, Virgin's best-selling album of 1976 was a collection of Mike Oldfield's first three records, packaged with a fulsomely extravagant colour brochure and entitled Boxed .
To the record industry at large, Virgin's image remained firmly wedded to an era already passed.
In the summer of 1976, for example, a dispute between members of the group Gong over who owned the rights to the name resulted in the Virgin offices being ‘occupied’ by the group's followers — a motley congregation of men, women, children and animals, with the appearance of refugees from Gandalf's Garden.
When the protest finally collapsed, Richard Branson stood by the door ushering out the gypsy-like throng, politely removing the records, tapes, posters and movable items  of office furniture which had been secreted in robes and kaftans.
It was an incident that said much of Virgin's style.
At any other record company, the protesters would not have got beyond the uniformed commissionaires on the door; at no other record company would you have found a group still wearing kaftans.
Such an anachronism owed something to the belief of Simon Draper — Virgin's ‘ears’— in the higher ideals of musical taste.
As well as its roster of English and German progressive rock, Virgin also distributed the highly musicianly experimental jazz of the ECM and Watt labels.
Draper's own favourite records of the moment were by the Brazilian guitarist Egberto Gismonti, Joni Mitchell and the virtuoso jazz pianist Keith Jarrett.
By comparison, he thought the Sex Pistols were ‘an indescribable noise’.
Nor was Draper reassured on seeing the group perform in front of the seething, gobbing mob of self-mutations at the 100 Club in Oxford Street.
The Sex Pistols were not quite ‘the change’ for Virgin Draper had in mind.
Richard Branson was prepared to bow to Draper's more practised musical judgement in the matter.
The Sex Pistols sounded like an unholy row to him, too.
So it was that in October 1976, the Pistols signed to EMI Records.
‘Anarchy in the UK’, the group's first single, was released on 26 November.
It was greeted within Virgin by the sound of opinions being busily revised.
What had sounded ‘indescribable’ a few months before on stage now sounded  coruscatingly powerful on record.
What's more, the growing climate of controversy surrounding punk had aroused Branson's instincts.
No matter what the Pistols sounded like, he reasoned, they now made perfect commercial sense — a feeling emphatically  confirmed by their confrontation with Bill Grundy.
Signing the Sex Pistols, Branson reasoned, was the way to put Virgin back on the map.
The problem was how to get them.
Malcolm McLaren did not arrive at the Virgin offices that December afternoon, as arranged.
Nor had he ever intended to.
It was not until January that EMI at last rid themselves of the Sex Pistols —‘in view of the adverse publicity generated over the last two months’, as an official statement put it — and at a cost of £50,000 in settlement.
McLaren then began shopping around for another label, pointedly ignoring Virgin.
On 9 March the Pistols finally signed with A&M records, in a ceremony staged, for the benefit of press photographers, outside Buckingham Palace.
The managing director of A&M, Derek Green, was sanguine about his controversial new signing.
‘Every band is a risk,’ he said, ‘but in my opinion the Sex Pistols are less of a risk than most.’
On 16 March Green issued another, somewhat terser statement, saying that the contract between A&M and the Sex Pistols had been terminated.
Complaints from staff about the behaviour of the group at a party at A&M's office to celebrate the signing and protests from other A&M artists about the company's judgement were the reasons cited for the volte face .
The Sex Pistols received £75,000 in compensation.
To Richard Branson, the worse the Sex Pistols' public image became, the more he wanted them.
Here was the perfect opportunity to shed the stigma attached to Virgin and bring the label into the ‘now’.
Branson could spend ten times as much money signing half a dozen acts and never achieve the same effect.
The Pistols, he believed, were ‘The Rolling Stones of their generation.
I was going all out to turn them into the Seventies’ strongest band.’
This was not, as it turned out, an accurate thesis.
The Pistols' strength lay not in their future potential but in their immediate shock value.
They were a highly volatile entity that would need to be properly channelled, if not contained.
And Branson knew that Virgin stood a better chance of achieving that than either EMI or A&M had done.
He was not answerable to shareholders.
There were no major artists on Virgin whose sensibilities were likely to be offended as there had been at the Pistols' previous stopovers; no American parent company to interfere.
The only reputation which worried Richard Branson was that of being the head of a record company which looked increasingly out of touch, out of time.
Being spurned by Malcolm McLaren only made him want the group more.
McLaren and the Sex Pistols would be a challenge.
And it would be fun…
From the moment the Sex Pistols contract with A&M was rescinded, Branson was on the phone to McLaren, sometimes three times a day, with the same question.
‘When are you going to sign with us, Malcolm?’
To Branson's irritation, McLaren prevaricated as long as possible, affecting the disinterest of an ingénue being courted by a philanderer.
McLaren too was in a quandary.
While he subsequently made it appear like a carefully premeditated act of cunning, being sacked from EMI and A&M was, in fact, a disaster.
Of course, it had made a bloody marvellous spectacle — not to mention £125,000 for doing absolutely nothing — but ‘the boys’ were growing increasingly restive at having their records, and themselves, banned.
And as the Silver Jubilee drew near, the need to find a company to release the Pistols' ‘commemorative’ recording was becoming acute.
But Virgin was the very last label to which McLaren and Jamie Reid had wanted to sign.
As the more doggedly political of the two, Reid in particular despised Richard Branson as an ‘entrepreneur hippie’ who had sold out everything that was exciting and subversive about the Sixties and turned it into big business.
Reid found Virgin's ‘hippie façade’ disconcerting.
With EMI or CBS you knew exactly where you stood, whether you liked it or not.
It was fat-cats doing business.
But with Virgin, he complained, the laid-back Sixties seediness and everybody wanting to be on first-name terms, all seemed like a ploy to lull an honest Situationist into a false sense of security.
Whenever he met Branson, Reid insisted perversely on addressing him as ‘Mr Branson’.
In the offices of the Sex Pistols' company, Glitterbest, Branson became known as ‘Mr Pickles’.
Malcolm McLaren too believed that groups and management should always be on the worst possible terms with the record company, to avoid co-option and defeat.
Never believe Virgin are ‘nice people’, he would tell the Pistols; they're only after your money.
But for McLaren the enmity was more than ideological.
Richard Branson symbolised everything he despised; the world of upper-middle-class, public-school, breadroll-throwing, cultural philistinism.
It fostered in McLaren what Jamie Reid identified as ‘nigh on complete hatred’.
From the outset, McLaren was convinced that Branson wanted only to take the Sex Pistols away from him, ‘and grind me into the ground’.
But Branson too was instantly on his guard.
He knew nothing about Situationism, and cared even less; but he suspected that what McLaren wanted to do was force Virgin, just as he had forced EMI and A&M, to drop  them — and pay the appropriate price.
One bright May morning in 1977, Malcolm McLaren came to Branson's house in Denbigh Terrace to finalise the signing of the Sex Pistols to Virgin.
The mood was cordial, almost jokey.
‘You do realise what you're getting into, Richard?’ asked McLaren.
‘We don't want to go through that business we had with A&M.
We want somebody who's going to run with us.
It'll be hair-raising, but it'll be fun.’
Branson joked back.
‘The question is, Malcolm, do you realise what you're getting into?’
That settled, the two men began to discuss plans to rush-release the Sex Pistols' first record for Virgin, a special composition to mark the Queen's Silver Jubilee.
Officially entitled ‘No Future’, it became more popularly known as ‘God Save the Queen’.
Virgin's first promotional act on signing the Sex Pistols was to organise a boat trip on the River Thames in the week of the official Jubilee celebrations, to mark the release of ‘God Save the Queen’; an idea which seemed to meet everybody's requirements by being both a revolutionary gesture and a wizard prank.
John Varnom booked the pleasure cruiser, fittingly named The Elizabethan (and which Virgin would actually buy some years later), reassuring the owner that the party was for ‘some boring German synthesiser band’.
In the mood of schoolboys off on an expedition to plant stinkbombs on speechday, the party set off from Westminster Pier, shadowed by two police launches.
Branson and McLaren stood side by side on the upper deck, incongruous partners in crime, the contrast almost comical — McLaren in drainpipes, Branson with shoulder-length hair tumbling  over a multi-coloured sweater of Hobbit-like cosiness.
As the boat bobbed outside the Houses of Parliament; a cacophonous version of ‘God Save the Queen’ echoed across the Thames to bemused sightseers.
It was at that point that the police came on board, and the pleasure cruiser was ordered to return to the shore.
As the boat docked, police swarmed on board.
‘Fascist pigs’, yelled McLaren, at last creating an ‘incident’ worthy of the Sex Pistols' reputation.
In the ensuing mêlée, McLaren, Reid and others of the Pistols camp were dragged up the gangplank and into the waiting police vans.
Branson, who had been attempting to play the role of diplomat with the police, was not arrested.
The incident showed the basic difference in measure of commitment to the Pistols' ideology of subversion.
While McLaren was happy, not to say eager, to be arrested, Branson was equally eager not to be.
The next morning he presented himself in court to give evidence, and a character reference, on McLaren's behalf.
The release of ‘God Save the Queen’ caused an immediate furore.
‘No pop song has ever had lyrics like these,’ the Sunday Mirror raged sanctimoniously, helpfully reproducing them in full on its front page: ‘God save the Queen/A fascist regime/Made you a moron/ A potential H-bomb/God save the Queen/She ain't no human being/There ain't no future in/England's dream.’
Packing ladies at the CBS factory where the record was being manufactured refused to handle it, until threatened with the sack.
Television and radio advertising was banned; the BBC refused to play it, and some major retailers to stock it.
On what grounds it was hard to discern.
By no legal definition was the record ‘obscene’; it was hardly even objectionable.
But in a  week in which Britain was in the self-hypnotised thrall of royalty and its traditions, any criticism carried the odium of high treason.
‘But such is the new-found and disturbing power of punk that nothing can stop the disc's runaway success,’ ranted the Sunday Mirror .
Throughout Britain, thousands of teenagers, offered a rude purgative to royal overkill, chorused a noisy amen.
Yet despite selling more than 100,000 copies in its first week of release, ‘God Save the Queen’ reached only number two in the pop charts — Rod Stewart being at number one.
Branson's suspicion that the chart had been ‘fixed’ to prevent the embarrassing spectacle of an anti-royalist song reaching number one during Jubilee week was lent weight by an anonymous telephone call, alleging that the British Phonographic Industry (the record companies' professional body) and the BBC had colluded to keep the record off the top of the charts.
Branson was told that in the week in which the Sex Pistols might have been expected to reach number one the BPI had issued an extraordinary secret directive to the British Market Research Bureau, who compiled the charts, that all chart-return shops connected with record companies should be dropped from the weekly census of best-selling records.
Virgin, the stores where most Sex Pistols records were being sold, was therefore struck off the list.
One week later, the decision was reversed.
But by then Virgin and the Sex Pistols had been denied their first ever number one single.
The recording contract which had been agreed between Richard Branson and Malcolm McLaren, after much protracted discussion, was, in lawyers' parlance, unusually ‘live’— that is to say, open to constant reappraisal, argument and haggling.
McLaren's ‘plunder’ of EMI and A&M was not repeated.
The agreement signed on 12 May 1977 between Glitterbest and Virgin Records gave McLaren and the Pistols an initial payment of just £15,000 for the British rights for material sufficient for one Sex Pistols album, to be paid in twelve instalments.
This rather meagre figure was increased by a further £50,000 one month later, when Virgin negotiated the rights to release the Pistols in all other world territories, excluding America, France and Japan.
McLaren insisted that, rather than being paid the advance in one single lump sum, an amount should be paid on the delivery of each track.
The staff at Vernon Yard grew accustomed to the spectacle of Malcolm McLaren seated outside Branson's office, clutching a package of tapes under his arm.
Almost from day one, the arguments over royalty rates, promotional budgets and artwork waged unceasingly.
Making ever more provocative demands and outrageous gestures became an integral part of McLaren's tactics.
The initial air of reasonableness and cordiality had quickly given way to a more chameleonlike personality, shifting and dodging behind a variety of masks; one minute the crafty haberdasher, the next the erudite political activist, the next the polite, smiling business associate.
Fred Vermorel, an art-college friend of McLaren's, who later wrote a book about the Sex Pistols, described him as having ‘the vision of an artist, the heart of an anarchist, and the imagination of a spiv’.
Sometimes Branson's phone would ring at two in the morning.
It would be McLaren, intoxicated by an evening of drink and conspiracy with his lawyer, Steven Fisher, with a  shopping list of demands.
‘I was hoping Branson would be so tired I could beat him down, nag him into submission,’ says McLaren.
‘What I didn't know was that the man was an insomniac.
I would go round and round on the same point, he would commiserate, pretend to understand, but never move an inch.
To Richard, it was always the deal; that's what got him excited.
Everything else was just water off a duck's back.’
At other times, playing back the office answering-machine first thing in the morning, Branson's secretary would be greeted by a stream of McLaren's comical invective and abuse.
One of McLaren's favourite ploys was to deliberately fly in the face of convention and logic.
Coming into the Virgin offices he would make exaggeratedly friendly overtures to the post boy and the receptionist and be sullen and truculent with Branson or Simon Draper.
‘It's nothing to do with business, you just don't feel right emotionally, Richard,’ he would say, in the manner of a schoolmaster lecturing a particularly dull and inattentive pupil.
Curiously, Branson did not dislike McLaren — Malcolm's transparently roguish charm made him hard to dislike — but he had never trusted him from the day they had first shaken hands in Leslie Hill's office and McLaren had failed to arrive at the Virgin offices; failed to keep his promise.
McLaren would be charming, interesting and warm-hearted; Branson would momentarily drop his guard, and McLaren would immediately try to exploit it.
Branson came to realise that ‘fair compromise was not really in Malcolm's language’.
McLaren, he was convinced, was determined to get the better of him, ‘and I was determined not to let him’.
Malcolm liked to rattle  you, catch you off-guard by making demands nobody could possibly meet.
The trick was not to be rattled, but to ride along with them, at least some of the way.
McLaren's stance required an enemy to define it.
It was disconcerting to his whole thesis that Branson did not behave like the enemy enough.
Even when, in 1978, McLaren returned from Brazil with the news that Great Train Robber Ronnie Biggs was now ‘lead singer’ of the Sex Pistols and someone McLaren earnestly claimed to be the missing Nazi war criminal Martin Bormann was the new bass-guitarist, Branson took it with disarming enthusiasm.
A singing Ronnie Biggs was ‘a good idea’.
It was McLaren's pleasure always to up the ante…
‘And we'll call the record ‘Cosh the Driver’, Richard'.
Branson demurred at that.
After yet more haggling, the title of the song was changed to ‘The Biggest Blow’.
Artwork and advertisements for the Pistols records became a perennial source of conflict, a challenge to Virgin's commitment to Situationist spectacle.
Jamie Reid's graphic designs — cut-ups, like a kidnapper's ransom notes — mocked the ethos of the record industry, and the Sex Pistols' relationship with it, with a wickedly funny disrespect for politesse or law.
For one single sleeve, Reid adapted the design of the American Express credit card, to depict the ‘real relationships within the music industry; the record company as nothing more than a huge pimp — and the band as prostitutes’.
American Express won an injunction against the sleeve; copies of the record were recalled for resleeving and Virgin were ordered to pay £30,000 in legal costs.
It was an ironic prelude to Richard Branson's association with American Express, some years later, advertising the credit card.
Reid reserved his most venomous attacks for Virgin  and Branson.
He peppered his designs with slogans which ridiculed Virgin, and then challenged the company to use them.
He designed a series of posters including one of Branson himself under the caption ‘No One is Innocent’, an another bearing a swastika made of cannabis leaves, the Virgin logo and what had become a Sex Pistols' slogan, ‘Never trust a hippie’.
Branson refused to let them be used on any Virgin-owned material.
There were boundaries as to how far he would go, but in his own way Branson was as much committed to creating a spectacle as McLaren and Reid, if for very different reasons.
Branson was no insurrectionary.
He readily acknowledged that the Pistols felt more strongly about the ‘difficulties’ in England than he did.
Branson's views about England were more platitudinous than revolutionary; England, he would say, is ‘a great place to live in, but as a great place it should carry on standing totally for democracy and people should have the absolute freedom to say what they think’.
As to offending royalty, or a significant swathe of popular opinion in releasing ‘God Save the Queen’, Virgin were strictly neutral —‘Like publishers.
What our artists were saying was, in effect, nothing to do with us.
We could have books criticising royalty, and books praising royalty.
It makes no difference.
To have one lone voice attacking royalty in Jubilee week seemed perfectly fair.
It also happened to sell a lot of records, and was great for the company.’
To Branson, the Pistols offered an unparalleled opportunity to combine business with schoolboyish pranks — the perfect combination of a challenge and ‘fun’.
It was fun to watch the press perpetuating the myths of shock and outrage, and sometimes help them  along by ‘leaking’ stories, through a compliant journalist, about the next shocking Sex Pistols record, or nonexistent controversy.
It was enormous fun to be juggling with the high explosive which had already exploded in the faces of EMI and A&M, and which the rest of the record industry had decided was too volatile to touch.
As everybody at Virgin would testify, the Sex Pistols were actually, in their own screwed-up kind of way, ‘sweet kids’.
Branson grew accustomed to the spectre-like figure of Sid Vicious lurching into his office unannounced to steal from his drinks cabinet, or scrounge another £5 or £10.
‘Come off it, Sid,’ Branson would say.
‘You're a rock star now.’
He began to take a liking to John Lydon, who beneath the carefully cultivated exterior of ennui, Branson recognised as being extremely bright, ‘if rather lazy’.
For the Sex Pistols, Richard was prepared to weather the scornful disapproval of Eve and Ted on his even occasional visits to Shamley Green.
The first Sex Pistols album,Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols was released in November 1977.
It immediately ran into trouble.
Once again, television and radio refused to carry advertisements for the record, and in Nottingham the manager of the Virgin shop was charged under the Indecent Advertisement Act, 1899, for displaying album covers and promotional material containing the word bollocks ‘in letters four inches high’ in his shop window.
For Branson, the case invoked a strong sense of déjà vu .
It was exactly the same act under which he had been prosecuted seven years before, with the Student Advisory Centre.
He asked John Mortimer, once again, to defend the case in court.
Mortimer advised him to find a linguistics expert who could advise them on the meaning of the word ‘bollocks’.
Branson found just the man he was looking for in James Kingsley, Professor of English Studies at Nottingham University.
Over the telephone, Kingsley explained to Branson that bollocks was a nickname given to priests in the eighteenth century, because of the nonsense they spoke.
Hence the word had come to mean nonsense.
‘By the way,’ Kingsley added, ‘I'm actually a priest myself.
Would you like me to wear my dogcollar in court?’
Branson said he thought that would be very useful.
The next day brought one of those interludes for which the English legal system should be cherished.
Considering the effects of language on delicate sensibilities, John Mortimer — whose main concern had been to keep the Sex Pistols as far away from court as possible — pondered that the word Maidenhead did not appear to cause the inhabitants of that town any problems.
Professor Kingsley was called and asked by prosecuting counsel, ‘Are you just an expert on the word ‘bollocks’?’
Kingsley adjusted his dogcollar meaningfully and replied that he was an expert on the English language who could speak authoritatively not only on the matter of ‘bollocks’ but also on ‘shit’or ‘fuck’if required.
Thus enlightened, the magistrates dismissed the case, and English justice was served.
The success of Never Mind the Bollocks did nothing to heal the rift rapidly developing in the Sex Pistols camp, between McLaren and the group, and among the members of the group themselves.
Johnny Rotten in particular was becoming increasingly estranged from McLaren's view of what the group should be, and resentful of  McLaren's attempts to control them.
Rotten had also adopted an increasingly withering view of his colleagues.
Sid Vicious was notionally his ‘friend’, but it was obvious he was a pathetic loser.
Jones and Cook were simply likeable dimwits.
The whole bunch were looking more and more like liabilities.
It had always been Jamie Reid's belief that the Sex Pistols should be broken up after successfully scandalising the Jubilee.
In offending the most dearly held shibboleths of common decency and accepted business practice, the group had, after all, achieved what they set out to do.
Making ‘careers’ was never in the game-plan.
McLaren agreed.
He had never intended the group to become pop stars — and Rotten's increasingly self-important behaviour was a worry.
But McLaren had not finished with the idea of the Sex Pistols yet; he wanted to push the group further.
He was now obsessed with the idea of using the Sex Pistols in a film.
It was to be the cause of his downfall.
His first plan was to have the film, provisionally entitled Who Killed Bambi ? directed by Russ Meyer, a corpulent, moustachioed American whose films featuring pendulous-breasted women had made him an improbable recipient of cult acclaim.
Meyer duly came, and went again, leaving McLaren and the Sex Pistols some thousands of dollars poorer, and with a negligible amount of film in the can.
McLaren decided to try another tack.
A new face had tagged on to the Pistols party.
Julien Temple was a precociously clever young film-maker, a graduate of King's College, Cambridge, and a student at the National Film School.
Temple had enthusiasm, he had theories about pop culture and the importance of the teenager; above all, he had some equipment which he  had borrowed from the National Film School.
McLaren felt they could work together, and he started raising money on another project, to be entitled The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle — a documentary history of how McLaren and the Sex Pistols had taken the record industry for a ride.
McLaren himself would star as The Swindler.
McLaren's abiding fears that Virgin were working to undermine his influence on the group had some substance.
Simon Draper, in particular, realised that as the Sex Pistols began to disintegrate it was Lydon who was ‘the valuable commodity’, and that Virgin should be putting some effort into cultivating a relationship with him, with an eye to the future.
‘It was not a question of coming between Malcolm and John,’ says Draper.
‘They hated each other anyway.
We had a valuable property, and it was a question of not being rowed out.’
While McLaren was in Hollywood attempting to raise money for his film, Branson and John Varnom took Lydon to lunch and, over pork kebabs, persuaded him to appear on Top of the Pops to promote the single ‘Pretty Vacant’.
‘Rotten didn't want to do it,’ remembers Varnom.
‘But Richard said, get hold of him and we'll persuade him.
I was saying, ‘Just think what fun it's going to be, following Cilla Black…’ and you could just see him succumbing.’
McLaren was furious when he returned.
It showed the Sex Pistols were becoming ‘safe’.
McLaren's conviction that Branson wanted revenge, to find a way to seize control of the Pistols for good, ‘and cut me off at the pass’, now became an obsession.
In January 1978, the disintegration of the Sex Pistols began in earnest.
Touring America for the first and last  time, the group squabbled incessantly, among themselves and with McLaren, leading John Lydon finally to quit the group.
To add to McLaren's troubles, the cash required to finance his film was all but gone, depleted by the Russ Meyer fiasco and the Brazilian interlude with Ronnie Biggs.
Virgin were the only company that could pull him out of the hole, and it was to Virgin that McLaren now turned, cap in hand.
Richard Branson agreed to advance £200,000 to complete The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle — but on the basis that Virgin had rights not only to the film but also to recoup the money from the group's record royalties.
McLaren, desperate to complete the film, had no option but to agree, thereby effectively signing away his control of the Sex Pistols' future.
He would turn this, as he turned all things, into theatre, and ultimately into myth.
With great relish he would recount the story of how he had surprised Branson one morning outside his house in Denbigh Terrace.
Caught him by the Arran-knit jumper, he did, and flung him against the railings, demanding money.
And every week after that, he would come with a man — a big man — in a huge Mercedes, pushed all the way down Vernon Yard until the nose touched the windowframes of the Virgin offices.
And he and his man would take a black bin-liner and carry it upstairs and stuff it full of cash from the safe, and then carry it downstairs again on his shoulders, like Father Christmas.
Six weeks this went on!
Six weeks!!
And forever afterwards, Richard Branson would blink and smile and say that, actually, he could not remember the incident personally and perhaps Malcolm was imagining it.
And no one at Virgin could ever be  found to confirm it.
But it was a good yarn, just the same.
Throughout his trials with the Sex Pistols, Richard Branson had been engaged in another, even more delicate negotiation, one which promised, at last, to provide the antidote to the enduring unhappiness over his broken marriage.
It was a coincidence that, once again, Branson should have met the object of his romantic attentions at the Manor, early in 1976.
The girl he had fallen in love with was named Joan Templeman.
They were not, on the face of it, a likely match.
Quite apart from the Pre-Raphaelite blond ringlets and blue eyes which immediately, and utterly, transfixed Branson, Joan Templeman had an air of self-contained, utterly unflappable Glaswegian common sense.
Thirty years old — five years older than Richard — she carried the unmistakable air of not being easily impressed by anything, or anyone.
Furthermore, she was happily married.
Indeed, at the very moment at which Branson now engaged her in conversation in the Manor kitchen, her husband, Ronnie Leahy, was working in the studio next door, producing a Virgin group called Wigwam.
Joan Templeman was born and grew up in Glasgow, the daughter of a carpenter, and one of six children.
In 1966 she met Ronnie Leahy, a respected musician who, for many years, played the keyboards for a Glaswegian group called Stone the Crows.
Marriage to Leahy had had its ups and downs, of course; but Joan was not of a nature to play anybody false.
She was not interested in Richard Branson; not interested in anybody.
A week later, however, when Branson walked into the  shop close to the Virgin offices in Portobello Road where Joan worked, selling Victorian advertising ephemera, and invited her to lunch, she accepted.
He took her to his own restaurant, Duveens.
From that moment on, Richard wooed Joan with all the single-minded persistence of a deal to be clinched.
Whenever her husband was away, he pressed dinner invitations on her, always in the company of friends, and thereby immune to suggestion or danger.
He appeared regularly in the shop, invariably walking out with yet another purchase for which he had scant use.
His Denbigh Terrace home became a shrine of tin signs advertising elixirs, tobaccos and teas.
Everywhere Joan went, Richard would appear, tipped off by mutual friends in Virgin, among whom he acquired the nickname Tag — after his constant request, ‘What are you doing tonight?
Seeing Joan?
Mind if I tag along?’
Joan's friends did not think Branson to be a particularly eligible figure.
Enforced bachelorhood had left him unkempt and ill-groomed.
Sartorially, he had still to progress from desert boots to Kickers.
Years of social discourse appeared to have done little to relieve his prevailing impression of awkwardness and unease, his inability to small-talk.
His determination to impress Joan, to win her, made him even more tongue-tied; his usual conversational gambit was to shift from foot to foot and laugh a great deal.
Joan's Scottish fluency was sufficient to fill the spaces for two.
It was a complement of total opposites.
While Richard is keen on sport, Joan is utterly indifferent to it.
He is intensely competitive, she is not.
While he manifested his inner restlessness in a constant repertoire of ticks, gestures and an impression of perpetual motion, she radiated a stolid sense of calm.
Joan's great skill, then as now, was to be completely nonplussed by anything Richard did.
They became the best of friends and, at length, lovers.
From the outset, Richard had said he would never encourage Joan to leave her husband; he knew the pain which a broken marriage could cause.
But as the relationship deepened, so a separation between she and her husband came to seem inevitable.
For some months, Joan moved in some indecision between her home and Richard's.
At the beginning of 1978, she went with Ronnie to Los Angeles, where he was working with Donovan.
Unbeknown to Joan, her husband had contacted Richard with a plea, ‘Give me three months alone with Joan.
Don't contact her, don't telephone her.
And if she still wants to go with you after three months, you have my blessing.’
After two weeks in Los Angeles, Joan telephoned Richard.
The bargain had evaporated.
The next day she flew to New York, to join him, for good.
While Joan Templeman was in Los Angeles with her husband, playing out the last days of her marriage, Richard Branson was in Jamaica, doing business.
Virgin had been dabbling in West Indian music for three years, and again it was Chris Blackwell and Island who had been the inspiration for Virgin's involvement.
Since founding Island, Blackwell had championed the cause of Jamaican music — in its different guises of ska, rock-steady, then reggae — almost single-handedly in Britain, enjoying intermittent success with artists like Millie, Jimmy Cliff and Bob and Marcia.
But with Bob  Marley, Blackwell at last found the performer who could escape the ‘ghettoisation’ to which Jamaican music had always been subjected.
Marley had a revolutionary's zeal and a charismatic presence which made him an intensely romantic figure not only to the young blacks whose predicament he articulated, but also to the white rock audience.
True to historical precedent, it required a white rock musician to have a hit with a black man's song — in this case Eric Clapton with ‘I Shot the Sheriff’— before the breakthrough could occur; but at length Bob Marley became the first reggae superstar.
Other record companies looked enviously at Island's success — none more so than Virgin.
As two independent companies, now of roughly equivalent size, they felt both a spiritual bond against the major companies such as EMI and Warners and also a natural sense of rivalry.
The arrangement whereby Island pressed and distributed Virgin records had sometimes come under strain, with Virgin accusing Island of putting their own product first.
To Branson, Chris Blackwell had always been something of a role-model — someone whose achievements were to be emulated, but also surpassed.
If Island were having hits with reggae music, Virgin should be too.
In 1975, Branson went on an exploratory trip to Jamaica with his lawyer and friend Charles Levison.
Levison had worked for Blackwell, too, and knew the Caribbean well.
Branson's principal target was Peter Tosh, who had sung with Bob Marley in the Wailers.
Tosh had a reputation for being difficult.
According to local rumour, he had once threatened Chris Blackwell with a machete.
The fact that the rumour had probably been planted by Tosh himself did nothing to diminish his fearful aspect.
He treated Richard Branson with  imperious disdain; twice inviting him to his home, and being pointedly out on both occasions; then declining to share his torpedo-sized spliffs when a meeting was at last arranged.
He did, however, sign for Virgin, and his first solo album,Legalize It , was released in 1976.
As well as signing artists in Jamaica, Virgin had come to an arrangement to release local product with a small reggae label based in London, Atra Records.
It was this arrangement that led to Branson waking up one morning in March 1976, at his home in Denbigh Terrace, to find three men standing at the foot of his bed demanding money.
The full details did not emerge until the court case eighteen months later, when three men — brothers Sebastian and Brent Clarke, owners of Atra Records, and Dennis Bartholomew — were acquitted at the Old Bailey of charges of blackmail and assault with intent to rob.
According to the Clarkes' evidence in the Old Bailey court, Atra signed a contract with Virgin in September 1975, under which Virgin were to directly handle certain Atra recordings.
Atra in turn would supply sleeves and labels, and receive 65 per cent of the wholesale price; Virgin would get 35 per cent.
Two problems quickly surfaced with the contract.
One was that the principal Atra artist, Keith Hudson, began to express a wish privately to sign to Virgin direct, thereby increasing his own percentage.
The second, and more fundamental one, was a suspicion of the Clarkes that Virgin were selling more records than they were declaring to Atra on their sales figures.
Virgin invited the Clarkes to carry out an independent audit, with the assurance that any money found to be owing would be paid.
But Atra declined to provide an independent  auditor.
Sebastian Clarke arrived to conduct the audit himself.
Relations between the two companies broke down in December 1975, when Virgin's lawyers terminated the contract, with the Clarkes claiming that Virgin owed them money.
Branson's role in the Atra deal had been negligible, and his first reaction on waking up to find three men standing at the bottom of his bed demanding £5,000 was one of confusion and outright terror.
According to the prosecution at the trial, Branson was hit, thrown around the room and finally dragged downstairs.
Only the timely arrival of a window-cleaner enabled Branson to make good his escape.
He arrived at the Virgin offices, breathless, panicked and still in his underpants.
Branson then spoke to the Clarkes on the telephone.
The police suggested he arrange a meeting.
That afternoon, Draper and Branson walked into a Caribbean restaurant on the Portobello Road to meet his alleged assailants.
Branson was wired to a tape-recorder connected to a police vehicle outside.
The idea was that the police would wait until they had incontrovertible evidence before moving in for the arrest, but Branson and Draper had barely sat down with the Clarkes before some forty policemen swarmed through the door, knocking over tables and chairs and arresting the two brothers.
A transcript of the tape-recording made in the restaurant was a central plank in the prosecution case when it finally came to court eighteen months later.
But in the course of the trial, more than a dozen inconsistencies emerged between the tape and the transcript, undermining the police evidence in the eyes of the jury.
Also  Branson was unable to identify the Clarkes and Bartholomew as the men who had broken into his home.
It was further revealed that after their arrest the Clarkes had been prevented from seeing a lawyer for two days.
The jury found them not guilty.
Neither Keith Hudson nor Peter Tosh became the superstars to challenge Bob Marley.
By the time the Sex Pistols had arrived on Virgin, the initial enthusiasm for reggae among those running the label had begun to wane, but it was suddenly revived by an intriguing, and wholly unexpected, business opportunity.
Towards the end of 1977, ‘Greek Chris’ Stylianou, Virgin's exports manager, suddenly noticed an upsurge of orders for reggae records for export to Nigeria.
Quite why this should have occurred nobody could explain, but Nigerian audiences had developed a particular liking for Jamaican ‘toasters’— disc-jockeys who usurped the role of singers by half scatting, half shouting over backing tracks in a style half mystical, half political, but wholly saleable.
U-Roy, a toaster with only a modest following in Britain, was selling 100,000 copies of each release in Lagos.
Virgin even accepted an order to manufacture a consignment of eight-track tapes, long redundant in Britain, specifically for the Nigerian market.
Richard Branson's response to this curious phenomenon was immediate.
Virgin needed more reggae artists to take advantage of it.
There would be an expedition to Jamaica immediately.
Jumbo Van Rennen, who now worked in the A&R department and was the house authority on reggae, drew up a list of all the performers in Jamaica worth auditioning or signing, and in February 1978 a small contingent from Virgin, led by Branson, flew out to Kingston.
Among them was Branson's right-hand  man, Ken Berry, and also John Lydon, latterly of the Sex Pistols.
Branson had decided that after his experiences in America with the Pistols, Lydon needed a holiday; a keen reggae fan, he could also help on auditions.
But there was another reason for his presence.
Contrary to what Malcolm McLaren believed, Lydon's departure from the Sex Pistols, and the dissolution of the group, was the last thing Richard Branson wanted.
It was in Virgin's interest for the Sex Pistols to continue working together with or without McLaren.
There was, Branson reasoned, more money to be made from the group's longevity.
He was to spend much of his time in Jamaica fruitlessly trying to persuade Lydon to rejoin the group.
They arrived in a country on the brink of civil war.
Jamaica was bankrupt.
Imports had virtually dried up.
Cigarettes, soap, even guitarstrings, could be found only on the black market.
Gunshots echoed in the languid Kingston night as henchmen of the rival ‘political’ parties, the People's National Party and the Jamaican Labour Party, settled territorial disputes and personal scores with a startling lack of diplomacy or discrimination.
Branson and Berry had brought with them a suitcase containing several thousands of American dollars, which was carried coolly through Customs, in defiance of the local currency regulations.
It was enough to buy almost every available reggae singer on the island.
Court was established in the Kingston Sheraton, and an emissary named Scubba dispatched to Trenchtown to seek out those artists bearing Jumbo's seal of approval.
Branson interviewed them in his hotel room, to see if they wanted a deal.
They always did.
Berry made out a standard record contract on the hotel typewriter and ran off photocopies.
Down-payments were made in cash.
It  spilled from the safety deposit boxes and washed over the floors of the rooms.
One artist concluded his deal by standing on a cardboard box full of notes while Berry taped it up.
To the majority of performers, cash advances of any substance were a rarity, contracts a thing only of myth.
The most usual way for a musician to do business in Jamaica was through a producer, who would pay the musician a nominal sum for his work and then make his own deals with record companies: a system which traditionally guaranteed disproportionately generous returns for the producer, and next to nothing for the musician.
Alerted by a grapevine of unparalleled efficiency to the presence of honkies with money, hitherto undiscovered talents began swarming in from the ghettos and down from the hills, bearing tape-recordings, even guitars, for impromptu auditions.
By the end of a fortnight, Branson and Berry had signed more than a dozen acts, some good, some not, and spent over 100,000 Jamaican dollars.
Branson flew to New York, to join Joan.
He felt a curious mixture of elation and unease.
The delight at being finally united with Joan was tempered by a feeling of discomfort about Ronnie Leahy.
Branson had fully intended to keep his word on not seeing or communicating with Joan for three months.
Now he had broken it.
Similarly, the satisfaction he felt over the Jamaican excursion, with its intoxicating combination of deal-making, fun and the promise of profit, was somewhat dampened by the nagging uncertainty over the future of the Sex Pistols.
Lydon was adamant that under no circumstances would he rejoin the group.
Furthermore, twelve months of fencing with Malcolm McLaren had  taken a toll on Branson's nerves.
And the New Year's greeting which McLaren had sent, scrawled on Glitterbest notepaper, saying ‘Happy New Year, Richard, next year will be worse…’ was hardly reassuring.
What Branson most felt like doing was getting away.
In New York, somebody asked if he had named his company after the Virgin Islands.
He hadn't, but, looking at the map, Branson could see they were within striking distance.
An idea began to form in his mind.
He had no idea what a tropical island cost, or even whether one was available, but it would be fun to investigate.
A telephone call to London found an agent who specialised in such transactions, and an appointment was made.
When Branson and Joan arrived in the Virgin Islands, they were sped effortlessly through Customs, conveyed by limousine to a private villa, and a helicopter was put at their disposal.
Feeling fraudulent, but enjoying himself immensely, Branson went looking for an island.
There were, in fact, two to choose from, but it was Neckar Island that took Branson's eye as he circled above it.
Neckar had four beautiful beaches, abundant vegetation and wildlife — but no fresh water supply.
Its last human inhabitants had been two journalists, engaged on an exercise to test their powers of self-sufficiency.
They had fled the island after a week, suffering from sunburn and dehydration.
But as soon as he set foot on it, Branson wanted it.
Neckar Island was owned by Lord Cobham, who had never actually set foot on it himself.
He was asking £3m for it.
Branson offered 250,000 dollars.
The helicopter and the keys to the private villa were promptly removed; Branson rode back to the airport in a taxi.
Before making the offer Branson had done some homework.
Through  contacts in London he found out that Lord Cobham was selling the island to finance the construction of a building in London to house an educational trust; furthermore, Cobham needed the money in a hurry.
But there was one major snag to Branson's plan.
Under a government order to discourage land speculation, whoever bought the island would be obliged to develop it within five years.
Branson had no money for development.
In order to keep the island he would have to raise the money and complete building within five years.
It would cost millions, but it was a challenge.
Shortly after arriving back in London, Branson received a telephone call: if he could raise his offer to 300,000 dollars, Neckar Island was his.
He took it.
While Branson was negotiating the purchase of his Caribbean island, the living corpse of the Sex Pistols was slowly kicking itself to final, ignominious extinction.
In October 1978, Sid Vicious — whom Malcolm McLaren had described as ‘never seeing a green light; it was always on red’— woke up in his room in the Chelsea Hotel, New York, to find the body of his girlfriend, Nancy Spungen, sprawled on the bathroom floor, dead from multiple knife wounds.
Vicious was charged with the murder, but released on bail.
Four months later, on 2 February 1979, Sid Vicious finally shot one red light too many, dying from a drugs overdose, naked — so the popular press reported — and in the arms of his latest girlfriend.
He was twenty-one years old.
Later that month, an action began in the High Court between John Lydon and Glitterbest, in which Lydon asked the High Court to render the management agreement void and appoint a receiver to sort out the Sex  Pistols' affairs and finances.
Central to Lydon's action was the allegation that McLaren had signed away the group's future record royalties to Virgin in order to finance The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle .
Lydon's counsel alleged that Malcolm McLaren ‘regards himself as a Svengali of these people to do whatever he cares without asking anybody else’.
The court heard that the Sex Pistols had earned £880,000 in their short career.
But apart from £30,000 in the Glitterbest bank account there were no other assets left; other than future income from the film and recording contracts.
The official receiver was duly ordered to exploit the film.
This, at length, came under the control of Virgin, as the principal British investors, and The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle became the first production of a new company, Virgin Films.
John Lydon — the punk nomenclature had been banished for good— remained contracted to Virgin with his new group, Public Image Ltd (PIL), as did Paul Cook and Steve Jones, who recorded briefly under the name the Bollock Brothers.
If this constituted defeat for Malcolm McLaren, it was, perhaps, only a pyrrhic victory for Richard Branson.
What Branson had wanted to do, above all else, was keep the Sex Pistols together, build a future for the group.
As it was, the Pistols were not together long enough, nor did they sell sufficient records, to make the profits for Virgin which Branson had always anticipated.
Virgin did, none the less, retain all rights on the Sex Pistols', and Sid Vicious's, work for the full duration of the copyright laws, to be exploited as the company saw fit.
A flow of records ensued, including a posthumous Sid Vicious album,Sid Sings , and sundry repackagings of those few songs which the group had actually  recorded, wringing the cash cow dry, as Richard Branson later pointed out with some irony, ‘in just the spirit of the Swindle Malcolm had always talked about’.
Malcolm McLaren, meanwhile, was down, but not out.
He assembled another group of protégés, named Bow Wow Wow, and, again with some help from Jamie Reid, launched them as ‘pirates’ with a campaign in support of home-taping — which the record industry was then spending thousands of pounds declaring was ‘killing music’.
Bow Wow Wow did not repeat the success of the Sex Pistols.
However, in 1983, McLaren became a recording artist himself, producing an album called Duck Rock , which plagiarised, and brilliantly synthesised, African music and American rap and hip-hop to create a best-selling pop record.
McLaren recorded Duck Rock for a small, independent record label called Charisma.
A year later, he produced a second album,Fans , which did for — or unto — opera what Duck Rock had done for ethnic music.
By then, Charisma, and the rights to Malcolm McLaren, had been sold to another British record company.
In his capacity as a recording artist, McLaren visited the offices of his new holding company, and was ushered in to meet the chairman of the board as he rose from behind his desk.
‘Hello again, Malcolm,’ said Richard Branson.
Growing Pains
In the Christmas of 1979, Richard Branson took a holiday from Virgin to go ski-ing in the Colorado resort of Aspen.
The location aside, it was a holiday much like many others which Branson had taken in recent years: the party of friends consisted almost exclusively of Virgin employees — Simon Draper, Nik Powell, Ken Berry.
As in previous years, the resolutions not to discuss business (it carried the threat of a fine) gave way early on the first evening.
In between carousing down the powdery slopes, Branson and his colleagues could take stock of an empire that had grown almost beyond recognition in the last six years.
Virgin Records was no longer the small, struggling outsider with only a handful of artists, but an established and thriving company, vying competitively with the likes of Island and Chrysalis — and, what's more, they now had a newly-established office in America.
Virgin retail was among the top three record-shop chains in Britain, with shops in almost every major town and plans to develop a new concept in record retailing, a ‘megastore’, in Oxford Street, close by the site of the first ever Virgin shop.
While barely profitable, retail continued to be a useful source of ready cash.
The studio division had also grown.
As well as the Manor, there was now a mobile studio — the Manor Mobile — and a studio complex in West London, opened in 1978, called the Townhouse.
All boasted the finest state-of-the-art recording equipment — a development largely afforded by having taken advantage of the Government's 100 per cent tax allowance on any equipment investment.
To Branson, paying tax was ‘a waste of money’ when you could plough that money back into the company.
The music publishing company was also showing a healthy profit, particularly with the coming success of a young Newcastle songwriter, contracted to the company under the name of Gordon Sumner, but better known to the record-buying public as Sting.
He had been ‘discovered’ and signed to Virgin Publishing by a girl named Carol Wilson.
There was now a modest book-publishing division, concentrating mostly on pop music books.
Acquiring the rights to The Great Rock ‘n’ Roll Swindle had led to the formation of what was grandly called the Film Division although that was the only film yet within its compass.
Virgin had also bought a London cinema, the Scala, specialising in ‘art house’ films; and a video-editing suite, called Off Line — both of which had become the particular interest of Nik Powell.
It was also at Powell's suggestion that an old cinema had been acquired in Victoria, and turned, at considerable expense, into a nightclub-cum-concert hall, modelled on the Bottom Line Club in New York.
The Venue, as it was called, opened on Halloween night, 1978, after a minor crisis involving fire-officers refusing to grant the appropriate permits.
They relented only when Branson, who had  spent three sleepless nights preparing the club for opening, burst into tears of frustration.
And there was, at the empire's furthest perimeters, a Virgin island.
The principal source of finance for all of this remained the record company.
The Sex Pistols had, in part, achieved what Branson had expected of them.
They had not reaped the fortune he hoped for — they had not become ‘the new Rolling Stones’; but the signing had the required affect of shaking Virgin out of the torpor of the mid-Seventies.
It turned the attention, and the skills, of those within the company to the younger, singles-buying music audience, and it attracted a different kind of group to the label.
In one fell swoop, Virgin had acquired that most elusive of qualities, ‘street credibility’; the company roster now boasted groups like Magazine, Penetration, the Members, the Skids — what was becoming known as New Wave, a marketing term used to denote almost any performer that had emerged in the aftermath of punk who did not spit in his audience's eye.
Indeed, in 1979, Virgin enjoyed its most successful year ever on the singles charts, with the Skids alone providing five consecutive hits in the Top Fifty.
But it was a success that flattered to deceive.
Album sales were poor.
And the worst was yet to come.
The record industry in both Britain and America had gone into a worldwide recession, and Virgin were as vulnerable to its effects as anybody else.
In Britain, sales of long-players dropped from 107.2m in 1978 to 92.6m in 1980.
Sales of singles dropped from 88.8m to 77.8m.
To a large extent, the decline was a measure of the degree to which record sales are susceptible to inflation: in times of rising prices, and tightening purses, luxury items like recorded music are among the first things people stop  buying.
In 1976, inflation stood at 23 per cent.
By 1978, it had dropped to 8.3 per cent.
But in 1979, it rose again to 13.4 per cent and in 1980 to 18 per cent.
The recording industry reacted with barometric sensitivity.
Pre-tax profits on UK sales for the entire industry, which had stood at 8 per cent in 1978, dropped to zero in 1979.
By 1980, the industry as a whole was registering a 2 per cent loss; by 1981, a 3 per cent loss.
But if the decline reflected prevailing economic conditions, it also reflected pop music's own failure to produce records that people wanted to buy.
Punk rock had had a purging effect on pop music; clearing out the old to make way for the new.
Yet none of the vanguard punk groups had enjoyed significant — and, more crucially, long-standing — commercial success, not even the Sex Pistols.
Most importantly, punk had made a negligible impression in America, the world's largest market, where 50 per cent of all records are sold.
Virgin had long struggled to make an inroad into the American market.
Ever since 1974, when Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells topped the American charts, Virgin had struggled in vain to gain a foothold in that country —‘karmic retribution’, as Nik Powell had it, for Virgin having reached Number One with its first ever release.
Some Virgin records had continued to be released in America through licensing arrangements with Atlantic and CBS.
But Branson always regarded licensing deals as unsatisfactory; in the first place, the licensee could pick and choose which records it wanted to release, and did not always have the ‘emotional commitment’ to making them hits.
Branson and Draper were convinced that this was why acts like Oldfield and Tangerine Dream, who had been phenomenally successful in  Europe, had not fared so well in America.
More importantly to Branson, it meant Virgin were on a far smaller margin of any profit.
Under a licensing arrangement, Virgin would receive a cash advance from the American licensee, deductible from royalties, and then only 15–18 per cent of the price of all records sold.
If they were to set up their own company in America instead, and negotiate a distribution deal with an American major just as they had done with Island when first setting up Virgin — then that profit margin could be inflated from around 18 per cent to 80 per cent.
The knowledge that the larger margin was there for the taking, if you were bold enough to seize it, exercised him as much now as it had done back in 1973.
So it was that late in 1978 Ken Berry was sent to set up Virgin America.
In a further echo of that first contract with Island, Branson bought the New York house of Island's managing director Chris Blackwell — a charming brownstone on Perry Street, in Greenwich Village — to use as offices.
But the American adventure proved a costly failure.
Branson had not anticipated the difficulty in gaining a foothold in the American market, nor the expense.
Promotional costs on Virgin's first single release alone on the new label came to around $50,000 — and it flopped; an omen of things to come.
At a time when America's interest in British pop was at an all-time low, the label failed to produce one significant hit.
In 1980, the office was closed, at a cost of more than £0.5m.
It would be another six years before a Virgin office would open in America again.
Before leaving New York, Ken Berry visited ‘Black Rock’, the towerblock offices of CBS, the world's largest record company, to reopen licensing discussions.
With a  heavy heart, Berry sat in an ante-room watching as a stream of employees were called in to be given their pink dismissal slips.
It was a prophetic scene.
The recession abruptly derailed the gravy train on which most in the record industry had ridden through the 1970s; the generous salaries, inflated expenses and transcontinental junkets.
Virgin had never had the profits to squander.
In 1977, Virgin recorded a profit of just £400,000.
In 1978, that rose to £500,000.
Salaries had never been comparable with others in the record industry; the smaller, more agreeable, ‘cottage industry’ atmosphere of the company had always been held up as compensation for a parsimonious attitude to wages.
Working for Virgin was fun, in a way in which working for a large, anonymous corporation such as EMI or CBS could never be.
And if it entailed a degree of sacrifice, there was always the prospect of better times, just around the corner.
Now it seemed as if they were postponed indefinitely.
In 1980, Virgin's expansion ground to a sudden halt, as their bank, Coutts, put their foot on the brake, signalling what would develop, in the coming years, into a major crisis over banking.
Since 1973, Coutts' support of Virgin had been pivoted on the cashflow generated by Tubular Bells .
The steady flow of money from record sales and overseas royalties had meant that Virgin had not made great demands on their overdraft facility.
Whenever Coutts requested restraint, Virgin had somehow been able to achieve it.
But with the industry in recession, and record sales dropping, the hitherto dependable cashflow was trickling down at an alarming rate.
Furthermore, Coutts themselves were undergoing a change in policy, consolidating their business around the wealthy personal customer and shedding some of their  ‘high-risk’ business accounts.
A request by Branson for Virgin's overdraft to be extended to £3m to allow normal trading to continue was met with prevarication.
Coutts wanted more evidence of financial controls, ‘restraint’.
In an attempt to swell the accounts, Branson desperately began to call in money from abroad.
The 10 × 8 notebooks, which balanced habitually on his knee or beside the telephone, and in which he scribbled details of conversations, contracts, memos to himself, became increasingly filled with lists of monies owing, from foreign licensees, publishing, club takings — a barometer of his mounting sense of urgency: ‘Germany, £200,000 in deutschmarks in banking system, on way; France, £50,000 coming later this month; Portugal, £20,000 coming 14 June; Australia, 25,000 Australian dollars coming next Friday.’
In a move to consolidate the company assets, the Manor, the various office properties throughout West London and the Virgin island were revalued.
Branson had already moved home, and office, to a new houseboat, the Duende : now the Denbigh Terrace house was sold, along with two flats in Vernon Yard and a shop in Brent Cross.
The rights to all Virgin music publishing in America were extended to the licensee, Chappell Music, for a further £0.5m advance.
It was like selling the family silver, but Branson believed it was necessary to maintain ownership of the family home.
The one thing he always refused to consider at any time of financial uncertainty was selling any of his personal shareholding in Virgin.
As had become customary in times of financial uncertainty, Nik Powell took it upon himself to ‘sort out’ the accounts, as he had sorted out so much over the years, from feuding gangs in Bold Street to  disputative bank  managers.
Powell was the nearest thing to an orthodox businessman to be found in the Virgin offices, with an understanding of business techniques and practices and no little amount of jargon — studiously drawn from the American magazines to which he subscribed.
It was Powell who took care of the necessary details that Branson was too impatient to deal with — accounting, credit controls, job descriptions, compliance with Acts.
Now Powell outlined a way of cutting the wages bill by almost £1m, through ‘natural wastage’, pay freezes but also, for the first time in Virgin's history, through redundancies.
Branson and Draper drew up a list of twelve people — almost a fifth of the staff employed in the record company, Branson telling himself, with little conviction, that ‘people will understand’.
But people, of course, did not.
The effect within Vernon Yard was one of complete shellshock.
‘Nobody really knew what to do in that situation,’ says Ken Berry.
‘The whole Virgin approach had been that you simply don't fire people.’
The number of people laid off was proportionately less than from some other record companies.
But for a company which had always prided itself on its ‘family’ aspect it was a cruel blow.
Nor was the record roster to be spared.
Artists whose presence on the label was predicated on success in America were dropped, their advances written off to experience.
Kevin Coyne, the longest-standing Virgin artist after Mike Oldfield, was also dropped.
Virtually the entire complement of reggae artists, signed in the tropical heat of optimism eighteen months before, were dropped.
The Nigerian adventure had come to an abrupt end with the arrival of a new military government and a ban on all imports.
Branson was pragmatic about the cutbacks.
Pruning, he argued, was an essential part of the record business.
‘You must cut your lossmakers, because they'll drain the company and ultimately bankrupt it.
Sometimes a crisis focuses the attention far better than if you're doing well.
You reevaluate your strengths and start again.’
Importantly, it also gave Simon Draper a chance to start planning for the future.
In September 1980 he had paid £65,000 for the British rights to the release of the first solo record by Phil Collins, the drummer from Genesis.
It was an unprecedented sum for a solo album by a drummer, but Draper told his doubting colleagues that he was confident Virgin would see a return on its investment.
In pressing for cutbacks, Nik Powell also urged Draper to drop a group called the Human League from the roster.
The Human League represented the coming vogue; a young group from Sheffield, much more accomplished in matters of style, presentation and business than in music, with an as yet barely formed talent for playing synthesisers.
They had made one album, which had failed, partly, it was felt within the company, because they had thrown away the chance of a prestigious tour, supporting Talking Heads, by their novel plan to simply switch on their machines and tape-recorders and then sit in the auditorium with the audience and watch the show themselves.
Powell believed they were a luxury Virgin could ill-afford.
Draper insisted they should be retained.
There was a heated argument between the two men which at length it fell to Branson to settle.
Branson sided with Draper.
If Simon wants to keep the Human League, he said, then he should keep them.
It was a vote of faith in Draper's musical  judgement rather than a demonstration of Branson's own, but the decision was the right one.
The next Human League album,Dare , sold more than two million copies and was a major factor in digging Virgin out of its parlous financial state.
The incident was a small measure of how the balance of power, and relevance, within Virgin had shifted.
As the record company, and its revenue from worldwide licensing deals, became more important, so Branson spent more time with Simon Draper and less and less with Nik Powell.
No longer privy to Branson's innermost thoughts — and frequently in disagreement with them when he was — Powell's influence within Virgin began to diminish.
His cautious and methodical ways, once so valuable a buffer to Richard's impetuosity, now become more and more a cause of annoyance.
As Virgin's accountant, Jack Claydon, observed, Branson's attitude was to be looking ahead all the time.
‘If something was a loss, he wasn't really concerned with that; somebody else could clear that up — he was already on to the next thing.
He was not reckless exactly, but he certainly never stopped to consider whether that loss was too great to hamper expansion.
He just got on with expansion.’
To Branson this embodied a business principle of disarming simplicity: some people, when they are in trouble, cut back and back and back until they have nothing left.
The other approach is to expand.
It was this principle which had saved Virgin from collapse in the wake of the Customs and Excise fine ten years before; it was the principle, Branson believed, that would now secure the company's future.
In 1981, the Virgin empire was, therefore, swollen yet  further with the purchase of two more nightclubs, one called the Roof Gardens, the other, Heaven, purchased with the help of loans from the bank and monies from a foreign licensee.
The Roof Gardens had some claim to being a London landmark.
Sited on the top floor of a department store in Kensington High Street, the principal feature of the club was the gardens, which had been planted, literally on the roof, some fifty years before, and grown in prodigious abundance.
Formerly Derry & Toms, in the late Sixties the building became Biba's, a fashionable boutique of the day; in the Seventies, the roof club became Regine's, a watering hole of the internationally rich and idle.
When, in the manner of migratory buffalo, they moved elsewhere, its owner, an Indian businessman named Ram, who had spent £2m refurbishing the club, looked for a quick sale.
Branson bought it for £400,000.
The purchase of Heaven elevated eyebrows parallel to hairlines in Coutts, not least because Heaven was London's largest, and most popular, club for homosexuals.
The proposal came through Branson's youngest sister, Vanessa, who had recently gone into business as an art-dealer.
An artist friend wanted to sell his 50 per cent shareholding, and the second partner was open to persuasion.
Branson made his way to the club — situated, by a felicitous coincidence, directly opposite Coutts's head office in the Strand — and wandered beneath the flashing strobe-lights, more fascinated than intimidated by the spectacle of 1,500 moustachioed, bejeaned and leather-clad males gyrating to the strains of ‘I Want a Man’.
Other businessmen, he knew, might have made their excuses and left, worried about the effect of such a  purchase on their bankers, their colleagues, the City.
But Branson felt quite the reverse.
Branson's awareness of homosexuality had broadened gradually.
There had been homosexual behaviour at Stowe — as at most British public schools — but Branson had not participated.
When running the Student Advisory Centre, he had taken telephone calls from homosexuals, assuming at first that they wished to be ‘cured’.
He had quickly discovered that this was not the case; the biggest problem facing gay people was the attitude of ‘straight’ people, and the difficulty of meeting others of like mind.
It was obvious to Branson that Heaven was providing that meeting-place.
Nor did it escape his attention that as well as its social role Heaven also gave access to a large group of demonstrably big spenders.
To any businessman, the ‘pink economy’ constituted a sound investment.
Branson bought Heaven for £500,000.
The acquisition of the clubs only served to inflame the disagreements between Branson and Nik Powell.
Powell felt both clubs were impetuous buys which Virgin could ill-afford at a time when it was struggling out of recession.
Branson, he argued, was attempting to expand at a faster rate than the resources of the company allowed.
There were too many ventures for the existing management resources and expertise within the company; existing projects should become profitable before yet more were added.
Board meetings grew ever more vociferous and anguished.
To Branson, arguments had never been a symptom of animosity; rather, he and Powell had always argued ‘like a married couple, knowing you could shout at each other and it wouldn't matter’.
Sometimes one or other would misuse that  privilege and perhaps shout more than was otherwise seemly, ‘but the fact that we'd grown up together meant we could have our rows and know that the next day one of us would apologise, and it would all be forgotten.’
To Simon Draper, Ken Berry and the other Virgin directors, however, it was apparent that the rift was becoming unbridgeable.
‘Nik didn't want to be Richard's yes-man in the company,’ says Berry, ‘and, frankly, he was the only person in the company with the position to be anything other than Richard's yes-man.
They were just banging heads constantly.
Richard was getting impatient with Nik, Nik annoyed with Richard, and everybody else was sitting around saying, What can we do about this?
Nothing…’
At length, the dilemma was resolved in the way everybody recognised as inevitable: the marriage contract was torn up.
Powell drafted a letter to Branson, laying out his areas of disagreement over company policy and raising the consideration of whether they should go forward together.
Branson wrote to Powell, agreeing that the time had come for a separation.
Over lunch at the Roof Gardens, an agreement was drawn up for the purchase of Powell's share in Virgin, giving him one million pounds, the Scala cinema and the video-editing suites.
From these elements, Powell went on to found Palace Pictures, initially distributing videos and films, then moving into production through such films as Mona Lisa ,Company of Wolves and Absolute Beginners .
On the last — as on several other projects — Palace actually collaborated with Virgin, although Powell and Branson would seldom discuss these ventures personally.
While their relationship managed to remain friendly they saw each other less and less in the years to come.
After ten years in partnership, Nik Powell vacated his office at Virgin in less than twenty-four hours, and Richard Branson was on his own.
The rapid expansion of the Virgin empire added fuel to the view commonly held within the music industry that Richard Branson was an ambitious, clever, acquisitive and highly idiosyncratic maverick.
The withering epithet of Virgin as ‘Earl's Court Hippies’ was now forgotten.
Yet it was clear that Branson was not properly a creature of the industry in the manner of his contemporaries.
Most record-company chiefs had risen to their position by one of two ways; either they were ‘record men’ born and bred, who by their own taste and judgement had quietly built their own companies, or had risen through the sales and marketing ranks of some multinational to positions of prominence; or they were lawyers or accountants, practised in the art of negotiation and creative bookkeeping.
Branson was neither.
He was interested in the music industry only insofar as it affected Virgin.
He was seldom to be found at meetings of the BPI, the industry's body, or glad-handing at functions among  bow-tie- and cumberbund-wearers.
Some might remark disparagingly on Branson's lack of clubbishness; but most respected him, as one rival put it, ‘as a successful predatory animal in the music business jungle’.
In fact, Branson's almost total lack of interest in music had been an advantage.
Had he been, say, Chris Blackwell at Island, he might have invested money in idiosyncratic musical favourites, to the detriment of the company's commercial fortunes.
But Branson was not interested in being a gardener for art; he was interested in being successful.
He was happy to let Draper make the creative decisions.
Branson was not a record man, he was an entrepreneur; and it was clear that what he wanted out of the record business were new and different opportunities.
So it was that as March 1981 drew to a close, Branson telephoned Rodney Birbeck, the editor of Music Week — the trade ‘Bible’ of the British record industry — and invited him to lunch.
Birbeck was surprised.
His sober, professional and dependable manner, as much as his editorial position, had put him on good terms with most managing directors of most record companies, but his contacts with Branson — while always cordial — had been few.
Now, as he pushed open the wooden gate leading to Branson's houseboat, and threaded his way down the overgrown towpath, Birbeck surmised that something big must be on the agenda.
Just how big, he was astonished to hear.
Manoeuvring down the narrow steps into the boat, and turning into the airy and deceptively spacious lounge, Birbeck was greeted by Branson and Al Clark, Virgin's laconic press officer, poring over a mass of paperwork.
The scheme which Branson spelt out over lunch was indeed revolutionary.
Virgin, he said, were planning something which would effectively wipe out the manufacture of records, tapes and home hi-fis — direct cable music.
The Music Box system, as it was called, would consist of four central computer terminals, located in different parts of the country, on which would be stored every single and album ever released in Britain.
Subscribers to the service required only a cable line, an amplifier, a pair of speakers and a computer pad, on which to tap out the number of their choice.
Subscribers would pay a flat charge each month and receive a catalogue of available music, constantly updated.
‘It beats  buying records, eh, Rodney?’ laughed Branson.
Birbeck was stunned.
The scheme Branson was outlining would, Birbeck knew, effectively mean the end of the record industry as he, and anybody else, recognised it.
The implications were almost too enormous to contemplate.
So enormous it couldn't possibly be true -could it?
In front of him, Branson was earnestly shuffling through a detailed prospectus.
‘Where is the money coming from?’ asked Birbeck.
Branson pulled out a file and handed it to Birbeck; inside was correspondence from banks outlining weeks of discussion over preliminary financing.
Of course, Branson explained, the whole scheme would be in profit very quickly: the real bonus was that under the regulations governing hospital radio, which is also transmitted by cable, Music Box would not actually be legally obliged to pay any of the standard performers' royalties.
‘But we'll be prepared to give the artist something, of course,’ Branson added expansively.
Birbeck reeled out into the daylight, bemused and shocked.
The idea was utterly outrageous, yet also highly feasible.
Cable was, after all, the buzzword of the moment in the quality newspapers; the future, it was said, of broadcasting.
Among the Music Week staff, the general consensus was that the scheme was simply too astonishing to be true.
And the more Birbeck thought of it, the clearer it became.
Of course, it couldn't be true.
Could it?
The next day, he telephoned Al Clark, asking that Music Week be let in on the joke.
But Clark was unequivocal when he returned the call.
Richard, he said, was deeply offended that anyone should think he would lower himself to the depths of duping the editor of Music Week .
The story was ‘totally one hundred per cent’.
It duly appeared on the front cover of Music Week the following week: BRANSON BOMBSHELL: VIRGIN CHIEF SEEKS £2OM CITY BACKING TO PUT CABLE MUSIC INTO MILLIONS OF HOMES.
Astute readers might also have found a small note, placed in the magazine's gossip column, referring to the front page story and reminding readers that it was 1 April — placed there by Birbeck as a precautionary measure.
But not everybody read that far.
In the plush chrome and buttoned-leather offices of the record industry the story was greeted by the sound of jaws dropping incredulously.
That morning Branson was inundated by telephone calls from his colleagues, accusing him of plotting to destroy them.
Warner Brothers immediately set in motion its own research programme to explore the feasibility of the idea; it would run for some months before anyone realised it had been an April Fool and abandoned their research.
Capital Radio offered free Music Box equipment to the first one thousand callers, and were also inundated with calls.
The following day, Virgin received its first order for Music Box, from Nigeria.
Rodney Birbeck was less amused.
He felt that his trust and position had been taken advantage of: that he had been made to look a fool.
The dozen bottles of champagne which Branson sent, with a note ‘Sorry, I had to do it’, were returned to him.
Birbeck believed that Branson had played the joke as ‘revenge’ for a Music Week reporter feeding stories disparaging Branson to the satirical magazine Private Eye — and he was partly right.
Private Eye was indeed an extremely sore point with Branson.
The magazine had first taken note of him in his Student whizz-kid incarnation, when Branson had appeared in a BBC documentary  entitled Men of the Future .
Inevitably, it had been parodied in the Eye as Men of the Past , awakening in Branson the first stirrings of what became a lasting sensitivity to adverse publicity.
For days afterwards, he was unable to make a telephone call without imagining he was being laughed at on the other end of the line.
Lord Gnome had returned to Branson intermittently over the years, christening him ‘a reptilian little shit’ in stories which Branson always maintained were ‘inaccuracies’.
Rightly or wrongly, Branson suspected that a Music Week reporter had been the source of some stories (others, he suspected, had been planted by John Varnom).
And revenge had been in his mind when playing the joke on Music Week .
It was the reason he had poured so much effort, care and attention into ensuring the joke's success.
But revenge was not the whole motive: without it, the joke might have been cheaper, less elaborate, of a different kind — but there would probably have been a joke of some kind.
Branson held no grudge against Rodney Birbeck.
Quite the opposite.
He thought Birbeck scrupulous and likeable.
But the fact was that when it came to practical jokes, he regarded anybody as fair game, from the most fleeting acquaintance to the dearest friend.
This was Richard Branson in his manifestation as cheerleader — a manifestation which some found charming and amusing; others intensely tiresome.
It was the Richard Branson that would throw anybody in a swimming-pool — literally and metaphorically — often forgetful of the cost, be it of a junior employee's ruined wristwatch or an editor's dignity (the watch could be paid for afterwards: dignity was harder to repair); the Richard Branson that, when playing wicket-keeper in a company cricket match, would tie cotton round the bails and then ‘when the batsman has been in long enough’ yank them off with a roar of laughter, all the more resounding for the look of fury on the fallguy's face.
Revenge was seldom, if ever, the motive in these pranks.
It was Branson, the eternal child, wielding a pin at the balloon of grown-up dignity.
This may be regarded as the chairman exercising his prerogative to amuse himself; yet it is also governed by a simple and earnest desire to amuse others.
It is Eve's imprecations to ‘Do a turn, Ricky’.
Something else which is expected of him; the most curious manifestation of noblesse oblige .
As the host of a party, he says, you have a responsibility to amuse.
And it is a characteristic of Richard Branson that wherever he is, he regards it as a party, and has usually done his best to make it such by the addition of as many people as possible.
‘If there are four people in a car, Richard will always try to make it six,’ says one friend.
‘If he is going on holiday, the first question is ‘How many people can we fit in the villa?’’
This attitude became institutionalised in Virgin through the ritual of the staff outing, in which the company would take over some holiday hotel for three or four days of high jinks.
This usually entailed Branson being the first to let off fire-extinguishers, initiate a food fight, or dress up in fishnet stockings and make-up for the inevitable fancy-dress party.
Older, and more knowing, Virgin hands, seasoned veterans of countless swimming-pool duckings, kept their distance; but as a way of fostering a sense of belonging among staff these outings proved a powerful catalyst.
Virgin had, to a large extent, been built on Branson's abilities at man-management and manipulation — his  unrivalled capacity, as one friend put it, ‘to get people to do things for him, and feel that they are the ones who have been done a favour’.
Staff accepted lower wages because Virgin seemed to be a more agreeable place to work than anywhere else in the record industry.
Life was not hidebound by rules or convention.
The sense of hierarchy was so subtle as to be almost non-existent.
No one spoke about ‘management’: it was simply Richard, Simon and Ken.
Staff could feel, in that all-purpose adjective, ‘involved’.
The record industry is a notoriously chauvinistic business, but almost from the outset women had been put into positions of power and seniority at Virgin.
Barbara Jeffries had gone from managing the Manor to running the entire Studio Division.
Women headed the International department; Sales; Production; Marketing; Promotion; Music Publishing.
Carol Wilson, who had joined in Music Publishing and signed Sting's songwriting to the company (but not Sting as an artist) had developed her own label, DinDisc, under the Virgin umbrella, which in 1980 gave the company one of its best-selling artists, Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark.
Some argued that ‘equal opportunity’ in this case was simply another illustration of Richard's entrepreneurial canniness.
‘The theory we all had was that Richard knew very well that women worked twice as hard for half the price,’ as one girl put it.
But the fact remained that there were more women in positions of authority in Virgin than anywhere else in the record industry.
The fact also remained that almost everybody in Virgin worked twice as hard for half the price.
In part, the atmosphere of almost wilful asceticism a stoic sense of ‘doing without’— that permeated the  company grew unconsciously from Branson himself.
His almost total indifference to the trappings of conspicuous wealth or consumption proved a subtle, yet powerful, role-model, and a disincentive to the usual gripes about status and salary.
Virgin took its tone from Richard's unkempt appearance, his apparent indifference to material luxuries, the fact that his money went not towards Savile Row suits or extravagant limousines but back into the company.
If Richard drove a beaten-up car, it seemed that nobody could reasonably ask for anything more themselves.
Even as the company got bigger, the familial atmosphere on which Virgin had been built in the early Seventies stayed strong, a flame that was kept alight by those who had been with Virgin since the earliest days, until it became a myth, self-perpetuating and strong enough to touch any newcomer to the organisation, strong enough to have even Richard Branson in its grip.
Long after Branson had moved his office to the houseboat Duende and was seldom to be seen by most of the Virgin staff; long after he had ceased to know everyone by name, or even by sight, Branson himself would continue to refer to a special Virgin ‘atmosphere’, barely perceivable to the outside world.
Branson's readiness to delegate responsibility and encourage people in tasks for which they had no particular qualification had been important in determining the mood of the company.
By turning record-packers into talent scouts, magazine salesmen into managers, Branson had paid them the compliment of saying ‘I trust you’.
And that trust was invariably repaid with a fierce loyalty — if not always love — to Branson himself, and to the company.
Branson ignored the conventional wisdom  that you do not bring friends into business, or business into friendship, and over the years there grew up around him a circle of trusted friends and advisers in the company.
Those who had somehow violated the bond of trust, friendship, loyalty — for reasons they may not always be able to discern — could find themselves suddenly and inexplicably cast out into the cold.
Some left, complaining that Branson demanded their soul as well as their time.
Those who remained loyal could expect to be generously rewarded, in position if not always in money.
With the eventual departure of Nik Powell, the inner core was built around Branson, Draper and Berry — a triumvirate whose similarity in medium-length haircuts, corduroy trousers and comfortable sweaters could, on occasion, make them look almost like brothers.
For a trusted confidant contemplating moving on, Branson could go to considerable lengths of generosity, flattery or playfulness to persuade them to stay.
When, in 1978, after four years with the company, Al Clark presented himself in Branson's office to announce that he was leaving for a job with better pay and more responsibility, Branson's response was to pull a water pistol from his desk and start firing at him, grinning broadly all the while.
Later that afternoon, Branson telephoned Clark's wife, pretending to be the managing director of the company to which Clark was going, and talked gibberish down the telephone.
Clark capitulated and stayed with Virgin, on the grounds that idiosyncrasy and fun were worth more than conventional careerism.
Branson's standing joke that ‘I believe in benevolent dictatorships — provided I'm the dictator’ contained more than a germ of truth.
He had always run Virgin  with something of the paternalism of a nineteenth-century Lancashire mill-owner, believing himself to be mindful of the welfare of his staff, if not always fully in touch with the vicissitudes of their day-to-day existence, but certainly never tolerating any direct challenge to his authority.
Unions were anathema to him.
Unions meant bureaucracy and restrictive practices.
In a properly run business — a sufficiently benevolent dictatorship — they should be unnecessary.
That was the theory, anyway.
The occasional protests by staff through the years over pay and conditions had usually been dealt with quickly, abrasions salved and healed by the implicit belief that matters would eventually improve, if not tomorrow, then certainly by the day after — and that one was still having more fun than was to be had almost anywhere else anyway.
By 1981, however, the mood in Virgin had darkened.
Figures for the twelve months ending in January 1981 showed that Virgin had traded at a loss of £900,000.
The staff redundancies and the cutbacks in the artists' roster had taken their toll on everybody's morale.
But among the more lowly paid members of staff there was a feeling that the sacrifices that they had been urged to make over the previous twelve months — the constraints and pay-freezes and appeals to their better nature — had not been matched by a tempering of Branson's acquisitive spirit.
In the record company — the one division of the company which supported the rest — staff had been made redundant, yet money had been found to go on buying nightclubs, expand the empire.
To people struggling to make ends meet, the rationale about ‘expanding out of difficulties’ was not easily understood.
At Vernon Yard, the complaints became more vocal.
At length, a handbill was circulated, unsigned, calling for a staff meeting, without Branson, Draper or any other directors present; on the bottom was the suggestion that a vote should be taken to see if staff wished to be represented by a trades union.
There was some trepidation at the thought of even having a staff meeting at all; wasn't it, some people wondered, rather disloyal ?
But a significant body of respected people, notably from the press and A&R departments, some of whom had worked for Virgin for years, argued that the meeting should go ahead, ‘For the sake,’ as one person put it, ‘of those who are afraid to speak up for themselves.’
To Branson, the handbill provoked feelings of complete shock and disillusionment.
Didn't people realise that his door was always open?
The fact that he had been unaware that there was a problem at all, and that people had grievances they felt unable to air to him privately, was, perhaps, a measure of him losing touch since moving office to the houseboat.
Certainly no more flagrant invitation to anguish could have been devised than that single, small word ‘union’.
He would talk to them.
On the allotted day, some forty people crowded into an upstairs office at Vernon Yard.
Branson stood beside Simon Draper, visibly shaking, his face set in a grim mask, ‘I can't tell you,’ he began, ‘how sad I am that people have felt the need to have a meeting, without Simon and I being present.
It's a strange experience for me…’
He paused, as if gathering breath for an ascent up a steep mountainside.
‘I've always felt in the past that if anyone had a problem, they could always come to me and talk about it, and there haven't been many problems that we haven't been able to solve that way.’
It had, he said, been a very tough year, and times were tight.
‘But that said, if people feel the way they do, if you don't think I have your best interests at heart, if we aren't all pulling together as one, then I have personally failed.
If the time has come when Virgin needs a union for people's grievances to be redressed and their rights upheld, then it would almost not be worth me going on, and I will pack up and get out.’
Among some of the staff there now swelled feelings of awkwardness, embarrassment, even incredulity.
For Richard Branson was clearly upset, sniffing hard and wiping at his face with his sleeve.
Some swore they saw tears.
People coughed, shuffled and looked away.
Nobody could have dreamt of introducing the subject of a union now; for some mysterious reason, even the feelings of righteous indignation about pay and conditions had given way to distinct pangs of guilt.
‘But, Richard,’ a voice came from the floor.
‘There's people here on just forty quid a week.
Do you know the cost of rent, groceries, even a pint of milk?
This isn't about changing the company; what people want is more money…’
The word brought a change over Branson's countenance; a glimmer of something like light, as if to say, Money?
Is that all it is?
Just money…
The meeting broke up in disarray.
The next day an announcement was made to staff.
A number of people would have their wages reviewed immediately, and the wage structure would be altered so that people on the lowest wages would get proportionately higher increases.
Furthermore, there would be regular staff meetings from then on.
And for a while there were, until staff no longer bothered turning up for  them, and the practice was quietly abandoned.
The whole episode had been an education for all, with one revealing truth emerging among many.
Richard Branson actually didn't know the price of a pint of milk.
From the outset, Joan Templeman had some difficulty growing accustomed to the fact that living with Richard Branson seldom meant actually being alone with him.
Branson's living arrangements had always been a moveable feast, a reflection of the lack of boundaries between his work and private life.
The house in Denbigh Terrace, which was his home during and after his marriage to Kristen Tomassi, had been progressively colonised by the office; Nik Powell took over the first floor; board meetings were conducted in the lounge; paperwork spilled into the bedrooms.
When, late in 1978, Kristen and her boyfriend Kevin Ayers announced that they were leaving England to live in Spain, Branson took the opportunity to buy Ayers' houseboat, the Duende , moored on the Regents Canal, a short distance from his old boat.
Branson's relationship with his former wife remained highly civilised.
He and Kristen kept in touch; Joan and Kristen became friends.
Some years later, when Kristen fell in love with a German architect named Axel Langer, he and Branson became partners in the ownership of a hotel in Majorca.
Joan had no wish to live in Denbigh Terrace, a house filled with all Branson's memories and few of her own, and the pair moved in together on the Duende .
Conditions on the boat were cosy, not to say cramped, reflecting Branson's absorption in work and his somewhat bemusing sense of priorities.
There were any number of telephones and a photocopier, but no  washing-machine.
With things being tight at work it was necessary to set an example, he explained to Joan, as she set off yet again for the launderette.
Early in 1980, Joan announced that she was pregnant.
Branson was less than enthusiastic.
‘The thing is,’ he confessed to his assistant Penni Pike, ‘I haven't got my career together yet.’
She could hardly believe her ears.
‘Richard, you're twenty-nine years old, you've got everything you wanted and more than you need; you're ready for children.’
But the thought of a child, and the responsibility it would entail, continued to panic Branson.
To Joan, he confessed that he was ‘not sure’ so often that at one point she left the boat, determined to have the child on her own.
Branson spent a frantic evening phoning around friends until he found her, and persuaded her to return.
In the summer, while Branson was away in Europe on business, Joan, now six months pregnant, returned to Scotland for a holiday.
Whilst in Fort William she was taken ill with stomach pains.
Doctors diagnosed appendicitis and she was operated on.
Branson flew back from Europe and they went to a house near Inverness, where Richard's sister Lindi was staying, for Joan to convalesce.
But within days she went into labour.
Joan was told that the baby would be unlikely to survive, but she was advised to give birth naturally, to avoid gynaecological problems that might affect her capacity to have children in the future.
The baby, a girl, three months premature and perilously fragile, died four days later.
The death of the child deeply affected both of them.
But at the age of thirty-five Joan was determined to get pregnant again as soon as possible.
Slowly, Branson's  continuing fear of the responsibility which a child would bring began to evaporate.
But again the pregnancy was not without drama.
Six weeks before the baby was due, Branson attended a dinner at the Venue.
It was a long evening, and he arrived home at two in the morning, much the worse for wear.
Shortly after falling into bed, he was awakened by an urgent voice in his ear, ‘Richard.
It's happening.’
Feeling one step from death, Branson dragged himself out to the car and drove quickly through the early morning traffic to the hospital in Wimbledon.
At the hospital, the doctor examined Joan and said, ‘You look fine’; the verdict on Branson was less optimistic.
‘You look absolutely dreadful,’ said the doctor.
‘Take two aspirins, go to bed, and we'll wake you when we need you.’
An hour later, he awoke to find three figures clustered around his bed, dressed in white and wearing face masks.
For a moment he thought he had been in a terrible accident.
The next minute, he was clutching Joan's hand as she gave birth to a daughter.
‘Because she was premature, as they were pulling at this thing I was thinking, ‘Don't touch…’, and one worries that something might go wrong, and then there's this tremendous sense of relief, and elation and exhaustion.
And it is the most incredible thing.’
As anyone but Richard himself might have predicted, the palpable, screaming existence of his daughter, Holly, assuaged whatever doubts he might have had about his readiness for parenthood.
‘I think he was quite shocked at how much you could love something when Holly was born,’ says his sister Vanessa.
‘I don't think anyone had warned him about how overwhelming that feeling of love can be.’
On a bitterly cold November day, Richard collected Joan and the small, pale, vulnerable bundle and brought them home to the boat.
The central heating was fixed at ninety degrees.
Through the night feeds, he sat transfixed, preparing endless cups of tea.
Parenthood began to impose its own time-honoured and inexorable pattern.
It was not in Richard Branson's instincts to look back, but occasionally — just occasionally — he thought about Student , and what it might have become.
In his own mind, Richard Branson had never fully abandoned journalism.
An inveterate reader of newspapers, his understanding of what constitutes ‘a good story’ had been put to some use over the years in the cause of promoting his own artists, not least the Sex Pistols.
But the thought of returning to publishing had not seriously entered his head until the spring of 1981, when his attention suddenly focused on an industrial dispute afflicting Time Out magazine and its proprietor Tony Elliott.
Elliott was a man cut, in many ways, from a similar bolt of cloth to Branson.
He too had been educated at Stowe — although he was three years older — and like Branson he turned an understanding of Sixties culture to profitable advantage.
Elliott had founded Time Out in 1968 as a duplicated broadsheet guide to London's ‘alternative’ events.
With its listings of all-night movies, ‘happenings’ and a news section of political agitation that once moved Mick Jagger to remark that wading through it to find out what was showing at the NFT was ‘like crossing a picket line’,Time Out became as much a fixture of London bedsit life as the latest Mike Oldfield or Sex Pistols record.
Just like Branson, Elliott had run  his business with a curious mixture of post-hippie idealism and proprietorial droit de seigneur ; for many years, all staff, from the postboy to the editor, were paid the same amount.
But in May 1981 the contradictions finally became irreconcilable when Elliott insisted on his right to hire prestigious journalists at ‘appropriate salaries’.
The staff revolted, Elliott locked them out of the Time Out offices, and the magazine vanished from the  newsstands .
Elliott's predicament was watched with some interest from the houseboat Duende .
Richard Branson had long admired the simplicity and effectiveness of the Time Out concept.
It was, in many ways, the magazine Student might have become under different circumstances.
In 1978, Elliott approached Branson with a view to tying up a New York version of Time Out with Virgin's American office.
At that time Branson said no.
But as the Time Out dispute gathered steam, he telephoned Elliott with another proposition.
‘It's clear from what you've said in the papers that you're determined to have a full blown lock-out and deal with the union problem once and for all,’ Branson said.
‘That means you're going to be off the streets for quite a while.’
‘It looks like it,’ said Elliott.
‘Then why don't we look at this scenario?’ said Branson.
‘I'll start a publication to fill the gap — let's call it Stepping Out — which could possibly be free.
I'll run that for as long as you're off the streets, and then, when you've solved your problems, I'll close Stepping Out and we'll do Time Out together.’
The following weekend, Elliott went to the Manor to meet Branson and discuss the proposition further, but after some thought he turned it down.
He felt he knew  Branson well enough to surmise that it would not evolve into an equal partnership, because Branson would be bound to ‘over-interfere’.
Furthermore, there was a marked difference in ‘ethos’.
Elliott thought Branson rather straight: ‘I had a suspicion he would want people like George Melly in as columnists.’
Branson was nonplussed by Elliott's refusal; in fact, it constituted the perfect challenge.
If Elliott did not want a partner, he would have a rival.
Branson had long felt that the greatest drawback to Time Out was its left-wing politics.
He would start his own listings magazine,Event , without a picket line — metaphorical or real.
The project was greeted with some antagonism among his Virgin colleagues.
Simon Draper thought it a bad idea, but realised that argument was futile.
It was almost the last item of discussion with Nik Powell before Powell's departure.
Powell had no argument with the principle of starting a magazine, or even over the amount of money it would cost, but he felt that Branson was treading on sensitive political ground in attempting to take advantage of somebody else's industrial dispute.
But, more than anybody, Powell recognised that whatever the business opportunities Event presented, it was also Branson's way of exorcising the journalistic instincts — the excitement of chasing stories and airing issues — which had been thwarted by the failure of Student .
Branson spared no expense in getting Event off the ground.
He plundered the opposition and hired Pearce Marchbank, a designer whose covers had done so much to establish the identity of Time Out on newsstands, as co-editor, along with Al Clark.
He commissioned an expensive advertising campaign.
At a launch party, at  Heaven, he took two platefuls of celebratory cake and, with a gesture of proprietorial confidence that Rupert Murdoch or Robert Maxwell would have been hard put to match, flung them in the faces of his two editors.
But Event was already doomed, through a congruence of misfortune and misjudgement.
Branson conceived Event to fill a gap; it would, he maintained, be a general entertainment and listings magazine, without the strident political polemic of Time Out .
He believed the dispute at Time Out would not alter the magazine's basic editorial thrust; merely weaken the magazine's spirit.
Even when Time Out returned to the stands, those readers tired of the magazine's ‘agit-prop’ news coverage and of film reviews dense with Marxist dialectic, would surely switch to Event .
The belief — fallacious, as it turned out — in the unique selling points of Event lulled everybody on the magazine into a false sense of security.
What Branson did not envisage was that the dissenting faction of the Time Out staff would leave to produce their own magazine,City Limits , run on the cooperative principles eschewed by Tony Elliott; and that Time Out would return to the streets largely shorn of its radical bent — in fact, very much the magazine Branson wished Event to be.
The first new-look Time Out appeared on 18 September 1981; the first City Limits a fortnight later.
The first issue of Event appeared on 2 October; by then, as Branson admits, ‘Our reason for existence had already vanished.’
Lacking the long-established authority of Time Out or the political commitment of City Limits ,Event fell awkwardly between both stools.
Branson's role in any Virgin project was traditionally to set it up and leave it be, getting involved only when  things went wrong.
But from the outset he had felt jittery about Event : it was not a project that he could trust to a dependable partner, as he could trust the record company to Simon Draper.
The obvious fact that Event was not working, his instincts to protect his investment, but also the awakening of his latent enthusiasm for the business of running a magazine, all drew Branson deeper into the quicksand which Event became.
Things went from bad to worse.
Branson was not able to inspire the same sense of esprit de corps among the hastily assembled team of Event journalists as he had always done among the staff at Virgin, and the magazine quickly became rife with internecine dispute and conspiracy theories.
When Branson brought in his old friend John Varnom as deputy editor, Pearce Marchbank saw it as a challenge to his authority.
Marchbank complained that Branson intervened ‘consistently’ over editorial and artwork.
In such an atmosphere of rancour and distrust it was hardly surprising that the magazine never developed a proper editorial identity.
Together with John Varnom, Branson concocted some ideas to give Event ‘some bite’.
One was an extraordinarily candid ‘interview’ with Tim Bell, then the managing director of Saatchi & Saatchi, the Conservative Party's advertising agency, about the idiosyncrasies and shortcomings of Mrs Thatcher and her family.
The account in fact came from John Varnom, who was delighted to find himself placed next to Bell at a dinner party, and spent the entire evening commuting between the table and the lavatory, furiously jotting down the overheard anecdotes.
The second story came from Branson himself, and arose from a tip-off from a journalist named Carla Dobson who worked as the assistant  to the Daily Mail gossip-columnist Nigel Dempster.
Over lunch, Dobson regaled Branson with a tale of how Private Eye had suppressed a story about adulterous liaisons at a national newspaper — precisely the kind of story in which the Eye habitually delighted — because of the interests of some Eye contributors who worked for the paper.
Branson, in fact, had no particular interest in gossip for its own sake, either public or private.
This was partly the result of an upbringing that had instilled in him the belief that it was wrong to say unkind things about people behind their backs; indeed, a lack of verbal malice, and a determination to try always to see the best in people, is one of his qualities.
But it was also a mark of his belief that gossip was simply a waste of time.
Gossip put nothing of himself to the test but his patience.
Friends remarked that it was a measure of Branson's single-minded approach to conversation that you could be regaling him with the most scandalous piece of tittle-tattle in London and he would turn on his heel and walk away, leaving you talking to thin air, while he made yet another telephone call about business.
Yet Dobson's story had an undoubted attraction.
For one thing it was an opportunity, in a purely objective, journalistic sense, to expose the hypocrisy of a magazine that, to Branson's mind, ‘had always purported to be so perfect itself while having a go at everybody else’.
For another, it was the opportunity to take proper revenge for the discomfort that Private Eye had caused him over the years, a revenge more satisfying than that afforded him by the Music Box April Fool's joke.
The headline emblazoned across the cover of Event — PRIVATE EYE GOES SOFT.
HOW THE GOSSIP COLUMNISTS PROTECT  THEIR OWN.
WE NAME THE GUILTY MEN — was the Eye 's ‘reptilian little shit’ getting his own back at last.
The story excited some comment, and no little pointing of fingers, in Fleet Street — and Greek Street — but ultimately led Event into deeper water when the magazine printed an allegation about a Daily Mirror executive, and was obliged to promptly follow it with a full-page apology and retraction in the face of legal action.
But its biggest impact was within the offices of Event itself.
Al Clark read the original story about adulterous liaisons with a sinking heart.
It was, he believed, quite valid to attack the hypocrisy of Private Eye ; but there was a slight problem.
The philandering husband named in the piece, and his wife, were family friends of Clark.
With feelings torn between embarrassment, familial duty and rage, and following a furious row on Branson's boat, Clark resigned from Event .
The magazine's initial circulation of 50,000 was, by now, on an inexorable downward spiral.
By January, it was just 18,000.
Branson's response was to try and cut overheads.
Redundancies were made; the magazine was reduced in size; the number of colour pages were cut back and eventually eliminated altogether — measures that lent an impression of panic and fast-reducing circumstances to the operation.
By then, Marchbank too had resigned in an acrimonious row over money.
‘Richard didn't understand magazine publishing,’ he says.
‘He thought it was like a record — that you go to Number One immediately.
He didn't understand that you have to throw away a million pounds in the first year in order to establish a readership and the faith of advertisers.’
But for Branson a quick death had become preferable to the prospect of prolonged agony.
Event had become  too much of a drain on both his time and the resources of the rest of the Virgin Group.
‘We lost heart over it,’ he says.
After four more months, and two more editors, Branson closed the magazine, with a sense of something like relief.
The project had been wrong-footed from the outset.
Initially conceived to capitalise on Time Out being off the streets, it was clearly a mistake to sit back and allow Time Out to return first.
There were question marks too over Branson's choice of his editorial team.
Marchbank was, first and foremost, a designer, not a journalist; Al Clark had some journalistic experience, but not as an editor; nobody had any great confidence in the man Branson had appointed as publisher, Greg Thain.
Branson himself was torn between a belief that the magazine needed more of his time, and not having the time to give it.
He remained convinced that if he could have spent ten hours a day working on Event , ‘wining and dining advertisers and so on’, the magazine could have been saved.
But there was never the time to put the theory to the test.
Failing, as he would say, is not important, ‘just as long as you've done everything you possibly can to avoid it’.
As it was, the failure of Event cost Richard Branson more than £750,000.
The cost to his pride was not so easily calculated.
He had closed businesses down before, but never so publicly, and the fact that it was a project so dear to his heart wounded even more.
To close one magazine is unlucky; but to close two casts serious doubts on your capabilities as a publisher.
Shortly before Event finally closed, Branson made one last telephone call to Tony Elliott.
‘Tony,’ he said, ‘I've made an  awful lot of cash from the Human League.
I could put it into Event , or I could give it to you for Time Out …
’ It was a gesture of bravado rather than a serious business proposition.
But Elliott turned him down anyway.
There was nothing for Branson to do now but cut his losses, and trust to a return of the Branson luck.
No one could have predicted it would soon arrive in the form of a boy dressed as a woman, and calling himself George…
Litigation and Consolidation
In April 1982, a Task Force of warships and marines set sail from British ports to dispute with a tin-pot dictatorship the ownership of a territory on the other side of the world, of which many Britons had never before heard.
Where were the Falkland Islands anyway?
By June, when the war was over, the Falklands had entered the British vocabulary: a word with mixed connotations of heroism, waste, duplicity, valour and a desperate, atavistic yearning for national pride.
The ‘Falklands factor’ would be seen as a principal reason for the Conservatives' unexpectedly good showing in the local council elections that year, and, too, for the return of Margaret Thatcher for a second term as prime minister at the General Election of 1983.
It was ‘the Falklands spirit’, Mrs Thatcher said, that would make Britain great again.
This yearning for former glories was already manifest in a particular kind of sentimentality and nostalgia.
The wedding in 1981 between the heir to the throne and a nursery-school helper had confirmed the elevation of the Royal Family in the popular imagination to a singular  hybrid of deity and soap-opera.
The enormous popularity on television, and on film, of Brideshead Revisited and Chariots of Fire , suggested a nation looking collectively over its shoulder towards the cosy certainties of the past.
Perhaps, together, these totems could banish the modern-day spectres of inflation and spending cuts; of strike action that endangered hospital patients or people whose houses were on fire; of lying politicians and rampaging football hooligans; of the seemingly irreversible rise in unemployment, and the terrible inner-city disturbances of the summer of 1981, from which the country was still reeling, and which had brought a suddenly sinister resonance to otherwise neighbourly sounding places.
Toxteth, Brixton, Handsworth.
Pop music mirrored the mood of Britain's desperation — and its barely expressed hopes — in a curious way.
The new groups who were in the charts, even as the British Task Force made its way across the Atlantic — Duran Duran, ABC, Spandau Ballet — suggested that, of all things, fun was once again back in fashion.
After the film noir of punk had come the escapist musical spectacular of ‘the new pop’, demonstrated in a wild flamboyance which banished the austerity of punk rock to the shadows.
In the gloom of a London club called Blitz, the person who would define this new sensibility above all others, the club's sometime cloakroom attendant, a young boy called George O'Dowd, caught sight of his reflection in the mirror, applied his make-up — as he would put it, ‘to remove all the hideousness’— and plotted how he too might acquire the only worthwhile currency left: fame.
Such flamboyance is a familiar response of popular culture to recession: consider Hollywood in the Thirties.
Yet it also signified, at another  level, how pop music was responding to the undercurrents of the new mood of the country, and the pronouncements of an insistent, steely-haired woman in a blue twin-set about a sleeker, leaner Britain, built on the cut and thrust of the free market; unfettered competition; standing, as it was frequently said, on one's own two feet.
In fact, the pop industry has always embodied what were now coming to be known as ‘Thatcherite’ values: highly competitive, determined by ‘market forces’, with no grants, no subsidies, negligible government interference.
There is no more exacting a yardstick of free-market principles than the pop charts, where the successful bask unashamedly in the spotlight and conspicuously consume the fruits of their success, while scant sympathy is expended on the failures.
The difference now was that while once the significant body of musicians had attempted — or affected — to snub those values, they now embraced them.
Paradoxically, the example of Malcolm McLaren and the Sex Pistols — pop music's last true anarchists, and Investors Review 's ‘Young Businessmen of the Year’ in 1977 — was an abiding influence on the new manners.
The film The Great Rock'n'Roll Swindle provided a blueprint for embezzlement to a rising breed of would-be McLarens — notwithstanding the irony that the erstwhile Swindler's tract was distributed on film and video by his most bitter adversaries, Virgin.
Indeed, that only underlined the moral: pop music could be playful, and possibly even subversive, but nobody would pretend any more that it was anything but business.
To the coming generation of performers, pop was no longer expected to mean anything other than what it represented on the surface; it was as if pop music's aspirations towards deeper meanings and truths had been exhausted; social realism was distanced by irony and a conscious manipulation of artifice.
A tyranny of ‘style’ was born.
‘Credibility’ now meant working with the right video producer, clothes designer and hair stylist.
Groups spoke of ‘strategies’ and making ‘career moves’; the jargon of the Harvard Business School had banished forever the Utopian cliches of Woodstock, and the anarchist ones of punk.
Irony piled upon irony in the shape of one group on the Virgin roster, Heaven 17, whose ‘image’ portrayed them as pony-tailed businessmen in executive ‘power’suits.
Everybody had an ‘image’ now.
Even punk, once the rhetoric about dole queues, anarchy and Sten guns in Knightsbridge had been exhausted, had become just one more uniform to be hung on the clothesrail of British pop culture, to be dusted down nostalgically on anniversaries.
The rise of the pop video was an important element in the growing supremacy of style over substance.
The video had originally come into use as a promotional device — a way for a group to receive television coverage, in Britain and abroad, without the expensive and time-consuming necessity of travel, hotel bills, etc.
A few, more adventurous, performers had spotted the creative potential of the medium, and were busy conceptualising music for video as well as disc.
But in the main videos were, simply, advertisements for records.
That changed in 1981, with the arrival in America of MTV — the cable television station which broadcast music videos twenty-four hours a day to a rapt teenage audience.
MTV asserted the primacy of the new medium of pop video, and once again, through ready access, made British pop  fashionable, and saleable, in America.
It also made the pop video an industry in itself, with its own cast of producers, directors, cameramen, technicians and so on.
The video quickly became a mandatory part of the pop star's armoury; no performer, no matter how well established, could afford to ignore it; the simple truth was that without a video a record stood less chance of becoming a hit.
And a strong video, projecting the right image for a performer, could turn the most indifferent song into a smash, and the performer into a star.
To a generation of prospective pop stars, the video offered new possibilities of benediction.
No longer did one have to sound right, one need only look right — or, at the very least,different .
From the nightclubs of London there surfaced a person called Steve Strange, a burly Welsh boy whose only demonstrable skill lay in concealing his prosaic origins beneath make-up and fancy dress.
Strange's achievement in parlaying this modest qualification into a highly visible career in fashion magazines, pop videos and records was a potent example to those, like George O'Dowd, whose most ardent infatuation was with their self-image.
The coming of MTV, and the growing importance of the pop video, also sowed the first seeds of future developments within Virgin.
The pop video had become a commodity saleable to the public.
From the need to produce videos of Virgin artists came the idea of distributing them on a commercial basis as well through their own distribution company; and within two years Virgin were busily developing their own, European version of MTV, Music Box.
The reshaping of Virgin's musical policy over the past  three years, under Simon Draper's direction, had positioned the record label perfectly to capitalise on the new developments in pop.
The failure of Event magazine had been offset — and ultimately subsidised — by two great successes in 1981.
The Human League and Phil Collins embodied two distinct strands of the pop music that would come to dominate the charts.
The Human League's snappy pop songs, drum machines and synthesisers were the embodiment of ‘electro-pop’, the new teenage esperanto; while Collins' sleek, craftsmanlike records were the perfect palliative for an older generation of listeners, turned off by punk rock, whose interest in pop music would be rekindled by the coming phenomenon of the compact disc.
The Human League's Dare album sold 1.8m copies around the world in its first year of release.
And Collins' Face Value also became a million-seller.
Both records were auguries of things to come.
With Collins, the Human League, Japan, Simple Minds, Heaven 17 (whose two pony tailed members had previously been in the Human League), Virgin began to swamp the pop charts.
Meanwhile, George O'Dowd, the former Blitz cloakroom attendant, had been making some progress of his own towards the altar of fame.
He had become the singer with a group which was exciting some interest among the A&R men and women of London's record companies, including Steve Lewis, the head of Virgin's music publishing company.
Lewis impressed upon Simon Draper the need for Virgin to sign the group, Culture Club, and their lead singer — now rechristened Boy George.
They signed with Virgin early in 1982.
Within a year, Boy George was the biggest pop star in the world.
With British pop music once again in the ascendant, Richard Branson set off to America to sell Virgin artists, with an optimism that almost banished the memory of his company's disastrous American adventure of two years before.
Branson had made countless such sales trips over the years, and it was not a task he relished.
In fact, he had come to find it degrading, having to adopt the demeanour and the practices of a door-to-door brush salesman to A&R men, long bored by the entreaties of managers, artists and agents to hear their ‘product’.
He had become inured to the long, solitary vigils in hotel rooms awaiting the return telephone calls; learnt the art of never leaving one's name and telephone number more than once, because ‘it makes you look desperate’.
These trips would proceed on the basis that Richard Branson's lack of musical expertise was less of a liability than Simon Draper's lack of salesmanship.
Having been primed by Draper back in the hotel room on who played or produced what, Branson would present himself with a box of tapes and play just one track by each artist; enough to whet the appetite, but not so much as to test his customer's patience — or indeed Branson's own musical knowledge.
To executives more accustomed to the slick, desk-pounding, hustling and screaming school of salesmanship, Branson's gauche, schoolboy manner and his abashed confessions that ‘actually, I'm not sure who produced this one’ proved appealing, particularly when allied with the offer to license yet another curious collection of British haircuts whom their competitors were anxious to sign.
Returning from one trip, where they had licensed the material of three groups to different American record labels, Branson and Draper were greeted at Heathrow  airport by a girl brandishing a questionnaire: Where have you been?
How did you fly?
Did you do any business in America?
And, she added jokingly, did you make any money?
Branson and Draper smiled broadly at each other.
‘Just $1.5m,’ said Branson.
The renewed popularity of British music in America only made Branson more determined than ever that Virgin should, once again, have their own operation in the States.
Indeed, he was determined that Virgin should, one day, have their own offices throughout the world, with all their licensing deals changed to distribution arrangements.
The closure of the American office was a temporary set-back; attention was now turned to Europe.
Only one other British record company — EMI — had ever taken the step of setting up their own operations in Europe.
Only a handful of British companies were of a size to contemplate it, and among them there existed a curious air of parochialism, of not wanting to venture into foreign-language recordings, or markets which were unfamiliar.
But Branson's attitude was simplicity itself.
‘You just take the margin you're paying somebody else; make sure your overheads didn't come out to more than that, and you can't lose.’
In 1981, Virgin set up their first overseas operation, in France.
The occasion was celebrated at a hotel in Normandy, where local sales representatives were treated to a screening of The Great Rock'n'Roll Swindle .
Somebody, not informed of Branson's excitable nature, had made the mistake of arranging the buffet luncheon around an open-air swimming-pool; within minutes, waiters, guests and chairs were all in the pool.
Virgin were banned from the hotel for life.
However, the French adventure established a successful formula.
In all the countries across Europe, the most likely individuals handling Virgin material for the licensee in that country were approached to set up the new local Virgin office.
Unhappy about losing 80 per cent of their profits on Virgin acts, but unwilling to surrender 10–20 per cent, most foreign companies accepted the switch from being licensees to being distributors.
With committed and knowledgeable staff in each country, Virgin set about a policy of signing local acts as well.
Performers such as Richard Cocciante, Sandra, Renaud and Telephone mean little to British audiences, but in their own countries — Italy, Germany and France — they are stars, selling enormous quantities of records.
By 1986, almost 75 per cent of Virgin's overall business would be generated by its foreign subsidiaries.
Arguably the most popular of all these foreign performers was found by Branson himself, albeit quite by chance.
In France, meeting with the head of Ariola Records, the company responsible for distributing Virgin in that country, Branson listened with interest as the managing director told him excitedly that Ariola were about to pull off an enormous coup by signing Julien Clerc, France's Frank Sinatra.
Branson had never heard of Julien Clerc, but once out of the office he scribbled the name on his hand.
Within a week, Clerc was signed to Virgin.
Ariola's managing director never forgave Branson for the ‘theft’.
Foreign expansion also gave fresh vigour to Branson's powers of hyperbole.
Staff in Virgin's international department grew to accept the fact of opening Music Week to read that Virgin now had offices in fifteen countries (a slight exaggeration), and would shortly open  in a further five (It's the first we've heard of it, Richard has to be kidding!).
These pronouncements became, in time, self-fulfilling prophesies.
The expansion of the Virgin operation, the sharp influx of profits (the loss of £900,000 reported at the beginning of 1981 had been turned into a profit of £1.5m by the beginning of 1982), and the more aggressive attitude of performers to selling themselves had all put Virgin in a more competitive milieu and frame of mind.
The record industry is actually subject to a very simple application of market forces.
When a group is unknown, the advantage lies with the record company in signing them on the company's terms.
What confounds that argument is if the group can inflate its value before signing with anybody, either on its musical merits, or by ‘hyping’ a reputation.
By hyping through shock value alone Malcolm McLaren had provided a model with the Sex Pistols and in his wake came a new wave of manager-entrepreneurs who recognised that the process of ‘selling’ a performer began long before you signed a record contract.
By creating demand for the group among record companies you could provoke an auction which would push up your advance (signing-on fee) by tens of thousands of pounds, and your royalty percentages by two or three ‘points’.
After that, it was your lawyer against theirs.
For record companies, it now became a question of who could pay the most money to secure the most in-demand acts.
This appealed to Branson's competitive instincts.
From 1979 onwards, most of the negotiations on record deals, and all the practical day-to-day details of the record company, had been handled by Simon Draper, as managing director, and Ken Berry, as the  company's all-purpose troubleshooter.
Branson's absence had made office life more predictable, less exciting, but Virgin had become a better record company.
As Draper put it, ‘Richard liked instant excitement; let's go for it, negotiate, and then if the record wasn't out in three weeks, he'd lose interest.’
However, there was nothing to stimulate Branson's interest more than the prospect of a good contract race against a rival company — Chrysalis, Polydor or CBS.
This was not always a good thing for Virgin.
Overcome by a sudden desire to become more involved in the record business again, Branson developed an inexplicable passion for a very mediocre pop group called Headline, and signed them against Draper's advice.
Similarly, he was temporarily dazzled by Blue Rondo à la Turk, a group of snappy dressers who crystallised a momentary enthusiasm in London's clubland for zootsuits, pachucho haircuts and Latin rhythms.
Branson bought them at an auction which inflated the group's price far beyond its true value.
Both were horrible failures and, to the relief of Draper, Branson's interest in music faded.
The contract with Blue Rondo, and Virgin's success in another auction for the signature of a limpid guitar group called the Pale Fountains, brought accusations within the industry that Virgin were guilty of ‘chequebook signing’— paying prices that made life more expensive for everyone.
But Virgin were not victors at every auction.
Branson was personally angered over the negotiations with the singer Sade.
After weeks of talks, it was finally agreed that Sade would sign to Virgin.
On the morning she was expected in the office for the signing ceremony, Stephen Navin, Virgin's lawyer, telephoned  the singer's lawyers, only to learn that she had actually signed for a larger sum to CBS the day before.
Branson wanted to sue, but counsel dampened his ardour: all correspondence had been clearly marked ‘subject to contract’.
From now on, for the most part Branson confined his role in contract negotiations to a neo-imperial one, coming in to ‘do a number’, as Draper put it, when a particularly big star, or recalcitrant manager, required wooing.
Branson's increasing celebrity, albeit still confined to the music industry, had become a selling point in itself.
Other record companies offered long, fattening lunches in over-priced restaurants as part of the deal-making process.
Virgin had their own method.
To walk the overgrown towpath to Branson's barge, bang your head as you descended the small, brass-railed ladder and step over the pile of nappies; to be served stir-fried vegetables and noodles, fresh orange juice and Perrier; to be treated to a private exposition of what were becoming the most famous teeth in the record industry — to attain these was a sign that a group was truly regarded as important.
On one occasion it was a group called the Fine Young Cannibals who made the journey, to discuss Virgin's offer for the rights to their song-publishing.
Another company had offered an identical amount; to the group — there was little to choose between them.
After some deliberation, the group made a proposal, ‘We'll sign with you,’ they said, ‘if you throw in a Steinway Grand piano, non-recoupable.’
Branson thought for a moment.
‘That's about £5,000.
I'll tell you what, why don't we toss for the piano?’
Amid great deliberation, the coin was tossed.
Branson won.
‘But’, he said, ‘you can have the piano anyway.’
In any contractual negotiation with a record company, a good lawyer had become as important to a performer as a good tune, or a good haircut.
Historically, the advantage in record contracts had lain on the industry's side.
Venality was rife; the precedent of even groups as illustrious as the Beatles and the Stones signing to contracts which gave them only a penny a record had become legendary: at the end of the Sixties, Allen Klein had achieved notoriety for his dexterous accounting abilities, working for both groups in the role of both ‘finder’ extracting hidden royalties from the record company for the group — and ‘taker’— extracting them from the group for himself.
Entertainment had become the growth area for the legal profession during the 1970s, as more and more lawyers sought to capitalise on the growing awareness of pop groups about the inequities of the world they inhabited.
The entrance of lawyers changed the pattern.
No longer did record companies set a contractual agenda which the young, naive performer was obliged to follow.
Armed with a lawyer, an artist could, theoretically, get a contract that was equal to — or, at a push, even greater than — his worth.
Relations between performer and record companies became more combative, with legal action, or the recurrent threat of it, the principal weaponry.
Many of these exchanges followed a predictable pattern.
A group signs with a record company at a modest royalty rate, in direct proportion to their lowly status and their impatience to become stars.
Suddenly they become successful.
Their immediate wish is either to  improve the terms of their contract, or, failing that, to leave the company and go elsewhere.
In more severe cases, the performer awakes, as if from a deep sleep, to realise that he has been cheated of his just desserts.
To lawyers the challenge became how to find loopholes in existing contracts, through which their clients could either escape, or drive a series of new demands.
A number of test cases through the Seventies had established precedents for what courts would and would not accept as ‘fair’ in existing contracts.
It became clear, for example, that a contract signed without the artist having had independent legal advice was virtually unenforceable.
And a further principle was established — that of ‘conflict of interest’, in which a manager who advises an artist to sign with his own recording and music publishing companies can hardly be said to be acting impartially, or necessarily in the best interests of his client.
For years, Virgin had been largely untroubled by litigation.
Relations with the four hundred or so different acts that had passed through the company had been, for the most part, harmonious.
And such arguments as there were had been settled without recourse to the courts.
Which was why the writ which arrived on the desk of Virgin's lawyer, Stephen Navin, in September 1979 from solicitors representing Gordon Matthew Sumner, came as a particular shock.
‘Sting’, as Sumner was better known to the record-buying public, had been signed to Virgin music publishing as a complete unknown in 1976.
This meant that Virgin had the right to publish his songs, but no rights on Sting himself as a performer: his group, the Police, were signed as recording artists to A&M.
In the past three years, as his star had risen, Sting had become an important asset  in Virgin's publishing catalogue.
Now he was issuing a writ which alleged that Virgin had made ‘fraudulent use of a dominant position’ in their dealings with him, and claimed damages and a reversion of all his songwriting copyrights.
Richard Branson regarded it as vital that Virgin should win the case.
It was the first time that an artist had taken the company to court.
It was not only Virgin's reputation that was being challenged — Branson had no doubt that the contract signed with Sting was fair; but if a court ruled otherwise it could set a precedent which other acts, and their lawyers, would be looking to exploit.
It was unfortunate then that Virgin's case should be complicated by, and ultimately hinge upon, another, far less public, contractual dispute.
Sting, as a songwriter, had been signed to Virgin by the head of the publishing division, Carol Wilson.
It was Wilson who had ‘discovered’ the singer as an unknown in his native Newcastle, playing with a local group called Last Exit.
Under her direction, and with Virgin money, Sting had recorded a series of demos which had led to his association with the Police, a recording contract with A&M and, ultimately, the hit parade.
The arrangement Sting had signed with Virgin had been for a 50–50 split, rising to 60–40 in Sting's favour after two years.
It was a standard contract for an unknown songwriter, but as the Police began to enjoy enormous success, so Sting's value in the market-place rose.
Virgin offered to improve the deal still further to a 75–25 split, but Miles Copeland, Sting's manager, flatly refused, ostensibly because Virgin were asking for the length of the contract to be extended to include the publishing rights to more albums.
To Carol Wilson, however, it  became fairly obvious that Copeland wanted to sign Sting's publishing to his own company.
Sting and Carol Wilson had remained friends throughout the negotiations.
In fact it was she who had advised him to get a second opinion on the matter, from a lawyer.
He did and a writ was issued against Virgin shortly afterwards.
For Wilson, Sting's success, and the prodigious royalties it had earned for Virgin, was merely one feather in an increasingly crowded cap.
Not only did Wilson have a good ‘pair of ears’, in musicbiz speak, but she was also a formidable negotiator, tenacious in the pursuit of acts she wanted to sign, and in fighting her corner over day-to-day interdepartmental matters.
Simon Draper took to calling her ‘She who must be obeyed’— if not to her face.
She also got on well with Branson; she had become one of the ‘inner circle’ at Virgin, invited on ski-ing holidays and country weekends, utterly trusted within her own sphere; a model, in fact, of the Virgin ethos of somebody being given responsibility and rising to it.
In 1979, she and Branson began talking about establishing an independent label, which Wilson would head, working under the aegis of Virgin and to be called DinDisc.
It was verbally agreed between them that as well as a salary she should have 15 per cent of the company to Virgin's 85.
Negotiations over the final contract were still going on as the first DinDisc releases appeared.
Martha and the Muffins and Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, both Wilson discoveries, came and went in the charts — and still negotiations dragged on.
Each party was now becoming increasingly impatient with the other.
Wilson had employed a lawyer who, according to Simon Draper, was ‘well known in the record industry for never being able to conclude an agreement’.
At one  meeting, Branson became so exasperated that he walked off his own boat and paced up and down the towpath outside to cool down.
But Carol Wilson believed that it was Branson who was ‘stalling’ over giving her any control in the company.
At one point, she discussed the position with Simon Draper.
Draper, after all, was in a not dissimilar position himself, as a 15-per-cent shareholder of Virgin.
‘Look, Carol,’ he said.
‘In the end its a matter of trust.
As a minority shareholder you're in no position to get anything out of Richard.
You either trust that he is going to do things fairly or you don't.’
But Wilson felt aggrieved.
She had, by then, been with Virgin for six years, and brought the company much success, in particular during a time of economic crisis for Virgin.
In 1980, Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, a DinDisc act, had given the company their biggest selling album of an otherwise disastrous year.
Wilson felt she deserved more.
By now, at Virgin's instigation, negotiations had taken a turn in another direction.
Rather than a shareholding, it was proposed that Wilson should be on an ‘over-ride royalty’, whereby she would be paid a royalty for every record sold.
It was a scheme that promised more immediate profits for Wilson, based on results, but entailed sacrificing any control in the company.
Wilson agreed.
It was settled that Branson would give her the signed contract at the Roof Gardens, where all the directors of Virgin were meeting for a Christmas dinner.
Wilson arrived at the table, as arranged, but the contract did not.
‘It's in the car,’ said Branson.
‘I'll sign it tomorrow.’
Coldly, Wilson turned on her heel, walked out of the restaurant — and out of Virgin.
Her resignation became official in January 1982, with a £25, 000 settlement from Virgin.
Wilson says there was a  condition on the settlement — that she should agree to give evidence in the impending case of Gordon Sumner v. Virgin .
She refused to sign, but was paid the settlement anyway.
Wilson's reputation as a talent scout ensured that she was not out in the cold for long.
A plan to go into business with Chris Blackwell at Island did not materialise; but she did agree to operate a new company, InterDisc, under the aegis of CBS.
It was only when she began to spend time at CBS's corporate headquarters that Wilson realised just how congenial the atmosphere at Virgin had been by comparison — particularly for a highly motivated woman.
By record industry standards, she felt, Virgin was a haven for ‘oddballs’— she and Richard Branson both.
So when Branson contacted her to see whether they could resume negotiations, Wilson agreed.
The deal that was eventually signed in April 1982 was, in essence, the deal that had not quite been signed at Christmas 1981, giving Wilson an over-ride, but no percentage of the company.
Within hours of signing, however, she began to have doubts.
Her arrangement with CBS would have given her a 100-per-cent shareholding in her own company.
If she was running the same company for Virgin, shouldn't she have some shareholding in it?
The next day she went back to Branson and asked if he would renegotiate along the lines of the original Virgin proposition, for an 85–15 split in the shareholding.
Both Simon Draper and Ken Berry had been vehement in their opposition to Branson even contemplating rehiring Wilson, and advised him to now tear up the contract and be done with it.
For his part, Branson was within his rights to insist that Wilson abide by the contract she had signed, but he agreed to renegotiate.
It was a delicious quirk of fate that this situation should have arisen even as the legal action with Sting loomed on the near horizon.
For Wilson, as both she and Branson were acutely aware, was a key figure in Virgin's defence.
The importance of the case, and the fact that Virgin's public reputation was at stake, had driven Branson to take an active role in preparing Virgin's defence, rather than simply entrusting it to his lawyers.
In a week of feverish detective work, he amassed a dossier on the publishing arrangements of Sting's manager, Miles Copeland.
What he discovered was rather surprising.
The standard agreement which Copeland's company had with such acts as Caravan, the Climax Blues Band, Wishbone Ash and Squeeze was for a 50–50 split — a worse arrangement than the one Copeland had encouraged Sting to sue Branson over.
To Branson, it was evidence of ‘the worst kind of hypocrisy’, and proof of the relative fairness of the Virgin contract.
The crux of Sting's accusation, however, was that he had suffered from ‘inequality of bargaining power’ which is to say, that he had not had proper legal advice when signing the deal, and had been taken advantage of by Virgin.
In fact, as he later admitted in court, he had been represented by a lawyer from Newcastle at the time of signing to Virgin: not a music-business lawyer, it was true, but a lawyer none the less.
Carol Wilson was a potentially important witness on this point.
After all, she had signed Sting in the first place (she had even given him a list of music-business lawyers to consult at the time, but he had used the Newcastle lawyer because he was cheaper).
And she had been party to every stage of his renegotiations.
She and Sting were still on good terms — they actually sat beside each other throughout the court case, exchanging pleasantries.
Without her testimony, Virgin's lawyer, Stephen Navin, believed that Virgin's case could look ‘a bit pathetic’.
It was important, everybody in the Virgin camp agreed, to keep Carol Wilson sweet.
Wilson too recognised her value to Virgin's defence.
Her renegotiations with Branson over her contract now became a question of who was using whom.
Wilson suspected that Virgin were simply ‘stringing her along’ on her promise to give testimony on their behalf.
Could that even have been why Branson had invited her back in the first place?
Branson, meanwhile, suspected that she was trying to ‘blackmail’ Virgin into bringing her renegotiations to a hasty and favourable conclusion.
Wasn't that why she had asked to renegotiate after signing the contract?
But without Wilson as what he termed ‘a reliable witness’, could a favourable outcome of the Sting case be assured?
By now, the case of Sumner v. Virgin had dragged on in the law courts for eleven days, with the two parties holding each other up in the centre of the ring like panting heavyweights, while the legal fees gushed forth like blood from the wounds.
The case had already cost Virgin alone more than £100,000.
Counsel on both sides were pressing for a settlement; to go on would be futile.
In a feverish rush, an agreement was finally drawn up in the corridors outside the court room, under which Virgin were entitled to one more album of Sting's songs (Synchronicity ) and also retained the ‘exploitation’ rights on existing material for a further eight to ten years.
But Sting's royalty rate was increased, and backdated, giving him an immediate cash payment of some £100,000.
It was  a pyrrhic victory for both sides.
Ironically, Carol Wilson had not, after all, been called upon to give testimony.
But neither had the rancour of the last few weeks been dissolved.
A week after the case finished, Wilson received a letter from Branson saying that the contract which she had actually signed some three months before was now binding.
There would be no more renegotiation.
Wilson was furious.
But Branson was in no mood for reconciliation.
Virgin, he claimed had been precipitated into a compromise with Sting largely because their key witness was unreliable.
‘We felt that if she was going to turn on those sort of tactics we were not going to be gentlemanly about it, and that she should just get on and do the job.’
But Carol Wilson never did go back to Virgin.
Branson held her to contract for five more months, preventing her from working anywhere else, until he decided it was unreasonable to hold her any longer, and she was at last able to find work elsewhere in the record industry.
As is invariably the case in such matters, the only people to profit from the entire episode were the lawyers.
The irony was that two years later Copeland and Branson were once again on cordial terms, their differences momentarily forgotten, while they discussed a possible business deal together.
Richard Branson and Carol Wilson have not spoken since.
Business and friendship can often make for strained bedfellows — as the experience of the man who had made Virgin's first fortune also proved.
The past ten years had been a long, strange and often puzzling journey for Mike Oldfield.
His first response to the enormous success of Tubular Bells was to undergo a  minor nervous breakdown.
Craving isolation, he moved to the depths of Herefordshire.
He expressed interest in few things in life beyond music, and the purchase of a series of improbably fast and expensive motor cars.
He ventured forth to London, and the offices of Virgin, only rarely, to sit silently under the desk of Richard Branson's secretary, Alison, while she arranged test drives of the latest Italian roadsters.
Oldfield's friendship with Richard Branson remained one of the few absolutes of his life.
He continued to idolise Branson; and Branson, in turn, to protect Oldfield.
But Branson's role as Oldfield's manager was now made somewhat problematic by the musician's recalcitrant attitude.
He produced records at his own unhurried pace; he refused to tour, give interviews, or engage in any sort of promotion.
His recreational hours were invariably spent either driving at great speed down country lanes or in the public bars of Herefordshire, engaged in uncomplicated conversations with local farmers.
Branson made of this what he could.
He financed a short film,The Space Movie , in which Oldfield's music was set to footage from the American space programme.
He attempted to interest the producer Dino de Laurentis in using Oldfield to score the film Dune , but de Laurentis declined even to see them.
And Richard took it upon himself to make his friend more sociable, bringing him up from the country for dinners and parties, to Oldfield's obvious disinterest.
And yet they remained close friends.
Being together even wrought a curious change in their characters; Oldfield noticed that something of his diffidence seemed to have rubbed off on Branson.
Richard was…quieter, ‘less the buffoon’, as Oldfield put it.
But still capable of a joke.
On one occasion, they even swapped identities.
Branson had arranged to see an advertising agency about Oldfield producing music for a commercial for Dulux paint.
But when they arrived at the meeting it was Oldfield who was wearing Branson's horn-rimmed spectacles, riffling papers in his briefcase and doing his best to look brisk and businesslike, while Branson gesticulated in a parody of artistic eccentricity.
‘How do you want the music?
Fast?
Slow?
Medium?’
They didn't get the job.
The possible paradox of having Branson as both his manager and the head of his record company did not occur to Oldfield until 1976.
By then, he had made three albums for Virgin, all of which had sold in enormous quantities, but the contract which he signed in 1972 had not been reviewed.
That contract was for ten albums, which, at Oldfield's work rate, could amount to fifteen to twenty years' work.
And while a 5 per cent royalty rate might have been fair in 1972, times had changed.
It had not escaped Oldfield's attention that even young, inexperienced artists signing to Virgin were commanding 3 or 4 per cent more than he was.
Tom Newman, who had managed the Manor and been so instrumental in the creation of Tubular Bells , was among those urging Oldfield to seek an improved arrangement.
But Mike, says Newman, was ‘frightened of his own shadow’.
He would certainly never challenge Branson.
However, Oldfield did get himself a lawyer, and after negotiation with Virgin, an amendment to his contract was signed in April 1977, increasing his royalty rate to 8 per cent.
Oldfield himself asked Branson to carry on as his manager, which Branson agreed to do for a new rate — Oldfield would pay him one barrel of beer a year.
The following year, Oldfield underwent Exegesis, the then fashionable and expensive ‘therapy’ in which people are shouted at and humiliated in front of a group, and then convinced by ‘brainwashing’techniques that they actually feel better for it.
Oldfield emerged a new man.
From being a painfully shy, diffident recluse, he suddenly metamorphosed into a garrulous and sometimes painfully overbearing extrovert.
The first indication that Richard Branson had of his young protégé's dramatic metamorphosis came with a telephone call.
Wide-eyed and dazzled from his epiphany, Oldfield announced that he was to marry the daughter of his Exegesis instructor and Richard must be best man.
Branson had grown accustomed to Oldfield's eccentricities; but even by past standards this seemed positively lunatic.
‘You've known her less than a week, Mike,’ he protested.
‘Wouldn't it be better to wait?’
‘No, no,’ said Oldfield.
‘I want to get married now tomorrow, as soon as possible.
You've got to organise it, Richard.’
With a distinct feeling of foreboding, Branson arranged a date at Kensington registry office.
On the allotted day, he and Joan arrived at the office for a ten-o'clock wedding, carrying with them a gift of two enormous chairs of the type popular with minor African potentates.
There was no sign of Oldfield and his bride-to-be.
For two hours Richard and Joan sat in the potentates' chairs on the pavement outside the registry office, watching the conveyor belt of marriages go by.
By the time Oldfield and his bride-to-be at last arrived, Joan and Richard had fallen to speculating which of the marriages would end in divorce.
Wedded at last, Oldfield and his new wife waved  goodbye.
Twenty-four hours later, he was on the telephone again to Branson with another request.
‘Richard, can you arrange a divorce?’
Oldfield's marriage lasted for just two weeks, requiring lawyers and a large sum of money to bring it to a conclusion satisfactory to the bride.
However, the effects of Exegesis lasted somewhat longer.
Having once decried ‘commercialism’ in all its forms, Oldfield now embraced it: he recorded a disco song, ‘Not Guilty’, and, for reasons that were not altogether clear, was photographed for the music papers posing naked as Rodin's Thinker.
And, for the first time ever, he announced that he would be touring — not alone, not even with a small, manageable and economically viable ensemble, but with an enormous entourage, including a choir of young schoolgirls.
The tour, unsurprisingly, lost money; both Oldfield's own, and some £250,000 which Virgin had put up for tour support.
It also marked the end of Branson's role as manager; at his suggestion, Oldfield took on somebody else to supervise the tour.
The friendship between Branson and Oldfield had been based initially on dependence and protectiveness — mutual need, and mutual gratitude.
Without the cement of regular meetings or contact, they gradually began to drift apart.
Oldfield grew increasingly unhappy.
A new manager and a new accountant had alerted him to the alarming fact that, notwithstanding his private plane, home recording studio and sports cars, he was short of money.
The more he thought about it, the more he felt that the contract he had renegotiated with Virgin had not gone far enough.
Furthermore, he felt that Virgin were being distinctly ‘unhelpful’ towards him these days.
Once  upon a time he had instant access to anyone in the office; now he would telephone and be put on hold.
The musical policy of the label had changed — Oldfield thought punk rock ‘absolutely disgusting music’— and it was as if he was no longer important to the label which he had done so much to build.
The final humiliation came when Branson and Draper flew out to Munich to see Oldfield perform in concert and bring him up to date on the current situation.
After the concert, Branson explained how difficult it was to sell Oldfield's music in America; indeed, the only way Virgin had been able to find an American distributor for his records at all was on the back of a deal made for a new group on the label, XTC — precisely the kind of music Oldfield abhorred.
‘I wasn't getting any respect, any money; I couldn't even get hold of Richard when I wanted to, so I decided to put my foot down and straighten things out.
I got a new lawyer and said, I just want out.’
In July 1981, a firm of lawyers acting for Mike Oldfield issued a writ against Virgin for ‘repudiation’, claiming that the original contract, signed in 1972, was not valid.
Branson was shocked by the claim.
In the first place he disputed the contention of Oldfield's lawyer that the original, 1972 contract was unfair.
Record companies, he argued, make their profits by taking risks on unknown acts, which are signed for modest royalty rates.
Oldfield's initial deal had been a fair reflection of the market-place at the time.
Furthermore, every other record company in London had turned Oldfield down.
Virgin, it could be argued, had given him a chance when nobody else would.
With the 1977 renegotiation, Branson argued, a new royalty had been set which Oldfield and his lawyer at the time had considered fair.
Now here was another set of lawyers coming along and saying, ‘I think I can do better for you than that.’
In other words, trying it on…
Nor could it have occurred at a worse time.
In mid-1981 Virgin was doing badly; the company had made redundancies and the roster was being cut back.
Branson felt in no mood to be conciliatory, let alone generous — even to Oldfield.
‘Mike,’ he complained to Draper, ‘is richer than the label is.
Sometimes you have to put your foot down and say no, a contract is a contract.’
This, he felt, was very much one of those times.
Underlying his bullishness was a feeling of incredulity that Oldfield, one of his oldest friends, should be taking such a step at all, and that Oldfield could have drifted so far away from him without Branson having read the warning signs.
‘Mike is being put up to this by his lawyer,’ he told friends.
But Mike wasn't.
For Oldfield, exacting a satisfactory arrangement with Virgin had become a point of principle, inextricably entwined with his feelings for the man whom he had long regarded as friend and protector, and his need to prove something to himself: ‘It had got to a point where I said I can't respect myself unless I'm prepared to stand up and fight Richard.
I was quite prepared to go to court.
I knew that I would probably lose the case if I did, and lose everything, but for my own personal esteem I needed to actually make that stand.’
The argument ground on for almost two years, in a mood of escalating resentment and bitterness.
Oldfield refused even to speak to the person he had once idolised.
Stephen Navin was urging that the case should be allowed to go to court: Virgin, he argued, were on solid ground.
But Branson was very reluctant to go that far.
The thought of facing his old friend, and the man on whom Virgin's fortunes had been largely built, across a courtroom was too upsetting.
A contract may be a contract, but Branson was now coming round to the belated realisation that a suitable gesture to Oldfield much earlier on in his career — increasing his royalty rate after Tubular Bells , for example— could have prevented all this ugliness.
An independent manager would have been fighting on behalf of his artist for just such a concession; but for a manager who owned the record company, that meant arguing against himself.
Life, Branson reasoned, was too short to make enemies.
At a final lawyers' meeting, it was at last agreed that Oldfield's royalties should be increased, in varying amounts according to territories.
He also received a large sum of money, which included all the commission Richard Branson had ever earned as his manager.
In return, Oldfield agreed to add three more albums to his Virgin contract.
The final, symbolic point on which Branson relented was in giving Oldfield an increased royalty on all future sales of Tubular Bells .
As they toasted the agreement in champagne, and Oldfield and Branson shook hands, somebody pointed out that it was exactly ten years since Tubular Bells had first entered the charts.
In time, Branson and Oldfield even became close friends again.
This was, as far as anyone could remember, the first, and last, occasion on which Richard Branson had allowed sentiment to interfere with business.
To everyone in Virgin who had met him, it was only a matter of time before George O'Dowd proved to the world at large what he already believed, they suspected, and a not inconsiderable advance was banking on — the fact that he was a star.
The first two singles released by Culture Club failed.
There was no panic, no consternation.
All they had to do was wait.
Then, in October 1982 came ‘Do You Really Want to Hurt Me’.
It went immediately to Number One.
The group's fourth single, ‘Karma Chameleon’, became the best-selling single of 1983, selling 1.3m copies in Britain alone.
Yet, beguiling as these songs may have been, there was little doubt that the success of Culture Club was based largely on the curious popular appeal of Boy George himself.
The spectacle of a beautiful boy in a dress and dreadlocks confiding to the nation's media that he preferred ‘a cup of tea’ to sex appeared both to arouse the public appetite for sexual frisson and deflate it with humour, honesty and a curious sort of innocence.
He was all things to all people: to The Times Literary Supplement he was ‘striking a sincere blow for one of the oldest traditions of them all: genuine, unself-conscious self-expression’.
To the tabloid newspapers he was ‘Naughty Boy George’, one minute ‘a poof with muscles’, the next ‘laying off love for seven months’.
To the frockcoated bankers at Coutts he was a welcome asset in the account of a perennially trying customer.
Culture Club's first album,Kissing To Be Clever , was released in October 1982.
It went on to sell four million copies around the world, the lion's share, it was noted with some satisfaction within Virgin, in territories where Virgin had their own label.
The second album,Colour By Numbers , went on to sell ten million.
The arrival of Culture Club, allied to the successes of the Human League, Phil Collins, Japan, Simple Minds and others, released vast reservoirs of cash into the  Virgin account.
By the end of 1982, the company turnover was £48.6m, and the profits had risen to £2m.
By the end of 1983, as the worldwide royalties from Culture Club and others poured in, the turnover had risen to £94m and profits to £11.4m.
Richard Branson now headed an empire that encompassed some fifty different companies, incorporating records, studios, nightclubs, video production and distribution, film-making, book-publishing and property.
There was a company developing games; another developing an instrument called the Synthaxe; for reasons which nobody could quite discern, there was a company dedicated to the servicing of air-conditioners, and another, called Top Nosh, selling food around industrial estates.
And yet, for all its size, this remained an unusual sort of an empire, not consolidated, in the customary imperial manner, in some glossy West End towerblock but scattered around Notting Hill in a random assortment of properties, in varying states of ramshackle informality.
Virgin did not place much store by superficial appearances.
The record company had now moved from Vernon Yard to larger premises, beyond the canal, railway tracks and council estates.
But still the boxes continued to pile up in reception and the feeling of overcrowding persisted.
Only the haircuts had changed.
The head office was now located in a converted Victorian property on the litterstrewn thoroughfare of Ladbroke Grove, opposite a particularly combative Irish pub.
Other outposts included converted industrial premises beside the canal, for the film division, and two minute mews houses on the Portobello Road, for whoever needed them.
In all of this there existed an air of the  cottage industry, with an informality that, consciously or not, took its measure from the example of its chairman, who continued to live and work — now with the added impedimenta of potties and baby-gates — on a houseboat on the Regents Canal; who drove a second-hand Volvo; and who had not long come into possession of a washing-machine.
But the appearance of modesty was somewhat misleading.
Branson also had his own Virgin island; and he and Joan had acquired a country house for weekends, a short distance from the Manor Studios.
But he insisted on continuing to live on the houseboat Duende , despite Joan's pleadings to find somewhere with more room to accommodate the needs of their growing daughter Holly.
It was not until early in 1984 that Branson was finally persuaded to stop living on the houseboat, by his doctor, after he had contracted a severe case of pneumonia.
Joan found an imposing, double-fronted house in Notting Hill Gate and the family moved in.
Branson, however, continued to work on the boat.
Out of the apparent random chaos of the Virgin organisation, a business philosophy — almost an entrepreneurial blueprint — could be discerned.
By situating each company in its own — albeit small and determinedly unglamorous premises — overheads were kept to a minimum, but, more important, a familial atmosphere was created among staff.
As the record company had grown, it too had been broken down into smaller units: DinDisc had been a model for two more affiliated labels, 10 and Siren.
The greater number of small companies you have, Branson reasoned, the greater number of people to whom you can give responsibility; ‘encouraging entrepreneurship’, as he put it, under the umbrella of Virgin.
In setting up any new project, Branson's abiding objective had been — in what was fast becoming his favourite phrase — to ‘protect the downside’.
It had become his belief that a good entrepreneur is not the person who takes the biggest risks but the one who learns to spot the safest bets.
Virgin had grown through a series of developments that business schools call ‘vertical integration’, but which Branson saw as just common sense.
The progression from selling records by mail-order to retailing in shops, to running a record label, studios, publishing company — all was perfectly logical and obvious, allowing Branson and his colleagues to expand in the business they knew best.
Indeed, it was on those occasions when Branson had invested in projects not obviously related to the pop milieu that the losses had been greatest; clothes, restaurants,Event magazine.
Top Nosh and air-conditioning servicing were shortly to go the same way.
That was why Simon Draper was appalled, horrified and dumbstruck when Richard Branson telephoned him at home one Sunday evening in March 1984, gushing enthusiasm for another idea.
‘Simon,’ he laughed down the phone.
‘What do you think of starting an airline?’
Virgin Atlantic
It had not occurred to Richard Branson, even in his wildest dreams, to own an airline.
So the message that a Mr Randolph Fields had telephoned to see if he was interested in buying one only mildly excited his curiosity.
He deflected the call.
When Fields persevered, Branson told his assistant Penni Pike to ask him if he would send ‘something on paper’.
The dossier outlining how Richard Branson might conquer the North Atlantic air-routes arrived the next day.
He took it away with him for the weekend, to his home in Oxfordshire.
It was a cold, wet February; and Branson spent most of the weekend in front of the blazing log fire, reading.
Fields, he learned, owned a ‘paper’ airline, British Atlantic, which had applied for a licence to fly from Gatwick to Newark airport, New York, on an air ‘frequency’which had been vacant since the collapse of Laker Airways two years before.
Fields had spent some months, and a modest amount of money, examining the feasibility of a new transatlantic airline; he had approached several key figures who had been with Laker Airways and solicited their interest; he had begun to make enquiries about purchasing an aircraft.
All he needed was Richard Branson's money.
As Branson would have been the first to acknowledge, common sense dictated that he avoid it at all costs.
He knew nothing about airlines, and even less about Randolph Fields.
It was nothing to do with the record industry, or entertainment of any sort, and thus a radical departure from the Virgin principle of expanding into related fields.
Furthermore, the investments necessary to make an airline work could, theoretically, drag Virgin to bankruptcy.
And yet, the more Branson thought about Field's scheme, the more feasible — and attractive — it began to look.
By Sunday evening, what had seemed utterly ludicrous a mere forty-eight hours before, had taken on almost tangible form in his mind.
The first person Branson telephoned on Monday morning was Randolph Fields.
Within a week they had agreed, in principle, to be partners.
Virgin were going into the airline business.
Randolph Fields was thirty-one years old and a barrister by profession.
A short, somewhat corpulent man, he wore dark, double-breasted suits of discreet quality.
A brown kisscurl fell over his forehead; he chortled often, showing the sly, boyish grin and the self-satisfied air of one who had been told once too often that he was a lovable rascal.
Fields had been born in America and had moved to Britain as a child.
He had been expelled from grammar school at the age of sixteen, manufactured tie-dye T-shirts, and then worked in the refreshment kiosk in the monkey-house at London Zoo, where he had the distinction of organising the first strike (of staff, not animals) in the zoo's history.
Finally, deciding to ‘get serious about life’, he had enrolled to study law at the Polytechnic of Central London.
His contemporaries  remember him as ‘Dear Randy’, the epitome of the slick student politician.
He qualified as a barrister in 1980 and within a year was an attorney-at-law in commercial insurance litigation which he claimed was making him £500,000 a year.
The idea of starting an airline had come to him on the demise of Laker Airways in February 1982.
Fields's first scheme had been to capitalise on the aftermath of the Falklands conflict, by operating a service between Gatwick and Port Stanley.
That was modified to running a business-class only service to New York.
He had discussions with a company called Travel Trust to back his project and, in December 1983, had applied to the British Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) for a licence to operate a service between London and New York.
This application was refused, but he was told by the CAA that there was an opening on the route if he wished to reapply for a licence.
Fields now began thinking along the lines of a low-budget operation — and of a possible investor with the money, and the push, to satisfy the requirements of the CAA, and get the airline aloft.
Virgin, he thought, fitted the bill.
Furthermore, he felt a curious bond with Branson.
‘Like Richard,’ he said, ‘I've always been considered precocious too.’
Branson did not warm to Fields's initial concept of a 100-per-cent business-class service between London and New York; that, he felt, was ‘not the right image from Virgin's point of view’.
But a cut-price airline, along the lines of Laker, certainly would be.
People Express, the American carrier which had, to a certain extent, inherited the mantle of Laker's ‘Skytrain', was a proven success, but research showed that the transatlantic market was big enough to support two cut-price carriers.
And, after  all, discounting was what Virgin had been built on.
It just added further proof to Branson's growing conviction that Virgin and the airline business were made for each other.
Now all he had to do was convince his colleagues in the company of the fact.
Ever since the departure of Nik Powell, it had fallen to Simon Draper and Ken Berry to perform the function of attempting, where necessary, to temper Richard Branson's more fanciful, grandiose and outlandish schemes.
For Draper, the principle of expanding only into related fields, where Virgin had at least a margin of experience and expertise, was sacrosanct.
Draper had tried to veto Event , and been proved right; he had tried to veto Top Nosh, and been proved right on that too.
But Branson could be obstinate when he wanted to be.
He would listen to advice, but invariably trust to instinct.
It had let him down badly on some occasions, but, on balance, nobody could deny that it had served him extremely well.
Draper was appalled when Branson telephoned him from Oxford on the Sunday evening, bubbling with enthusiasm for his new project.
Draper interrupted him in mid-flow: ‘I think you're a megalomaniac, Richard.
I don't want to be in the airline business.
I don't want to know.
This is the beginning of the end of our relationship if you do this.’
Branson was taken aback by his vehemence.
But while Draper might protest against the idea — while he might fulminate against his partner risking the hard-earned profits of the record company, the fruits of years of work and tears on a hare-brained scheme to run an airline — he also knew that there was little he could actually do to stop it.
Branson, after all, owned 85 per cent of Virgin.
The point at which Draper categorically said ‘You can't do this’ would be the point at which he would have to leave.
‘That's what owning 85 per cent of the company is all about…’
Draper reasoned.
‘…Doing what you want.’
Ken Berry too was deeply sceptical.
Of the three men, Berry was the most innately conservative and cautious; thorough and conscientious, his ability to explore every nook and cranny of a record deal exceeded even Branson's.
Berry knew the record business backwards, and he also knew that this was what Virgin's success had been built on.
Buying an airline seemed foolhardy and unnecessarily ostentatious: it affronted his sense of proportion.
But Branson swept all objections aside.
It was a risk, certainly, but an acceptable one, within the strictures of his maxim about ‘protecting the downside’.
He promised Draper and Berry that he would not stake the existence of Virgin on the airline.
On the basis of Fields's figures, if certain guidelines were adhered to rigorously, Branson estimated that it would cost Virgin £20m a year to run the airline, but the most they stood to lose by ‘cutting and running’ at any time was £2m.
Flying at full capacity which was highly unlikely — the airline could show a $9m profit in its first year.
It would need to be flying with 70 per cent capacity to break even; for every percent above that it would make $250,000.
Nor, Branson had now convinced himself, was an airline that far removed from the principle of expanding into related businesses.
The people who would fly a Virgin airline were the same young, mobile, relatively affluent people who had been buying records by Virgin artists in Virgin record stores for years.
Latterly, they  would have been reading Virgin books, watching Virgin videos and Virgin films.
Virgin had long ago ceased to be simply in the music business; it was now in that most Eighties of concepts, the lifestyle business.
Branson was faced with an immediate, and critical, choice.
Virgin Atlantic, as the new airline was to be called, would need to become airborne within the next three to four months, to take advantage of the summer traffic and generate the necessary cash reserves to see it through the fallow winter months.
Failing that, it would have to wait another twelve months.
Branson had no interest in waiting.
He would attempt the impossible and set up an airline from scratch in three months.
The fact that he knew absolutely nothing about the airline business was neither here nor there.
He would educate himself — fast; and there was no better place to start than with the sorry tale of Freddie Laker.
Randolph Fields had already recruited to the nascent operation two former Laker executives, Roy Gardner, who later became Virgin Atlantic's chief executive, and David Tait, who was appointed head of the American operation.
Both had worked closely with Laker; been witness to — and victims of — his downfall; both had much to say about the pitfalls Branson should, at all costs, avoid.
Branson already knew enough about Laker, his entrepreneurial flair, his reputation as the champion of ‘the ordinary man’ in air travel, to regard him as something of a hero.
Laker was a highly charismatic individual; a self-made man who had built his airplane business on a visionary self-determination and zeal, a refusal to take no for an answer — all qualities which Branson fancied he could sympathise with.
But Laker, like all tragic  heroes, had his fatal flaw, hubris.
Simply, he had been carried away on the potency of his own vision, and come to believe himself infallible.
He had launched Laker Airways saying it would be a tight operation with no more than six planes and a staff of 120.
Thus established as a low-risk business, flying under contract for package-holiday firms, Laker had promptly assumed all the risk by buying out his two biggest customers.
Then in June 1971, he had launched Skytrain — the first ever low-budget, no-frills service between London and New York.
He was so confident of his own sense of destiny that he had bought 3 DC-10s before the US government had even approved the Skytrain service.
He made £2m profit in his first year.
Intoxicated by success, he then ordered eight DC-10s and ten Airbuses in rapid succession, saddling himself with a debt of £350m.
His fundamental mistake was not only to buy all his planes, but to buy them only on borrowed money.
He borrowed £150m to buy his planes from McDonnell Douglas and Airbus Industrie, and each year he had to find the cash to repay the instalments as well as paying the interest.
With wafer-thin profit margins, this meant he had to keep his planes to full capacity if he were to meet his debts, which he was never able to do.
The final nail in Laker's coffin came in the winter of 1981 when the big transatlantic carriers, including British Airways, cut their fares to match Laker's.
It was the end of ‘the people's champion’.
The only fight Laker would have with the big airlines thereafter was in the American courts, suing them under the anti-trust laws for driving him out of business.
Another factor in Laker's downfall had been currency.
He had bought his planes in dollars, so the falling value  of the pound had made his repayments all the more expensive.
Virgin, as Branson well knew, could not afford to buy an aircraft outright; nor would it be wise to do so.
By leasing he could not only spread the payments, but either enjoy for himself the benefit of a 100 per cent tax write-off on the asset of the plane in the first year, or come to some arrangement with a financier, who would build the tax deduction into the price.
The very first words which Branson scribbled in his diary as he began his researches were, ‘If we go out of business, must get out of plane deal — three months’ notice preferably.’
By the end of two weeks, Branson had the following locked firmly in his mind: the airline would not be an all business-class service — but it would combine an economy section with a first-class section at business-class prices.
The aircraft should be a 747, not a DC-10, in order to carry freight as well as passengers.
And it should be leased, not bought, and the purchasing agreement should be protected against swings in currency.
In April, Freddie Laker himself came to lunch on Branson's boat, to recount once again the story of his own downfall for the benefit of his would-be successor.
At the end of the lunch, Branson said in a faltering voice that there was something he had been thinking of doing, and he wanted to ask Laker how he would feel about it.
Still unsure whether or not it was appropriate, he said that he would like to name Virgin's first plane Spirit of Sir Freddie .
Laker flushed slightly and fell silent.
At length, he looked up and quietly thanked Branson.
Of course, he said, he was flattered by the suggestion, but it would be a mistake.
‘It's best to break with the past,’ he said.
Laker knew only too well that the name which had  once been an asset in the world of aviation was now a liability.
The public hearing of Virgin Atlantic's application for a licence to fly between Gatwick and Newark was scheduled to begin at the Holborn offices of the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA: the regulatory body of the airline industry) on 1 March.
Three days before the CAA hearing, the new Virgin Atlantic Airways was launched publicly at Maxims restaurant in London, with the requisite drum-banging to ensure the media paid full attention to Branson's claim that there were ‘250,000 people who do not yet travel to New York, but would if the price was right’.
As a publicity exercise, however, its main target was not the public at all, but the CAA.
‘We felt it was important to let them know beforehand that the public would welcome another airline,’ as Branson put it.
As the man with some previous experience of CAA hearings, it was Randolph Fields who arrived at Civil Aviation House in Kingsway, London, on the first day of the hearing to present the case for the newly inaugurated Virgin Atlantic Airways.
Branson was not present, but his personal lawyer, Colin Howes, sat through the hearing with a sinking heart.
Fields's presentation was rambling, discursive and, at times, Howes thought, ‘over emotional’.
It was clear the licensing panel were not impressed.
Howes reported back to Branson that evening with the advice that ‘you'd better be there yourself tomorrow’.
Howes's fears were well-founded.
Having already turned down Fields's first licence application in December 1983, Raymond Colegate, the CAA's commercial director and the chairman of the licensing panel, was  ‘deeply sceptical’ of Fields's ability to get the project airborne.
But the arrival of Richard Branson changed Colegate's view.
Branson, he felt, had just what the airline needed — money.
Presenting himself at Holborn the next day — without a tie, the panel's secretary noted disapprovingly — Branson assured the CAA that Virgin would guarantee the airline up to £3.5m.
When the lawyer representing British Caledonian Airways, who were opposing Virgin's application, remarked that Virgin would need ‘a lot of groups on Top of the Pops' to afford to run an airline, Branson promptly retorted that Virgin's £11.4m profits in 1983 were actually more than twice those of British Caledonian.
A month later, the CAA notified Virgin of their decision.
The airline had permission to fly.
Being granted a CAA licence was, however, only the beginning.
Branson had drawn up what was to become known as the ‘Million List’— the number of things that had to be taken care of in the next three months before the airline could fly.
At the new airline's operational headquarters — a small warehouse at Lowfield Heath, near Gatwick — recruitment of aircrews began.
There were some three hundred cabin attendants to be found, and trained from scratch.
British Airways' recent decision to lower the optional retirement age for their pilots, however, meant there was a sudden surplus in the airline business of highly experienced pilots, still hungry to fly: Virgin's first flightcrews had the highest number of flying hours of any British airline.
There was a complex web of landing and departure agreements to be negotiated with the British Airports Authority: maintenance and service  contracts to be drawn up.
There was the provision of food, drink, in-flight entertainment and duty-free goods, and the printing of tickets.
Branson, in a moment of impulse, decided to do away with the convention of describing passengers as first class or economy; instead baggage stickers were printed for ‘Upper Class’, ‘Middle Class’ and ‘Riff Raff’.
Older, wiser heads in the organisation prevailed upon him to stick with ‘Economy’.
And then, of course, there was the aircraft.
Ever since filing his first application as British Atlantic, Randolph Fields had been scouring the world looking for aircraft of the right type and price.
His search had led him, at length, to the headquarters of the Boeing aircraft corporation in Seattle, where row upon row of second-hand aircraft of every size and specification sat awaiting scrutiny.
Responsibility for disposing of this fleet, which Boeing employees had nicknamed ‘The Aluminium Cloud’, had fallen to one of the company's most experienced salesmen, R.Q Wilson — a tall, cadaverous man whose Brooks Brothers suits, and the ostentatious flashes of gold at his wrist, cuff and spectacle-rims actually belied a distinctly English politesse and gentility.
When Richard Branson took over negotiations from Fields in March, Wilson and a team of Boeing executives and lawyers flew to Britain, installed themselves in the Carlton Towers hotel in Knightsbridge and prepared to make a killing.
One of Virgin's lawyers returned to his office after a preliminary meeting with the news that ‘there are two American piranha fish in that hotel, waiting to eat Virgin up…’
The deal that was eventually drawn up between Boeing and Virgin was of a complexity unprecedented even in R.Q. Wilson's considerable experience.
Who had killed  whom at the end of the day was hard to tell.
Tactics which Branson had developed in negotiating the fine points of recording contracts were now amplified in the more complex arena of aircraft negotiation.
Wilson found it agreeably ‘refreshing’ to face a customer not across a football-field-sized desk in a corporate headquarters but bobbing gently up and down in a houseboat on the Regents Canal, or over a pleasant weekend at Branson's Oxford home.
The deal agreed was structured to put two parties between Virgin and Boeing: one was Barclays Bank, who actually bought the plane in cash, and took advantage of the tax allowances available; they then leased the aircraft (on a UK Tax Lease) to Chemco Equipment Finance (a subsidiary of the American Chemical Bank), who in turn subleased it (on an Operating Lease) to Virgin Atlantic.
Chemical Bank guaranteed Chemco's obligation to Barclays; and the obligations of Virgin Atlantic to Chemco were guaranteed by the Virgin Group and County Bank.
The safety net for the Virgin Group was the ‘buy-back’ clause — an option for Virgin to return the aircraft to Boeing at the end of the first, second or third years, if required; and for Virgin to retain the ‘outside’value of the plane.
This meant that if the plane increased in value, Virgin were the beneficiaries; while if it decreased in value, Virgin were protected by a fixed-price agreement.
Boeing fought to have that clause removed; Branson, equally tenaciously, insisted it should be retained.
At length, Boeing conceded the point, leaving Bob Wilson to lament that ‘it was easier to sell a fleet of aircraft to United Airlines, than to sell one to Virgin.’
As a final safeguard on their position, Chemco insisted on Virgin Atlantic taking out a forward-currency  contract to protect the buy-back agreement against fluctuations in the pound against the dollar and to protect themselves if Virgin defaulted or went bust.
If Virgin pulled out, Chemco would be left with an obligation to pay Barclays £16.8m in sterling.
But the asset in the deal — i.e. the aircraft — was valued in dollars.
If the dollar fell, the sterling value of the plane could have dropped below £16.8m.
The ‘insurance policy’ would ensure that there would be a matched sum delivered come 15 July 1985.
The exchange rate at the time the contract was signed was 1.45 dollars to the pound.
Branson crossed his fingers that sterling would hold firm.
The negotiations for the purchase of the aircraft culminated in the offices of the London lawyers, Freshfields, with representatives of five companies and some six different law firms clustered around a table in the conference room.
At the end of it all, Virgin had agreed to pay a total of $31m dollars, spread over ten years, for their first aircraft.
The plane Virgin bought was a 747–200 series, with one previous, careful owner, Aeroleneas Argentinas, and only 19,000 flying hours on the clock.
Bob Wilson was so confident that the deal would go through that some weeks before it was even completed he had given authorisation for work to begin at the Boeing factory in Seattle to modify the aircraft to British CAA regulations and finish it in the red and grey Virgin livery.
With permission granted to operate a service out of Britain, Virgin now looked to America for permission from the American regulatory bodies, the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Federal Aviation Authority, to fly into that country.
This would not prove so easy.
The airline world is built on a fine web of international agreements, with each government vying to protect the interests of its own airlines, as well as of international passengers.
It was unfortunate for Virgin that in applying for ‘exemption’ to fly into America they should have walked into a simmering row between the American and British governments over the British refusal to allow PanAm to operate a third frequency across the Atlantic.
Virgin's application was just the bargaining chip the Americans had been looking for.
Under international agreements, the Americans were obliged to notify Virgin within sixty days whether exemption would be given.
Under the bilateral agreement, there was a clear case for the Americans to admit a British carrier to ‘balance’ People Express.
It was almost unthinkable that the Americans would refuse outright to grant the exemption, but it quickly became clear that they would prevaricate for as long as possible.
After discussions with American Department of Transportation officials, Branson's Washington lawyers advised him that although there was no clear indication that Virgin's application would be ‘held hostage’ to the demands of PanAm, ‘the US team certainly has these issues at the forefront of their decision-making process’.
One US DOT official, Matt Scocozza, had even suggested that Virgin ‘might wish to mention to British aviation officials the benefits to UK carriers from flexibility in the next round of bilateral negotiations, scheduled to begin in August’— in other words, lean on the British government on the American government's behalf.
And while Scocozza was optimistic that Virgin's request would eventually be granted, he warned that ‘it would  not be easy’, and encouraged Virgin to exert pressure on ‘decisionmakers’.
Meanwhile, Virgin's application became the subject of intense lobbying by British government officials in Washington.
The British were emphatic that Virgin's application and the question of PanAm's third frequency were unrelated.
Branson himself was assured by British officials that the government were wholly on his side, and that there would be ‘an unholy row’ if Virgin was not flying on 22 June.
Branson was fully aware that even if the Americans decided to grant permission, it was likely that it would not be given until a day or two before the flight — retaliatory treatment for the way the British government had delayed until the eleventh hour and fifty-ninth minute permission for People Express to fly into Britain.
And he was right.
The CAB did not grant the necessary exemption until 19 June — three days before the first plane was due to land at Newark.
By then, Branson already had an alternative tactic in mind.
If the Americans refused permission to land, he said, he would simply take off anyway and embarrass them into giving landing permission from above Newark airport.
The delay effectively hindered the setting up of the American end of the Virgin operation.
David Tait had arrived in New York in March, with the instructions to ‘set up an airline; we'll be sending you a 747 a day in three months time’.
He moved into the Greenwich Village brownstone which had once housed Virgin's American record company operation and hastily recruited staff.
Now he was faced with the problem of how to promote an airline which was forbidden under US law to sell tickets or advertise its service until the CAB and  Federal Aviation Authority had given their approval.
Tait and his advertising agents hit on an idea for generic advertising, of filling the skies above New York with a message done by ‘skytyping’— a development of skywriting in which five light aircraft, working on computer synchronicity, puff dots into the sky to form letters sixty feet high.
A suitable ‘teaser’ message was devised, and the aircraft booked for Memorial Day weekend, traditionally the first holiday of the year when New Yorkers take to the beaches and the parks.
That day, the aircraft wheeled above Manhattan in tight formation, pumping out their message, thrown into relief against a clear blue sky with vivid clarity, WAIT FOR THE ENGLISH…
It was at that point that the planes vanished into the solitary cloud in the sky, leaving all of New York craning their necks, scratching their heads and asking ‘What the hell is an ENGLISH VIRGI…?’
The airline business gave Richard Branson a challenge which, in recent years, the record industry had been unable to provide.
And he attacked it with a relish and enthusiasm which surprised even himself.
Whether Branson had taken over Virgin Atlantic or it had overtaken him was difficult to tell.
Between March and June 1984, he worked harder than he had ever worked in his life.
He negotiated the purchase of a plane, and the acquisition of a licence, he flirted with domestic politics, and international diplomacy.
And he thoroughly enjoyed every minute of it.
Even the minutiae of the airline business obsessed him more than the minutiae of the record business ever had.
He fussed about what kind of headphones to use on the aircraft, approved uniforms and checked menus.
Getting the airline up and flying — proving wrong everyone who had doubted him — became an obsession.
Of one thing Branson was certain: if the airline was to succeed, it needed to be sold to the public, and to the media — and sold hard.
Virgin's future competitors PanAm, British Airways, British Caledonian — all had huge advertising budgets, running into millions of pounds, to attract customers.
Virgin could never compete with that.
Another way would need to be found.
What other companies fancifully referred to as ‘corporate public relations’ had hardly been an issue at Virgin up till now.
The record industry, of course, runs on hyperbole, and Virgin Records, like any other, had a press office feeding stories to the music or national press when it profited them to do so, and doing their utmost to keep the press at bay when it didn't.
Branson understood media manipulation as well as anybody, and had much enjoyed helping to orchestrate the on-going controversy around the Sex Pistols once they had signed to Virgin.
But this had never required him to put himself in the spotlight.
Few people outside the record industry knew who Richard Branson was.
Indeed, Branson had often gone out of his way to avoid newspaper or television interviews.
In part this was due to an acute awareness of his own awkwardness as a speaker; the stuttering circumlocutions, the ers and ahs, leading inexorably to a pained silence, or the word that always hung there like a tail, ‘Anyway…’.
The memories of public humiliation, all those years ago, on the steps of University College, London, with Tariq Ali and Daniel Cohn-Bendit remained fresh in the mind.
And so too, for some curious reason, did an injunction from his father many, many  years before: if you want to be happy, keep out of the public eye.
With the launch of the airline, however, Branson decided that things would have to change.
He would put privacy to one side, and consciously set out to become what Freddie Laker had been: his company's most visible and effective public relations asset.
The requirement of spreading the name of Virgin in Britain, but also in America, shaped Branson's life from that point on.
To help publicise the launch of the airline, Branson had taken on the services of Tony Brainsby, a man whose hyperventilated style of press-arousal on behalf of such clients as Paul McCartney had made him a small legend in the pop world.
It was Brainsby's idea for Richard Branson to arrive at the inaugural press conference wearing a brown leather aviator's helmet,à la Biggles, in an attempt to lend the launching of an international airline something of the savour of a Boys Own adventure.
But it quickly became apparent to the practised eye of Brainsby that Branson required little advice in the matter of public relations — or, for that matter, in dressing up.
The exhibitionist streak that had been confined to fancy-dress parties at Virgin's weekends away now found full public licence; Richard Branson embarked on a sort of alternative career in fancy dress that would see him, over the years, photographed in airline captain's uniform, as Peter Pan, Spider Man, City Gent and, on one occasion and for reasons that were never entirely clear, in the bath, wearing only bubbles and a cunningly placed newspaper.
Nor did Branson's social awkwardness prove quite the liability he had feared.
Indeed, it became something of an asset in formulating a public persona.
For Branson  did not appear pompous, overbearing, practised or City-Slicker smooth in the manner of other captains of industry.
In fact, you could hardly believe he was a businessman at all.
Businessmen simply did not become celebrities .
Newspapers actually seemed to find the gauche, schoolboyish manner, the ubiquitous sloppy sweaters a clothing preference that Branson subtly exploited as a sort of trademark — all rather charming.
His naturalness made a refreshing change; there were no obstructive minders or ghastly PR men surrounding Branson.
He was disarmingly available, with a natural propensity for generating what Randolph Fields called ‘free ink’.
If a journalist wished to talk to Richard Branson, he simply telephoned; not only did Branson invariably take the call, but he treated the journalist with civility.
Journalists liked that.
The trick of public relations, Branson discovered, was not to pretend to be something you were not, but simply to project what you were on to a larger canvas.
Colin Howes, Branson's lawyer, perhaps recognised better than most that Branson was in a period of significant transition.
In conversations snatched in the backs of taxis between meetings, and in office anterooms, Branson spoke about the process of turning himself into a public figure if the airline were to succeed, fully aware of the consequences.
On one occasion, they clambered out of a taxi in Oxford Street.
On the other side of the road, outside the HMV record shop a horde of young girls mobbed a limousine, carrying members of the group Duran Duran to a personal appearance.
Branson and Howes walked past the scene, ignored.
Howes thought it a prescient occasion.
Unlikely as it was that Richard Branson would ever have quite the impact on  teenage sensibilities of Duran Duran, the days he could walk down a busy London street totally unrecognised were surely numbered.
On 19 June, three days before the inaugural flight of Virgin Atlantic's Gatwick to New York service, Richard Branson flew by helicopter from the Midlands to Gatwick airport, in the company of two other passengers, the cricketers Ian Botham and Viv Richards.
En route, the helicopter flew over Stowe School.
Looking down, Branson could see a cricket match in progress in the grounds.
He had not been back to Stowe since the day he left, almost seventeen years before.
Now, in a mood of heady exhilaration, a delicious scenario flashed in his mind; the school drop-out, on his way to take delivery of his own Jumbo Jet, literally dropping back in during a First XI cricket match with two of the most celebrated test cricketers in the world in tow.
The expressions on the faces of the boys — and the masters — of Stowe would be a joy to behold…but the helicopter flew on.
The 747 was waiting on the runway, in pristine white livery, the Virgin name emblazoned on the tailfin in red.
Branson was as awed as anyone could expect to be at the first sight of their own Jumbo Jet.
It was barely four months since Randolph Fields had first approached him with the idea of starting an airline.
Now he had one.
It was all quite ludicrous after all.
That afternoon, the plane sped down the runway, on the flight of inspection for the air-operator's certificate.
It was the ‘one millionth’ item on the list, but now, surely, a mere formality.
On board the plane was the entire staff of Virgin Atlantic Airways.
Branson himself  was seated next to a CAA inspector.
But as the plane climbed in a steep curve above the Sussex countryside it was rocked by a sudden explosion.
Looking out of the window, Branson saw flames streaming momentarily from an engine; then the plane righted itself and flew on.
He could feel the blood draining down to his shoes.
The CAA inspector put his arm round Branson in an avuncular manner.
‘Don't worry, Richard, these things happen.’
Only when the plane landed was it discovered that there had been a compressor-blade failure in one of the engines.
It would need to be replaced overnight, in time for another test flight — and, because insurance cover only became active on the granting of a certificate, it would cost £600,000 to do it.
Relieved that he had an airplane at all, Branson received the news with a wan smile.
There was a reporter and a photographer from the Financial Times waiting to interview Branson as he touched down.
They had seen and photographed everything that had happened.
Branson did not need them to tell him the damage that could be done to the airline's reputation by a story appearing about engine failure on the day before the inaugural flight.
‘Don't worry,’ said the reporter, ‘We're not really that kind of paper.’
The photographer pulled his roll of film from the camera and held it up to the light.
Branson almost wept in gratitude.
Two days later, journalists, television crews, a smattering of ‘celebrities’, and even some paying passengers were loaded on to the plane for its inaugural flight.
As the 747 coasted down the runway for take-off, a voice announced to passengers that, following the lead of some American airlines, passengers would be shown the view of take-off from the cockpit.
The backs of the  heads of the first and second officer and engineer flashed on the video screens.
As the plane soared up, all three turned round: Ian Botham, Viv Richards and Branson himself.
It was not the sort of gag one would have expected from Lord King, and it set a certain tone…
Virgin Atlantic's 747 flew the ocean fuelled by some seventy crates of champagne.
The pilot's only problem en route was the need to constantly readjust the trim to cope with the numbers of people rolling towards the front of the aircraft.
Richard Branson gave some hundred press interviews, sipping discreetly at his champagne, acutely conscious of being, in his own phrase, ‘on duty’, while the majority of passengers, blissfully unaware of the dramas of the last forty-eight hours — or the last four months — drank themselves into a condition of happy oblivion.
In this sense, it was the perfectly orchestrated media event.
Fleet Street journalists require a modest range of incentives to make them feel agreeably disposed towards something, and the maiden flight (on a plane which had been named the Maiden Voyager ) was warmly and comprehensively reported in almost every national daily and Sunday newspaper.
On the return journey, Branson, utterly spent and exhausted by the events of the last four months, slept a deep and dreamless sleep.
Midway across the Atlantic, the 747 was struck by lightning.
It bucked wildly in the night sky, as if deciding whether or not Richard Branson had been lucky enough already, then righted itself and plied on through the night sky, swift and inviolate.
When Richard Branson returned from New York somewhat  hung-over and in a state of weary exhilaration, there was a visitor waiting at his London home to see him.
Chris Rashbrook, the manager of Virgin's account at Coutts Bank, had hoped to avoid this meeting, but over the previous week circumstances had made an unpleasant and embarrassing task unavoidable.
For some time, Coutts had been considering an application from Virgin to increase their overdraft facility above the previously agreed limit of £4m.
The previous week, Virgin had requested immediate permission to go over the facility by some £200,000, to meet short-term outgoings for the airline (to pay, in fact, for the engine which had expired on the air-operator's test flight).
The application had been subject to long and disapproving scrutiny at Coutts.
The bank had made no secret of their dismay over Virgin's venture into airlines.
For a company with Virgin's limited borrowing power the venture seemed foolhardy, not to say suicidal — notwithstanding Branson's protestations about ‘protecting the downside’.
But that was not all.
In the last year Virgin had invested some £4m in their first major film project,Electric Dreams ; more money was now being poured into yet another, a new version of George Orwell's book Nineteen Eighty-four .
When would it end?
Rashbrook broke the news as delicately as he could.
He had come, he said, to give Branson a message.
Coutts had considered Virgin's request to exceed their overdraft by £200,000 over the next seven days.
And had decided to refuse it.
If Virgin exceeded their overdraft by so much as £25, the cheque would, alas, be returned marked ‘refer to drawer’.
In a word, bounced.
‘This is an absolute farce,’ Branson said.
Coutts had been informed that a cheque for $6m was expected at any moment from MGM films in America — payment for the distribution rights of Electric Dreams .
The company had made a proper request to extend its facility.
‘You're telling me that it's official Coutts policy to bounce a cheque on one of the ten biggest private companies in Britain?’
Rashbrook nodded silently.
Branson felt indignant.
Virgin had shown a profit of more than £11m in the last year.
At an absolute minimum, the worth of the company must be £100m (in fact, within the next two years it would be worth £25Om.)
And yet Coutts were threatening to bounce cheques of £25!
In fact, Branson should have known it was coming.
Virgin and Coutts had long been growing apart.
From the earliest days of Student magazine, Coutts had indulged the idiosyncrasies of Branson's banking practices with bemused aplomb.
They had raised only the most discreet eyebrow at the bedraggled urchins who queued to deposit the takings from the magazine and mail-order; at the implausible schemes for manor-house recording studios and sundry businesses of a  bizarreness beyond the bank's mannered comprehension.
The Bransons, after all, had banked with Coutts for generations.
Richard was one of ‘us’— after a fashion.
But, in recent years, the relationship had outgrown even that important bond.
Virgin were now a commercial concern, trading with a flair, and a lack of convention, that tested Coutts's nerve and understanding.
Such assets as Virgin had were almost meaningless: not the bricks and mortar so reassuring on the balance sheet, but the more nebulous assets of music and publishing copyrights tangible enough, perhaps, to people who understood the music business, and knew that at any given moment Virgin could raise millions if they so chose; less comprehensible to a bank where customers were still greeted by frock-coated doormen.
Branson's attitude to his bank had always veered between naivety, respect — and evasiveness.
He no longer approached his bank manager with the trepidation of an errant sixth-former being summoned before a housemaster; indeed, he no longer approached his bank manager at all if he could help it.
He had always preferred to leave that to Nik Powell, or the man who had joined Virgin as financial director on Powell's departure, Terry Baughan.
The prospect of changing banks had been discussed before.
But changing banks, as Branson was prone to saying, ‘is a bit like changing your parents for a new set.
When you've been with the same bank since you were thirteen, you somehow feel they will grow up with you.
’ This was patently no longer the case.
Branson brought the conversation with Rashbrook to a perfunctory close.
‘I'm sorry’, he said, ‘but you are not welcome in my house.
I'd rather you left.’
He then telephoned Ken Berry, to begin the task of urgently calling in money from abroad.
It was a depressing reprise of a familiar refrain: scouring for deposits in banks in France and Germany; outstanding royalties from Greece and  Scandinavia .
Berry, Branson knew, would salvage the situation in the short term.
The long-term solution would have to wait.
Randolph Fields had taken to describing the relationship between him and Richard Branson as ‘very magical’.
‘It's what the Americans call ‘synergy’,’ he gushed to the Sunday Times , a week before the inaugural Virgin Atlantic flight.
‘Richard and I understand each other perfectly.’
The fact that Branson had not a clue what ‘synergy’ meant was just one sign that he found the understanding  between them somewhat less than ‘magical’.
‘Exhausting’, ‘frustrating’, ‘maddening’— all of these things, perhaps; but ‘magical’?
No.
Indeed, from the outset, relations with ‘Dear Randy’ had been somewhat strained.
The original agreement, signed on 4 April, between the Virgin Group and Fields Investments, Fields's holding company, gave Virgin 75 per cent equity in the new Virgin Atlantic Airways to Fields's 25 per cent.
But it also guaranteed Fields equal say in the running of the company, by the expedient of comprising the board of four directors.
Two ‘A’ directors would come from Virgin Group, balanced by two ‘B’directors — Fields and another director nominated by him.
As president of the company, Branson would not have a seat on the board.
That agreement had been signed only after acrimonious debates about the size of Fields's shareholding (Fields had originally wanted 50 per cent), and the payment to him of £250,000 — the amount of money he had spent on laying the foundations of the airline before meeting Branson.
At one stage, Fields had threatened to pull out of the arrangement altogether and find a new partner, until the CAA made it clear that Fields would not have a licence without Virgin's involvement.
The agreement drawn up between Branson and Fields in April 1984 gave Fields, as chairman, responsibility for the  day-to-day running of the airline, while Branson, as president, considered the broader picture.
Fields set up new offices in London's West End — in Woodstock Street — with the reservations and booking staff.
Branson continued, as ever, to work from the houseboat.
But the arrangement was not a recipe for happiness.
Fields privately resented the way in which Branson  had taken responsibility for the purchase of the first Virgin aircraft; while Branson, for his part, grew increasingly alarmed at the way in which his new partner appeared to be running the rest of the company.
In early June, while Fields was away in New York, a deputation approached Branson from the Woodstock Street offices, with a litany of complaints.
Bookings, reservations, staffing…just about everything, they claimed, was in a state of total chaos.
Branson brought in a travel consultant, Douglas Paul, from Virgin's own travel agency subsidiary, All Star Travel, to report on the situation.
With barely a week to go before the maiden flight, Paul's report made alarming reading.
He reported that the situation at Woodstock Street was ‘far worse than was previously imagined’, and that ‘the prevailing background chaos could have severe effects on the future successful operations of Virgin Atlantic’.
Ticketing was ‘desperate’.
Operating problems with the computer reservations system had resulted in a backlog of 10,000 bookings needing to be rechecked, making it impossible to tell who had and had not paid for tickets.
In all the confusion, it was quite possible that some people would be flying on Virgin Atlantic for nothing.
Paul then addressed the matter of Fields's man-management.
Staff had been employed, he claimed, who were grossly inexperienced and ‘who would not be in a position to question or disagree with any actions being taken by Randolph Fields’.
Most ‘appeared to be frightened of the man’.
The commercial manager had admitted he obtained the job ‘because he knew Randolph's brother’, and was ‘totally out of his depth’.
Morale, Paul went on, was at a ‘frighteningly low level’.
‘I cannot understand how or why Randolph Fields has  been allowed to permit such a situation when the whole of the Virgin Group is at stake if Virgin Atlantic is not a success.
’ This, clearly, was melodrama, but the point was made.
At a strained board meeting held on 18 June, four days before take-off, Douglas Paul's report on the reservations situation was read out and it was agreed that Fields should leave the Woodstock Street offices immediately and relinquish personal control of the reservations.
Branson began to assemble a dossier on his chairman's activities.
It included a memorandum from David Tait, in charge of American operations — and originally a Fields appointee — urging that Fields ‘be restrained from any further involvement in Virgin Atlantic's North American operation’.
Tait had already resigned after a row with Fields, only withdrawing his resignation after Branson had pleaded with him to stay on.
Matters deteriorated, to the point that at a board meeting on 25 July 1984, Fields felt obliged to bring his solicitor with him, to sit like a boxing second, while his record with the company was contested.
Terry Baughan, the financial director for both the Virgin Group and the airline, revealed that the airline had incurred a trading loss of £514,000 for the first three weeks of operation.
The ‘disastrous’ reservation system run by Fields had been ‘a major contributor to the appalling trading results to date’, Baughan claimed.
He then went on to attack Fields over the proliferation of licence applications to the CAA (for routes that included Perth, Port Stanley, Barbados and Toronto) which made Virgin look ‘absurd’, when the airline had neither the planes to fly those routes, nor the finances to acquire them.
By this time, Branson and the other Virgin Group 292  directors were of one opinion, Randolph Fields must be got rid of.
In formulating the original agreement with Fields, Branson had ensured a clause be written in stipulating that, under the Articles, Virgin as the majority shareholder had the right to appoint more than two ‘A’ directors, and thereby gain a majority of the board, if it was ‘not satisfied with the financial position, or the management position of the company’.
Confident that there was enough evidence to support the move, Branson now appointed himself to the board as an ‘A’ director, giving the Virgin Group a three to two majority over Fields.
To Fields it was clear what was happening.
Having grabbed the idea of the airline with both hands, Branson was now trying to squeeze him out of the operation altogether.
In July, Fields sought an injunction, restraining Virgin Atlantic from ‘terminating or altering’ its agreement with him and restraining Branson from acting as a director.
In a sworn affidavit, Fields alleged that Branson and the Virgin Group had ‘merely treated [Virgin Atlantic Airways]as just another subsidiary without any proper regard for the contractual arrangements entered into in April 1984’.
He went on: ‘The truth of the matter is that Mr Branson and the Virgin Group appear to be’ determined to get the company exclusively for themselves and to exclude me from it.
That is their real motivation for this litigation.’
The injunction was subsequently lifted by the court, effectively endorsing Branson's appointment as director and leaving the way open for the Virgin Group directors to exercise full and unhindered control of the airline.
However, the court did restrain Virgin from terminating or altering the terms of Fields's service agreements.
Even  this, however, was only a partial reprieve for Fields.
In September, Virgin and Fields finally agreed that his contract should be terminated, and a sum of £125,000 was agreed in compensation.
He did, however, continue to remain a director and shareholder in Virgin Atlantic until an agreement was reached in 1985 to buy out his shareholding.
The acrimonious struggle for power was given a somewhat comical twist by the issue of a press release in September from Virgin Atlantic's publicity office, saying that in response to the many rumours circulating in the airline industry, Virgin Atlantic wished it to be known that there had been no boardroom ‘bust-up’ between Randolph Fields and Richard Branson.
‘Indeed the working relationship between the two is as good now as it has ever been.’
Indeed, it was better than it had been for months.
For Fields was now out of Virgin Atlantic for good: Richard Branson had total control of the airline.
Fields was paid a total of £1m for his shareholding in the company — in two annual instalments, paid on 18 July 1985 and 1986.
By a happy coincidence, the date was Richard Branson's birthday.
Fields was also given unlimited free travel on Virgin Atlantic — a useful bonus as he set about establishing his own, rival airline, Highland Express, to fly between Prestwick and Newark.
Highland Express subsequently went into liquidation in December 1987.
Branson was unrepentant about Fields's departure.
It was not, he would say, a reflection of his — Richard Branson's — inability to enter into equal partnership with anybody.
‘I would love to be in partnership with someone who would do all the work, and leave me 50 per cent.
But it gets frustrating when you think the other  person isn't delivering, or is endangering our interest.
And that was the situation with Randolph.’
The nuts and bolts of running an airline were not necessarily Fields's strength, Branson said, ‘but conceptually, he was very good.’
The fact that Fields had arrived out of the blue, managed to sell Branson the basic idea of an airline and walked away six months later on his way to a million pounds…that was evidence of a particular sort of skill which Branson could appreciate.
Branson did not have to like Randolph Fields, but, in a curious sort of way, he admired him.
Richard Branson had always known that, sooner or later, he would have to face the possibility of a price war with the big transatlantic carriers.
Everyone from Sir Freddie Laker to the CAA warned him it was likely, and Branson had taken what measures he could to prevent it happening.
In June 1984, shortly before Virgin's inaugural flight, he sought a meeting with the Government's Secretary of State for Transport, Nicholas Ridley.
What Branson was looking for was nothing short of government protection.
He expressed to Ridley his fears that, come the winter months, when payloads on the North Atlantic dropped alarmingly, the big airlines could very easily get together to squeeze Virgin out of the market-place, in the same way they had squeezed out Laker.
The government should bear in mind that Virgin did not have permission to fly 95 per cent of the routes around the world; it was unfair for British Airways to fly a ‘loss leader’ on the one route where Virgin did have permission.
When there was prima facie evidence of an airline cutting the price on one route simply to take a competitor out of the market, then  there should be machinery compelling that airline to cut prices on all its other routes.
That way, protection could be extended to small airlines, such as Virgin, in the winter months, enabling them to lower fares in the summer months.
‘We believe in competition,’ Branson told Ridley, ‘but having a bleeding competition with a blood bank isn't fair competition.’
Branson realised the difficulty of trying to influence a Tory minister, whom he suspected was fairly sceptical about the idea of government interference at all.
But Ridley was cordial and interested in what Branson had to say.
Even if he did politely turn down Branson's parting offer of a seat on Virgin's inaugural flight — for obvious reasons.
The crisis Branson had been expecting broke in October, when British Airways dropped the price of their cheapest return ticket on the London-New York route from £278 to £259 — only £1 more than Virgin — and began selling tickets ‘subject to government confirmation’.
The same day, the other major transatlantic carriers, PanAm and TWA, rushed to match them.
Branson protested loudly to whoever would listen: the Virgin fare was a ‘realistic’ one, which reflected his airline's lower overheads.
The new fares proposed by the big airlines, however, were not realistic at all, but ‘predatory’— designed simply to put Virgin out of business.
The outbreak of price warfare put the British government in an ideological dilemma.
In theory, the government was pledged to promote more competition among airlines, with the aim of reducing fares and generating more services.
To be seen to be defending Virgin against attack by the big airlines would be a contradiction of this.
But more pragmatically, the British government  was hamstrung by its aviation agreements with America, and the fears of debilitating legal consequences if it allowed a price war to break out.
The ill-feeling between the British and American governments which had led to the delay in granting Virgin an exemption to fly into the States back in June now resurfaced.
At the heart of the disagreement was the air-traffic agreement between the two countries, known as the Bermuda Two Agreement, which had been signed in 1977.
This agreement, arrived at in a period of relative stability in international air travel, had been thrown into question with the arrival — and more pertinently, the collapse — of Freddie Laker's cut-price service.
Laker's liquidators had taken the opportunity under American law to pursue an anti-trust suit, seeking up to £1 billion in damages against British Airways and others, claiming that through ‘predatory’ fare-cutting they had driven Laker out of business.
Britain argued that British Airways should not be included in any anti-trust action because, under the Bermuda Two Agreement, British carriers should be excluded from the effects of US domestic law.
The new fare reductions filed by British Airways, in response to Virgin and People Express, and the matching fares filed by the other big airlines, therefore worried the British government.
Branson's fierce attack on ‘predatory pricing’ carried with it the implied threat of another anti-trust suit against British Airways in the American courts.
And the implications of that as the government readied itself for the privatisation of British Airways were too horrific to contemplate.
The government were not reassured to learn that Branson had been in consultation with Robert Beckman, the New York lawyer who  was fighting the anti-trust action on Laker's behalf.
Beckman had indeed contacted Branson to see if he could advise him on the taking of anti-trust action, but the offer had not been taken up.
The only consultations now were with Beckman's market research consultancy over anodyne questions of marketing.
The British government now sought assurances from the Americans that British Airways, and other UK airlines, would be safe from anti-trust action if the new fare proposals were accepted.
The Americans refused, arguing that granting immunity from US domestic law to one section of commerce would create immense constitutional difficulties in other areas.
On 18 October, therefore, the British government turned down the new fare proposals from American operators, while the CAA rejected British Airways' request.
Branson himself said that he welcomed the ruling, if it accepted that the fare proposals were predatory, but that he was ‘obviously disturbed’ if the decision had been taken as a political move to stop Virgin applying in the US courts for remedies under the anti-trust laws.
In fact, the government's action caused chaos.
Some 100,000 tickets had already been sold at the new, low fare, in Britain and America, before the government ruling.
On 30 October, faced with the prospect of chaotic and unpleasant scenes at airports if ticket-holders were asked to pay a surcharge, the Transport Secretary, Nicholas Ridley, performed an about-turn, and allowed a moratorium on the cheap tickets sold up to 18 October.
Seven thousand people who had bought tickets at the cheap rate in the following week were obliged to pay a surcharge.
However, the principle of resisting fare cuts — for  whatever reason — had been maintained.
Ray Colegate of the CAA continued to argue that his authority had moved to block British Airways on the principle of ‘infant firm protection’.
‘One intervenes to protect competition, to ensure so far as one can that competition continues to exist in the marketplace.
’ But it was not, as it proved, an effective measure.
The CAA had allowed British Airways to introduce a low-cost Latesaver fare on the Boston route.
In the event, PanAm, which did not serve Boston, seized the opportunity to introduce a London-New York-Boston ticket, in order to fly to New York on the lower Boston fare.
The result was that all New York fares could now be reduced, bringing them to a level only slightly above that of Virgin's competing New York fare, and fares on the Boston route were adjusted to match the New York level.
This time, Colegate told Branson that there was nothing more the CAA could do, and that Branson was ‘on his own’ from then on.
Virgin subsequently filed its own, even lower fare to New York.
The cut and thrust over pricing proved a  salutary experience for Virgin Atlantic and Richard Branson.
The international airline business is a fiercely combative arena, where competitors enjoy nothing more than slitting each other 's throats; Virgin's tribulations showed the difficulties in allowing it to be governed by free market principles.
Branson's feeling that ‘competition is good for the consumer if fares come down, but not good if it puts us out of business’ constituted a political education of sorts.
Competing in the free market of air fares had catapulted Branson into the  rarefied area of government policy and international relations, and helped to define what had hitherto been purely  instinctive beliefs in a more rigid ideological context.
The fact that Virgin Atlantic had won the licence to fly the Atlantic in the first place was, he said, a brave move on the part of the Civil Aviation Authority, given the Laker experience, but also a measure of government policy.
‘There is no way we would have got in under a Labour government.’
Big business and politics, he had now discovered for himself, were inseparable bedfellows — a lesson he learnt with increasing frequency in the years to come.
The shift of Richard Branson from the hazy and ill-defined politics of idealism to the politics of pragmatism had begun in earnest.
By the end of 1984, Virgin Atlantic seemed well and truly airborne.
The airline had withstood the predatory pricing moves of its competitors, and overcome its early loss.
It had been running at more than 90 per cent capacity through the peak season, and weathered the lean winter months to show a profit of more than £250,000.
Emboldened by the success on the North Atlantic, Virgin now introduced a short-haul service to  Maastricht , in Holland, with an initial fare of £19 one-way, using a plane leased from British Island Airways.
The service also proved a modest success, and Branson began exploring the possibility of flying to Dublin, and to Miami, on a route which had not been taken up by a British carrier since the collapse of Laker.
Everything pointed to the fact that something at an extremely high altitude looked favourably on Branson's endeavours.
Only a bolt out of the blue could stop him now.
It came at eleven o'clock on the morning of 18 April, when Chemical Bank in New York telephoned Branson with some unexpected news.
A crisp voice informed him that the arrangement between Chemical and Virgin over the financing of Virgin's aircraft was to be terminated forthwith, and the aircraft given back to Boeing.
Branson was staggered.
What the hell was going on?
Virgin's payments had all been made on time, and as far as he was aware there was no problem at all.
What he did not know was that Chemical had run into massive internal problems.
The New York headquarters of Chemical had discovered that the deal their leasing arm, based in London, had negotiated with Virgin could technically be regarded as an infringement of New York banking law, through theoretically leaving Chemical with unlimited liability if the Virgin Group were to suddenly collapse.
It was not Virgin's responsibility, but from Chemical's headquarters in New York, the instruction went out to terminate a number of existing contracts negotiated by the London office — Virgin's among them.
The news was deeply worrying for Branson.
Whatever happened, the Virgin Group was secure, but the airline, 500 jobs, everything that had been built up over the last eighteen months, was suddenly in jeopardy through no fault of anyone at Virgin.
Furthermore, if Chemical did hand back the plane to Boeing, it would be at an effective cost to Virgin of a further $10m — the amount by which the plane's value had increased in the time Virgin had owned it.
If Chemical attempted to terminate the deal, Branson threatened, then Virgin would sue for that $10m, plus  damages.
Within two hours, a representative from Harbottle and Lewis, the lawyers retained by Branson, was at the High Court in London getting an injunction to stop Chemical handing back the plane to Boeing.
The possibility of the action being leaked to the press — with the ensuing headlines screaming BRANSON AIRLINE COLLAPSE — did nothing to calm Branson's nerves.
But to his enormous relief the story never got out.
The injunction began a saga that was to run for two months, as Virgin scrabbled to find another bank to take over the role played in the lease agreement by Chemical.
After much negotiation, Security Pacific eventually agreed to take Chemical's place in the leasing arrangement, securing the future of the airline — at least, until more permanent financing could be worked out.
However, there was still one more thing to worry about: the currency protection deal which Virgin had entered into at the beginning of the aircraft negotiation.
When Virgin had entered into the deal, the dollar rate stood at 1.45 to the pound.
But by January the pound had dropped in value to 1.05.
This was not good news.
The currency deal expired in July; if the exchange rate remained the same, Virgin would be obliged to pay £6m, to make up the difference.
This would not affect the finances of Virgin Group at all.
The £6m would be paid for by the sale of the aircraft, but that would mean the end of the airline.
For the next four months, Branson watched the exchange rate with uncommon interest and trepidation, until the pound at last began to climb penny by agonising penny against the dollar.
By February, the potential loss to Virgin was down to £4m.
As the commitment came due in July, the exchange rate had climbed above $1.40 to the  pound, leaving Virgin with a loss of £0.5m.
That, thought Branson, was affordable.
To the passengers in the skies over the Atlantic drinking free champagne to celebrate the first anniversary of Virgin Atlantic, oblivious to all the dramas which had unfolded to keep them airborne, it probably would have seemed a bargain.