

Corporate Power
‘[O]ur style of life is largely determined by the activities and style of business; and the style of business is largely determined by the activities and style of our companies’.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe some of the ways in which companies exercise power and to examine the relevance of the possession of power to the concerns, or what should be the concerns, of company law.
The chapter will cover the following ground.
It will begin with a brief survey of the corporate economy.
This will provide a background for the consideration of the nature and scope of corporate power that will follow.
Next, it will support the claim that corporate power is justifiable only in so far as it promotes the public interest, and accordingly that society is entitled to demand that company policies serve that interest.
The claim will be defended in particular against the argument that the company should be seen as a private vehicle which may legitimately be employed for the exclusive pursuit of the purposes of its members.
The final section will set out a provisional theory explaining how companies best further the public interest and the implications of that theory for company law.
I THE CORPORATE ECONOMY
The next section will examine in more detail what is meant by ‘corporate power’, and the different areas in which it has an impact.
The purpose of the present section is to bring to mind the shape and scale of the corporate economy in which this power is located.
The possession of power by companies is principally an attribute of size, and so the companies with which this book is concerned are usually large both in absolute terms and in relation to the industry or industries in which they operate.
There is, however, no need for a precise definition of ‘large’ since nothing turns on any particular size threshold being crossed.
The companies we will be discussing are public companies with shares listed on the Stock Exchange.
(There is also a small number of very large companies that are private.)
They often have a broad product range, operating in more than one industrial sector, and sometimes show a high degree of vertical integration, having control of their sources of supply at one end and the chain of distribution at the other.
They have professional management and normally a complex organisational structure.
For convenience these enterprises will mainly be discussed as though they were single companies, though in fact they are normally composed of a parent company and several layers of subsidiaries.
In many cases some of these subsidiaries are based overseas.
Conversely, a significant proportion of the companies operating in this country are off-shoots of enterprises whose head offices are situated abroad.
Large companies constitute a very small proportion of the total population of firms (’ firm’refers to all forms of business organisation, not only those that are incorporated).
In manufacturing, for example, firms with fewer than 100 employees accounted for 95 per cent of all firms in 1981.
As far as companies are concerned, in 1990 there were over one million on the register in Great Britain, but of these only a little more than one per cent were public companies.
But while large companies are only a small percentage of total businesses, they dominate the economy, such that‘a large proportion of economic activity in present-day capitalist economies is concentrated in a relatively small number of absolutely large firms’.
As Hannah points out in his historical study of the development of the corporate economy, during the course of the present century British industry was transformed from ‘a disaggregated structure of predominantly small, competing firms to a concentrated structure dominated by large, and often monopolistic, corporations’.
This transformation came about as companies expanded to take advantage of mass production methods and associated economies of scale and integration, and also as they strove to limit the competitive forces to which they were subject.
Some of this expansion was through organic growth, but increased concentration is mainly accounted for by a series of merger waves beginning towards the end of the nineteenth century.
Large absolute size was in turn facilitated by improvements in financing and management techniques and developments in organisational structure.
To gain an impression of the size of individual enterprises, it may be noted that in 1985 165 companies in the UK employed over 10,000 people, 36 over 50,000, and 11 over 100,000.
A composite picture of the position of large companies within the economy is presented in a study of statistics relating to the ‘top 100’ manufacturing companies published by the Department of Industry in 1976.
This reveals that these companies accounted for about 40 per cent of manufacturing industry's net assets, employment, and inward direct investment from overseas (excluding oil company investment), 40–50 per cent of visible exports, 70 per cent of expenditure on industrial scientific research and development, and about 75 per cent of direct investment by UK companies (excluding oil) in manufacturing overseas.
In the same vein, the Bullock Committee in 1977 noted that the ‘last 20 years have seen the growth of the giant industrial enterprise and the concentration of economic power in the hands of fewer and fewer such companies.
For example, in 1953 the 100 largest manufacturing enterprises in the UK accounted for 25 per cent of the total net output; in 1971 the corresponding figure was 40 per cent ’.
By 1981 328 companies accounted for over 50 per cent of manufacturing employment, and a mere 66 companies for 30 per cent.
The contraction of the British manufacturing base over the last decade had done little to reduce overall concentration.
For example, the share of listed market capitalisation of the largest 100 companies in 1990 was as high as 67.3 per cent .
Within the set of large companies there is a tendency towards dominance by the very largest.
Thus, in 1982 the top 100 quoted companies accounted for well over half the turnover, profit, and capital employed of the top 1000 companies, and within the top 100, the top 10 accounted for over a quarter of turnover and capital.
The figures for concentration overall indicate the degree of centralisation of decision-making in the economy as a whole.
The level of concentration within a particular industry casts light on the competitiveness of the industry and hence on the scope for the exploitation of economic power (though the globalisation of business and difficulties in specifying product markets, given the availability of substitutes, make the figures an uncertain guide).
It is clear that in a number of sectors concentration is significantly higher than in the economy generally.
The share of total output of the five largest companies in chemicals, vehicles, electrical engineering, and drink, for example, average around 70 per cent .
Large parts of the service sector, which now contributes a higher proportion of GDP than manufacturing industry, are similarly characterised by high concentration ratios.
Retail banking, insurance, property, shipping, communications, and retailing, for example, are all dominated by a small number of giant enterprises.
Corporate power is not merely a matter of the resources and market share of formally independent entities.
It also results from coordinated activity between companies.
As Herman explains, ‘[c]ollective action may result from structural ties between firms that integrate their interest and facilitate coordination between them — such as a common ownership interest — or it may arise out of a recognized common interest or mutual business interdependence with minimal personal contact and communications among the companies and their officials.
In between these extremes is a wide spectrum of linkages, such as interlocking directorates; common membership in trade associations, government advisory bodies, and public affairs groups; and personal connections of officials through clubs and other social bases of contact’.
All of these relationships are integral features of the British economy, though assessing their practical significance in terms of reduced competition or the pursuit of common purposes is far from straightforward.
It is important to note finally the international character of corporate enterprise.
As regards the presence of outposts of overseas companies in this country, it has been observed that though ‘the British economy is not dominated by foreign investment, the foreign presence in Britain is highly visible and statistically important.
Roughly one in seven of British workers work in foreign companies, which [incidentally]tend to be more efficient than their British competitors’.
Conversely, most of the 100 largest UK companies also operate abroad.
A significant feature is that for many of these companies their overseas activities are more important than their domestic ones.
It has been pointed out, for instance, that in 1983 the largest 70 British manufacturing multinationals had a foreign output of around £100 billion, whereas their home production was £70 billion.
While the parent company in a multinational group will necessarily be registered in a particular country and the group headquarters and a preponderance of shareholders may also be located there, in the case of some multinationals it is scarcely any longer appropriate to regard them as having national loyalties.
Thus, it has been suggested that ‘although we think of IBM and General Motors as American, and Unilever and Shell as British (or, more exactly, Anglo-Dutch), firms as large and diverse as these plan their operations on a global scale in their own interests.
In terms of sheer size they are sometimes bigger than the countries in which they operate; they are estimated to control over a quarter of world output; and their ‘inter-firm’ shipments of goods from one country to another account for nearly one-third of recorded trade’.
Clearly, controlling such organisations is beyond the regulatory capacity of national governments.
Attempts to regulate the global activities of multinationals, particularly in relation to employment and developmental issues in the third world, have evoked an inter-governmental and ‘world-organisational’ response.
A consideration of the form and effectiveness of this response falls outside the scope of this book, but is should be emphasised that the international context in which large companies operate is also of central importance to the control of companies domestically.
The ability of enterprises to transfer investment from countries in which the regulatory environment threatens to become uncongenial, and the damage to international competitiveness that will result if domestic industry is subject to a more stringent regulatory regime than rivals abroad, are liable to circumscribe severely the capacity of national governments to establish an appropriate control framework.
Purely national solutions to problems of corporate control are likely, therefore, to be unavailing.
II THE NATURE OF CORPORATE POWER
Power is a contested concept.
There is no need for our purposes to explore all the different conceptions of it, though some of them will emerge during the course of the discussion.
A widely accepted understanding of power is that it is the ability of A to cause B to behave in a manner intended by A that B would not have done without A's intervention.
Implicit is the idea that A has some form of control over B, or at least a strong bargaining position that enables A to score a ‘victory’ over B. Companies sometimes have power of this kind over suppliers, as where the company is one of only a limited number of buyers of a supplier's goods or services, and even to an extent over governments, manifested, for example, in negotiations over subsidies or in successful attempts to dilute the content of regulation.
(We will return to the issue of corporate influence over government below.)
The context in which power in this sense most conspicuously occurs, however, is in regard to employees.
Companies may have power in setting the terms of the employment relationship arising from a possible asymmetry in bargaining position, but they also possess power within the relationship.
Indeed, the position of authority in which the company stands towards its employees is a central feature of the standard definition of the firm.
According to Coase, firms are ‘islands of conscious power’ in a sea of market transactions.
This idea of an authority relation, giving the employer a special power of direction over employees not found between parties transacting in the market, has, however, been disputed, notably by Alchian and Demsetz, who argue that the employer/employee relationship does not differ in substance from any other relationship founded in contract.
An employer has no more power to give orders to an employee than a customer has to demand that a grocer supply goods at a certain price: all a discontented employer can do in practice, just like a customer, is terminate the relationship.
In neither case is there any additional disciplinary power with which the employer or customer are able to impose their will.
From this perspective, therefore, employers do not have power over employees, they do not give them instructions, but rather are involved in a process of constant renegotiation of the employment contract.
But this is surely to misdescribe the social reality of the employment relationship.
Dismissal imposes costs on the employee, in terms of lost income, severance of social relationships at work, and the inconvenience involved in finding another job, that the employee will wish to avoid and which have no equivalents when relationships between customers and grocers break down.
And in periods of high unemployment, and especially in areas or occupations in which the current employer is in a dominant position, the threat of discharge is a potent weapon.
The attempt to assimilate the employment relationship to one of continuous contractual renegotiation is therefore unconvincing.
Decision-making power
The possession of power over employees is not unique to large companies (though as just mentioned, size may create a position of dominance and hence accentuate power), but rather is inherent in the employment relationship itself.
We turn now to a type of power that is more specifically an attribute of large companies, and which is our central concern.
This is power in the sense of decision-making power .
Power of this kind can be defined as ‘the scope of significant choice open to [an actor]…his power over others is the scope of his choices which affect them significantly’.
It is distinguishable from power in the sense just discussed (though the two forms may exist side by side) in that it does not rely on any idea of direct control over others or coercion.
The key elements are instead discretion and significant effects.
The point at issue is, then, that companies are able to make choices which have important social consequences: they make private decisions which have public results.
It is possession of this kind of power that gives rise to a distinct need for justification, and which forms the basis for the claim that companies must be required to act in the public interest.
We should note that in recognising that companies have power, it is not suggested that their power is anything like absolute.
Corporate decision making is constrained by governments, unions, customers, other companies, and community pressures of both diffuse and organised kinds.
These constraints limit and shape corporate power, but the discretion that lies within them, although variable, is nevertheless real.
Power and the market
In the economist's model of perfect competition firms have no capacity to exercise significant choice: they have no option but to obey the signals of the market.
It is because markets are not perfect in reality that companies have power, though in adopting this perspective it is important to guard against the tendency to view  divergences from the model as temporary and aberrant rather than as a standard feature of market systems.
In the perfect competition model the number of producers is sufficiently large that all firms are ‘price- takers’.
A firm cannot, in other words, charge more for its goods than the current market price.
Because firms have no discretion over prices but must passively accept the price prevailing in the market they have no ‘market power’: they can make profits only at the level that justifies the continued employment of their assets in their existing use and are unable to effect a transfer of wealth from customers to themselves.
Competitive conditions also ensure that firms have no discretion over the quality of goods supplied, since failure to match the quality or provide the features demanded by the market (the model assumes that market participants possess full product information and  knowledge of alternative opportunities) would mean that a firm would lose all its business to competitors.
Furthermore, since all firms are bound by an exogenously determined price, a firm with production costs higher than those of rivals would not survive.
This, together with perfectly competitive markets for labour and other inputs and the assumption that all firms are fully informed about the most profitable factor combinations, has the effect that discretion over production methods is also ruled out.
Where the requirements of the model are satisfied it can thus with some truth be said that there is an ‘utter dispersion of power’.
In reality, many companies operate in conditions which are to a greater or lesser extent uncompetitive.
Although technical monopoly may be a rarity, as already noted markets are commonly dominated by a small number of large producers.
In such circumstances by colluding or in virtue of the structural properties of  oligopolistic markets companies are able to obtain variable degrees of protection from competitive pressures.
In addition to the relatively small number of producers, other requirements for perfect competition are also unlikely to be met in practice.
Thus, an uncompetitive market structure may be maintained indefinitely because of barriers to entry and exit; products are not, as in the model, homogeneous, but have differentiating characteristics which enable producers to raise prices without causing a total shift in demand to their rivals; and finally, purchasers lack perfect information and hence may pay higher prices than they would if aware of alternative, cheaper, sources of supply.
The effect of these various imperfections is to cede to companies a zone of discretion in relation to products and prices and the wide range of factors connected with the production process.
The ambit of this discretion will now be reviewed in more detail.
The theory of consumer sovereignty
It will be convenient to examine corporate discretion over products and prices by exploring the weaknesses in the ‘demand side’ corollary of the theory of perfect competition, the theory of consumer sovereignty.
This holds that through their actions in the market consumers oblige companies to produce the goods they require in the largest quantities at the lowest possible price.
As well as making claims about the efficiency of markets, the theory denies the existence of producer power, at the same time drawing a reassuring analogy with democratic control in the political sphere: corporate behaviour is no more than a reflection of the popular will, expressed not through the ballot box, but via individual purchase decisions.
Once the reality of some degree of uncompetitiveness in markets is acknowledged the consumer's sovereign status is inevitably diminished.
As Lindblom has pointed out, however, it is by no means wholly destroyed, since ‘[m]onopoly weakens responses to popular control, but it neither eliminates a response or leads to a perverse one…
Rare, even bizarre, circumstances aside, it never profits a monopolist to do more when customers are signaling for less, or less when they are signaling for more’.
In the same vein, Winter explains that ‘[i]fconsumers prefer yellow widgets to blue ones or widgets with safety features to plain ones, and if they will pay the true cost of such improvements, the monopolist ignores their tastes only at a financial cost.
Even in the case of a clear monopoly, therefore, markets do constrain corporate behaviour, although output is restricted and resources misallocated’.
But we should be careful to note that inherent in this finding of inefficiency is also an acknowledgment of the existence of power.
A company's ability to raise the price of its goods above the competitive level affects the demand for its products (and through the effect on relative prices, the pattern of demand throughout the economy).
From this it follows that a degree of decision-making power about how society's resources should be used has been transferred from the market to the enterprise.
The sovereignty of consumers has therefore become at best a shared sovereignty.
A separate source of unresponsiveness to the consumer ‘electorate’ derives from the fact that since companies have control over the goods and services made available to the public, consumers cannot positively ‘vote’for the production of goods with the particular characteristics that best suit their requirements, but can only ‘veto’the products they are actually offered.
Products which do not meet consumer desires will fail the market test, but whether products come onto the market in the first place is a matter entirely in the hands of business.
Companies have in this sense the power to shape the ‘structure of opportunities’ available in society.
A practical instance is cited by Lindblom, who notes that
‘[f]or twenty-five years after World War II, the automobile industry in the United States demonstrated that industry response to consumer wishes can be extremely slow.
Until the last few years the entire auto industry was so fixed in its opposition to small cars as to leave the market for them to foreign firms.
Clearly corporations exercise substantial discretionary controls over the timing and fullness of their responses to consumer demands, including the possibility that for a decade or more they may ignore them’.
As this excerpt itself implies, the dynamics of competition may in due course bring producer behaviour into line with the wishes of consumers, since there are clear opportunities for profit in being the first to satisfy unmet demand.
Where these opportunities are ignored by domestic companies they are likely to be exploited by those from overseas.
Nevertheless, as the quotation also illustrates, companies can have substantial vested interests in the viability of current products and production processes.
Once the assumptions of the perfect market model are dropped it becomes clear that they have the capacity to safeguard these interests, manifested in a sluggishness of response, if not outright resistance, to changes in what consumers actually want, or might want if they were aware of the full range of possible alternatives.
It has so far been assumed that while the corporate sector's response to consumer demand may be imperfect, that what is responded to is at least an authentic expression of consumer tastes.
If, however, those tastes have been generated by companies in the first place then the idea of consumer sovereignty is overthrown.
Far from companies being part of a productive apparatus under the ultimate control of consumers acting through the market, the position is reversed and consumers are instead the manipulated subjects of producer domination.
It follows in virtue of this control that companies have power not only in the sense of discretion over the allocation of resources between different uses, but also in a more invasive sense of an ability to influence individual desires and conduct.
These ideas are particularly associated with Galbraith, who refers to the process whereby consumers are managed in the corporate interest as the ‘revised sequence’.
Instead of instruction flowing in one direction — from the consumer to the market to the producer (the ‘accepted sequence’), ‘the producing arm reaches forward to control its markets and beyond to manage the market behaviour and shape the social attitudes of those, ostensibly, it serves’.
Such management, which is effected through advertising and other forms of promotional activity, is necessary, Galbraith argues, to minimise the risk inherent in modern, large-scale, capital- intensive production methods.
Without the assurance that there will be a market of sufficient size for the company's products when they eventually come on stream (a considerable period may elapse between product conception and realisation), projects requiring major capital investment would be too hazardous to undertake.
Want creation is thus an essential part of a modern technologically-based economy.
Galbraith's views have been widely criticised, most frequently on grounds of exaggeration, though it should be noted that he does not suggest that the revised sequence has replaced the accepted sequence, but that there is a complex inter-action between the two.
It is undeniable that consumers have the capacity to resist the blandishments of advertisers, as borne out by the failure of many products brought on to the market.
And again, companies that produce goods that customers ‘really’ want can be expected to out-perform, and ultimately replace, those who merely manipulate demand.
 Nevertheless , the view that consumer tastes are in part the result of corporate influence and do not originate exclusively in the autonomous individual will is a persuasive one.
We should note finally a separate strand in Galbraith's argument, to the effect that advertising and associated activities serve the purpose not only of promoting the products of individual companies, but also of shaping the ‘attitudes necessary for the performance and prestige of the industrial system’.
These attitudes involve, he suggests, a high regard for material goods and consumer services in general, as distinct from leisure and other forms of non-consumption behaviour.
Without corporate efforts to reinforce the importance of traded goods and services the sustainability and growth of the industrial system would be at risk.
Advertising and its related arts are thus necessary to ‘develop the kind of man the goals of the industrial system require — one that reliably spends his income and works reliably because he is always in need of more’.
The extent to which the desire for the products of industry, beyond necessities, results from the processes of want-creation as distinct from pre-existing materialistic tendencies is obscure, but there is some plausibility in Galbraith's picture of a corporate system whose power includes an ability not only to stimulate demand for particular goods but also to shape prevailing social values.
Discretion in making delegated decisions
We have so far considered corporate decision-making power in the sense of discretion over what to produce, in what quantities, and at what price.
Our conclusion was that control over these matters is not located entirely in the market, as the theory of consumer sovereignty holds, but is divided between companies and the market in an uncertain and complex way.
Corporate power is not, however, limited to decisions about products.
In a useful distinction, Lindblom refers to the discretion that exists also in making (often more important)‘delegated’ decisions.
These are the ‘decisions instrumental to production: among others, on technology, organization of the workforce, plant location, and executive prerogatives’.
As he points out, ‘[e]ven in an idealized market system, consumer control over them ranges from weak to non-existent, except to impose least-cost decisions’.
Thus, even on the unrealistic assumption that consumers acting through the market are able to force managements to produce at the lowest possible cost, companies nevertheless retain a discretion within that constraint over such issues as plant location, appropriate levels of automation, and policy on research and development, since these and other delegated questions do not yield unique least-cost solutions.
Further, the concept of least cost is not in any case self-applying, but depends on the exercise of choice over production variables and time-frame.
As Lindblom observes, a ‘least-cost location for a new plant, for example, depends on the range of products that might be produced, the flexibility built into the plant, and the period over which costs and revenues are estimated’.
The scope of corporate discretion in making delegated decisions is obviously extended substantially once uncompetitive product market conditions, and the consequent reduction in the pressure to keep costs down, are taken into account.
Weaknesses in the corporate governance structure and slackness in the other markets that constrain management behaviour also mean that the existence of these additional controls is consistent with considerable managerial latitude.
Whether managers fully exploit the pocket of discretion thus created depends on the intensity of their own commitment to profit maximisation.
Possible non-maximising motivations include self-interest, and, with less plausibility, the furtherance of some sub-profit-maximising conception of the public good.
We will explore in due course whether these objectives are pursued to any significant extent in practice.
If companies have discretion in making delegated decisions, in what ways might the exercise of that discretion significantly affect others, demonstrating the existence of power?
One group conspicuously affected by corporate decision-making is of course employees.
It was mentioned above that employees are subject to company power in the sense of being in an authority relationship with the employer.
One aspect of company power of the different kind that is in issue here lies in the company's ability to shape the terms of that relationship.
As far as wage levels are concerned, this is self-evidently an area in which corporate discretion is not unbounded, particularly in view of the countervailing power of trade unions.
The strength of union bargaining power is, however, variable, being dependent on such factors as levels of unionisation, the regulatory controls to which unions are required to conform, the ease with which the employer can transfer operations to another country, and not least the state of the employment market.
An area of corporate discretion traditionally less constrained by bargaining relates to the nature of the work experience: whether, for instance, employees are allowed to participate in decision-making at appropriate levels in the organisation; whether attempts are made to enrich otherwise boring jobs by rotation of tasks; or whether the introduction of new technology leads to de-skilling or instead prompts investment in the acquisition of new competencies.
These and similar decisions not only affect how a substantial proportion of the population spend their working lives, but also influence the level and distribution of skills within the workforce, which in turn is a determinant of national economic success.
Corporate decision-making, of course, affects not only what employees do at work, but sometimes whether an employee has a job at all .
As Hannah and Kay observe ‘the elimination of inefficient productive capacity is now less frequently achieved through the action of bankruptcy in a competitive market process , but more commonly emanates from decisions to ‘rationalise’ made by a bureaucratic organisation ’.
They go on to say that large firms ‘are constrained in some way [in making these decisions]by the requirement to make profits and serve consumers’, but it is nevertheless appropriate to stress that companies will usually have options about how to manage the impact of changed market conditions or technology: the company is not merely a passive instrument of the market.
Responses which may be open to the company range from plant closures and mass redundancies, through scaling down operations with some job losses, to investment in alternative productive capacity with partial or full retention of the workforce.
It is also important to note that the option chosen will often affect not only the employees directly involved, but may also have a significant impact on the local economy.
Large-scale redundancies, particularly where the company employs a sizeable proportion of the workforce, are liable to result in a substantial reduction in local purchasing power; this may in turn have a knock-on effect on other local businesses and on local tax revenues and hence municipally-provided services, and the ensuing high level of unemployment is likely to contribute more generally to a weakening of community relations.
Turning to the impact of corporate discretion on communities more generally, it is clear that decisions about the location of company activities can have major implications for the economic, environmental, social, and cultural well-being of urban centres and entire regions.
As Kaysen notes, ‘[w]here new plants are placed both in regional terms and in relation to existing centers of population affects the balance of regional development and the character of urban and suburban growth’.
These decisions are not, needless to say, left wholly to companies.
The system of planning controls imposes limits on their freedom to locate operations where they will or to increase the scale, or change the nature, of the activities carried on at a particular site.
And national or local government may offer subsidies for businesses to set up in favoured areas.
Nevertheless, negative planning controls and the positive inducements of regional policy leave the basic initiative about locational decisions with the company.
It should be noted further that these decisions affect not only the physical character of an area, including its infrastructure requirements and the condition of the local environment, but also the range and type of other economic activities that are carried on there.
The construction of large production plant may, for instance, attract an influx of other manufacturers to supply it.
Of particular significance is the siting of company head offices, research and development facilities, and various other executive functions.
These create a demand for a mix of local support services such as those of financial institutions, lawyers, and technicians, and whose availability may attract into the area additional users of these services, strengthening its economic base.
A region dominated by branch assembly facilities and devoid of senior decision-makers, in contrast, is likely not only suffer from a sense of remoteness from those who control its destiny, but will also tend to lack social diversity and cultural vitality.
The consequences of corporate discretion in the field of research and development are worldwide and pervasive.
Kaysen has pointed out that: ‘[d]ecisions as to the technical areas which will be systematically explored by research and development divisions and decisions as to what scientific and technical novelties will be translated into new products and processes and tried out for economic viability have very deep effects.
Ultimately, the whole material fabric of society, the structure of occupations, the geographic distribution of economic activity and population are all profoundly affected by the pattern of technical change’.
Research is, of course, carried on outside the corporate sector in universities and other institutions of learning; even so , these bodies are increasingly dependent on commercial sponsorship, and corporate funds tend to flow more readily into projects identified by, or otherwise of interest to, the sponsor.
And it is industry that usually has control over which developments are taken up and marketed.
This list of areas affected by corporate discretion could go on, taking in decisions about the environment, the employment and promotion of women and members of racial minorities, and about mainstream business policy.
Decisions of the latter kind, about whether to import components or obtain them locally, for instance, or about investment policy in a recession, or pay restraint, can have major implications for national economic performance.
Mention should also be made of the importance of large corporate organisations as disseminators of news, entertainment, and cultural values, bringing an ability to influence perceptions of political issues and prompting Goyder to ask whether ‘spiritual and intellectual values [can]be safeguarded when the channels for their transmission to the masses are cut in commercial grooves for commercial ends’.
But by now the basic point is clear.
Corporate freedom of action is bounded by law (the rights of employees, environmental controls, and so on) and constrained by markets, but within these limitations there is a core of real business discretion.
It is with the legitimacy of this discretion, and particularly with the form that the rules of company law should take in order to control it in the public interest, that this book is principally concerned.
Political power
Arguments that companies possess political power, defined here as the ability to influence government policy and law-making, should finally be noted.
A recurrent theme in the literature is that the position of business in relation to government differs from that of other interest groups by virtue of the possession by companies of ‘real’ power — social decision-making power as it has been termed above.
Marsh and Locksley, for instance, contend that business
‘is different from other interests because it exercises power or influence in two ways — directly through interest groups and structurally because of the crucial role boards and managers exercise over production, investment and employment decisions which shape the economic and political environment within which Governments make policy’.
To elaborate, business, like other interest groups, makes representations to government in order to influence government policy.
But company decision making also shapes the economic context in which policy is made and hence constrains the available policy choices.
And further, the crucial role of companies at the structural level substantially enhances the bargaining power of business in its dealings with government, giving it a special influence which other interest groups lack.
Important to this analysis is the fact that the electoral prospects of democratic governments are substantially dependent on the overall performance of the economy, something that is at least partially under business control.
This being so, it is essential for government to retain the confidence, and hence the co-operation, of the business sector by maintaining the conditions for its profitability.
In an increasingly internationalised economy particularly, governments must be sensitive to how their policies will be perceived by business interests, since an adverse reaction can lead to rapid and massive capital outflows and consequent economic destabilisation, or the relocation of productive capacity to more hospitable environments with an equally obvious effect on jobs and growth.
One concrete result of government dependence on business, as Lindblom has noted, is the corporate sector's ability to extract ‘inducements in the form of market and political benefits’, for example, tax concessions and subsidies.
Another is that governments must be cautious in their regulatory policies, avoiding ‘excessive’ regulation that might damage profitability; governments that ‘go too far’may be subjected to direct industry pressure to dilute regulatory regimes.
It has been suggested further that corporate ambitions extend beyond influencing the detail of regulation, with Reagan for instance claiming that ‘…corporations are not only much concerned to protect their own immediate legislative interests, but are reaching out in an attempt to create a business-oriented political and social framework within which all public decision-making would be constrained.
Instead of the society channelling business decisions within the bounds of public interest, the corporations seek to channel public-interest decisions within business-interest bounds’.
A variation on this theme is that a consequence of the preeminence of business interests is that the fundamental ingredients of the capitalist system, notably private ownership of the means of production and the rules of the ‘free market’, are afforded a protected status.
As a result, policies that might be considered harmful to the functioning of business, such as a major redistribution of wealth or income, are effectively removed from the political agenda.
Whether or not we accept these points, their importance for the present discussion is clear.
They indicate a need for a measure of doubt, first, about the ability of the state to constrain the self-interested  exercise of corporate decision-making power through regulation.
Secondly, they call into question the capacity of the state to make more fundamental changes to productive arrangements should conventional regulatory techniques appear inadequate.
III CORPORATE POWER AND THE NEED FOR A PUBLIC INTEREST JUSTIFICATION
As stated earlier, the purpose of this book is to examine certain aspects of company law from a particular point of view: one which takes the relevant rules to be part of the machinery by which power, and particularly what we have called social decision-making power, is sustained and regulated.
The legal duties and control structures imposed or sanctioned by company law shape the criteria by which companies exercise social decision-making power.
Some advocates of corporate social responsibility (the term is deeply ambiguous, as will be seen in Chapter 9) maintain that companies should allow their decisions to be influenced not only by profit, but also by social policy factors.
This causes them to argue for a loosening of the legal duties that define the objectives of management decision making, which currently emphasise the maximisation of shareholder wealth, to enable a broader range of purposes to be pursued.
And in some cases there is support for more elaborate reforms to ensure that social welfare considerations are given appropriate weight in decision making and are not left merely to managerial discretion.
Critics of these views on the other hand insist that the public interest is properly served only where companies pursue the traditional goal of profit maximisation.
These positions have it in common that they express a view about how company law should regulate corporate power in the public interest: by introducing social welfare considerations as explicit decision-making criteria, or by excluding them and relying instead on the benign effects of the invisible hand, guided where necessary by external legal controls.
The merits of the respective arguments will not be considered until Chapter 10.
In this section the object is to examine in some detail the important preliminary issue of why the debate should be one about the public interest in the first place, and why company law should not be seen instead as being solely concerned with the rights of the corporators, that is, the shareholders.
It should also be emphasised at this point that references to the ‘public interest’ are not intended to imply that there is a consensus as about what constitutes the public good or that it is objectively determinable.
The discussion in this chapter and throughout the book is less concerned with what the public interest actually is (though the issue cannot be ignored) than with appropriate mechanisms for securing it.
A well-established approach denies that the public interest is the relevant standard, or at least the primary standard, by which company law should be assessed.
It sees companies as purely private organisations, existing for whatever purposes their members intend; there is no assumption that they should serve the public good, though the approach recognises that their operations are, in fact, highly beneficial to society.
From this perspective, proposals to redefine corporate decisional criteria in the public interest are misplaced.
External regulation, at least in a form that applies to all citizens equally, is legitimate, but state intervention beyond that constitutes an illicit curtailment of individual freedom.
The point then is not that reforms will necessarily fail in their objective of furthering the public good (though this is normally supposed), but that interference in company affairs for that purpose is morally impermissible.
We intend to reject this approach, and instead to embrace Dahl's claim that ‘every large corporation should be thought of as a social enterprise ; that is, as an entity whose existence and decisions can be justified only insofar as they serve public or social purposes’.
The reason large companies should be viewed as social enterprises relies, it is suggested, on a political theory about the legitimacy of private power.
That theory holds that the possession of social decision-making power by companies is legitimate (that is, there are good reasons for regarding its possession as justified) only if this state of affairs is in the public interest.
Since the public interest is the foundation of the legitimacy of companies, it follows that society is entitled to ensure that corporate power is exercised in a way that is consistent with that interest.
To describe companies as social enterprises is thus to make a claim about the grounds of their legitimacy, and its practical significance is to hold that the state is entitled to prescribe the terms on which corporate power may be possessed and exercised.
It should be stressed at the outset that maintaining that large companies are social enterprises involves no necessary finding that the root principle beneath the current rules of company law, that companies exist to make profits for the benefit of shareholders, is unsatisfactory.
It is quite possible that that arrangement is the one that is most conducive to the public good.
But the point is that making profits for shareholders must now be seen as a mechanism for promoting the public interest, and not as an end in itself.
It follows that society is entitled to insist, for example, that companies are equipped with governance structures adequate to enforce a  commitment to profits on the part of management and to promote the efficient operation of the business.
And the detailed rules of company law must be tested not just to see how well they serve the interests of shareholders, but also how well they serve the interests of society in having an efficient and productive economy.
A separate dimension of the social enterprise perspective is that if we view the company as a public or social body, albeit under private control, then its directors and managers should be held to requirements of disclosure and standards of ethical conduct appropriate to those carrying out public functions.
Galbraith has described the denomination of corporate enterprise as ‘private enterprise’ as ‘a formula for hiding public business behind the cloak of corporate privacy’; it is a device for diverting the eyes of government and the general public ‘from things like executive compensation, lobbying, political activity by executives and employees, profits, and bureaucratic error or nonfeasance’.
If we reclassify companies as social enterprises such issues are then not only matters of legitimate public concern about which the public has a right to information, but also matters in which the state is entitled to intervene in order to safeguard the public interest and to ensure compliance with publicly acceptable ethical standards.
It may be, on the other hand, that profit maximisation within the law is too limited a formula for aligning corporate decision making with the public good.
Without at this stage examining the measures that might be necessary to improve the responsiveness of companies to the interests of the various groups that make up ‘the public’, we should note that the social enterprise perspective supplies a justificatory foundation for the relevant programme of reform.
That foundation is analytically stronger than one relying on the casual observation that since companies possess power, they must use that power ‘responsibly’.
Rather, because the public interest is taken to be the root of corporate legitimacy, compliance with whatever ‘social responsibility’ demands is seen as a pre-requisite, a defining condition, for the possession of power.
It follows that changes to the legal framework that are deemed necessary to encourage or induce the desired behaviour should be viewed as permissible even though a substantial curtailment of shareholder rights may be involved.
Social responsibility is thus not merely a matter of the adoption of changed standards on a voluntary basis.
Further, because the public interest is the root of corporate legitimacy demands for responsibility need not be confined to the avoidance of obvious forms of social harm, such as might result from pollution, dangerous products, or false advertising, but potentially embrace all exercises of social decision-making power by companies, the manifestations of which were considered earlier.
The concession and contract theories of the company
The idea that companies should be viewed as social enterprises does not depend on a theory specifically about the nature of the corporate form, but, as has been mentioned, on a theory about the circumstances in which power may legitimately be held.
In arguing that large companies are social enterprises there is no intention, in other words, to revive the concession theory of the company, at least in its traditional form.
That theory, and its antithesis, the contract theory, share a common assumption that whether or not society has a right to demand that companies serve the public interest depends on whether the state can be depicted as playing some special role in corporate existence, different in kind from its role in sustaining unincorporated businesses.
It is worth spending some time in showing that this assumption is false, and why the theories that employ it should be rejected.
The concession theory regards the company as owing its existence to an exercise of state power.
More specifically, in allowing certain individuals the benefits of incorporation the state is viewed as having made a concession or having bestowed a privilege on them.
This favourable treatment is explained and justified on the basis that the corporators are required to perform public functions in addition to serving their own private interests.
In contrast, the contract theory sees the company as the result of a purely private initiative.
It is the outcome of a series of contracts between the founding shareholders: in so far as the state has a role in corporate creation it is not materially different from its role in enforcing contracts in general.
Given, therefore, that the company has come about essentially through private means, it must be understood as a private body, to be run by the corporators for their own self-selected purposes, and without any obligation to further the greater good.
The importance of the concession theory is that it establishes a theoretical framework sympathetic to state intervention; the company is a creature of the state, existing to promote the public welfare, and as such the state has the right to interfere in its internal affairs and need not confine itself to external, general-law regulation.
The state may thus mould the company's constitution so as to protect the interests of parties directly involved, for instance the interests of shareholders against abuse of position by management, but it also has a much broader right of intervention, allowing it, if appropriate, to redefine corporate objectives to secure compliance with favoured social goals.
As might be anticipated, the contract theory denies that companies have any special relationship with the state that would justify such a right.
Companies are merely voluntary associations of individuals joined together by contract, and correspondingly the state has no greater standing to intervene in corporate affairs than it has in the individual affairs of the citizens who make the company up.
In short, the debate turns on two overlapping questions.
First, has the state conferred special benefits on the corporators such as to justify a right of intervention of a kind that does not exist in regard to other business forms?
Secondly, is it appropriate to regard the state as bringing companies into existence on the understanding that they are to carry out public purposes, and hence similarly  justifying a right of intervention?
Few would now give a positive answer to these questions.
It is widely accepted that attempts to apply the concession theory in modern conditions are inapposite: there is no longer any ‘privilege’ involved in obtaining corporate status and the source of companies'’economic energy’undoubtedly lies in individual initiative and not in the state.
Historically, there was a ‘privilege’, and it took a number of different forms.
First, incorporation itself was a privilege in the sense that it was an advantage that was not available to all, being dependent on an exercise of state discretion by way of the grant of a royal charter or a specific act of Parliament.
But with the enactment of general incorporation statutes, corporate status, and then limited liability, became freely available to any applicant on registration, and hence the element of differential treatment on which the concession theory partly rests disappeared.
Secondly, a range of collateral benefits have in different periods also accompanied incorporation.
Commonly, these took the form of  monopoly rights, possessed by such early incorporated bodies as the medieval guilds, and later by the overseas trading companies, for example the Merchant Adventurers and the East India Company.
In the nineteenth century incorporation of utility and railway companies was also generally accompanied by other inducements and special powers deemed necessary for the success of the undertaking, such as rights of compulsory acquisition of land.
Today, of course, corporate status carries no implication that the business has in some other way been favourably treated by the state, and so in this respect too the idea of privilege is now inappropriate.
In the past, the company's status as a body responsible for the performance of public functions, and the idea that public benefit was a prerequisite of incorporation, were also evident.
The craft guilds, for example, supervised the quality of their members' work and imposed standards of fair dealing in the public interest.
Similarly, with the state lacking means of its own to regulate the conduct of business by its subjects overseas it was convenient to delegate this function to the great trading companies, which also assumed responsibility for general colonial administration.
The companies thus provided ‘the requisite amount of public law for local government, trade organization, control of the customs and foreign policy’, as well as serving national commercial interests by gaining access to natural resources and expanding overseas trade.
Cooke notes that this equation of incorporation with public service continued into the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, with the general theory of corporate form still dominated by ‘the concept of the corporation as a public body, an institution created by specific act of Parliament or the Crown for purposes approved as being in the national interest’.
In accordance with this concept incorporation was, for example, much easier to obtain in the case of transport and utility undertakings, such as canals, railways and waterworks, than for ordinary trading ventures.
Here the public interest in encouraging the private provision of a transport infrastructure and the other  prerequisites of industrial development were manifest, and the comparative willingness of the state to provide a business vehicle that would facilitate the accumulation of the vast sums of capital required is readily comprehensible in that light.
Since in these cases incorporation and public benefit were intimately linked it was also accepted that there should be a measure of state control to ensure that private interest was not allowed to predominate over the public good.
In the case of the railways this included a power to revise fares where excessive profits were made and even in some circumstances an express right to take the undertaking into state ownership.
Again, however, with the arrival of general incorporation on registration the idea of public benefit as a specific precondition of corporate status disappeared.
Instead, consonant with the prevailing economic orthodoxy, the public interest became at most a background justification for the free availability of incorporation and limited liability.
This would serve the general welfare by facilitating the development of large-scale business enterprises, which if left alone to pursue their own interests would also further the interests of society.
There was no longer any understanding that in making available advantages to private individuals the state was at the same time imposing a ‘trust’ that the business be conducted for the public good.
In modern conditions the only remaining peg on which to hang the concession theory's claim that the state has a special right of intervention in company affairs is the idea that since separate personality and limited liability are benefits conferred by the state, the state is entitled to intervene to safeguard the public interest as a quid pro quo .
But that argument is difficult to sustain.
For one thing, it is not at all clear that in offering the facility of doing business in corporate form the state is performing a service materially different from the service it provides in making available and enforcing the rules of contract, which supports no such argument.
But in any event, the argument makes a disproportionate claim, or may even involve a non sequitur .
Thus, while the conferment of limited liability undoubtedly warrants the imposition of statutory safeguards to prevent its abuse, it does not provide an adequate foundation for a general right of intervention in corporate affairs, unrelated to creditor protection.
Nor do the other attributes of incorporation suggest a basis on which a more extensive right of intervention on public interest grounds could be justified in the case of a company, than of, say, a partnership,simply in virtue of their respective legal characteristics .
The answer to all of this is surely that it is not the legal qualities of limited liability or separate personality in themselves that justify intervention, but the concentration of power in private hands that has come about partly as a result of their existence.
The right to intervene does not, in other words, depend on any particular characterisation of the state's role in corporate creation.
Nor is it determined by contemporary attitudes towards the terms on which corporate status is made available.
It relies instead on a political theory about the legitimacy of private power and the conditions subject to which that power may be exercised: a theory that contends that power may be legitimately held only for the purpose of furthering the public good.
The reason for this somewhat laboured refutation of the concession theory is to emphasise that the social enterprise concept does not in any way depend upon it.
It shows further that since the social enterprise concept does not rely on a special characterisation of the role of the state in corporate existence, then even if the contract theory provides a more  descriptively accurate account, no threat to the concept is entailed.
It thus does not follow from the inappropriateness of the concession theory in modern conditions that we must accept the normative conclusions of the contract theory.
It should instead be recognised that the concession/contract debate is a distraction, artificially confining the discussion to the company's supposed public or private origins.
In truth, the fact that a position of power might be attained as a result of ‘private’ contracting in itself says nothing about the legitimacy of the possession of that power, and hence even if the company could be explained in purely contractual terms this would, without more, have little impact on the question of the propriety of state intervention.
As it is, the company cannot in any case be accounted for as a wholly contractual phenomenon.
The distinctive attributes of the company, separate legal personality and limited liability, are beyond the reach of private agreement.
Furthermore, while the corporate constitution has a partially contractual basis, there are also significant mandatory elements, and many of those ingredients which are attributable to private ordering are more accurately described as resulting from management imposition than a process of contracting.
We will see later that a model of the company infused with the imagery of contract, suggesting negotiation and mutually beneficial exchange, or at least optimal, market-induced equilibria, supports a different analytical and evaluative approach to current corporate governance arrangements from one which views those arrangements as partially shaped by management power, but that is a different debate from the one in which we are currently engaged.
The scope of the present debate will now be expanded by examining whether there are more substantial grounds than those so far considered for regarding companies as ‘private’ bodies.
Shareholder rights and corporate legitimacy
Under this heading some arguments will be considered to the effect that corporate power can be legitimated by reference to the rights of the corporators.
If this proposition is valid, our insistence that companies should be regarded as social enterprises is undermined.
The idea that society is entitled to take whatever steps may be considered necessary to ensure that companies serve the public interest depends on the theory that the only basis on which companies can be allowed to possess power, which effectively means the only basis on which large companies can be allowed to exist, is that they produce consequences beneficial to society.
The theories now examined offer an alternative, non-consequentialist justification of corporate power, and argue that the exclusive concern of company law should be to protect the rights of the relevant rights-holders.
A revised contract theory
A possible response to the dismissal of contract as a ground of corporate legitimacy is that it pays insufficient attention to the moral significance of contract.
Is not the act of contracting an exercise of the parties' moral rights, with the effect that the outcome of the contracting, the company, is legitimated by reference to those rights?
Put another way, in so far as companies have power, is not that power justifiable on the basis that those who exercise it can claim a moral right to do so?
Expressed in these terms the contract theory does not merely (irrelevantly) emphasise the company's non-state origins, it also offers a political justification for the possession of private power.
Arguing along these lines, Hessen asserts that ‘men have a natural right to form a corporation by contract for their own benefit, welfare, and mutual self-interest’.
More particularly, he contends that a company is the result of an exercise of freedom of association and freedom of contract.
On this basis it could be argued that companies should indeed be regarded as purely private organisations, and that state intervention in their internal affairs constitutes an improper interference with the moral rights of the participants.
It is suggested, however, that corporate power cannot be legitimated merely by reference to the rights cited by Hessen.
The foundation of a company's power is its control over property, and the claim of the members to be entitled to exercise that power or to delegate it to representatives rests on their rights as owners.
Without access to property, the freedom of the parties to associate with one another and to make agreements would be of little practical significance in this context.
A property rights theory
A credible justification of corporate enterprise in terms of rights must, therefore, be based on rights of ownership.
A property rights justification might take the following general form.
While shareholders are not the owners of the company's assets as a matter of strict law, they are in substance the owners by virtue of being the contributors of the company's capital.
Owners are entitled to use their property in whatever ways they wish.
It follows that the power that results when shareholders pool their resources in corporate form is legitimate, because in possessing and exercising it they are doing only what they have a right to do.
Accordingly, it is not necessary in order to establish that corporate power is legitimate to show that the existence of companies is conducive to the general welfare, and the state has no right to intervene in their affairs in the name of the public good other than by the traditional means of  alterating the background legal constraints within which all businesses and citizens must operate.
Before evaluating this argument two preliminary objections will be noted.
The first is that the corporate constitution does not provide that the members shall decide how the business is run, but vests decision-making power in the directors and managers.
Not only that, if we accept that there has been a divorce between ownership and control in the typical large company, then management has escaped effective shareholder supervision and hence possesses a broad discretion as to the ends for which the company's power shall be used.
The objection therefore is that since power and property have separated, the legitimating link between them has been broken.
As against this, it is possible to argue that corporate power, as exercised by management, is still ultimately rooted in, and hence legitimated by, property rights, on the ground that the structure that gives rise to it is created with the consent of the shareholders.
The members' rights of ownership entitle them not only to make decisions personally about how their property is to be used, but also to delegate that power to others, and they are free to stipulate what degree of control they require over the discretion ceded by them.
The validity of this reasoning ultimately depends, it is suggested, on the genuineness of the shareholders' consent to the resulting situation.
If the reality is that through the inadequacies of the governance structure and of other pressures for conformity the directors have effectively wrested power to pursue goals which diverge from those preferred by the shareholders, then the necessary legitimating connection with property rights is not made out.
Whether corporate boards have escaped shareholder control will be considered in Chapter 2 below.
The second objection is that the ownership justification erroneously assumes that property rights are absolute.
The justification supposes that so long as a person is possessed of a right, that right may be exercised regardless of the consequences for others.
But it can be argued that we should not view rights in this way, and that when their use has adverse effects on third parties, rights should not be treated as signifying a moral entitlement in the right-holder to bring about those effects.
The harm resulting from corporate discretion might lie in its impact on particular individuals or groups, or it might exist at a more abstract level, in the social disfiguration that the concentration of power in a small number of hands represents.
If the position of power that comes about when shareholders combine their property in a company is damaging in either of these ways, then an invocation of ownership rights will not constitute a conclusive justification.
Now the purpose of relying on a rights- based argument is frequently to claim an entitlement to act irrespective of the consequences for others, and so if the idea of rights is to be coherent we must accept that a freedom to act in the face of at least some adverse social outcomes is entailed.
If this is so, then the issue should be formulated as one of whether the existence of corporate power is sufficiently objectionable to defeat the prima facie justificatory force of a rights' claim.
It is not clear how this issue could be resolved, other than by stipulation, and hence rather than attempt to reach a conclusion we will proceed to the more fundamental question of whether the shareholders should, in the first place, be considered to have a moral right to decide how companies should be run in virtue of their ownership of corporate property.
If the fact of ownership does not carry with it a moral right of control, then the property rights justification of corporate power collapses and the objection in the previous paragraph (and the one before) becomes irrelevant.
Much of the theoretical literature in company law treats property rights as though they were unproblematical; they are the unquestioned starting points of analysis rather than artifacts whose existence and distribution themselves demand justification.
This truncated approach is unsatisfactory, and so the discussion that follows will explore the grounds on which ownership of corporate property might be thought morally to entitle shareholders to exercise power, and, more realistically, to delegate that right to management.
Needless to say, a full-scale review of the moral justification of private property will not be undertaken, but enough will be said to indicate that there are substantial difficulties in the way of providing a satisfactory justification of corporate power by reference to the shareholders' supposed moral ownership rights.
Historical entitlements
A well-established tradition holds owners to be morally entitled to their property where they have obtained it by way of an uncoerced transfer from someone who received it in a similar manner, subject to the property having been originally taken into private ownership by a legitimate process of acquisition.
The latter requirement necessitates showing that the person who first removed the property from the ‘common store’ was entitled to do so; it must then be demonstrated that subsequent transfers have been consensual.
Locke explains how property rights are  initially obtained by reference to the labour expended on the property by the acquirer.
Nozick, the most recent exponent of entitlement theory, does not discuss the precise requirements for a morally just acquisition, but asserts that since taking property into private ownership will not in general prejudice the interests of others (he argues that their welfare will be increased owing to the greater efficiency of an economy based on private property), a taking will normally be morally legitimate.
The problem faced by all versions of entitlement theory, however, is in demonstrating why acquirers should be rewarded for their efforts with full rights of private ownership.
We might accept, for instance, that labouring on property should give the labourer some preferential interest in it (for example , a right to the value added by the work done), but it is not self-evident that any particular set of more extensive rights is warranted.
The success of entitlement theory depends, however, on showing precisely that.
Since historical entitlement theorists make original acquisition the root of all subsequent entitlements it is essential that they demonstrate that acquisition is an event of sufficient moral significance to bestow on the acquirer all the incidents of private ownership, including the right to transfer the property at will and to confer the same package of rights on all subsequent transferees.
Some quality of original acquisition must, in other words, provide a justification for the perpetual privatisation of property and the consequent denial of its use to third parties.
But rather than meet this challenge, entitlement theorists simply take for granted that if original acquirers deserve any rights they deserve the full rights of liberal ownership, and hence assume, rather than demonstrate, the legitimacy of that which has to be justified: the institution of private property.
Entitlement theory therefore offers no satisfactory justification of private property in general, and hence, for the purposes of our more limited enquiry, establishes no moral basis for shareholder control over corporate property in particular .
Property rights and freedom
A different way of justifying private property is by reference to a supposed dependence of individual freedom on the existence of a private property system.
Hayek claims, for instance, that ‘a people averse to the institution of private property is without the first element of freedom’.
The point is not that everyone needs property to be free; some people have little or no property but are not necessarily any the less free as a result.
The freedom that a private property system brings is not the freedom to do things with property, but freedom from coercion, and this does not depend on property being owned by all.
The connection between the existence of a system of private property and freedom is that the former enables each individual to construct a ‘private sphere’, rendering him or herself safe from coercive interference by others.
Where there is private property the actions of individuals cannot be ‘shaped at will by another’ because the individual is able to form a coherent plan of action in the knowledge either that he has control, through ownership, of the material objects necessary to implement it, or that he can enter into enforceable contracts with a range of other people enabling him to have access to those objects.
What is crucial, then, is not that a particular individual should necessarily own property himself, but that ‘property should be sufficiently dispersed so that the individual is not dependent on particular persons who alone can provide him with what he needs or who alone can employ him’.
The chief virtue of a private property system is that it achieves this dispersal and is therefore structurally antagonistic to coercion.
The problem with this reasoning is that even if we accept the narrow definition of freedom on which it relies, a system of private property, and in particular private ownership of productive assets, is not the only property system that is capable of bringing about the required dispersal of control over material goods.
Monolithic state ownership is not the sole alternative to private property; productive assets can, for example, be owned in common by the members of a co-operative, no individual member having a transferable property right in them.
In such systems it is entirely feasible for there to be a plurality of owning or controlling groups, thus preventing any particular group from having a monopoly over goods or employment opportunities that would enable it to exercise coercion.
Private property and freedom are not uniquely connected in the way that Hayek suggests, therefore, and if private property is to be justified in terms of freedom some further argument is required that the dispersal theory does not supply.
Rights protecting interests
Rather than justifying private property by reference to its role in creating a ‘free society’, emphasis can be placed on the part played by ownership in securing vital human interests.
This latter approach, unlike the previous one, depends on all individuals actually owning some property, and not merely the background existence of private property as an institution.
Waldron refers to a justification of property along these lines as a right-based argument for private property, which he defines as ‘an argument which takes an individual interest to be sufficiently important in itself to justify holding others (especially the government) to be under duties to create, secure, maintain, or respect an institution of private property’.
We might claim, for instance, to have a right to life because we each have an interest in being alive that is of sufficient importance to justify holding others to be under a duty to respect our lives, and the government to be under a corresponding obligation to reinforce that duty by enacting appropriate laws.
Similarly, we might claim to have a right to private property on account of having interests which crucially depend on private ownership.
One such interest might be autonomy, the rights of exclusive use and alienation inherent in private property enabling individuals to organise their affairs without the need to obtain the permission of others.
Alternatively, private ownership might be necessary for our full development as moral agents, for instance, in order to foster a sense of responsibility and prudence.
These arguments are attractive, and might well justify private property in personal possessions, and also such productive assets as may be needed for the satisfactory fulfillment of an individual's human potential.
It is difficult to see, however, what interests we might have of the necessary importance whose realisation depends on owning corporate property.
And once we take notice that in reality individual holdings in companies, other than in exceptional cases, give the holder negligible rights of control it becomes clear that ownership of corporate property could make no distinctive contribution to the realisation of whatever individual interests might be specified.
Conclusion: back to social enterprises
This brief survey reveals some of the difficulties of establishing that shareholders are morally entitled to control companies by virtue of their legal property rights, and hence of attempting to legitimate corporate power by reference to those rights.
If shareholders cannot be shown to be morally entitled to the corporate property then they have no antecedent moral right to exercise or allocate the power that flows from it, and accordingly the property rights justification of corporate power must fail, and with it, the project of explaining companies as private shareholder domains.
Now that the objection based on shareholder rights to viewing companies as social enterprises has been removed, we can proceed to a provisional account of the objectives companies should be required to adopt if they are to serve the public interest.
If the existence of companies should be regarded as premised on ‘the understanding that their activities are to fulfill our purposes’, some idea of how ‘our purposes’ should be understood is needed.
Before moving on it should however be noted that it does not follow from the rejection of justificatory theories of corporate power based on antecedent rights that the shareholders' legal rights in the company, including the right to exercise ultimate control and to have the business operated in their interests, are not morally defensible.
If, as will be considered next, companies serve the public interest by seeking to maximise their profits, then the shareholders' rights may be justifiable on functional grounds, that is, by virtue of their role in securing the efficient operation of the business.
On the other hand, if the single-minded pursuit of profits (as constrained by external regulation) is liable to damage the public interest, then this will require a modification of the existing set of shareholder rights and the framework of company law that upholds them.
Since, according to the argument above, the rights of the shareholders are not foundational, the necessary reforms may legitimately be undertaken.
IV COMPANIES AND THE CREATION OF SOCIAL WEALTH
What criteria should guide corporate decision making if companies are to serve the public interest?
A useful starting point is to note the traditional justification of capitalism in terms of consequences (as distinct from rights).
This is that capitalism, and now its modern form of large-scale corporate capitalism, is the most efficient (practically realisable) system for the creation of wealth.
According to economic theory, with some reservations that will be examined shortly, companies contribute to the maximisation of society's total wealth where they seek to maximise their own profits.
If, therefore, we were to equate the public interest, so far as relevant to the operation of business, with the maximisation of the wealth of society as a whole, it would follow that in order to serve the public interest companies should be required to pursue the goal of profit maximisation: maximum profitability should be the sole criterion that guides management discretion and the exercise by companies of social decision-making power.
Unconstrained profit maximisation is not, however, conducive to the public interest, or at least any easily defended conception of it, for two reasons.
First, while the efficient creation of wealth may be regarded as a high social priority, we also recognise individual and collective interests and values that ought not to be sacrificed in its pursuit.
Such recognition is reflected, for instance, in the enhancement by statute of the rights of employees against dismissal, which from an aggregate wealth viewpoint may be depicted as inhibiting factor mobility and hence on occasion as being wealth reducing.
Secondly, because of defects inherent in the operation of markets, the strict maximisation of profits will in any case frequently fail to lead to the maximisation of aggregate wealth.
An example is the problem of ‘externalities’.
This is the problem that behaviour which is privately profitable will not be wealth maximising overall where an actor can ignore the costs that its activities impose on others, for example where a company without cost to itself can emit into the atmosphere the noxious by-products of its production processes.
Society seeks to rectify the effects of this  divergence of private and social interests by imposing limits or prohibitions on certain kinds of emissions or on the use of polluting processes; other techniques, such as taxing the production of harmful wastes, are also available to force companies to ‘internalise’ the full costs of its activities.
The imposition of legislative constraints on profit maximisation can, therefore, be viewed as a procedure for adjusting, in the public interest, the terms on which wealth is created.
If this procedure is the most appropriate way of correcting market failure and of otherwise setting the requisite ‘sociopolitical limits on the exercise of economic rationality’ then it would seem to follow that the goal of companies should continue to be profit maximisation, within the relevant constraints.
To the extent that maximising profits conflicts with the public interest, the solution from this perspective is not to modify corporate objectives, but to strengthen the limiting conditions within which companies are required to operate.
In this way society benefits from the most efficient means of producing wealth, consistent with the protection of non-aggregative social values.
It follows from this reasoning that a company law focussed on the public interest should define management duties exclusively in terms of profit maximisation and should more generally provide a legal framework orientated towards that end.
Dissatisfaction with the ‘profit maximisation within the law’ formula is at the centre of the debate about corporate social responsibility.
It can be argued that the interests of the various groups affected by company decision making — employees, local communities, consumers, and all of us, through our interest in the environment, for example— are invested with a moral significance that cannot be adequately captured within the relatively finite external legal controls that are currently relied on to regulate the terms on which wealth is created.
Accordingly, obedience to the demands of ‘profit maximisation within the law’ prevents the full range and texture of third party interests from being taken into account or given sufficient weight in corporate decision making.
For example, whether or not a company should relocate its head office, creating unemployment and inflicting wide- ranging economic and social damage on the community from which it proposes to exit, is not an issue that is resolvable by conventional regulatory techniques.
It is true that ethical values are to an extent also transmitted through markets, with the effect that a company committed to profit maximisation cannot afford to ignore the impact of its activities on others.
Some minimal level of compliance with societal expectations is, in other words, built into the profit goal.
A business may, for instance, spend more on anti-pollution measures than is necessary to satisfy the relevant legislation, perhaps to avoid adverse publicity which may damage sales.
But so long as the company's objective is maximum profits, a concern with the welfare of third parties is necessarily an instrumental one: it is a means of protecting profitability in the long term.
The concept of social responsibility, in contrast, demands that affected interests be treated as ends in themselves, and this will at times require a deviation from long-run profit maximisation.
From the standpoint of advocates of social responsibility, therefore, it should be a function of company law to facilitate the reception and proper weighting of third party interests in corporate decision making, even though this may require the adoption of policies which are not privately profit maximising.
As compared with a ‘profit maximisation within the law’ regime, this may in some areas lead to outcomes which are more efficient from a social point of view, as where a company takes voluntary action to internalise external costs.
In other respects it may in principle result in conduct which is wealth reducing overall, as where a company retains employees who on a strict cost/benefit analysis would be made redundant.
Mechanisms by which third party interests might be more fully integrated into the corporate decision-making process will be discussed in Chapter 11.
For the time being these issues will be held in suspense, and the following chapters will examine those aspects of company law which bear on management decision making on the assumption that their aim should be to promote profit maximisation subject only to external legal constraints.
Whether this objective should underlie company law, viewed from a public interest perspective, or whether the alternative approach just discussed is preferable, will be considered in Chapters 9 and 10.
Thus, Chapters 2–8 will, among other things, describe and evaluate the controls on goal selection, the controls relating to the efficiency with which permitted goals are pursued, and the controls designed to prevent the diversion of corporate assets to management.
Three issues remain for consideration in this chapter.
First, it is necessary to look more closely at the relationship between profit maximisation and aggregate wealth maximisation, and to introduce an additional reservation.
Secondly, it will be examined why, granted the profit maximisation objective, the profits should accrue to the shareholders, as opposed, for example, to the employees: if considerations of efficiency underscore the shareholders' current position of preeminence, then this may be thought to provide a justificatory foundation for shareholder rights within a public interest framework.
Finally, it has so far been taken for granted that satisfaction of a social objective of efficient wealth creation is capable of legitimating the existence of corporate power.
The capacity of wealth maximisation to legitimate power, however, requires some elaboration.
The relationship between profit maximisation and wealth maximisation
It will be assumed for present purposes that society's wealth is maximised when production takes place at the lowest possible cost, thus avoiding the waste of scarce resources (the goal of ‘productive efficiency’ is satisfied), and goods and services are produced in the quantities and are of the quality demanded by consumers (the goal of ‘allocative efficiency’is satisfied).
There is an obvious connection between profit maximisation and productive efficiency.
A company committed to maximising its profits will strive to minimise its costs, and will thus aim to use the resources at its disposal in the most productive way.
The link between profit maximisation and allocative efficiency, on the other hand, is more complex, since profit maximisation can lead to different outcomes depending on the structure of the market in which the company operates.
A profit-maximising firm under conditions of perfect competition will expand production up to the point at which the additional cost of producing the last unit of output (’ marginal cost’) is equal to price.
Once this point has been reached increased production will make no further contribution to profits.
Output at this level is optimal not only for the firm, but also for society, because the type and quantity of goods produced will match the demand for them, at least in so far as demand is represented by the willingness and ability of the consumer to pay.
Where this situation prevails in all industries throughout the economy (that is, price equals marginal cost for every firm) the distribution of resources between competing uses is allocatively efficient: the total value of output could not be increased by distributing resources in some other way.
The pursuit of profits and the social interest are therefore coincident.
However, as was mentioned earlier in the chapter, the model of perfect competition does not present an accurate picture of reality.
Many industries are dominated by a small number of large companies; because of their relative share of the market, the existence of barriers to entry, and the differentiated character of their products, these companies are not pure price- takers, but have the ability to increase their prices above marginal cost.
Where firms maximise profits in uncompetitive conditions the effect is that consumers are denied goods which they would have been willing to buy at the competitive market price.
Output is accordingly lower than it would have been under conditions of perfect competition, and resources are diverted to alternative, less valuable uses.
Another result is that firms make ‘supernormal’ profits (profits in excess of those necessary to induce them to remain in the industry) at consumers' expense.
In short, the outcome is allocatively inefficient: a rearrangement of resources would produce a net increase in the satisfaction of wants.
It does not necessarily follow from this, however, that an economy in which large firms predominate is inefficient on balance.
In many cases the large size of a company, which is the source of its market power, may enable it to make cost savings which, although not fully passed on, more than compensate for the distorting effects of an uncompetitive market structure.
It may therefore be that while a perfectly competitive market composed of producers big enough to benefit fully from economies of scale would be the ideal, something like the existing state of affairs, particularly against a background of merger control and regulation of anti-competitive practices, is the best realisable outcome.
But though this may quell doubts about the benefits of the existence of large-scale enterprise, it does not bear on the point that where competition is attenuated a policy of profit maximisation may not be wealth maximising: society might be better served if companies were to lower price and increase output, even though this would be less profitable from the company's point of view.
This point will, however, be ignored until Chapter 10, and in the meantime it will be assumed that profit maximisation is in the social interest regardless of the particular market structure within which the company operates.
Profit maximisation and shareholder rights
The fruits of a policy of profit maximisation accrue to the shareholders as dividends and increased share values.
What is the logic that dictates that the shareholders should be entitled to the corporate surplus, instead for instance of the employees or management, with the entitlement of the shareholders reduced to a fixed return on capital?
The possibility of a functional justification of the rights of shareholders was referred to earlier.
It is sufficient for present purposed to note one such justification, the incentive-residual rights theory.
Alchian and Demsetz characterise the firm as involving a team use of inputs together with the occupancy of a central position by a party whose function is to monitor the outputs of the team members and the other factors of production employed in the firm.
Monitoring is necessary in order to limit the tendency of team members to ‘shirk’, that is, to increase leisure and reduce effort ‘on the job’(they explain the existence of the firm by reference to the superiority of internal monitoring through observation of the behaviour of team members over monitoring of teams by market competition).
The central monitor, in turn, is given an incentive not to shirk in performing the monitoring function by giving him or her a right to the residual, that is, a right to the surplus that remains after all the other factors of production have been paid at the market rate.
Since the size of the residual depends on the efficiency of the firm, the monitor has an interest in ensuring that the firm is run as efficiently as possible.
In the classical firm the central monitor is the owner/entrepreneur.
In the large company with professional management the monitoring role is performed by the occupants of various levels in the management hierarchy, culminating with the board, but with the board itself ultimately monitored by the shareholders.
Shareholder monitoring may be depicted as taking an owner-like, internal form, involving scrutiny of management and replacement of under-performing directors via the company's democratic channels, or an external form, whereby dissatisfied shareholders dispose of shares in the market, possibly triggering the removal of the board via the market for corporate control.
In either event, it is argued that the residual rights of the shareholders create an appropriate incentive for them to activate the relevant disciplinary mechanisms.
As Chapter 3 will discuss, the legal duties imposed on management are directed towards shareholder benefit.
They do not consist of an abstract duty to maximise profits or otherwise to act in the interests of society.
Similarly, ultimate rights of control over the company are legally vested in the shareholders, giving them, at least in theory, the ability to shape the company's purposes for their own ends.
The members' status as residual claimants suggests that they have in fact the same interest in profit maximisation as we have postulated for society as a whole, and the incentive to enforce profit maximisation in both their own and the social interest.
This therefore suggests a unity between the fundamentals of the existing structure of company law and the interests of society, as they have been provisionally defined.
Chapter 12 will examine the challenge to the notion that the shareholders are uniquely qualified to be holders of residual rights, and the argument that a form of productive organisation in which the trading surplus accrues to the employees rather than the providers of capital is capable of operating no less efficiently, at least as far as the control of shirking is concerned, than the existing corporate form.
In the meantime the discussion will largely remain within the shareholder-centred conception of business enterprise, and during the course of the next seven chapters it will be considered whether in practice the mechanisms of shareholder control, particularly against a background of widely dispersed holdings, are adequate to promote satisfactory levels of corporate efficiency.
The justificatory force of the maximisation of social wealth
In the foregoing discussion the interest of society in the efficient creation of wealth was recognised.
If it is assumed that the system of corporate enterprise is the most efficient system for the creation of wealth, should it therefore be concluded that corporate power is legitimate?
In other words, does the system's putatively superior wealth generating capacity justify the concentration of decision-making power that is entailed?
Putting the question this way makes clear that a justification in terms of wealth relies on a trade-off: corporate decision-making power should be accepted as the price of efficient wealth creation.
The point is not that companies are ideal mechanisms for making decisions which have important social effects (in the sense that we would choose them for this purpose other considerations being equal).
Rather, it is that if we want the benefits of efficient wealth creation it must be acknowledged that companies will inevitably possess power.
In order to be persuaded by this justification one would need to be satisfied that the price is worth paying, that is, that alternative arrangements in which power was more widely diffused would not be preferable, even though this might mean that the system produced less wealth overall.
This is clearly a matter for moral or political evaluation and can have no objective answer.
It is, however, important to be a little clearer about the moral significance of wealth maximisation.
That the aggregate wealth of society is as high as it can be is of no moral value in itself; what counts is the effect of increases in total wealth on the welfare of the individuals who make up society.
The maximisation of social wealth is not however the same thing as the maximisation of total or average welfare.
An economy may be highly efficient, in the sense that goods and services are produced with the minimum of waste and are allocated in accordance with the demand for them, while at the same time the basic needs of many go unsatisfied.
What is in issue here is ‘demand’ that includes an ability to pay, and that is a function of the distribution of wealth.
As Veljanovski points out, ‘if wealth is concentrated in the hands of a few rich landowners who buy Rolls Royces and caviar, then allocative efficiency will be consistent with the poor starving and the economy's productive capacity channelled into the manufacture of these luxury items.
If wealth were distributed more equitably, less Rolls Royces and caviar and more necessities of life would be produced’.
The plausibility of a justification of power in terms of wealth cannot therefore be separated from questions about how wealth is distributed.
The issue of the legitimacy of corporate enterprise can, however, be saved from being swallowed up in this wider debate if the assumption is made that alternative patterns of distribution can be secured through state action should the prevailing one be considered morally unappealing.
In other words the justification for corporate enterprise lies in its ability to create wealth against any given background distribution.
If the existing distribution is unsatisfactory that is not an objection to corporate enterprise but results from the failure to rectify distributive injustice.
Of course, it is possible that corporate power is itself a barrier to changes in distribution.
Furthermore, corporate capitalism is actually a generator of substantial inequalities in primary incomes, and it is arguable that such inequalities are a precondition for the effective functioning of the system, with the consequence that the scope for redistribution is in practice limited.
A different way of questioning the justification of corporate power in terms of wealth maximisation is to argue that at least beyond a certain level of prosperity, increases in wealth do not compensate for, cannot be traded-off against, the accumulation of power.
The corollary of the possession of power by companies is that the individuals, interest groups, and communities affected by it suffer a lack of control over the conditions which determine how they live their lives.
The power to make decisions that is located within companies could in principle be vested in, or at least shared with, the affected groups.
An alternative vision of human flourishing to that which underlies wealth maximisation as a social goal ranks autonomy above continued increases in material well-being, and thus calls into question the legitimacy of non-participative organisations.
Some of the measures designed to induce socially responsible behaviour on the part of companies discussed in Chapter 11 involve the empowerment of affected groups vis a vis the company, and consequently a reduction of corporate power over them.
Chapter 12 will consider more comprehensive arrangements for participation in decision making by the group whose interests are most intimately bound up with the company, the employees.
More radical demands for participation argue against the legitimacy of the capitalist corporate form altogether.
A suggested alternative, the worker-controlled enterprise, will be discussed towards the end of the chapter, and in particular whether worker-controlled firms can be designed in such a way that participation is not bought at the price of rendering the economy as a whole substantially less efficient.
Ownership, Control, and the Pursuit of Profit
The previous chapter provisionally accepted that it is beneficial for society as a whole that companies should attempt, within the general law, to make the highest possible profits.
It assumed that pursuit of that goal is conducive to the maximisation of wealth overall: profit maximisation leads to the most efficient use of scarce resources and the greatest satisfaction of human wants.
The purpose of the present chapter is to examine the threat to the wealth- creating potential of large-scale corporate enterprise resulting from the organisational failure referred to generally as the ‘separation of ownership and control’.
The response of company law to that threat, and the response that a reformed company law might usefully make, will be considered in succeeding chapters.
I DELEGATION AND THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL
In all but the smallest companies efficiency necessitates the delegation of authority to manage the business to a specialised management team.
As noted by the European Commission, efficiency demands that the contributors of capital ‘hand over the management of the company's affairs to a smaller group capable of relatively quick and continuous decision making.
This also permits the company's affairs to be placed in the hands of those who are equipped with the special abilities and skills which are necessary for effective management and which many shareholders may not themselves possess’.
But while delegation is a prerequisite of corporate efficiency, it also carries with it the risk, common to all agency relationships, that the managers will act in their own interests at the expense of the shareholders, thereby reducing the expected gains, not only for the shareholders, but also for society as a whole.
Thus, Eisenberg explains that all agents have a potential interest ‘in working at a slack pace and in avoiding the effort and discomfort involved in adapting to changed circumstances, such as the emergence of new technologies.
This is the problem known as shirking .
All agents have a potential interest in diverting the principal's assets to their own use through unfair self-dealing.
This is the problem of traditional conflicts of interest ’.
A third problem is what Eisenberg refers to as that of positional conflicts of interest .
These are conflicts that exist because managers' interests are only indirectly and imperfectly linked to profit maximisation, with the result that they are liable to adopt divergent goals more focally connected with increasing the benefits attached to the occupancy of managerial office.
The behaviour that pursuit of management self-interest might entail is examined below.
Shirking and the pursuit of managerial goals are generally regarded as forms of behaviour that are socially inefficient, since the former involves the sub-optimal use of resources and the latter, on the assumptions discussed in Chapter 1, produces allocatively inefficient outcomes.
The solution to the problems of shirking and positional conflicts of interest is traditionally seen as lying in the governance function performed by the shareholders.
The principal instrument of shareholder control is their power to remove the directors from office.
Either through the use of this power, or the background threat of its use, the members are in principle able to induce management to conform to the demands of profit maximisation.
Company law also assigns to the members the ultimate right to make decisions in certain key areas, for example with regard to changes in the corporate constitution or increases in capital, again in order to ensure that the business is run in accordance with their, and not the directors', interests.
Similarly, the directors are bound by a fiduciary duty to advance shareholder welfare,(imperfectly) enforceable by the members.
The idea that compliance with profit maximisation should be enforced through shareholder supervision and control lies at the centre of what we will refer to as the ‘ownership model’ of the company.
The model is so named because it describes a mechanism designed to compel managers to act in the shareholders' interests which depends on vesting owner-like rights in the shareholders, as mentioned, to appoint, monitor, and replace the most senior tier of management and to make certain other fundamental decisions.
A recognition of the failure of this mechanism, consequent on the massive growth in the capitalisation of companies in the twentieth century, the corresponding increase in the size of their membership that this growth has required, and the shareholder passivity that inevitably results, underlies much modern company law scholarship.
The breakdown of the control apparatus is widely perceived as liberating managers to pursue economically sub-optimal goals, and as causing insufficient pressure to be imposed to promote managerial vigour and to ensure the competence of the management team.
A desire to strengthen the disciplinary framework has prompted a search for ways either of restoring integrity to the model or of installing functional equivalents for owner control.
With regard to traditional conflicts of interest, which are also liable to be  efficiency-reducing , there is little reason to think that the separation of ownership and control has contributed significantly to the scope for management self-dealing, but it does pose problems for the effectiveness of the mechanisms that regulate it, the design of which is premised on shareholder involvement.
These issues are considered in Chapter 7.
Before examining the separation of ownership and control and the inefficiency to which it allegedly gives rise, it should be noted that from a different analytical perspective the supposition that the absence of effective shareholder control over management is a problem which existing or improved governance mechanisms might or might not solve appears highly tendentious.
Writers with a preference for market over regulatory solutions (whom we will refer to generically as ‘market theorists’) insist that management and shareholder interests are adequately aligned by market forces, and therefore that the lack of shareholder participation in the internal processes of control need give no cause for concern, and certainly does not indicate the necessity for any kind of external intervention.
Supporters of the nexus of contracts model of the company go further, seeking to deprive the ‘problem’ of weak shareholder control even of its status as a problem, and thereby to legitimate the replacement of control by means of shareholder democracy with control through markets.
The failure of the shareholders to behave in an owner-like way is problematical only if they are appropriately categorised as owners.
From the nexus of contracts perspective the shareholders are not owners, but simply one of the several parties who make a contract with management to provide a factor of production (in their case, capital) for their common benefit.
As economically rational actors, the shareholders will ensure that the contract contains the terms necessary to safeguard their interests against management abuse.
The resulting ‘optimal’ control structure finds no place for active shareholder involvement, and hence the fact that the shareholders do not participate is a non-issue.
Chapter 6 will return to the contractual model of the company, where the conclusion will be reached that it is dangerously misleading.
For the time being, having noted the rival analysis, the issues will be approached through the framework of the traditional model and it will accordingly be assumed for the purposes of analysis that weak owner control at least raises a presumption that there is a problem about the adequacy of management discipline.
The following section looks in some detail at its parameters.
II THE SEPARATION OF OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL
Since the publication in 1932 of Berle and Means' study of American capitalism,The Modern Corporation and Private Property , it has been the orthodoxy that in the majority of large public companies managements have escaped effective shareholder control.
That shareholder control had become severely  attenuated was certainly accepted in Britain by 1945.
In that year the Cohen Committee succinctly explained how this state of affairs had come about: ‘[t]he illusory nature of the control theoretically exercised by the shareholders over directors has been accentuated by the dispersion of capital among an increasing number of small shareholders who pay little attention to their investments so long as satisfactory dividends are forthcoming, who lack sufficient time, money and experience to make full use of their rights as occasion arises and who are, in many cases, too numerous and too widely dispersed to be able to organise themselves’.
The weakness of shareholder control results, in short, from the ‘logic of collective action’: while the shareholders as a group would benefit if their rights of control over management were exercised, it is rational for the members individually to remain passive.
It is unlikely that voting by a single shareholder will make much difference to the success of a resolution either way, and so it is not worthwhile for shareholders to evaluate proposals put to the general meeting.
They will do better either to abstain from voting, or to vote with management as a low cost ‘rule of thumb’.
It is true that the shareholders would make an impact if they were to agree to vote in the same way, but this will usually involve the costs of educating and obtaining the co-operation of other shareholders being borne by individual activist members, and these are likely to outweigh the benefits that will be captured by them, since any increase in the value of the company attributable to intervention will be distributed among the shareholders as a whole.
The state of shareholder inactivity that results from these factors, it is argued, enables managers to pursue objectives of their own choosing.
These are likely to be self-serving, but, in Berle and Means' view, the possibility is also opened up that rather than furthering their own interests, or those of the shareholders as currently required by law, management might act in the interests of society as a whole, evolving into a ‘purely neutral technocracy balancing a variety of claims by various groups in the community and assigning to each a portion of the income stream on the basis of public policy rather than private cupidity’.
This, then, is the outline of the theory of managerial autonomy (’ the managerialist thesis’).
There are a number of variants of the theory, with different positions taken on how managers are likely to use their discretion, but they share a common structure.
This is made up of three propositions.
First, dispersal of shareholdings has led to effective control over the company being ceded to management.
Secondly, directors and managers have interests or aspirations which differ from those of the members, and hence their objectives are likely to diverge from the goal of maximising profits.
And thirdly, managements are able to pursue divergent objectives, not only because of lack of shareholder control, but also because of weak competitive conditions.
These propositions will now be examined in turn.
The location of control
The issue of who controls the company is of fundamental importance, since on it depends, as Herman points out, ‘[w*rsqb; hether the profitability goal is preserved, and the intensity with which it is sought’.
‘Control’ in this context has been defined by most commentators as the ability to appoint the board.
Where the board can effectively determine its own composition it has generally been assumed that it becomes immune from direct shareholder influence and hence that control has shifted from the owners to managers.
The point is not merely that decisions about the day to day operation of the business or even long-term strategy have been taken out of the shareholders' hands — this is the intended, central advantage of the corporate form — but that the shareholders are no longer able to shape the purpose for which the business is run, that is, they are unable to oblige management to maximise profits.
The role of the board
Before examining the evidence on the location of control, a brief digression to clarify the role of the board and its relationship to management may be helpful.
The Companies Act provides that companies must have directors but does not define their functions.
This is left to the articles, where the almost universal practice is to vest in the board all the powers necessary for the management of the business, bar those reserved by the Act to be exercised by the shareholders in general meeting.
From the board powers are frequently delegated to committees of directors or to individual board members, and thence down the managerial hierarchy.
As to the functions retained by the board itself there is no consistent practice.
The Bullock Committee found that ‘[t]he role of a board varies from company to company and is constantly changing with the requirements of business.
It may be related to the size, complexity and nature of the company's operation and therefore to the organisational structure which has been developed over many years.
It may depend on the philosophy of management in the company or on the personality of the chief executive.’
What is clear is that the scale of a large company's business and the fact that the board meets only periodically, perhaps monthly or even quarterly, mean that it is only the most important decisions that are made at board level.
The board will usually have responsibility for long-term strategic planning, for example concerning investment in new production facilities and products, merging or making a bid for another company, closing down existing plants or pulling out of unprofitable markets.
Another important function of the board, at least in theory, is to monitor the performance of senior executives, and also the performance of the company's operating divisions and subsidiaries.
The latter, as separate legal entities, are also required to have boards of their own.
In some cases these will have only a pro forma existence, with decision-making power lying higher up in the group and the organisational structure perhaps bearing little correspondence to the legal one.
In other groups subsidiaries or divisions may have a considerable degree of autonomy in operational matters; in these cases the role of the parent board is that of an allocator of capital, rewarding successful operating units with funds for expansion and curtailing or restructuring the activities of those whose performance is weak.
Our interest lies chiefly with the main board since it is here that investor pressure or the lack of it has its main significance.
Whether managers lower down the hierarchy pursue the profit goal depends in large part on organisational structure and the values imposed from above, though this is not to underestimate the problems of organisational design or the difficulties involved in ensuring compliance with those values.
The main board will normally be made up of a chief executive, who will hold the office of managing director, or possibly chairman, or both, and will include a number of ‘heads of department’, for example the finance director, personnel director, technical director, and so on.
As well as these full-time directors, most large companies also appoint (usually a minority) of part-time, non-executive directors to their boards.
Their function is in general to supplement the skills and experience of the management team, often by bringing a more dispassionate understanding to bear on strategic and operational matters.
It is also said that they are able to exercise an element of independent supervision over inside management.
In some companies this role has to a degree been formalised through the creation of audit committees made up of non-executives, their function being to review the effectiveness of the company's auditing procedures and to liaise with the auditors.
Non-executives may also staff a remuneration committee responsible for top management appointments and for setting the level of their salaries and other benefits.
Chapter 6 will consider the effectiveness of non-executive directors and that discussion will not be duplicated here.
We should, however, briefly note that because of their dependence on inside management for their tenure of office, their likely minority position, and the absence of a legal specification of the monitoring function and of the powers necessary to perform it, the potential for non-executive directors to exercise meaningful control over the executive members of the board will usually be slight.
Furthermore, since the board is dominated by the most senior representatives of management (this term will be used, except where the context requires otherwise, to refer to the executive directors and senior managers) it can hardly be regarded as a body providing independent supervision of management on the shareholders' behalf.
The absence of an effective internal mechanism for regulating the conduct of management means, of course, that the inability, if such it be, of the shareholders to exercise effective control is of increased significance.
We now turn to consider the extent to which management control is a reality in the modern large company.
Management control
Berle and Means concluded that 44 per cent of the largest 200 American corporations were subject to management control in 1929.
By 1963 Larner claimed that the figure had risen to 84 per cent, and in his major study conducted in the mid-1970's, Herman found that 82.5 per cent of the top 200 non-financial corporations were controlled by management.
In Britain, where the matter has been less extensively researched, Florence reported in 1961 on the basis of data from 1936 that two thirds of the ‘very largest’ companies were controlled by management and that the tendency towards the dispersal of shareholdings was increasing.
However, in a more recent study Nyman and Silberston cast some doubt on the growth of management control, reporting that as high a figure as 56.25 of the top 250 companies in the UK were still controlled by shareholders, and concluding that ‘the extent of managerial control is more limited than has been thought and may not have an inexorable tendency to increase.
The disparity in the results revealed by these and various other surveys is in part accounted for by the use of different definitions of ‘owner control’.
The percentage shareholding necessary to give control is problematical since as the degree of dispersal increases effective control can be exercised with a decreasing proportion of the votes, and certainly with considerably less than the 50 per cent required for a member or members to have the right to remove the board.
Berle and Means considered that a member with 20 per cent of the votes would have minority ownership control of the company.
Larner set the figure at 10 per cent, and in his later study, with the process of dispersal having become even more marked, Herman acknowledged that a holding of 5 per cent or more ‘begins to approach non-negligibility from the standpoint of corporate power’.
It has even been suggested that a member could exercise control with as little as one per cent of the votes.
Thus, Beed has claimed that ‘since ownership is very widely dispersed…either it could mean, with Berle and Means, that no one individual or small group could gain sufficient votes for control,or , contradicting Berle and Means, that only a few per cent of votes was required for control’.
Beed's preference for the latter alternative is, however, misplaced, since as Herman explains, it involves ‘a confusion between who controls and how control is obtained and maintained’.
Management can exercise control with a very small proportionate holding, but their control does not depend on their ownership stake, but on the position of power that results from executive office.
A member with a holding of a similar size will be quite unable to present a credible challenge to the board because in any contested vote the bulk of shareholders who bother to participate can be relied on to support the incumbent management team.
It is however clear that whatever percentage holding is regarded as indicating minority control, the figure selected will be somewhat arbitrary.
The approach of classifying control on the basis of fixed percentages is, therefore, likely to produce misleading results in some cases.
Instead of using a fixed percentage, Cubbin and Leech argue that a shareholder or group of shareholders can be regarded as having control where it is likely that they would win a contested vote, but that this can be determined only by examining the degree of dispersal of shareholdings within the individual company concerned.
The results achieved by Cubbin and Leech applying this method were similar overall to those obtained in their parallel study using traditional fixed percentage criteria, but there were different outcomes in respect of a significant number of individual companies within the sample.
Nyman and Silberston, while making use of fixed percentages, also insist that the location of control can only be discovered by a case by case approach.
They argue that ‘for many firms there is an effective locus of control connected with an identifiable group of proprietary interests’ which crude statistical tests may fail to reveal.
A company may be ‘related to other corporations, banks, financial institutions, and family owners via complex patterns of shareholdings, interlocking directorates, and kinship networks’ which must be investigated before applying a control classification.
Employing this methodology, Nyman and Silberston, as already noted, find a significantly higher occurrence of ownership control than is generally assumed.
Scott argues further that insufficient attention has been paid to the potential for collaborative action on the part of shareholders, which he regards as indicating the possibility of a form of ownership control despite the absence of minority holdings large enough in themselves to amount to a control position.
The growth of institutional investment is regarded as being of particular significance in this respect.
As will be considered further in Chapter 6, the large value of institutional holdings, the comparatively small number of institutions, and their mutual accessibility, make joint action more feasible than it is in the case of individual shareholders.
Scott contends that the growth of investment institutions has given rise to a distinct mode of control, namely ‘control through a constellation of interests’.
This is said to exist where a company has a number of large shareholders who engage in limited co-operation to protect their common interests, but are insufficiently cohesive and lack the necessary co-ordination to give rise to majority or minority control.
He goes so far as to claim that this form of control is now ‘characteristic of the majority of enterprises in the USA and Britain’, thereby denying the predominance of the management control form.
It is suggested, however, that to attribute control to a temporary and unstable alliance of members who intervene spasmodically to defend their interests in the face of emergent threats pays insufficient attention to the circumstances in which power is exercised on a continuous basis.
In the absence of a reasonably permanent alliance, the possibility of shareholder collaboration is better understood as limiting management freedom of action, but not as in itself amounting to a control position.
Exaggerating the significance of passive ownership stakes or the potential for collaborative action, sometimes ideologically inspired, is unhelpful, in that it draws attention away from the crucial issues of management motives and competence, and the adequacy of the mechanisms of accountability.
From this point of view Herman's approach of adopting a restrictive definition of minority control, but recognising the importance of sizeable ownership interests as a constraint on management power, is much more attractive.
Herman generally regards a company as under minority control where there is a holding in excess of 10 per cent together with board representation.
A large shareholding (for example, the Solvay group's 9.7 per cent stake in Allied Chemical) is not regarded as giving control in the absence of regular participation in management.
Rather, it is treated as evidence of latent power, which serves as a constraint on management freedom of action.
The result is significantly lower figures for ownership control than with a methodology such as that of Nyman and Silberston, discussed above.
The virtue of this control/constraint approach is that while laying due emphasis on the significance of management power, it also makes clear that management control is not an absolute.
Management control does not entail a state of decision-making autonomy, but rather is consistent with the possession of considerable influence by shareholding and other groups.
Moreover, as Herman explains, the boundaries between control and constraint are overlapping, since ‘[a]constraint is a form of control even if only negative in exercise, as it shapes the decisions made by limiting the scope of choice.
In many cases the power of veto is accompanied by the power to consult and a positive say in what is to be done.
A constraint also merges into control when it extends to the power to displace the active management.
But constraints usually involve power over only one or a narrow range of corporate activities, so that they amount to partial control rather than control over the entire spectrum of major decisions’.
He goes on to conclude that in large companies management frequently possesses power over a wide range of decisions, subject to constraints or partial control exercised by others in some decision areas.
Thus, by accepting in appropriate cases the existence of management control subject to constraints the continuing significance of ownership interests can be captured without misrepresenting the nature of ownership involvement in the management process.
Precise classification of control type itself then also becomes less important, and attention can be shifted to more fruitful enquiries about the source, scope, and intensity of the factors that constrain management power.
The foregoing discussion has juxtaposed management and owner control, but there is of course a range of other influences that set limits to managerial autonomy.
Of particular importance are providers of debt finance, who through powers contained in loan agreement covenants may prevent the directors from disposing of particular assets, for example, or restrict their ability to raise further debt or to pay dividends.
Some writers have also seen financial interests as exercising a more general control over companies, notably through networks of interlocking directorships.
Other limiting factors include unions, large customers and suppliers, and government.
Again without wishing to underestimate the significance of these and other influences, however, it seems more illuminating to regard them as sources of constraint than as contradicting the assumption of management control.
Managerial motives
The second component of the managerialist thesis holds that because of the weakness of ownership control managers are able to, and do, engage in forms of behaviour that fail to maximise shareholder wealth and which are inefficient from the point of view of society as a whole.
As already mentioned, one aspect of this behaviour is ‘shirking’— expending insufficient effort to ensure the maximum profitability of the business.
It seems intuitively likely that in the absence of effective shareholder control or other forms of external discipline some managers will shirk, though the importance of a sense of professionalism and self-esteem should not be overlooked.
The problem generally classified as ‘shirking’ also extends to incompetence, since if the shareholders are for practical purposes unable to replace management the company may suffer from inept leadership quite separately from questions of managerial diligence.
The other form of inefficient behaviour is the pursuit of goals that diverge from profit maximisation.
What these ‘managerial’ goals might be requires some elaboration.
The discussion here will be confined to self-interested goals; consideration of ‘socially responsible’ motives will be deferred until Chapter 9, which will conclude that sacrificing profits for socially responsible ends does not occur on a scale sufficient to raise serious doubts about the  commitment of managers to profitability (or whatever other, self-interested goals may predominate).
The goals commonly attributed to management, in no particular order, are status, power, salary, and security.
It is assumed that these are linked not to profit maximisation, but depend on the size of the enterprise.
The predominant management goal therefore becomes one of growth, and in particular growth of sales.
It should however be noted that while profit maximization is not regarded as a goal, it is accepted in managerial theories that there is a profits constraint, either because a minimum level of profitability is a condition of survival of the enterprise, or to necessary to protect management from loss of office through take-over.
Furthermore, growth itself is more difficult without a respectable profits record, and conversely in a dynamic economy continuing profitability frequently demands growth.
The mutual dependence of  profitability and growth, as we will see, makes the assessment of management motivation particularly problematical.
The connection of status and power with size, rather than with high profits per se , seems fairly self-evident.
Prestige is derived from holding executive office in a large, and hence well-known, organisation.
And the bigger the company is, the more important are the decisions made by its managers likely to be, affecting a greater value of assets and a larger number of employees.
The scope for discretionary action may also be increased, given the connection between size and market power.
The existence of a relationship between increased remuneration and profits on the one hand or growth on the other is capable of less impressionistic assessment, and indeed has been subject to detailed research.
It should be noted, however, that at best the results can establish only that managers have a reason for pursuing one or other goal, and not that they actually do pursue it.
For one thing, if, as will be considered shortly, employment income is in some cases only a small proportion of a manager's return from the company, then even with a significant correlation between remuneration and growth the growth motive would be cancelled out.
For another, the overall effect depends on the relative importance of income and other motives as determinants of management behaviour: a positive relationship between income and profitability may not counteract a growth motive inspired by a quest for prestige or security.
Even with these reservations, in fact no very clear picture emerges from the studies.
Two British ones agree that both profitability and size affect remuneration, one finding size to be the major determinant, the other that profitability was at least as significant as growth.
The results of the American surveys are also equivocal.
The argument that size and security are related has taken two forms.
The first is that the risk of insolvency diminishes with increased size.
Coffee has argued that this is evident particularly in the case of conglomerates, with growth being attributable to the desire of managers to reduce the risk of collapse by diversification.
He posits a difference in the attitude to risk on the part of management on the one hand and shareholders on the other, the former being much more risk averse than the latter, given the effect of insolvency on managers' jobs and on the value of their shareholdings in the company (which often constitute a considerable proportion of their total wealth), together with the possibility of personal liability in the event of winding up.
The shareholders, in contrast, at least as far as large and sophisticated investors are concerned, have no interest in increased diversification within the firm, since they will already have spread the risk associated with investment in a particular company or industry by holding a diversified portfolio .
Under the influence of excessive risk aversion managers are thus liable to cause the firm to grow to an inefficient size and to engage in other forms of behaviour which are sub-optimal from the shareholders' point of view, such as making low dividend payouts and an inadequate use of the company's borrowing capacity.
Coffee regards risk aversion as being responsible for the construction of bloated, inefficient mega-firms in the 1960s, in turn creating the setting for the wave of ‘bust-up’ take-overs of the late 1980s.
As he points out, the difference between the asset value and the depressed share price of the conglomerates concerned gave bidders an opportunity to make a profit by disposing of ill-fitting activities or otherwise increasing efficiency by reducing the scale of operations (though in fact the record of take-overs in increasing efficiency is mixed and not all take-overs are explicable as moves to reduce inefficiency in the target).
This reasoning seems plausible, though it is also possible that policies which, as it turned out, led to non-profitable growth, might at least is some cases be accounted for simply as failed experiments in increasing profitability.
Furthermore, the extent to which the underlying cause of inefficient diversification should be attributed to growth inspired by risk aversion, as opposed to growth resulting from other managerialist motives, is unclear.
The other possible connection between growth and security is that large size offers a degree of protection from hostile take-overs and hence against loss of office.
There is some empirical support for the proposition that the likelihood of attack decreases with size.
As just mentioned, however, there may in some cases be an off-setting increased risk of take-over as a result of unprofitable growth causing a depression in share price.
Assessing the magnitude of these conflicting variables and their impact on management motivation is clearly problematical.
An alternative (though partially over-lapping) motivation to that of growth is Williamson's concept of ‘expense preference’.
The idea is that managers derive utility from spending the company's funds to an extent beyond that necessary for profit maximisation.
They thus obtain status and other ‘psychological’ benefits at the shareholders' expense, and increase their rewards from office in a more tax-efficient way than through regular remuneration.
The types of behaviour to which this motivation is said to lead include employing a larger staff than is required for the purposes of the business, lavish expenditure on office accommodation, transport, and various forms of entertainment, and on image- building (but not cost-justified) advertising, and charitable giving.
Casual observation gives grounds for suspicion that excessive spending under these heads does take place, though establishing definitively the absence of an underlying profit justification is obviously problematical.
A different approach to management motivation from that considered so far is adopted by the behavioural school, whose members insist that it is inappropriate to regard the company as engaging in maximising behaviour of any kind, be the maximand profits on the one hand, or growth, or some other determinant of management utility, on the other.
Simon argues that as a result of ‘bounded rationality’ individuals do not maximise, but ‘satisfice’.
This behaviour has two facets.
Because of the vast range of the information potentially bearing on a decision individuals do not attempt to collect and assess all of it before deciding, but settle for a more manageable sample.
Further, rather than engage in an extended search for the maximising solution, they follow a truncated search process, accepting a solution which produces a merely satisfactory outcome.
When attention moves from behaviour at the individual to the organisational level, it is argued that since organisations are not unitary actors, but are made up of individuals and groups with competing interests and objectives, companies cannot be understood as pursuing a single goal, but rather a range of conflicting goals.
Company behaviour must then be understood as the outcome of a continuous bargaining process whereby management attempts to meet the demands of the various interests within the organisation.
Compromises are possible, among other reasons, because objectives are expressed in satisficing rather than maximising terms, and by making use of organisational slack.
The latter idea is that organisations have spare capacity that can be brought into play so as to enable the company to comply with the demands of one group without requiring a damaging transfer from another.
The validity of the behaviouralist analysis, and the impact of the conduct it portrays on profitability is uncertain.
As Scherer concludes, ‘we know far too little about the methods of goal formation and conflict resolution within large organizations.
What is clear is that business managers are pulled in many directions and that they must and do make choices among alternative objectives’.
The continuing pull of profits
We have so far considered reasons why the interests of managers may not be best served by pursuing the goal of profit maximisation.
There are, however, other factors that suggest that management and shareholder interests are more closely aligned than the managerialist thesis assumes.
One concerns the proportion of a manager's income that is derived from holding shares in the company in comparison with the proportion that depends on being an employee.
Research conducted in the United States discovered that for the top five executives from a sample of 50 of the largest companies three times as much income came from shares as from employment.
As Hay and Morris point out, ‘with regard to managerial objectives, it [may be]less important what proportion of a company's shares is owned by the management, but much more vital what proportion of the managers’ remuneration depends on stocks and shares’.
Another factor that may bring the position of managers closer to that of the shareholders is the use of performance-related pay and share option schemes.
While such inducements presumably have some positive effect, later discussion will note that management control over their terms casts doubt on the extent to which they secure an identity of interests with shareholders, and the danger that they create pressures for short-term increases in accounting profits or merely permit management to extract an increased proportion of company revenues.
The other market incentives/deterrents that might be expected to align management and shareholder interests will be briefly noted at the end of this chapter and examined in some detail in Chapter 4.
A different factor to which great significance has been ascribed in maintaining the pre-eminence of the profit objective is the evolution of the multi-divisional (’ M-form’) enterprise, which is the form of organisation now adopted by the bulk of large companies in the UK.
In the traditional unitary form (’ U-form’) enterprise, the business is organised as a single unit with administrative functions, such as production planning, sales, and personnel, centralised in a head office.
As the organisation grows there will be a partial delegation of these functions to branches, but because the business is still run as a single unit (even though it may produce a wide variety of products at many separate locations) responsibility for operational matters, as well as long-term strategy, remains with top management.
Such an organisational structure entails long chains of command, with the consequence that there is great potential for the distortion of instructions from senior managers as they pass down the hierarchy.
Effective monitoring of compliance with instructions and control of sub-goals are also inhibited.
In the M-form enterprise, in contrast, the company is organised into separate product divisions, each with responsibility for many of the administrative operations formerly performed by the head office and its sub-offices.
This enables each division to be treated as a separate profit centre, facilitating ‘the imposition of standardized financial goals on the various divisions, in place of ad hoc evaluations of the performance of noncomparable functional parts’.
The chief significance of this from the ‘separation of ownership and control’ viewpoint is that it is said to restore ‘integrity to the goal-specification and policing process’that is lost through the attenuation of shareholder control.
Indeed, superior control might be obtainable because ‘control is now internal and by informed managers rather than external and by uninformed shareholders’.
Two objections, however, may be made to this reasoning.
First, while tighter control over operating units and the exclusion of sub-goals may be achieved, it is not self-evident that the M-form organisation will affect pursuit of divergent objectives at the level of top-management, though Williamson does suggest that formalised goal and capital allocation procedures educe ‘a profit preference at the top as well’.
Secondly, it may underestimate the capacity of lower-level managers to transmit upwards inaccurate or self-serving information, particularly where they have the advantage of technical expertise not possessed by the head office.
By exaggerating operating difficulties or temporary adverse market conditions, for instance, managers can shape board decision making, providing some leverage against the imposition of rigorous profit-maximising targets, or may attract funds for divisional growth to a greater extent than is justified by the profit potential.
A final pro-profit influence is what Herman describes as the ‘subtle ideological impact’ of ownership.
The suggestion is that profitability is the pervasive criterion of success, providing the standard for self-assessment and for judgments of management performance made within the company and in the business community as a whole.
It is not inconsistent with this interpretation that managerialist goals are sometimes pursued, but it argues that such conduct should be seen as aberrant behaviour, contrary to the dominant management culture.
As against this view, however, Jensen and Murphy suggest with some plausibility that ‘there are strong political and organizational forces that tend to define success in dimensions other than shareholder wealth and exert pressures for actions that reduce firm value.
Managerial conformance to pressure to maintain employment, peace with unions, or major contributions to communities by keeping unprofitable plants open can easily become  synonymous with ‘success’’.
Here, as elsewhere, therefore, no conclusive view of the relative importance of potential motives seems possible.
Market constraints
The final ingredient of the managerialist thesis is the absence of strong competitive pressure.
Lack of competition is a pre-requisite for the survival of inefficient managements and the pursuit of non-profit objectives, since without some degree of monopoly power failure to maximise profits would in the long run lead to collapse.
Chapter 1 noted that competitive conditions in many product markets are such that they are likely to be tolerant of managerial ineffectiveness and in some substantial deviations from the profit goal will not be incompatible with enterprise survival.
Over the past two decades, however, market theorists, accepting the oligopolistic character of the product markets in which many companies operate, have elaborated theories that locate the company and management within other markets which, they argue, exert a more powerful disciplinary effect.
It is held that the market for corporate control in particular enables shareholders to set strict performance standards on management, not, in the terms of Hirschmann's much-quoted distinction, through ‘voice’(through the company's internal control mechanisms), but through ‘exit’(selling their shares’).
In order to avoid repetition, description and evaluation of these theories is mainly postponed until Chapter 4.
For the moment it is sufficient to note that while the managerialist picture of management discretion unbounded by market pressures is unquestionably a serious distortion, the more extreme claims made for the constraining power of these additional markets also give rise to considerable doubts.
Conclusion
The consideration of the consequences of the separation of ownership and control in this section has inevitably been somewhat impressionistic.
There is, however, no shortage of studies attempting to assess the impact of weak owner control on company performance.
Many of these have involved a comparison of rates of return on equity in owner- and management-controlled companies.
Herman refers to 14 such studies, but notes that the results are inconsistent, with nine of them finding that owner-controlled companies performed better than those subject to management control.
The inconsistency of the results is partly accounted for by the different methods used for adjusting for other variables, such as disparities in size and monopoly power between control types, but clearly these studies do not bring a definitive answer much closer.
Similarly inconclusive are studies that have attempted to evaluate the managerialist hypothesis through surveys of management attitudes based on questionnaires.
Of the two British studies, neither finds strong support for the managerialist view, but this is perhaps unsurprising given that there is likely to be an under-reporting of what respondents consider will be perceived as deviant behaviour.
There may also be a degree of self-deception, or at least lack of clarity, on the crucial issue of the distinction between means and ends: is growth seen as a means to long-term profitability, or are profits required as a pre-condition of growth?
Whatever the evidence, there is undoubtedly a widespread belief that the absence of effective supervision of management is an important factor (though by no means the only one) in the weak performance of the British (and the American) economy as compared with those particularly of Germany and Japan where management accountability is not in general regarded as a problem.
This chapter has suggested that in the majority of large public companies the separation of ownership and control is a reality, and that this opens up the possibility that in some of them, subject to the variable constraining influence of market forces, managements will pursue deviant goals and/or shirk.
In others, even though managers may be conscientious and committed to furthering the interests of the members, weak shareholder control may ensure the survival of boards which are incompetent or simply just ‘average’.
This does not of course mean that management control has detrimental effects in all companies, since that would be to ignore the significance of management values, and in any case the extent to which managers benefit from pursuing non-profit goals is unclear.
In short, while accepting that no conclusive view on the effects of the separation of ownership and control is possible, it is important to enquire what contribution the law and structural reform might make to closing the disciplinary gap.
Such an inquiry is undertaken in the next four chapters.
The Legal Control of Management Discretion
Chapter 2 considered how shareholder passivity in large public companies with widely dispersed shareholdings creates the possibility that managers will pursue self-interested ends, divergent from the goal of profit maximisation.
This chapter will examine the role of law in overcoming that problem through the imposition of legal duties which limit the purposes for which managerial discretion may legitimately be exercised.
The relevant duty is the duty to act bona fide for the benefit of the company.
Chapter 4 will describe and evaluate the legal response to shirking and managerial incompetence, the other problems we have assumed to be exacerbated by the separation of ownership and control, by way of the duty to exercise diligence, care, and skill.
Chapter 4 will also examine the impact of market mechanisms on those problems, a discussion which is relevant as well to the control of management goals under consideration in this chapter.
A third duty bearing on the consequences of the separation of ownership and control, the duty to act for a proper purpose, is the subject of Chapter 5.
That duty plays an important, indirect, role in shaping corporate objectives and in imposing pressure for high quality performance by protecting from management interference the company's governance structure and the operation of the market for corporate control.
Chapter 6 will consider the control of managerial discretion through the mechanisms of shareholder democracy, the possible revitalisation of those mechanisms as a result of increasing institutional dominance, and the merits of governance reform.
The control of managerial discretion by means of legal duties (sometimes hereafter, ‘duty- based controls’) relies ultimately on the use of an external agency, the courts, to monitor management conduct.
Two important issues arise from this reliance.
The first, which is one of the main concerns of this chapter, and a recurrent concern of the rest of the book, is with the role and effectiveness of rule-based standards, and judicial monitoring of compliance with them, as a technique for shaping management behaviour.
The second issue relates to the mechanisms by which management conduct is brought before the courts for review.
Frequent judicial intervention is not essential for duty-based controls to be effective, and would if it took place prove extremely costly, but it is necessary that there be a realistic prospect of enforcement.
Whether or not an action is brought mainly depends on the shareholders, but the collective action problem which underlies the separation of ownership and control also militates against shareholder participation in enforcement proceedings.
The question of enforcement is the subject of Chapter 8.
The remainder of this chapter is divided into two sections.
The first will examine the way in which the law has defined the ends for which the directors must exercise their powers.
The second will consider the effectiveness of the law as a control technique in holding directors to the ends so specified.
I THE CONTENT OF THE DUTY TO ACT BONA FIDE FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE COMPANY
The legal model
A distinction should be drawn first of all between limits on the discretion of the directors that result from the company's objects clause, and limits that depend on fiduciary duties.
As to the former, the objects clause in the company's memorandum of association sets out the activities for which the company has been formed, though these activities may subsequently be altered by special resolution.
As a result of changes effected by the Companies Act 1989 the objects clause no longer limits the company's capacity, or at least, the validity of an act may no longer be ‘called into question on the ground of lack of capacity’.
The right of shareholders to restrain directors from entering into transactions that fall outside the company's objects is preserved, however, and the directors remain liable to the company for any loss that may result from entering into such transactions, and to that extent the doctrine of ultra vires survives.
Furthermore, the objects clause continues to limit the directors' authority (as distinct from the company's capacity), though this will only affect a third party who is not in good faith, a requirement which is widely defined.
The objects clause is of little relevance to the containment of conduct inspired by self-interested ‘managerial’ motives.
The activities specified in it invariably extend to virtually every conceivable form of business, and so no basis is provided for example for restricting the ability of the company to diversify.
And so long as a transaction falls within the scope of an activity set out in the objects clause (’ manufacturing’, ‘property development’, and so on) it will be authorised.
The purpose for which the transaction is entered into, be it to make a profit or to further some  divergent managerial interest, is not an issue that arises as far as questions of authorisation are concerned.
The ultra vires doctrine has on the other hand been used to curtail management ‘generosity’ to non-shareholder groups in the form of gratuitous payments.
There is a substantial overlap here with the fiduciary controls and so this issue will be considered below, and in more detail in Chapter 9 where the extent to which the legal rules are tolerant of expenditure for ‘socially responsible’ purposes will be examined.
The fiduciary controls on managerial discretion provide that it is the duty of the directors to act in the interests of the shareholders.
This coincides with the view provisionally adopted in Chapter 1 about how the public interest is best served.
It is not suggested however that directors' duties, which are largely of judicial creation, are shaped by a theory that regards the purpose of the company and company law as being to further the public interest: it is not suggested that the ‘social enterprise’ perspective has influenced the development of the law.
Rather, the focus on shareholder interests results from a private conception of the company and company law.
The underlying theory views the shareholders as having an entitlement that the company be operated for their benefit (or for whatever other purposes they may choose) by virtue of their position as members or owners.
The law respects the right of the shareholders to determine the objectives of their association through contract and accepts that by virtue of their capital contributions they should be regarded as the owners of the company.
By reason of their ownership rights, and given the ‘traditional logic of ownership’, it is taken that the shareholders are entitled to have the company run in their interests: it is their company.
This conception of the company as a private association will be referred to as the ‘legal model’.
In recent years the model's exclusive focus on shareholder interests has to a degree been modified.
The main objective of the following discussion is to ascertain the extent to which the duty of the directors is to maximise profits, and hence is consonant with the putative social interest in profit maximisation.
This demands an examination of how the courts have interpreted shareholder interests, and a consideration of the theoretical and practical consequences of the modifications to the model.
The interests of the company
The standard formulation of the duty of the directors in running the business is expressed not in terms of benefiting the members, but of benefiting the company.
This does not, however, mean that the directors must use their powers to promote the welfare of the legal entity, though technically the duty is owed to the entity (this has important implications for enforceability).
A requirement to benefit an artificial entity,as an end in itself , would be irrational and futile, since a non-real entity is incapable of experiencing well-being.
Indeed, it is doubtful that an inanimate entity can meaningfully be said to have interests, or if it could, what they would be.
Is it in the interests of a corporate entity to be as profitable as possible, for example, or very large, or socially responsible?
Given that these questions seem incapable of being answered, it would be impossible to assign any definite content to a duty framed in terms of benefiting the enterprise as such.
This becomes feasible only when the purpose of the enterprise is taken into account, and the enterprise's purpose can be understood only in terms of serving human interests or objectives.
The correct position is thus that the corporate entity is a vehicle for benefiting the interests of a specified group or groups.
These interests the law has traditionally defined as the interests of the shareholders.
The duty of management can accordingly be stated as a duty to promote the success of the business venture,in order to benefit the members.
For the most part, what is good for the business will also be good for the shareholders and so speaking of a duty to benefit the business will often be accurate enough.
It is important, however, to stress the instrumental character of the prosperity of the business as far as the shareholders are concerned, since otherwise a discontinuity between the ‘enterprise interest’ and the interests of the shareholders is liable to be concealed.
That the welfare of the shareholders and the fate of the company are not co-extensive is evident in the situation that arises where a take-over bid is made for the company.
With the offer price necessarily in excess of current market value a member's best course may be to sell, depending on an estimation of what the company's future performance under existing management is likely to be and the possibility of a higher offer.
It is of no concern to a member who does sell (at least from a financial point of view) that the bidder, having gained control, may go on to operate the company less efficiently than the previous management or is some other way that is damaging to its business.
The law recognises that the shareholders' interest lies ultimately in the value of their shares and not in the business as such, or at least, it recognises that it should be the shareholders who determine the outcome of a bid, and hence (as we will see in more detail in Chapter 5) prohibits certain forms of defensive action on the part of the target company board which could have the effect of depriving the members of an opportunity to dispose of their investment on favourable terms.
This is regardless of the character of the bidder or the possibly depressing prospects for the company under the new management.
Of course, a rule permitting the directors to defend the company from a poorly-managed predator would be perfectly coherent (and might be desirable), but this would not be because the entity has an intrinsic significance that merits protection, but rather because the rule would serve the rational purpose of protecting the interests of groups other than the shareholders who would be adversely affected by a change in control.
These groups might include, for instance, the company's employees, customers, or suppliers.
Defensive measures might also be justifiable as being for the good of society as a whole (i.e. because society has an interest in the efficient operation of the business that might be damaged if the company is taken-over).
A duty to act in the interests of the entity or enterprise would therefore make sense if understood as a duty to benefit a range of corporate ‘constituencies’, permitting the directors to balance the various interests as they see fit in the take-over or any other context.
Expressing such a duty as a duty to further the interests of the enterprise is unhelpful, however, since the formulation has very limited information content: it fails to identify the relevant constituencies and gives no indication of what priority should be afforded to them inter se .
If, rather differently, serving the interests of the enterprise is taken as a proxy for maximising the joint welfare of the relevant groups the formulation is unsatisfactory for this purpose because it contains an inherent bias towards the shareholders.
Understood in this way a duty to serve the interests of the enterprise can sensibly only mean a duty to further the commercial success of the business.
The behaviour that this requires (e.g. plant closures, the use of environmentally damaging production processes) will often be contrary to the interests of non-shareholder groups, but nearly always of advantage to the members (with an exception sometimes arising in the take-over context).
If this is the intended outcome, it would be preferable to make it explicit.
Whatever the merits of entity or enterprise formulations as a means of protecting ‘third party’ interests, the content of directors' duties is not currently defined in enterprise terms.
Further, as will be seen below, the interpretation of the duty of the directors sanctioned by the traditional legal model forbids the subordination of shareholder interests to those of non- owners, though as will also emerge it is arguable that there may now be an exception to this principle.
Present and future members
It is often suggested that ‘the members’ as the beneficiaries of directors' duties means ‘the present and future members’.
It is difficult, however, to see why the directors should have to take account of the interests of the as yet unidentifiable persons who might acquire shares in the company at some future date.
Such an obligation would be particularly hard to justify given that those who join in the future will do so on financial terms that reflect the company's situation at the time they acquire their shares.
The point is of some significance because a duty to balance the interests of present and future members would involve an expansion of the directors' discretion, in effect, allowing them to justify their actions by reference to the well-being of the enterprise even though they are contrary to the interests of the existing members.
The true position is not that the directors must take account of the interests of future shareholders, but rather that they have a discretion concerning the time-scale over which existing members may be benefited.
The directors are accordingly not obliged to maximise current profits in order to satisfy short-term demands for dividends at the expense of a growth in profitability over a longer period.
They are entitled, in other words, to regard the members' interest in the company as being in general a continuing one.
The exclusivity of the members' interests
The effect of the duty introduced in the Companies Act 1980 to have regard to the interests of the company's employees, and of certain recent decisions in relation to creditors, will be examined in a moment.
These developments aside, the legal model has traditionally regarded the shareholders' interests as exclusive, in the sense that other groups may be benefited only to the extent that this furthers the interests of the members.
Thus, the interests of employees, customers, or the local community, for example, may be served only as a means of increasing shareholder wealth and may not be treated as ends in their own right.
The directors may, for instance, make gifts to the employees, but only where this can be regarded as ‘an inducement to them to exert themselves in future, or as an act done reasonably for the purpose of getting the greatest profit from the business’.
A graphic illustration of the purely instrumental status of employee interests can be found in the American case of Dodge v Ford Motor Co .
There Ford's management (dominated by Henry Ford) declared that they proposed to limit dividends in order to lower the price of cars and increase employment, so as to spread ‘the benefits of this industrial system to help [the employees]build up their lives and their homes’.
Such a policy, the court held, was improper, since a ‘business corporation is organized and carried on primarily for the profit of the stockholders.
The powers of the directors are to be employed to that end.
The discretion of directors is to be exercised in the choice of means to attain that end, and does not extend to a change in the end itself, to the reduction of profits, or to the nondistribution of profits among stockholders in order to devote them to other purposes’.
But while promoting non-shareholder interests is not a permissible management objective, the (limited) satisfaction of third party expectations is often a pre-requisite of maximising profits, and hence consideration of them is not precluded by the legal model.
A company will be adversely affected if it suffers from low employee morale, for example.
Similarly, a reputation for inflicting environmental damage will be harmful to profits, and conversely the company may be benefited if it is associated in the public mind with ‘good works’.
Given an objective of long-term profit-maximisation, it is evident that a broad range of concessions to third party interests that do not promise immediate financial returns may be advisable, and therefore that managers must be allowed considerable scope for discretion in such matters.
That the propriety of expenditure is premised on the possibility of an eventual return to the shareholders is, however, made starkly apparent in a number of cases concerning companies that are ceasing to trade.
Since the connection with future profits no longer holds in this situation the basis on which ‘altruistic’ acts can normally be supported, their putative contribution to long-term profits, does not obtain.
The interests of employees: section 309 of the Companies Act
Section 309(1) of the Companies Act 1985 provides that ‘[t]he matters to which the directors of the company are to have regard in the performance of their functions include the interests of the company's employees in general, as well as the interests of its members’.
What effect does this have on the legal model?
The section is open to at least two interpretations.
According to the more ambitious it is now the duty of the directors to operate the business in the interests of the employees in addition to those of the members.
If this is so, the legal model of the company as so far described needs to be rejected in favour of one which does not explain the rules of company law exclusively in terms of the rights of owners, but which instead regards members and employees as joint stakeholders, each with legitimate demands that the company be run for their benefit.
Clearly, there is a substantial community of interest between shareholders and employees.
Improvements in the prosperity of the company that lead to higher dividends or rising share values may also result in increased wages and job security.
But there is inevitably also a conflict of interests.
Each of the groups has an obvious, competing, interest in maximising its share of the surplus generated by the company's business activity.
And there is also a potential conflict in respect of the way the surplus is generated, and its size.
Shareholders have an interest in profits being as high as they can be.
The employees would prefer profits to be lower if maximising them involves plant closures or the introduction of job-destroying technology.
Since employee interests will not always be best served by a policy of profit maximisation, it is follows that section 309, on this first interpretation, will sometimes require, or at least permit, management behaviour to diverge from that which in Chapter 1 was provisionally accepted as best serving the general interest.
The argument in support of this interpretation is that section 309 changes the definition of ‘the interests of the company’— it adds the employees to the shareholders as the persons whose interests the directors are required to serve.
The section gives no indication that the interests of employees and shareholders are to be given a different weighting, and hence the duty of the directors in running the company would appear to one of balancing the respective interests.
Even if this interpretation is correct, however, the section is not likely to have very much effect on the way companies operate in practice.
This is because, first, the duty would appear to be effectively unenforceable.
Section 309(2) provides that the duty is owed ‘to the company (and the company alone) and is enforceable in the same way as any other fiduciary duty owed to a company by its directors’.
In other words, an action complaining of breach of the duty must be brought by the company (i.e. by the directors whose conduct is being challenged).
In certain circumstances proceedings for breach of other fiduciary duties may be commenced by a member on the company's behalf in derivative form.
This raises the possibility of an employee with a shareholding being allowed to enforce the section 309 duty derivatively.
Fitting such a claim into the requirements for a derivative action would, however, demand greater judicial creativity than can perhaps in the circumstances be realistically expected.
The second reason for regarding the section as likely to have only a limited impact is that the relevant duty, like the duty to act bona fide for the benefit of the company, is a subjective one.
The directors must act in accordance with what they believe to be an appropriate balancing of the sometimes conflicting interests, but the court cannot intervene merely because it disagrees with the way in which the directors have weighted those interests.
The court cannot, in other words, review the substantive merits of the directors' decision.
This means that a management policy that is injurious to employee interests can be attacked only on the grounds that the directors lacked good faith, meaning that the directors did not honestly believe that the policy constitutes an appropriate balancing of interests, or that they have altogether disregarded the impact of their decision on the employees.
The prospects for establishing bad faith are very limited however, given that virtually any policy that is premised on increasing profits but which will be damaging to employees, such as a plant closure, can be portrayed as being beneficial to the employees in general, for example by making other jobs in the company more secure, thus supporting the claim that employee interests have been sufficiently considered.
The effect of the section on this first analysis is, therefore, despite its mandatory language, to give the directors a discretion to act in the interests of the employees where they consider it appropriate in preference to those of the shareholders; they do not have a practicably enforceable obligation to further employee interests.
Another way of putting it, and this may be the section's true significance, is that the section provides the directors with a defence in the event of their making a decision that favours the employees at the shareholders' expense.
In that the directors are often likely to be better disposed to the workforce than are the shareholders this may be of some practical importance.
In general, however, the pressures on management are orientated towards shareholder rather than employee welfare.
The fact that the directors' discretion is not reviewable, therefore, means in short that the section is likely to have little causative impact: it does not compel the directors to do anything they would not otherwise have been inclined to do.
According to the second interpretation even this may substantially overstate the effect of the section.
One of the leading practitioner's texts on company law, Gore-Browne, argues that while the directors are now required to take employee interests into account, they are never permitted to subordinate the shareholders' interests to them.
This view is supported on the basis that the section does not affect the definition of ‘the interests of the company’, which continues to mean ‘the interests of the company as a commercial entity as judged by reference to the interests of the shareholders’.
Thus, in deciding, for example, whether to close down an unprofitable factory and make those working in it redundant, the directors are required to consider the effect of closure on the employees, but they are nevertheless under a duty to shut the factory if they believe this to be in the interests of the shareholders.
On this interpretation, ‘having regard’ to the interests of employees means literally that.
The duty is merely a procedural one, having no substantive content.
This does not perhaps leave the section totally without point, in that by directing the board to consider the employees it might expand the cognitive basis of decision making and so might on occasion lead to a superior accommodation of employee interests within the traditional framework of shareholder supremacy.
But it is difficult to believe that directors do not give at least some consideration to the impact of their decisions on employees in any event, regardless of the section.
It is not clear what view of the section the court would take in a case in which there was a clash between shareholder and employee interests, and there was evidence that the board had favoured the latter.
It does however seem quite possible that the second interpretation of the section would find favour.
An ambiguously worded provision, patently lacking adequate means of enforcement, may be too slender a ground on which to anticipate that the courts would sanction a derogation from the ownership rights of the shareholders, lying as they do at the foundation of the legal model of the company.
Chapter 11 will consider proposals to extend further the list of groups whose interests management should consider in running the company with a view to limiting the harmful effect of corporate activities on them.
The present discussion of section 309 exposes the difficulties inherent in such a strategy.
An objective duty to balance potentially conflicting interests would present the courts with a near-impossible task and hence it is impracticable to impose one: not only would the court need to assess the likely impact on each group of a contested business policy, both in the short and long term, but also it would have to evaluate the policy in accordance with a theory which stipulated when one set of interests should prevail over the others.
Even if the courts had the resources to perform the first of these tasks, the latter involves value judgments of a kind inappropriate to the judicial function.
If the duty is framed in subjective terms, as we have seen, the practical effect is not to impose a duty but to confer a discretion and hence a management which is not disposed to sacrifice profits (or otherwise depart from its chosen course) in order to advance other interests will not be compelled to alter its behaviour.
It seems to follow that if one wishes to change corporate goals one must look further than the modification of directors' duties.
Before leaving employees, a limited situation in which it is permissible for the directors to give priority to the interests of employees should be noted.
The Companies Act empowers a company to make payments to employees or former employees on the cessation or transfer of the business (in effect, voluntary redundancy payments), notwithstanding that the exercise of this power is not ‘in the best interests of the company’.
This provision overcomes the difficulty mentioned above that where a company is ceasing to trade there is no justifying rationale for such payments because there is no future flow of profits that present ‘generosity’ to employees might help increase.
Consent of the shareholders by ordinary resolution is required, unless the articles permit the board to sanction payments without shareholder approval, or provide that a resolution passed by more than a simple majority of shareholders must be obtained.
The requirement for shareholder consent, either by resolution or, formally, by their consent to the delegation of final decision-making power to the board, maintains the surface integrity of the ownership model, though certainly at least in the latter case shareholder consent is more hypothetical than real.
The interests of the creditors
A number of English and Commonwealth decisions have recognised a duty (owed to the company) to take account of the interests of creditors where the company is insolvent or on the verge of insolvency.
The decisions mainly concern the situation where creditors' interests have been prejudiced as a result of a gratuitous or non-commercial transfer of the company's assets to a director or to some person with whom the directors are connected.
On the facts of most of them breach of duty could have been established on the conventional ground that the directors had failed to act in good faith for the benefit of the company.
Their main significance is that by predicating the breach on damage to the interests of creditors and thus expanding the corporate constituency it no longer automatically follows that the breach should be ratifiable by the shareholders.
This is of practical importance particularly in the case of closely held companies or wholly-owned subsidiaries where the conduct complained of may well have received unanimous shareholder assent, which would otherwise have the effect of regularising the transaction and hence preventing the liquidator from taking remedial action.
The notion of a duty to respect creditor interests gives rise to a number of conceptual and practical difficulties (e.g. should present and future creditors be afforded different protection?).
These issues will not be pursued further here, however, since in addition to the limitation of the duty to cases of insolvency or near-insolvency, the authorities do not suggest a need for behaviour at variance with the demands of profit maximisation.
A duty of care founded on creditor interests, in contrast, might in theory constrain the pursuit of maximum profits since it is in the interests of creditors that the company should undertake low risk, but sub-profit- maximising, projects, given an entitlement to a fixed return.
The existence of such a duty has, however, been denied by the Court of Appeal and any development in that direction seems unlikely.
The interests of the members and profit maximisation
It is possible that some of a company's shareholders will have interests, for example, as employees or customers, that are distinct from their investment interest in the business.
Others, while having a relationship with the company only in the capacity of member, might prefer the directors to take account of such issues as the environmental or social consequences of the company's activities, and where there is a conflict, to modify the profit instinct accordingly.
Some may even consider that the company has positive obligations to secure the well-being of employees, the local community, or other non-shareholder groups.
Thus, although the legal model may prevent directors from regarding third party interests as ends in their own right, it is arguable that it is consistent with the directors' obligations to the shareholders for the company to sacrifice profits in order to protect them given these possible relationships with shareholder utility.
The problem with such a view is that as between the members in general, the various non-profit interests and aspirations are likely to conflict and members will undoubtedly differ in the extent to which they are prepared to forego profits in order to see them fulfilled.
It would be impossible, therefore, to construct a rule that would frame the ambit of management discretion in such a way as to ensure that the members' varying expectations were uniformly satisfied.
The only practicable alternative, of allowing the directors themselves to decide when a departure from the profit goal is justified, would involve a substantial abandonment of the duty-based control mechanism and would offer no guarantee that any member would be satisfied with the particular balance of interests that the directors might choose to strike.
While this issue has not been expressly considered, it seems fair to assume that rather than incur the risks inherent in giving the board so wide a discretion, and relying on the usually well-founded assumption that the shareholders' dominant purpose is to increase their individual wealth, the court, at the price of some distortion, would define the interests of the members exclusively in terms of their personal financial well-being.
The maximisation of shareholder wealth
To summarise the position so far, it would seem, subject to whatever the correct interpretation of section 309 may be, that the directors are required to further the interests of the shareholders exclusively, and that those interests should be defined purely in financial terms.
The law does not provide any more specific guidance however on how the furtherance of the shareholders' financial interests should be understood.
The standard formulation of the proper objective of management in the economics literature is that managers should seek to maximise the value of the firm, that is, the value of the residual after all fixed claims, such as those of the providers of loan finance and of employees, have been met.
This corresponds with the concept of profit maximisation that has so far been employed above, save that the latter concept contains an ambiguity about time-scale: it does not specify the period over which profits are to be maximised.
A goal of short-term profit maximisation implies conduct different in important respects from that required by a long-term profit goal.
Long-term profitability may depend on investing in research and development, capital equipment, and training, for example, which expenditure will be avoided where the objective is to maximise profits in the short term.
Maximising the value of the firm, however, does not entail any kind of trade-off between short- and long-term profits, since it is assumed that the firm's present value will reflect the future proceeds of current investment.
Thus, the value of the firm is equal to the total value of its expected future stream of cash flows, discounted to take account of the ‘time value of money’(’ a pound tomorrow is worth less than a pound today’) and risk.
It follows that the directors will best serve the interests of the shareholders where they adopt the policy, which may include undertaking investment projects that will produce a delayed return, that is most likely to maximise the firm's present value.
That maximising the present value of the firm will also maximise shareholder wealth depends on certain assumptions about the efficiency of the stock market (’ the efficient market hypothesis’).
The hypothesis holds that the stock market takes account of all relevant information in valuing a company's shares, with the result that the underlying realities of the company's business are fully reflected in share price.
Maximising present value ought, furthermore, at least in theory, to serve the interests of all shareholders, notwithstanding that some shareholders might have preferences for high dividend payouts rather than capital growth.
Since maximising the value of the firm will have the effect of maximising the value of each member's holdings, members with a demand for income need simply sell a proportion of their now more valuable shares in order to unlock their investment.
Of course, if no value-increasing projects are available to the company profits should be distributed to the shareholders.
It would seem to follow from this analysis that the most appropriate content to ascribe to the duty to act in the interests of the shareholders is that the directors should attempt to maximise the present value of the company.
It would appear, furthermore, that the policy of maximising firm value is ideal not only from the point of view of the shareholders, but also from that of society as a whole, since, by giving proper weight to projects with a future pay- off, it strikes an optimal balance between production for present consumption and growth.
There is, however, a problem with this theoretical account, which is that it depends, as mentioned, on the validity of the efficient market hypothesis, that is, it assumes that the underlying value of the company's business is accurately reflected in the market price of its shares.
Whether or not this assumption is well founded turns on the rationality of stock markets and their ability to absorb and evaluate information about a company's prospects.
It has been observed that there are failures in both these respects and that ‘[e]mpirical analyses consistently show that fluctuations in the stock price can be only modestly related to economic realities’.
Thus, if fads and limited access to, and comprehension of, information on the part of the market lead to a  divergence between underlying value and the market value of a company's shares, then the maximisation of underlying value will no longer necessarily maximise shareholder wealth.
Should this be the case, it would seem to follow that a strict concern with shareholder interests would dictate that managers should instead attempt directly to maximise share price, and that directors' duties should be framed accordingly, and not as just suggested.
Whatever advantages there may be to the shareholders in the adoption of one or other of these goals as the object of directors' duties, liability rules, as will be shown in more detail in section II, are too unsophisticated a control technique to make it possible in practice to discriminate between them.
That capital market imperfections might create discrepancies between share price and underlying value is a significant point, however, because it indicates a possible  divergence between the shareholders' interests and the general interest in economic efficiency in the long term.
If this is so, there are important practical implications, since while there may be no legal pressures, there would appear to be market pressures on managers to focus on share price.
A central element in the charge that companies are ‘short-termist’ is that the stock market undervalues projects with a long-term pay off, and therefore that companies may be deterred from investing to the extent that is socially desirable for fear of an adverse effect on the market value of their shares.
If these short-termist pressures exist (whether they do or not is controversial), the solution would appear to lie in addressing the market and institutional conditions that generate them, rather than the precise formulation of directors' duties.
A clarification of what society expects of directors might nevertheless be of some value in combination with other measures.
The issue of short-termism is considered in more detail in Chapter 4.
III THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE DUTY TO ACT BONA FIDE FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE COMPANY
As the courts have not articulated more precisely the content of the duty to act in the interests of the company we will continue to describe directors as being under a duty to maximise profits.
While this terminology may be ambiguous, it is however clear that the duty excludes the various managerialist objectives considered earlier, and hence to that extent is consistent with the general interest, as so far understood.
Having examined how the law defines the ends for which directors must use their powers, we are now in a position to consider the law's capacity to ensure that they act within the bounds laid down.
It is suggested that the controls constitute a necessary conceptual framework, and presumably have some practical impact on behaviour by providing a normative code for the guidance of management and a public standard for the evaluation of their conduct by others, but that as an enforceable control mechanism their effectiveness is very limited.
We will not for the moment consider the suitability of the procedures for bringing complaints of breach of duty to court, though the existence of well-informed plaintiffs with standing and motivation to sue is clearly an essential part of any system of control that is ultimately dependent on judicial sanctions.
Our current interest is rather in the inherent feasibility of controlling management objectives by means of legal duties.
The core of the difficulty faced by duty-based controls lies in the fact that ‘profit maximisation’, even ignoring questions of time-scale, does not refer to behaviour with any definite, objectively identifiable, content.
In the economist's model of perfect competition management behaviour is uniquely determined since there is only one set of responses consistent with the survival of the enterprise.
In more realistic conditions, however, managers are faced with a complex series of questions in the resolution of which they must exercise choice, for example, about plant location, production methods, employment levels, output, advertising, investment, research and development, and so on .
Furthermore, companies operate in an environment in which market conditions, consumer tastes, technological knowledge, and the behaviour of competitors, are in a state of constant change.
In order to maximise profits a firm would need both complete information about present and future states of the world and the capacity to digest and evaluate that information.
Given that in practice managers, like everyone else, suffer from ‘bounded rationality’, that is, inadequate information and computational skills, it is apparent that the conduct required for profit maximisation can only be a matter for judgment: there is no practically discoverable, uniquely correct, profit-maximising course of action.
The subjectivity of the duty
Against this background it is not surprising that the duty to benefit the company should be framed not as a duty to take specific actions or to achieve determinate results, but is instead concerned only with ensuring that the directors act in accordance with proper objectives.
The duty is thus a subjective one, requiring the directors to act ‘bona fide in what they consider — not what a court may consider — is in the interests of the company’.
In fact, there is no necessity for the courts to abandon a concern with substantive outcomes entirely, since, despite the above strictures, a judicial evaluation of the likely profit consequences of a particular course of action would not be impossible, within fairly broad limits.
The court could, for instance, intervene prospectively where a member was able to demonstrate that a proposed business policy would produce an a manifestly inadequate return.
There are, however, few attractions in making the court an ad hoc part of the corporate decision-making machinery.
Lord Wilberforce has insisted that ‘[t]here is no appeal on merits from management decisions to courts of law: nor will the courts of law assume to act as a kind of supervisory board over decisions within the powers of management honestly arrived at’.
Subjecting proposals to scrutiny by a body distinct from management may well be desirable, but this is clearly a function for an actual supervisory board, and not one for the court.
Apart form the unwieldiness of the procedure and the inevitably sporadic character of the intervention, judges are not obviously well qualified to make substantive evaluations of business policy.
Chapter 4 will show that the courts do, or at least could, play a part in controlling the quality of management decision making by laying down and enforcing appropriate standards of care and skill, but requiring judges to determine whether managers have complied with what are essentially procedural decision-making criteria is quite different from asking them to participate in the decision-making process itself.
The problem with framing the duty to act in the company's interests in terms of subjective intentions, however, is that in practice determining what the directors' true objectives are will often be beyond the court's capabilities.
One situation in which there will be no great difficulty in establishing that the directors have broken their duty is where there is overt evidence of divergent motivation.
Thus, the mistake of management in Dodge v Ford Motor Co was to admit that part of their aim was to benefit the employees.
Without that admission the pricing policy in issue could doubtless have been justified as a permissible interpretation of the requirements of long-term profitability.
Similarly, establishing liability will be feasible where it is clear that the company's interests have not been addressed by management.
These unusual circumstances, and cases of corrupt diversion of corporate assets aside, however, it will in general be very difficult to demonstrate that the directors did not believe that what they were doing would maximise profits, because of the often insuperable problem of distinguishing between means and ends that this entails.
Separating ends from means
Chapter 2 noted that managements may adopt non-profit-maximising policies for two broad reasons.
The first is self-interest.
They might consider, for instance, that their own welfare is linked to the size of the enterprise independently of whether the return to shareholders is maximised, perhaps because high remuneration, power, or prestige are associated with large scale rather than profitability.
The second reason, less plausibly, is that they regard non-shareholder groups as having legitimate claims on the company and believe that these claims should be satisfied even though a reduction in shareholder wealth is involved.
Policies with a growth motivation, for example, expansion by take-over, will normally on their face give no clue that their purpose is something other than the maximisation of profits.
Nor is it likely to be possible to infer motive from the outcome or likely outcome of a transaction, since the fact that a project yields less than optimal profits is an inherent risk in all business ventures and except in extreme cases will not reveal the existence of a non-profit goal.
Absent actual evidence of motive, therefore, the court will be unable to establish whether expansion was a means to profit maximisation or an end in itself.
Conduct within the second category, for example, a donation to charity, will sometimes be sufficiently disconnected from ordinary business practice to make an attack on motive potentially more manageable.
But the obscurity of the means/end relationship will again normally prevent divergent expenditure being identified, since a plausible case can usually be made for donations in terms of their contribution to goodwill and hence to long-term profitability.
The shareholders enjoy an additional layer of protection with regard to gratuitous payments, in that in order to show that a payment is authorised by the company's memorandum it will usually be necessary to establish that it is reasonably incidental to the company's business purposes, in essence, that it is for the company's benefit, which is an objective question.
However, in practice, because of the difficulties associated with assessing objective benefit already mentioned, the test is diluted to one of whether the transaction is capable of benefiting the company, thus adding little of substance to the subjective test.
In other cases of benefiting non-shareholder interests, for example installing more effective anti-pollution equipment than is consistent with maximum profits or required by law, or delaying closure of a redundant factory in order to preserve jobs, the conduct, as with growth-motivated behaviour, is an integral part of business activity and so not susceptible to this kind of attack.
We might finally note that the court is able to rely as an aid to discovering intention on the proposition that what no reasonable board could have believed to be beneficial to the company, the actual board could not have believed either, or, in other words, that where the means adopted could not on any reasonable view lead to the end of benefiting the company, the directors could not have been motivated by a desire to achieve that end.
This technique may have some application where there is a manifest disproportion between the scale of expenditure and any benefit that could possibly result to the business.
It may thus be of value in controlling outlays for ‘socially responsible’ purposes, or, conceivably, on a limited range projects motivated by management self-interest, for example, the acquisition of an over-lavish corporate headquarters.
To evoke a judicial response in either situation, however, it is likely that the company's behaviour will need to be glaringly out of line with that of similarly situated enterprises.
Conclusion
To sum up, the duty to act in the interests of the company (i.e. the shareholders) imposes only a weak control on managerial discretion, since any plausible assertion that a course of action is designed to increase the company's financial well-being will be enough to protect it from attack.
It follows that the duty cannot be expected to play a major part in controlling managerialist tendencies.
Whether this has serious implications for the efficiency of large companies depends on the effectiveness of other forms of control over management, and on the prior question of the intensity of non-profit motivations.
The duty to act for the benefit of the company does not exhaust the contribution of legal duties to the regulation of management goals.
Chapter 5 looks at the connection between a further duty, the duty to act for a proper purpose, and the  commitment to profit maximisation.
Before that the role of the duty of care in controlling managerial inefficiency will be examined.
Managerial Efficiency
The previous chapter examined the effectiveness of the duty to act in the interests of the company in holding directors to the goal of profit maximisation against the background of the separation of ownership and control.
The concern in this chapter is with the impact of weak owner control on management efficiency.
The term ‘efficiency’ is used here to refer to the expenditure of appropriate levels of effort and skill on the part of the company's directors and top managers.
Clearly, a company's senior executives may become lethargic where shareholder pressure is lacking, and profitability is likely to be prejudiced where incompetent directors are effectively unremovable.
Assuming that these risks are real ones in the large public company, the chapter will survey the law of negligence as it applies to directors, and will consider whether the role of the courts as external monitors of management efficiency could usefully be increased.
The contention that the separation of ownership and control does not lead to serious inefficiency, on the ground that market forces cause management self-interest and shareholder welfare to coincide, has already been mentioned.
This claim will be considered in more detail later in the chapter, together with the view of some market theorists that the operation of market forces renders liability rules in this area superfluous.
I DIRECTORS AND THE DUTY OF CARE
This section examines the current law relating to the duty of directors to devote adequate attention to the company's affairs and to carry out their functions competently.
It will consider whether it would be feasible for the courts to act as monitors of management standards on a scale significantly greater their current (very low) level of involvement.
An evaluation of whether or not it would be desirable to extend judicial activity in this area will be undertaken in section III, after the role of market forces in shaping management behaviour has been examined.
The courts do not, of course, monitor management on their own initiative, but only when an issue is brought before them by a suitably qualified plaintiff.
A consideration of the problem of standing and the practical difficulties faced by would-be litigants will be postponed until other aspects of directors' duties have been examined, and will appear in Chapter 8.
Monitoring management effort
Directors are required to satisfy minimum standards of diligence, care, and skill.
‘Diligence’ refers to the expected level of active engagement in company affairs.
It seems quite likely that lack of management diligence, in the form of lethargy or a preference for a ‘quiet life’, and leading, for example, to failure to adapt to new trading environments or to technological change, is the most serious source of avoidable damage to company profitability.
In aggregate, it will certainly be a greater cause of loss than the various forms of self-dealing, discussed in Chapter 7, which have generated a substantial body of case law and are subject to detailed statutory regulation.
Historically, the standard of diligence set by the courts has been comically low, as can be seen from the cases concerning failure to supervise fellow directors and managers who turn out to have been defrauding the company.
These old cases generally involve directors lacking executive responsibilities, however, and provide little guidance about the position of the modern executive director.
Executive directors have a contractual relationship with the company which imposes on them, either expressly or by implication, an obligation to devote such attention to the business as is necessary properly to carry out their functions.
This will normally mean that they must work for the company full-time.
Comparatively recent authority also indicates that a higher level of involvement is now required of non- executives than the old cases suggest, in line with changed social expectations of those performing that role.
The precise content of the duty of non-executive directors is, however, obscure.
While they undoubtedly have a duty of some sort in relation to the detection of management fraud, the details of that obligation have not been articulated.
Whether non-executives have any responsibility for company performance in general, arising from a duty to supervise the quality of management decision making, also awaits further litigation.
Statutory developments as well have set limits to permissible directorial inactivity.
The court has the power under section 214 of the Insolvency Act to impose personal liability on a director for the debts a company that has gone into liquidation where the director is guilty of ‘wrongful trading’.
The section makes it dangerous for a director to be unaware of the company's financial position, since  liability may ensue where a director fails to take appropriate action to ‘minimise the potential loss to the company's creditors’ once it would have been apparent to a properly informed director that the company was heading for liquidation.
Failure to act, at least if it amounts to ‘gross negligence’, may also result in a director being disqualified from office under the Company Directors Disqualification Act where the company has gone into liquidation.
There is, however, a difference between imposing liability where the company has collapsed and it emerges that a director has been in total dereliction of duty or something close to it, and using the law to promote managerial dynamism.
Even accepting that executive directors are now required to give their full-time attention to company affairs, the law appears to have little role to play in ensuring that the board engage in proper long-term planning or respond vigorously to changes in the business environment.
If, for example, it were to be suggested that management had paid insufficient attention to the development of the company's product base, establishing that this amounted to negligence would be highly problematical.
For one thing, there would be problems in establishing causation: showing that steps that a more energetic management might have taken would have made a difference to the company's position would involve an assessment of complex and often imponderable factors.
There would also be related difficulties in quantifying what the company had lost as a result of board passivity.
Furthermore, the resolution of both of these issues would require the court to evaluate the merits of alternative business policies which as we will see below, is something that they are most reluctant to do.
One area in which the duty to be diligent might usefully be developed is with regard to the installation and supervision by the board of adequate management systems.
The vast majority of decisions within large corporate organisations are not made by the board or even by managers that board members could reasonably be expected personally to supervise.
It should, however, be the responsibility of the directors to ensure that systems exist for confirming that decision makers possess appropriate skills and for providing adequate performance monitoring.
It is, furthermore, crucial to the profitability of a complex organisation that there be effective mechanisms to facilitate the flow of information.
Information that enters the company at one point (for example the complaints department) must be transmitted to all personnel whose decisions might be affected by it (for example, the design department), and there must also be systems for the collection of information from outside the organisation that might affect future profits.
The law has some part to play in stimulating directors to take appropriate action in these areas by imposing  liability where loss can be attributed to a failure on the part of the board to ensure that the company is equipped with an adequate organisational structure.
Monitoring the quality of decision making
We now turn to the judicial supervision of the quality of top management decision making.
The cases establish the basic requirement that a director must act in accordance with the standard of the ‘ordinary prudent man’.
The standard of care and skill owed by directors is often described as a subjective one.
While it is true that the standard expected of particular directors may be increased in accordance with their individual attributes, it is clear that there is also an objective base-line standard, though admittedly a low one.
This objective standard may be contrasted with that imposed on persons performing professional services (or other services involving technical expertise), who are required to satisfy the standard of ‘the ordinary skilled man exercising and professing to have’ the relevant skill.
The distinction is explicable on the basis that directorship has not been regarded by the courts as a profession, and hence a director is not expected to satisfy a higher standard, for example that of the reasonably competent business manager, simply by virtue of holding office.
Instead, directors have been treated as being in a position similar to that of trustees or agents, that is, as being persons appointed to perform a diverse range of functions that do not of themselves demand the possession of specific technical skills.
This view was no doubt reinforced in the past by the fact that those who became directors were frequently individuals of limited capabilities, good breeding often being a more important ground for selection than business acumen.
The cases do suggest, however, that where a director does possess a relevant expertise he should be judged by the standards of a competent practitioner of it, presumably on the ground that he has expressly or impliedly held himself out as being appropriately qualified.
This is, for example, stated negatively in Romer J's dictum in Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd to the effect that a director need not ‘exhibit in the performance of his duties a greater degree of skill than may reasonably be expected from a person of his knowledge and experience.
A director of a life insurance company, for instance, does not guarantee that he has the skill of an actuary or a physician’.
The implication would seem to be that an individual who does possess ‘knowledge and experience’ in a particular area of expertise will be required to satisfy a standard higher than that of the ‘ordinary man’.
Where it is evident that the directors have ‘knowledge and experience’ in the area of business , on the other hand, they have been held to a standard demanding no more than ordinary prudence.
Thus, in Overend & Gurney Co v Gibb , for example, it made no difference that the directors, who acquired for the company an insolvent business at great expense, were ‘men of the world, and accustomed to business, and accustomed to speculation, and [had]a knowledge of business’.
The ordinary prudent man standard was applied notwithstanding.
This seems to be inconsistent with the proposition that a higher standard applies where the director possesses relevant skills, but is presumably explicable on the basis that the higher standard relates only to distinct forms of professional expertise, such as that of the actuary or the physician referred to by Romer J, and not where the experience or expertise that the director has acquired is that of a business manager.
Business management, as mentioned earlier, is not recognised as a professional skill in its own right.
A further significant feature is that the ordinary prudent man standard has itself been applied in such a way as to leave the director's duty of care with little content.
This can be seen at work in the House of Lords decision in Overend & Gurney Co v Gibb , just mentioned.
The directors in that case had decided that the company should acquire a brokerage business for a substantial sum.
Before acquisition they became aware that far from being the prosperous enterprise the business had appeared to be, it was in fact insolvent by reason of having incurred a number of bad debts.
This did nothing, however, to deter the directors from completing the purchase.
The House of Lords held that for the directors to have been negligent in taking this course they would have had to have been ‘cognisant of circumstances of such a character, so plain, so manifest, and so simple of appreciation, that no men with any ordinary degree of prudence, acting on their own behalf’ would have entered into the transaction.
This suggests that the boundaries of acceptable behaviour lie beyond mere unreasonableness, that the directors would have been liable only if on no tenable view of the facts could their actions have benefited the company: in other words, if they had behaved in a way that was perverse.
Their conduct could not have been so described because the court believed that despite its insolvency, it was not inconceivable that the business could have been returned to prosperity.
Since this possibility existed, the court considered that it would be improper to substitute its own judgment as to whether it was wise to proceed for that of the directors.
This is to acknowledge that the court's role is merely to act as a long-stop.
Decisions that fall outside the parameters of ‘ordinary’ unreasonableness may give rise to liability, but those indicating a lesser degree of ineptitude will be categorised as merely imprudent, or as involving an error of judgment, and will, accordingly, be safe from attack.
This has the advantage from the point of view of the courts of largely relieving them of the necessity to enter into the merits of business judgment, a matter to which we will return below.
Where loss has been caused by an act or omission which is of a comparatively mechanical character, rather than involving an exercise of business discretion, the courts have, in contrast, shown themselves to be more willing to impose liability.
Thus, in Dorchester Finance Company Ltd v Stebbing , two non-executive directors were held to have been negligent in equipping an executive director with signed blank cheques who used them to make unrecoverable loans.
Similarly in Re New Mashonaland Exploration Company Vaughan Williams J commented,obiter , that where a company has resolved to lend money on security, to have parted with the money before the security had been created would have been negligent.
Two factors explaining the low standard of competence imposed by the courts have thus emerged: management is not a profession, and the courts wish to avoid second-guessing business judgment.
A third feature underlying the courts' tolerant attitude to managerial failure is their belief, at least historically, that mismanagement can, and should, be controlled by means of shareholder supervision.
It is no doubt true that there is a reduced need for rigorous liability rules where the shareholders are in a position to exercise a real, informed choice about the appointment and removal of directors, and are prepared to engage in active monitoring of management.
And where the members genuinely have control over the board it is legitimate to regard them as partly responsible for any losses that might result, and hence to view it as inappropriate for the court to come to their aid.
This attitude in evident in Turquand v Marshall , for example, where Lord Hatherley stated that ‘however ridiculous and absurd [the directors']conduct may seem, it was the misfortune of the company’ that it had chosen them.
The same sentiment appears in Lagunas Nitrate Company v Lagunas Syndicate , where it is suggested, somewhat eccentrically, that effect might be given to it by allowing the directors to plead the defence of volenti non fit iniuria .
The modern law
In the absence of modern authority it is possible only to speculate about how far the above account of the law represents the position today.
A useful starting point is to note that two of the three factors just mentioned as having influenced the law's development have little application in modern conditions.
Thus, far from shareholder control justifying judicial non-interference, the looseness of shareholder control over management indicates the need for at least considering an expanded role for the courts.
And even without the separation of ownership and control, business complexity and the ‘organisational distance’ of shareholders from managers make owner control over the quality of management decision making, if not over the quality of managers, a fiction, suggesting a need for alternative mechanisms for supervising managerial competence.
Secondly, it is difficult to believe that the courts would now fail to recognise that management involves distinctive skills.
Many business issues manifestly demand knowledge that would not normally be possessed by the lay person, for example, concerning the risks inherent in marketing new products, the techniques for maintaining cash-flow, or the steps that should be taken to guard against currency fluctuations, not to mention technical issues specific to particular industries.
The twentieth century has seen the growth of a considerable literature on management as an acquired skill and it has for some time been possible to obtain academic management qualifications.
It would, furthermore, be difficult to justify the scale of directors' remuneration if the recipients did not possess comparatively scarce abilities, and it would, if only for that reason, be surprising if directors were themselves to deny the possession of special skills.
Once it is accepted that management involves technical expertise, the court could, without departing from the existing but anomalous principle that the standard of care is linked to the attributes of the director, impose an appropriately higher standard, given that most executive directors of large companies do have considerable business experience.
It would, however, be preferable for the standard to be linked to the role being performed, irrespective of the actual talents of the individual performing it, since there is no reason why an under-qualified director should enjoy a partial immunity.
This may, in fact, already be the position as far as executive directors are concerned, in that they are employees and it is usual for the court to imply a term in employment contracts to the effect that employees will carry out their duties with reasonable care and skill.
Applied to directors, this would mean that they would be required to exercise such care and skill as is reasonably to be expected of a person occupying the relevant position.
A director whose functions demand the possession of some technical ability would accordingly be required to comply with the standard of the reasonably competent practitioner of the expertise in question, whether or not it was actually possessed.
A finance director, for example, would be judged by the standard of the reasonable person experienced in financial matters, and not by the standard of the ordinary person.
Similarly, a director who is in charge of the company's research and development programme would not be able to resist a negligence action by claiming that he or she lacked experience or qualifications in the area concerned.
Further, executive directors in general would presumably be required to display administrative and management skills commensurate with their functions.
Business judgment, risk, and the bounds of negligence liability
Even if this approach is adopted, however, it does not follow that it will lead to a marked increase in the role of the courts as monitors of business decisions.
As already mentioned, a refusal to enter into the merits of business judgment has been an important feature of the courts' attitude towards directors' negligence, and it is suggested that the basis of this refusal is, to an extent, well-founded.
The main point is that there is an absence of criteria by which the courts can assess the merits of an exercise of business discretion.
This should not be confused with the proposition that because judges lack business experience they are not competent to judge business issues.
In other technical areas, despite not personally possessing relevant expertise, judges are fully prepared to determine questions of professional competence.
Lack of medical knowledge, for example, does not prevent the courts from deciding whether the use of a particular medical procedure was negligent.
There is, however, a difference between making an assessment of conduct in a professional negligence case and evaluating a business decision.
It is that in the former situation it will be possible to adduce evidence as to established professional practice with which the defendant's actions can be compared, whereas in business, while it may be clear what steps should be taken before a decision is made, it is not obvious by what criteria the decision itself should be judged.
In other words, business decisions are of limited justiciability.
This point can be illustrated by making a comparison between the position of directors and that of trustees.
Bartlett v Barclays Bank Trust Co Ltd is a good illustration of the latter.
In this case Brightman J decided that trustees who held most of the shares in a company were negligent when they failed to prevent the directors of the company from entering into a highly speculative property development project, which turned out to be unsuccessful.
Whether or not the directors themselves had been negligent was not in issue, but it is suggested that a finding to that effect would have been more problematical.
The primary duty of trustees is to ensure that the trust fund remains intact, since the financial security of the beneficiaries may depend on it.
On that basis, entering into a hazardous transaction that results in damage is, in itself, negligent.
Directors, on the other hand, are charged with the responsibility of maximising profits.
To do this it will frequently be necessary for them to take risks.
Whether a risk is worth running depends on an estimate of its magnitude in the light of the size of the potential reward.
Assuming, on facts such as those in Bartlett , that the directors have sufficiently researched a project, it is not evident how a court could determine whether the expected profits justify the risks involved, and this is likely to be the case with respect to much business decision making.
In short, the indeterminacy of the issues before the court means that the judicial evaluation of management decision making will often be an enterprise of doubtful value.
At least in the eyes of the courts, too close a scrutiny of business decisions may, in addition, be dangerous, since it may inhibit legitimate risk taking.
In Re Faure Electric Accumulator Company , for example, Kay J stated that ‘to apply to directors the strict rules of the Court of Chancery with respect to ordinary trustees might fetter their action to an extent which would be exceedingly disadvantageous to the companies they represent’.
The danger of suppressing enterprise is an issue of which the American courts are also particularly conscious, and is a key justification for the ‘business judgment rule’.
The rule, which is an articulate version of the policy of judicial reticence that is implicit in the practice of the English courts, is designed to ‘stimulate risk taking, innovation and other creative entrepreneurial activities’.
The debate on how the rule should be formulated for the purposes of the American Law Institute's Corporate Governance Project has revealed the battle lines of those who favour leaving the disciplining of management to the market and those who see an important role for the courts.
As far as this country is concerned, the possibility of inhibiting risk taking is undoubtedly a legitimate factor to be taken into account in determining the content of management duties, but the law can surely afford to develop considerably more rigorous rules before problems of risk suppression are encountered.
Enforcing adequate decision-making procedures
While, for the reasons just explored, raising the standard of care may have only a limited impact on the courts' willingness to categorise a decision as negligent rather than as a mere ‘error of judgment’, it may still nevertheless lead to the courts playing a greater role as monitors of business efficiency.
This is because a higher standard of care may cause the courts to pay more attention to the adequacy of the informational base on which a decision is made and to how thorough the decision-making process has been.
These are, in fact, matters of which the courts have to an extent been prepared to take notice in the past.
Thus, in Overend & Gurney Lord Hatherley stated that the directors would have been liable if there had been any ‘undue neglect of any circumstance or transaction which ought to have been inquired into’.
In other words, while the court would not have imposed liability in respect of the decision itself (except if it had been perverse) failure to go through the preliminary steps of obtaining essential information could have grounded liability.
Vaughan Williams J. seems to have had something similar in mind in Re New Mashonaland Exploration Company .
In that case he refused to hold that directors had been negligent on the ground that he was satisfied that they had made ‘a real exercise of discretion and judgment’.
Knowing the right questions to ask often depends on being familiar with the activity in hand and on general business expertise.
Raising the standard of care should, therefore, have the effect of demanding that directors make an appropriately detailed investigation of the facts and engage in a suitably thorough decision-making process: directors who must comply with the standard of reasonable occupants of the relevant office, rather than that of ‘ordinary prudent men’, need to have a more sophisticated grasp of the factors that should influence their decisions.
For example, before embarking on a major project it will usually be appropriate for management to commission a feasibility study or market research, and it will obviously be essential to calculate likely costs and potential returns.
Where a project requires technical expertise it may also be necessary for the company to recruit suitably qualified personnel or seek outside advice if the expertise is lacking, both at the outset and during the course of the project.
By insisting on compliance with minimum decision-making procedures of this kind the courts can impose a valuable discipline on management without having to confront the difficulties inherent in evaluating the merits of actual decisions.
Nor are procedural controls likely to interfere unduly with risk taking.
The fact that the duty of care is enforced at all means of course that there is a possibility that decisions with bad outcomes will attract liability, and so to that extent procedural standards might suppress risk.
Rather than reducing the level of risk taking in general, however, the effect of a requirement to obtain adequate information ought to be that the chances of directors discriminating between legitimate and illegitimate risks are improved.
Of course, deciding how much information to obtain, given the cost in time and money of acquiring it, in itself demands the exercise of judgment.
It has been contended accordingly that managers should be allowed to determine for themselves how thoroughly they need investigate the background to a transaction, since judicial interference in this process is likely to lead only to wasteful investigations and excessive documentation in order to provide a defence if litigation ensues.
The implication of this, however, is that directors should be the sole arbiters of the appropriateness of their working methods; the suggestion that ‘rational shareholders would not have it otherwise…for their welfare is maximised by decisions that yield the highest profits net of the costs of gathering information and making the decision’, adds nothing beyond the empirically unsupported assertion that on balance, if left alone, managements will make decisions in the most cost-effective way.
Shareholders would be unwise to be so trusting and surely have little to lose from the insistence that directors comply with externally monitored rational decision-making procedures.
This, after all, is the position in which every other professional group finds itself.
To conclude, therefore, the enforcement of essentially procedural decision-making standards is within the capacity of the courts and might reasonably be expected to have beneficial effects.
With this in mind, a legislative change is desirable to make clear that directors, both executive and non-executive, owe a duty of care and skill with a standard linked to the functions they perform within the company.
A set of statutory guidelines, similar to those proposed in Australia, indicating factors to be taken into account in deciding whether a director has met the relevant standard might also have educative value and be useful in stimulating the development of a more detailed body of jurisprudence.
The Australian guidelines direct the court to consider, for example, the steps taken by a director to obtain information and to ensure that those from whom advice is sought are competent, to monitor decisions made by lower-tier management, and to monitor the company's compliance with law.
A consideration of additional factors bearing on the merits of an extension of negligence liability along the lines suggested in this section will be undertaken in section III, after the role of markets in raising the standard of management performance has been examined.
II THE DISCIPLINE OF THE MARKET
It was suggested in the foregoing discussion that the laxity of the duty of care can be explained partly by reference to the confidence of the courts, at least historically, in the effectiveness of shareholder control.
Given the inadequacy of the democratic control mechanisms, it was contended that an appropriate response might be to enhance the courts' monitoring function.
More rigorous liability rules are, however, opposed by market theorists, who believe that the operation of markets imposes a discipline which is sufficient to secure an acceptable level of managerial efficiency, without giving rise to the costs that flow from reliance on a liability regime.
Some of these possible costs have already been mentioned.
They include the damaging effect on the willingness of directors to take risks, wasteful research, excessive documentation of the decision-making process, and also the expense associated with litigation itself.
The object of control is not, market theorists emphasise, to eradicate inefficiency, but to ‘minimize the sum of the existing inefficiencies and the costs of the solution’.
Thus, it has been suggested that ‘the likely effect of legal regulation on top of that already provided by the markets…would be an inefficient and otherwise undesirable distortion of managerial behaviour’.
The validity of this statement rests, however, on the assumption that market forces create an optimal set of incentives and deterrents.
It should be emphasised at the outset that this is an assumption, not an empirically established or necessary truth: what theory dictates should happen in a state of perfect competition may not occur in real, imperfect markets.
The validity of the claims made for the efficacy of market forces will, therefore, be assessed on the basis of their inherent plausibility in the context of the complex circumstances in which they operate.
We will now examine in turn the markets likely to affect management behaviour.
The analysis is, of course, relevant not only to issues of managerial efficiency as defined in this chapter, but also to the selection of management goals, the subject of Chapters 2 and 3.
And it will be called on again in Chapter 9, as revealing the practical scope for profit-sacrificing ‘socially responsible’ management behaviour.
The product market
The market which affects management behaviour in the most obvious way is the market for the company's products.
An inefficient firm will face higher production costs than rival businesses and may eventually become insolvent as customers buy elsewhere.
The product market ought, therefore, to stimulate management efficiency: if managers are to keep their jobs they must strive to make the company as profitable as possible.
While this may be true of highly competitive markets, however, ‘an imperfectly competitive market will not quickly convert…inefficiency into insolvency’.
In reality, optimal performance is unlikely to be a condition of survival, and where a company dominates a market which is difficult to enter a high level of inefficiency may be tolerated indefinitely.
Product market signals can, however, be amplified by linking management remuneration to company performance, and thus while the market may be largely ineffective in so far as it offers threats, it can be made to function better by providing incentives.
Linkage can happen informally in that high salaries are easier to justify where the company is profitable, but in many companies the connection between profitability and remuneration is now made explicit, through the use of bonus payments or share options.
Such schemes are said to help align the interests of managers with those of shareholders and hence make the former behave more like owners.
It is argued, furthermore, that while incentive pay may be of value at all levels in an organisation, it is particularly beneficial at the highest level.
Thus, a principal function of top management is to co-ordinate and monitor the efforts of those lower down the hierarchy.
Managers are not themselves subject to these processes, and so in order to ensure that they carry out their duties efficiently, it is contended that they should be given the incentive of performance-linked pay.
Viewed in terms of agency theory, the problem is essentially one of the low visibility of management effort.
Because shareholders cannot tell how hard managers are exerting themselves on their behalf, managers have an incentive to shirk.
By linking rewards to what is observable, namely company performance, this tendency can be reduced.
The effectiveness of incentive schemes is in practice hard to assess.
There are certainly grounds for scepticism.
As Herman points out, ‘it is possible that the ‘incentive’ effects of different kinds of income may be overrated if the determinants of income are under management control and management can re-arrange them to achieve a predetermined result’.
Support for the view that remuneration schemes are designed to produce a particular outcome can be derived from the findings of Jensen and Murphy.
Their survey of the remuneration of chief executives in the United States reveals that although on average bonuses represent 50 per cent of salary, such bonuses are awarded in ways that are not highly sensitive to performance.
They estimate that in the 250 largest corporations, a $1,000 increase in corporate value (defined as share price appreciation plus dividends) produces an increase in the salary and bonus of the chief executive over a two year period of less than 10 cents, and share options add only another 58 cents.
As one commentator has thus pointed out, ‘[a]lthough the relationship between compensation and corporate performance is statistically significant, it is not economically significant’.
Jensen and Murphy go on to suggest that for pay to have a genuine incentive effect rewards should be made significantly more sensitive to performance.
This means that managers in companies that perform well should be paid very much more than they are now (and the prospects of dismissal for poor performance should be increased).
Whether large rises in what are already often massive salaries, even assuming them to be efficacious, would be politically acceptable, however, is doubtful.
The incentivising effect of performance-related pay can, furthermore, be over-rated.
Herman, for instance, queries whether ‘elaborate compensation systems’ are necessary to motivate ‘highly paid executives nurtured to be ‘achievers’in any case’.
Rather than take the route advocated by Jensen and Murphy, it seems more attractive to respond to the problem of the low visibility of management effort directly, by improving internal monitoring, for example, through board reform.
It should be noted finally that depending on their design, incentive schemes may actually be counter-productive.
Where, for instance, remuneration is linked to earnings per share, managers have an interest in increasing short-term profits, which may be detrimental to investment and the company's long-term value.
Furthermore, accounting-based measures of performance are manipulable and hence do not guarantee an ideal incentive structure.
Linking rewards to share price movements overcomes the latter problem, but whether it will instil a more forward-looking perspective depends on how well stock prices reflect a company's future prospects, a matter on which there is some doubt.
The market for managers
Much has been made of the disciplinary power of the market for managerial services.
One theorist has gone so far as to claim that ‘the viability of the large corporation with diffuse security ownership is…explained in terms of a model where primary disciplining of managers comes through managerial labor markets, both within and outside of the firm’.
As regards the market within the firm, it is obviously true that managers are frequently competitive by nature and hence will exert themselves in their quest for personal advancement within the organisational hierarchy.
It is also likely that they will monitor and criticize the performance of their colleagues to the same end.
These are not insights unique to market theory.
While such pressures will no doubt improve performance within the company generally, they are, however, likely to be at their least effective in increasing efficiency at the most senior level, since there, by definition, managers have little scope for promotion, and managers lower down the hierarchy have no power to unseat their superiors.
With regard to the board itself, its ‘group dynamics’ are likely to inhibit the instigation of disciplinary action against insiders: it is common for personal relationships between the directors and other senior managers to be such that they will stand together as a team and only consider removing one of their number in situations of obvious incapacity or wrong-doing.
The problem may be particularly acute where power is effectively vested in the hands of a dominant chief executive.
It is likely, therefore, that the forces of the internal market, such as they are, will often be defeated by management power and board cohesiveness.
The external version of the theory holds that the ‘market value’ of top managers (which takes account of the salary they could command if they moved to a different employer) will increase where they are associated with a successful company and therefore that directors will do all they can to boost profitability.
Since results are dependent on team effort, managers are also given an incentive to ensure that each member of the team pulls his or her weight.
While there is again doubtless some validity in this, there is a problem precisely because of the dependence of results on team effort.
The entire team will have the incentive to be diligent, including being diligent in monitoring each other, but individual managers will have this incentive only if their own contribution is identifiable, and in the nature of things this will probably not be possible.
The prospect of increased future earnings will also have no impact where a manager plans to leave the employment market, as will often be the case with chief executives who may be in their final period of office.
It is also important to note, furthermore, that while the external labour market may act as an incentive for directors to be more diligent, it is not obvious that it will improve the position where they lack flair or are simply inept.
The solution is to recruit managers who are more talented than themselves, but in so doing they risk losing decision-making power and may ultimately put their own positions in danger.
As with the internal market for managerial services, therefore, the external market is likely to have little effect in the face of entrenched management power.
The capital market
If a company is run inefficiently it will be penalised in the capital market, that is, its shares will be lowly rated as compared with more profitable companies.
This need not be of great concern to management, however, given the capacity of most companies to finance themselves through retained earnings.
Some companies never go to the new issues market, and it has been calculated that ‘in the past decade, in no single year have ordinary share issues accounted for as much as 10 per cent of the sources of capital funds, and the average has been less than half that amount’.
It could accordingly be a long time before resolutely indolent or constitutionally inept directors regarded the problems of raising money as a reason for modifying their behaviour.
Even if the company does go to the equity market, its depressed share price will affect management only indirectly, as noted in Chapter 2.
Thus, because its shares trade at a low price the company will need to issue a larger number of them to raise a given amount of capital than would otherwise be the case.
The effect of this will be to dilute further the value of the company's  existing shares.
This is a cost, but as Eisenberg has pointed out, it is a cost that is borne by the company's shareholders rather than its managers.
It is however true that a depreciation in share values will be of concern to management, because of possible repercussions in the market for corporate control.
This is examined next.
The market for corporate control
The market for corporate control has generated an enormous literature.
Some theorists regard the discipline it imposes as the only truly effective constraint on managerial discretion and therefore consider its operation to be crucial to the efficiency of the private enterprise economy.
The market is said to function in the following way.
If management is inefficient the company's securities will have a low stock market valuation as compared with those of similar, but well-managed, businesses, since the prospects for future dividends and share price appreciation will be relatively poor.
Observers of the stock market will interpret the low share price as a signal that the company's assets are being under-utilised and that an efficient management could employ them more profitably.
A bid will therefore be made to gain control of the company and unlock its assets.
In order to persuade the company's existing members to sell their shares, it will be necessary for the bidder to offer a premium over the current stock market price.
In effect, the bidder thereby divides the profit which is expected to result from improved efficiency between itself and the original shareholders.
By this process control passes out of the hands of the inefficient management team to those who are able to utilise the company's assets at a level closer to their true potential.
The effectiveness of the market for control rests on the proposition (’ the efficient market hypothesis’) that stock markets behave rationally, that is, that shares are priced at a level that reflects a company's prospects under existing management and that prices are not merely the outcome of speculations on the part of market participants about each other 's behaviour, causing price and underlying value to become  detached .
If the latter were the case depressed share prices would not be a reliable indicator of badly-managed companies and hence the market for control could not have the efficiency-stimulating effect that is claimed for it.
While Jensen contends that ‘[a]lthough the evidence is not literally 100 percent in support of the efficient market hypothesis, no proposition in any of the sciences is better documented’, there is in fact substantial disagreement about whether the market is efficient in the most relevant sense, that is, in reflecting companies' underlying value.
If shares are not accurately priced then there is ‘considerable scope for take-overs based on speculative and other motives where corporate control changes hands because of differences in information, or of opinion about the accuracy of stock market valuations, between sellers and purchasers of control, rather than because of proposed changes in management objectives or operating efficiency’.
We will return to this issue below.
The main significance claimed for the market for corporate control as an efficiency- inducing device is not so much that companies are actually taken-over and inadequate managements displaced, though of course this does happen and is regarded as a valuable effect of the mechanism, but that incumbent managements fear take-over and hence will do all they can to make the company efficient and the share price correspondingly high.
Since it is the threat of take-over that is crucial it is not possible to measure the effects of the market for control in any very scientific way, but there is nevertheless an intuitive plausibility in some of the claims made for it.
The market suffers from a number of imperfections, however, and it seems likely that these have a significant limiting effect on its disciplinary power.
The fact, as one commentator has pointed out, that bidders are prepared to pay substantial premiums over the existing stock market valuation of a company in order to gain control indicates that despite the presence of the take-over threat bidders still believe that there is considerable scope for efficiency gains.
The discussion that follows will examine the imperfections in the market for control and then consider the wider implications of reliance on it as a disciplinary mechanism.
Imperfections in the market for control
A major obstacle to the smooth operation of the market is the scale of transaction costs involved in changing in control.
It has been estimated that the total fees paid to third parties in the take-over process in the UK in 1985 came to £500 million, about 7 per cent of the value of the transactions, and the figure will be much higher in the case of contested bids.
Underwriting, professional fees, and advertising cost Argyll nearly £50 million in their unsuccessful offer for Distillers in 1985, for example, and the abortive consortium bid by Hoylake for BAT is reputed to have cost £140 million.
Added to these costs, a bidder will have to pay a premium over the current market value of the target's shares of anything up to fifty per cent in order to gain control.
Costs of this magnitude and doubts about the ability to recoup them through  improvements in efficiency or other gains are likely to be a significant disincentive to attempting a take-over and their scale suggests that they constitute a barrier behind which sub-optimally performing boards can find a substantial measure of protection.
Indeed, one commentator has argued that the cost of acquiring control is so great that the disciplinary force of the market is ‘likely to be limited to instances of gross managerial failure’.
This conclusion would appear to be valid except to the extent that raiders are in the habit of over-estimating the extent of likely efficiency gains, and therefore posing a threat of take-over in those cases in which, as it turns out, a bid is not cost-justified.
A different difficulty with the market for control derives from the particular character of that market as a market.
As Fairburn and Kay explain, ‘[i]f I produce a poor product, then I will gradually lose market share, and my competitors will gradually gain it.
If I run a company badly, however, the market does not gradually transfer its management to someone else; it leaves me with the monopoly of corporate control until, at the consummation of a take-over bid, it transfers it abruptly and completely’.
They go on to note that it is this feature of the market that necessitates detailed regulation to protect the interests of the shareholders, a principal objective of the City Code on Take-overs and Mergers being, for instance, to ensure a fair distribution of the take-over premium among the members.
Of greater relevance here, they also observe that it is an ‘important reason why the market for corporate control is less efficient and effective  than most other markets’.
The point is that individual shareholders, each with a holding insufficient to affect the outcome of the bid, have an incentive to reject the offer to buy their shares in order to be able to ‘free ride’ on the efforts of the bidder, if successful.
The idea is that the bidder must think that the shares in the company are worth more than the bid price, for example, because under the bidder's control the company will be operated more efficiently, otherwise the bid would not be made.
By retaining its holding the member will be able to participate in this post-bid increase in value.
The result, however, is that because of the free- riding element the bid may fail, and hence a substantial gap may arise between a company's actual and potential earnings without an inefficient management being ousted by take- over.
A further doubt about the operation of the market for control is created by evidence suggesting that inefficient companies are not as such regarded as favourable targets.
A survey conducted in the United States in 1981 revealed that directors considered the feature that made a company most attractive as a take-over target was that it had ‘excellent management’ and the majority of respondents regarded management inefficiency as something which would actually put them off.
A recent British study, summarising the evidence on the financial characteristics of acquiring, acquired and non-acquired companies, concludes that it is difficult to distinguish between them.
This is perhaps not surprising given that bidders are attracted to targets for a variety of reasons that may be unconnected with the potential for improving the target's management.
Other motives include diversification, gaining access to new markets and increasing market share, reaping economies of scale and other synergistic gains, and sheer empire-building.
If badly managed companies are no more at risk than efficient ones, however, it seems fair to assume that the disciplinary effect of the market for control is significantly diminished.
As Buxbaum suggests, ‘[s]ince takeovers appear to have no systematic impact on weak management or suboptimal resource use…takeover threats cannot affect management behaviour except in an inconsistent manner.
If doing well is no protection, the incentive to avoid doing badly is weak’.
There will, though, always be some incentive for managers to increase share price, since a more expensive company is harder to swallow and satisfied shareholders are less likely to sell.
The market for control and efficiency
What is not in doubt is that there is a highly active market in take-overs in the UK, and therefore not surprisingly managements do commonly take steps to safeguard their positions.
Leaving aside for the moment purely defensive moves, not calculated to increase efficiency, responses may, following Eisenberg's terminology, lead to improvements in operating efficiency or resource efficiency.
The former refers to the more efficient management of the company's existing stock of assets, the latter to changes in the combination of assets held by the company with a view to raising profitability.
Some improvements in operating efficiency are likely to occur under the pressure of the take-over threat, but they depend on managements recognising current weaknesses and on their having the ability to remedy them.
Where managers are of limited competence any increases in efficiency are more likely to result from improved resource efficiency, particularly through disposal of under-performing activities or subsidiaries in order to improve the group's financial profile.
A growth in divestment was a prominent feature of the 1980's, with parent companies making disposals both to other groups and to existing managers in the form of management buy-outs.
Economic gains may flow from this process through unscrambling previous misconceived acquisitions, for example, or simply from an injection of fresh and more dynamic management.
Management buy-outs in particular may lead to increases in efficiency by reducing the layers of administration and enabling key decisions to be made by managers with industry-specific experience.
There may also be stronger incentives as a result of management's having a significant equity stake in the company, and the stringent repayment conditions that banks and other institutions attach to the finance they provide to make the buy-out possible.
While this restructuring activity is likely to prove beneficial to the economy, the more fundamental problem of operationally inefficient managements may, however, remain relatively immune to the stimulus of the take-over threat.
Other effects of the market for control
As we have seen, market theorists regard the threat of take-over as the main contribution of the market for control to the promotion of efficiency.
In evaluating the market as a mechanism for disciplining management, however, it is necessary to take account of its wider impact, both in terms of the results of  consummated mergers and of the overall effects of the threat of a change in control on management behaviour.
The extent to which the market for control should be relied on as a disciplinary device can be determined only in the light of an approximation of the social costs it may impose.
The direct costs of the take-over process, in the form of fees to banks and professional advisers, have already been noted.
The level of transaction costs, and the scale of third party and other effects, invite speculation about whether management changes could be effected in a less costly and disruptive way.
The effects of mergers
The efficiency of the combined enterprise in concluded take-overs as compared with the pre-merger performance of the target and the acquirer is of crucial importance in evaluating the merits of reliance on the market for control as a disciplinary mechanism.
The evidence is mixed.
Studies based on relative accounting profits reveal that on average mergers have been unprofitable.
An alternative approach is to measure share price changes; prices at any given time reflect the market's estimate of future performance and if it is assumed that this estimate is reliable then a comparison of ‘before and after’ figures should provide an accurate guide to the change in earning potential brought about by merger.
The evidence not surprisingly shows that there are gains to acquiree shareholders, given the need to pay a premium to persuade them to part with control.
The crucial issue is whether this merely represents a transfer in wealth from the acquirer, or whether there is an increase in wealth overall.
On this the evidence is conflicting, some studies finding that take-overs were value-creating, others that target shareholder gains were more that off-set by losses to the shareholders of the acquiring companies.
Furthermore, even if there are net gains to shareholders it is not clear to what extent these result from increased efficiency, and hence represent net social gains, or are the product of what may be socially detrimental increases in market power.
In short, the evidence does not permit a concluded view on whether  consummated mergers have led to the creation of more or less efficient enterprises.
As just suggested, take-overs may lead to increased market dominance and hence the consequences of the market for control on competition must also be taken into account in any overall assessment.
Chiplin and Wright observe that ‘[t]he impact of large acquisitions on the number of independent companies in the UK is quite profound.
Of the top 200 companies, ranked by profitability in 1971–72, some 45 ceased to be independent companies by 1984.
Between 1982 and 1986, 137 of the top 1,000 quoted companies in the UK in terms of market value in 1982 were acquired or had merged with other companies…
‘. These figures do not necessarily correlate with increased market power, however, there being evidence to indicate that aggregate concentration and concentration in individual industries have not increased since the mid-1970's.
This is explicable, at least in part, by a shift from horizontal to diversifying mergers.
But while the latter may not have a material impact on competition, they do nevertheless contribute to an incremental drift of decision-making power to a steadily diminishing number of companies.
The significance of this was discussed in Chapter 1, and it might be added here that there is some evidence to suggest that concentration may have an adverse effect on the level of invention and innovation in the economy.
A dimension of increased decision-making concentration which has attracted particular notice concerns the effects on regional diversity and development.
A recent report by the Confederation of British Industry observed that take-overs contribute to ‘the gradual accretion of financial and management power in London and the South-East and the demise of independent companies based elsewhere that are able to contribute to the local community’.
This view is supported by a number of empirical studies of the regional impact of mergers.
A common result is an upward shift of decision making to the new parent company, often located in the south-east.
This can have an adverse effect on local suppliers of materials, and in particular of support services, such as insurance, advertising, and legal advice, with consequential damage to the vigour of the regional economy and its attractiveness to inward investment.
In terms of the performance of the economy as a whole it is not entirely clear what the impact of regional disparities is, though it seems plausible that congestion in the south east and the under-utilisation of resources elsewhere represent a net loss to the economy overall.
In broader social terms the costs are  fairly self-evident.
The regional implications aside, a group that will inevitably be affected by take-over activity is the target company's employees.
After a take-over a common way of making an acquired company more profitable is to reduce the size of the workforce or otherwise to change working conditions to lower costs or increase productivity.
Similarly, in order to integrate the target's business within the enlarged organisation overlapping or ill-fitting activities may be disposed of or discontinued.
New owners may have fewer qualms than long-serving managers about taking action of this kind which is likely to be damaging to the company's employees and the wider host community.
It has been argued that the dismissal of employees following a change in control is a (moral) breach of trust, in that employees have legitimate expectations of continuing employment, arising, for example, from their investment in the company in the form of firm-specific training.
In the language of implicit contracting, similarly, employees accept lower remuneration in exchange for job stability, and this (unenforceable) understanding is breached when employees are laid off following a take-over.
The market for control may be seen from this perspective, therefore, as having a negative side-effect in so far as it gives shareholders an opportunity to make unfair gains at the employees' expense.
Whether this is a form of unfairness specific to the take-over process, however, or whether control changes merely highlight the more general vulnerability of employees within the corporate framework, is debatable.
The effects of the threat of take-over
A well-documented response to the threat of take-over is for the company to increase its capitalisation by itself becoming a predator or otherwise absorbing additional businesses to enable it to obtain the relative security that comes with increased size.
Clearly, if the acquirer is not particularly efficient in the first place this response will simply result in more assets being controlled by an unimpressive management.
Growth and other  manoeuvrings motivated by no logic other than a defensive one are economically damaging by-products of an active market for control, causing a ‘huge diversion of managerial effort into devising ways to reduce a vulnerability that did not grow out of managerial inefficiency’.
The side-effect that has caused greatest concern in recent years, however, is that of ‘short- termism’.
This is a condition in which managements become excessively concerned with short-term profits with a view to keeping share price high and thus avoiding the attention of bidders.
In order to boost short-term accounting profits companies may be tempted to cut expenditure on items such as training, research and development, and investment in productive capacity, all of which are essential to a healthy economy, on the basis that they will show a positive return only in the longer term.
This tendency is said to be exacerbated by the growth of institutional holdings, the institutions themselves exhibiting a short-termist attitude, conspicuous in the fund managers engaged by them.
These, under pressure to increase the returns on their portfolios over very short review periods, turn over their holdings frequently (known as ‘churning’), disposing of a company's shares on the first sign that they are under-performing the market.
Similarly, institutions are accused of ‘disloyalty’ in bid situations, preferring to take the premium rather than await longer-term growth.
Since the threat of take-over is the most potent source of management concern with share price, the market for control is seen as profoundly implicated in converting this alleged investor short-termism into management short-termism.
Whether the charge of investor short-termism is valid turns essentially on whether the stock market is efficient in pricing shares.
According to corporate finance theory, ‘the share price of any company should reflect the present value of the company's stream of future cash flows’.
In other words, the current price of a company's shares should reflect expected future returns.
Thus, even though an investment may produce income only in the longer term, if it is financially worthwhile it will have an immediate positive effect on share price, assuming an efficient stock market.
As we have mentioned, the efficient market hypothesis holds that the market is efficient, in the sense that share prices are determined in the light of all relevant publicly available information.
It follows that there should be no pressure on management from share prices to sacrifice profitable investment opportunities, because even though these may depress short-term accounting profits, undertaking them will cause a rise, rather than a fall, in share price.
Similarly, if prices accurately reflect long-term prospects, a fund manager required to improve short-term performance can do so only by identifying and buying under-valued shares, and identifying and selling over-valued ones, which in turn depends on a balanced evaluation of both the company's short- and long-term position.
There is accordingly no reason why institutional behaviour should induce short-term behaviour in management.
The counter-argument, naturally enough, is that the stock market does not accurately price shares.
It has thus been suggested that while there is ‘substantial evidence of information arbitrage market efficiency, meaning that prices respond quickly to new information…this technical efficiency is very different from the claimed ability of the market to value stocks in accordance with the expected stream of future earnings or dividends’.
Part of the explanation for this failure is that not enough information about investment plans is available to the market, and also that market participants lack the technical ability to evaluate what may be highly complex and specialised projects.
This aspect of the problem is in principle remediable, though no doubt in practice the demands of commercial confidentiality will always to some extent limit information flow.
The other cause may, however, be inherent in the stock market system.
This is that the evaluation of a company's prospects is ultimately a matter of subjective judgment, and hence what ‘economists frequently characterize as quantifiable risks are in reality uncertainties of such large and incalculable proportions as to intimidate investors and send them scurrying to the seemingly safer ground of follow-the-leader’.
In this way share prices are determined not by reference to estimations of fundamental value, but by a series of guesses about the behaviour of other market participants; they result from ‘[s]peculations on the speculations of other speculators who are doing the same thing’.
In other words, share prices may be driven by fads and other forms of market irrationality, and, particularly, by a concentration on tangible short-term earnings figures rather than on relatively imponderable longer-term prospects.
An alternative explanation of short-termism, also attributable to the take-over market, should finally be noted.
Thus, it has been suggested that ‘[s]hort-termism may not be so much a product of the mispricing of assets,…but more a reflection of contractual failures in securities markets in part brought on by the takeover process.
According to this view, short-termism is a feature of investments in firm-specific assets that have a low resale value outside the firm.
Thus, it will be less prevalent in the development of oil fields and property sites, than in R & D and training’.
The point is that the threat of take-overs reduces the long-term security of employees and managers.
If a change in control occurs employment contracts may be terminated, with the result that employees lose the gains from firm-specific training.
Investment in training will therefore be discouraged, and managers are similarly discouraged from causing the company to engage in research and development and other projects the return from which will only be reflected in managers' rewards in the long term.
It may thus be observed that there is a ‘trade-off between the disciplinary effect of takeovers and their disruptive impact on investment and long-term growth’.
No conclusive view about the contribution of the market for control to management short- termism is, at least as yet, possible.
That it might be centrally implicated, however, adds to the overall impression that the stimulus to efficiency that that the market undoubtedly, though variably, creates, is achieved at a high price, and might be achievable with fewer side-effects by other means.
Market discipline: conclusion
The conclusion to be drawn from the above discussion is that while market forces undoubtedly constrain management behaviour, the disciplinary framework they impose is far from complete.
Claims of market optimality rest on standard neo-classical assumptions about economically-rational motivation, competitive market conditions, availability of full information, and absence of transaction costs.
The failure of these assumptions to hold in practice suggests that it would be unsafe to rely on markets as a substitute for all other forms of control.
It does not, of course, follow that because markets are of only limited effectiveness that legal intervention, in the shape of a more active liability regime or a reformed governance structure, would necessarily lead to an outcome closer to the ideal, since the costs of intervention may exceed the benefits.
In the absence of empirical evidence to that effect, however, the argument that intervention is inherently inefficient makes no stronger claim to validity than the original assertion of market competence.
With these points in mind the next section will return to the contribution that liability rules can make to increased management efficiency.
It should finally be noted that it has also emerged that reliance on markets as a disciplinary device, and in particular on the market for control, is itself far from costless.
The negative impact of the market invites the question whether it might be desirable to find a substitute for, and not merely a supplement to, the discipline the latter market provides.
This issue is taken up in the next chapter where some of the rules of company law that support the functioning of the market are examined.
A possible substitute, by way of a reformed governance structure, is discussed in Chapter 6.
III THE ROLE OF LIABILITY RULES
Section I concluded that the impact of the duty of care on managerial efficiency, even with a more rigorous content, will inevitably be rather modest, but that the duty nevertheless is capable of playing an important role.
A principal aspect of that role is as a deterrent.
The threat of personal liability provides directors with an incentive to comply with applicable standards of conduct.
This section begins with a group of contrasts concerning the deterrent effects of markets and liability regimes.
First, because markets are imperfect in various ways they will tolerate serious levels of inefficiency.
We have seen, for instance, that the magnitude of transaction costs in the market for control may shield all but the most egregious cases of management failure.
Liability, on the other hand, at least in principle, can be triggered by less serious, but still costly, defaults.
Secondly, a distinguishing characteristic of negligence liability (and indeed of the legal approach in general) is that it attaches to single episodes of management failure.
Market sanctions, in contrast, depend on the net outcome of an aggregate of performances.
Negligent conduct will thus frequently engender no market response, not simply because the loss that results is too small to register, given market insensitivity, but because its effects are masked by above-average returns from other, successful, projects.
By focusing on discrete activities liability rules are capable of creating a potentially more pervasive field of deterrence.
A third point of distinction concerns the nature of legal and market sanctions.
The severest market penalty for under-performance is loss of office following corporate collapse, or, more probably, a change in control.
But the availability of generous compensation in the latter case will often mean that this fate holds no great terrors for management, and may even be positively welcomed.
Thus, directors may receive substantial compensation for premature termination of their employment contracts, or may benefit from a ‘golden parachute’, that is, a contractual provision authorising a generous additional severance payment in the event of take-over.
The payment of damages for negligence, is, in contrast, entirely without redeeming features.
There is an at least theoretical possibility that a liability regime with teeth would deter not only negligent conduct, but also talented individuals from becoming directors.
There seems little likelihood of this occurring in the case of executive directors, at least unless the risk of liability were to increase massively, but a reduction in the supply of more modestly remunerated non-executives is not implausible.
Directors may, and frequently do, however, insure against negligence liability and this is likely, at least in part, to off-set any reluctance to take office through the fear of having to meet a damages award.
But there is a price to pay for this advantage, in that the effect of insurance is a reduction in the deterrence value of liability.
As against this, it is argued that insurance companies act as an additional monitoring agency: in fixing premiums insurers will assess the degree of risk and directors thus have an incentive to minimise the chances of liability arising in order to keep premiums as low as possible.
This is not persuasive where directors do not pay their own premiums, however, and in any case the difficulties faced by insurers in distinguishing high risk from low risk directors (i.e. performing the monitoring function) are considerable, given the low visibility of the management decision-making process and the wide range of functions that a director may be called upon to perform.
It is therefore difficult to avoid the conclusion that the effect of insurance is in general to reduce the deterrent effect of liability.
An undoubted limitation of liability rules in promoting managerial efficiency is that while they provide a deterrent, they cannot, unlike the market and market-linked devices, create a more positive motivational environment.
They lay down minimum standards, and do not as such provide an incentive, exerting upward pressure to achieve top quality performance.
The educational role of law in increasing efficiency should not, however, be overlooked.
It was suggested above that the duty of care is best conceived as imposing essentially procedural standards.
By laying down such standards the law is capable of defining what is expected of managers, of giving normative guidance on how they should fulfil their role.
In particular, we have seen how the law can structure the decision-making process by insisting that decisions are made on the basis of a proper appreciation of the facts and by persons who are appropriately qualified.
Although the law imposes only base-line standards, therefore, it can nevertheless create conditions which increase the chances of high quality performances being achieved.
Finally, an objection to relying on the law to regulate decision-making quality, additional to those considered earlier, should be noted.
It has been stated that one of the justifications for the American business judgment rule is that it limits ‘judicial intrusiveness with respect to private-sector decisionmaking’.
This suggests a contrast between the public realm of the legal system, and the private realm of business, with a presumption against interference by the former in the latter.
Even where the company is viewed as a purely private phenomenon, however, there is no justification for regarding the quality of management decision making as a matter that is ‘private’ in relation to the shareholders.
From this perspective, in imposing negligence liability the court can be seen merely as upholding private rights, and that is hardly an ‘intrusion’.
But in any case if, as was argued in Chapter 1, companies should be viewed as social enterprises, that is, they should be understood as vehicles for the promotion of the general good, then a requirement that managers should comply with publicly articulated decision- making standards, and that mechanisms should exist visibly to test compliance with them, should be regarded as something that is desirable in itself.
Quite distinct from the implications for increased efficiency, where managers are seen as holding positions of power for the purpose of furthering the public interest it is appropriate that there should be public participation in the formulation of appropriate performance standards and that those who have culpably fallen below them should be held to account in a public forum.
The underlying principle of responsibility that is entailed is scarcely capable of expression in the language of markets.
Problems of enforcement
A final note on the enforcement of the duty of care is called for.
If liability rules are to perform any of the functions mentioned there must be at least some prospect of their being enforced.
The scarcity of modern director's negligence cases suggests that the likelihood of liability actually being imposed is currently minimal.
Part of the explanation lies in restrictive rules of standing, which appear to deprive minority shareholders of the right to bring an action in respect of negligence.
This means that realistically it is only a new board, after a boardroom coup or a take-over, or the liquidator, who will be in a position to act.
The unclear and undeveloped state of the law, which makes litigation more than usually unpredictable, is no doubt also a major negative influence.
Even without the element of uncertainty, however, potential plaintiffs may be reluctant to inflict on the company the disruption that an action against a director can involve, or expose it to the unfavourable publicity that might result from airing its difficulties in public.
The problem of the damage that may result from litigation is undoubtedly a real one, and argues against giving shareholders unrestricted standing to sue, which might otherwise be regarded as a plausible means of increasing the chances of enforcement.
Chapter 8 will discuss where the balance should lie between ensuring that the rules are effective on the one hand, and avoiding unproductive litigation on the other.
In the meantime it is sufficient to note that the position where the rules are barely enforced at all is far from satisfactory.