

EXOCET DECK
I drive the car up the little single-track road leading towards the low hills; the headlights create a deep channel of illumination between the hedges.
I'm dressed in black jeans, black boots and a dark blue polo-neck over a navy shirt and two vests.
I've wearing thin black leather gloves.
I find a track leading off the road into a stand of trees; I take the car up as far as it will go, then turn the lights out.
The clock on the dash says it's 03:10.
I wait a minute; no traffic passes, so I guess I haven't been seen.
My heart is thudding already.
The night is cold when I get out of the car.
There's a half-moon but it's obscured ninety per cent of the time by a lot of low, fast-moving cloud producing occasional freezing gusts of rain.
The wind is loud in the leaf-bare branches overhead.
I head down the track to the road, then look back to the car; it's almost fully hidden.
I cross the tarmac and climb a fence, then take the ski-mask from my trouser pocket and pull it over my head.
I follow the line of the hedge along the side of the road, ducking once as a car drives past on the road; its  headlights sweep along the hedge above me.
The car carries on into the night.
I start breathing again.
I get to the fence leading downhill and follow it, stumbling now and again on the rocks and stones left at the side of the field; my eyes are still adjusting to the darkness.
The ground underfoot is fairly firm, not too muddy.
At the hedge marking the foot of the field I have to look for a minute to find a way through.
Finally I have to crawl through and underneath it, snagging my polo-neck.
Trees heard but barely seen in the darkness make a great rushing, crackling sound above me.
I scramble down a muddy, leaf-littered bank and into a chilly stream at the bottom; it flows over one boot and I whisper, ‘Shit’ and squelch up the far bank, holding onto the cold branches of bushes and the mud-slimy roots of trees.
I force my way through some bushes at the top.
I can see street lights ahead, and the geometric shapes of darkened houses.
I keep crouched and make my way through the low bushes, heading diagonally through the wood towards the estate.
I trip over a log and fall but don't hurt myself.
I come to the two-metre-high brick wall which surrounds the estate and feel my way along it, stumbling over piles of earth and building debris until I get to the corner.
I measure sixty paces along the wall and then walk away from it to the nearest tree.
A patch of moonlight means I have to wait nearly five minutes for the clouds to cover the moon again before I can climb the tree.
I get far enough up to see the house and identify it by its position and the garden furniture, then I climb back down, go to the wall and jump up, catching hold of the concrete ridge tiles on top of the wall and pulling myself up.
I rest on the top of the wall, my hands shaking, my heart pumping hard.
I look at the dark house in front of me and the screens of tall shrubs and young trees on either side concealing the two neighbouring villas.
The moon threatens to come out from behind the clouds again and I have to jump down to the paving stones of the patio beneath.
There is a small wall beside the greenhouse which rises to within a metre of the top of the estate wall; that's my escape route.
There are infrared-sensing security lights on the wall of the house and if they go on then the whole thing's off; I'm up and over the wall and back into the woods and away.
I walk quietly over the patio, onto the grass and towards the house, just waiting for the blaze of light from the security lamps.
It doesn't happen.
I reach the lower patio where the garden furniture stands by the side of the tarpaulin-covered pool and crouch down by the ghostly perforated shape of the cast-iron bench.
I feel up inside the overhang where the back of the bench joins the arm, the leather of my gloves catching on rough splinters of metal.
I can't feel enough.
I take my glove off and try again, the metal cold and edges sharp against my skin.
I feel the putty, then the embedded key and its short length of string.
I take hold of the string and pull gently.
The key comes out, clinking quietly once.
I put my glove back on.
I walk carefully past the conservatory to the back door of the house, slide the key into the lock and turn it.
The door opens silently.
The house is warm inside and smells of washing powder.
I lock the door; as I move away from it, a small, faint red light comes on with a tiny clinking noise, high up in one far corner of the room.
The sensor doesn't set the alarm off; the system isn't armed.
I move very slowly through the utility room and into the kitchen (another little red light clicks on).
My boots squelch and squeak on the tiles.
I hesitate, then kneel and quickly take the boots off, leaving them by the dishwasher.
When I stand up I see the wooden block full of knives on the work surface, just visible by moonlight next to the gently gleaming stainless steel of the sinks.
I pull out the largest of the knives, then turn and leave the kitchen, heading down the corridor past the dining room and the study to the stairs.
Beyond and to the side is the split-level lounge; a shaft of orange street light sifting through the trees round the front garden shows leather settees, chairs, bookcases full of videos, CDs and books, a couple of coffee tables and a big metal hood over a raised central  fireplace.
Another sensor high in one corner glows red as I move towards the foot of the stairs.
The carpet on the stairs is thick and deep and I make no noise as I climb to the top, then pad along towards the master bedroom, tripping one more sensor.
The bedroom door opens with only the softest of creaks.
At the head of the wide double bed there is a weak green glow.
As I move round I see the numerals of a digital clock.
The lime-coloured light spills faintly out onto white sheets and a single, sleeping face.
I go closer, very slowly, the knife held in front of me.
I watch her breathe.
One of her arms lies outside the covers, hanging out pale and naked over the edge of the bed.
She has short, dark hair and a slim, slightly boyish face; thin, dark brows, thin nose, pale lips with the hint of a pout, and a sharp biangular chin matching sharp, high cheekbones.
I creep closer.
She stirs.
I reach forward, the knife in one hand, the other glove touching then gathering and balling a fistful of duvet and then pulling it sharply, throwing it away behind me as I leap forward, seeing her pale nakedness in the same instant as I slap my hand over her mouth; her eyes open wide and she starts trying to push up; I force her back down into the bed, hand still over her mouth.
I raise the knife so she can see it.
She struggles, eyes widening further, but I pin her to the sheets with my weight and keep the glove firmly over her mouth even though she isn't making any noise.
I rest the blade of the knife against her throat and she goes still.
‘Make a noise and you're dead, understand?’
I say.
She seems not to hear, staring up at me.
‘Understand?’
I say again, and this time she nods quickly.
‘Warning you,’ I tell her as I slowly take my hand away from her mouth.
She doesn't call out.
I push myself up, still keeping the knife near her throat.
I undo the zip on my jeans.
I'm not wearing any underpants and my cock falls out, already hard.
She's staring into my eyes.
I see her swallow.
A pulse beats at the top of her long, white neck, under her chin.
Her hand is creeping to the side of the bed.
I look at it, and it stops.
Her eyes look terrified now.
I put the blade of the knife against her neck  again and look down to the edge of the mattress.
She's trembling.
I feel under the edge of the mattress, above the wooden frame of the huge bed.
I feel a wooden handle; I pull out a ten-inch hunting knife with a serrated blade.
I whistle softly, then throw it across the carpets towards the windows.
She's staring at me.
‘On your front,’ I tell her.
‘On your knees, like a dog.
Now.’
She starts to breathe raggedly, mouth open.
Her whole body is trembling.
‘Do it!’
I hiss.
She rolls over, onto her front, then gets up onto her knees, taking the weight of her upper body on her hands.
‘Face on the sheets,’ I tell her.
‘Hands up here.’
She rests her face on the sheet and puts her hands behind her.
I take the handcuffs from my pocket and snap them over her wrists.
I stop to put a condom on, then climb onto the bed behind her, put the knife onto the sheets just within reach, grip her hips with both hands and pull her onto my cock.
She shouts as I enter her.
She's soaking wet and within a few thrusts I'm ready to come and she's panting, then grunting then calling out, ‘Oh, fuck,yes !’ and then it's all over and I collapse over her and then fall off her and almost cut my ear on the cool blade of the kitchen knife lying on the sheet.
She lies there on her side, facing me, watching me, still panting, hands still trapped behind her back, a strange, charged expression on her face, and after a bit she says, ‘Is that it?’
I breathe deeply and say, ‘No.’
I haul her roughly back up onto her knees with her face down on the sheets again and spread her buttocks and stick an index finger into her anus, sliding it quickly half into her.
She gasps.
I position my head above her backside and let some spit fall down onto where the knuckle is caught on the ring of muscle, then push my finger filly into her.
She gasps again; I start to move the finger in and out, stroking her clitoris with my other hand.
I use two fingers after a while, then I'm hard again; I pull the first condom off and put on another one, then I spit onto my rubber-sheathed prick and, guiding it with my fingers, ease it slowly into her rectum.
She comes screaming; I don't think I'm going to but then I do.
We collapse together onto the bed, breathing in time.
I pull myself out of her.
There is a faint smell of shit.
I undo the handcuffs and lie there, holding her.
She pulls the ski-mask from my head.
‘Where are your shoes?’ she whispers after a while.
‘In the kitchen,’ I tell her.
‘They were muddy.
Didn't want to make a mess.’
She laughs quietly in the darkness.
‘But I was in control,’ she says, over the noise of the streaming water as she soaps my shoulders and back.
‘All I had to say was your name, and it was all over.
That's what we agreed; I trust you.’
‘But what's the difference?’
I ask her, trying to see her over my shoulder.
‘Anybody watching that would have said I was a rapist and you were being raped.’
‘But we knew different.’
‘But is that all it is?
I mean just thinking that?
What if it had been a real rapist?’
‘What if it had been the wrong house?’
‘I checked the furniture.’
‘And you were just you; you moved like you, spoke like you; smelled like you.’
‘But —’
‘Look; I enjoyed it,’ she says, soaping the small of my back and my buttocks.
‘I don't think I want to do it again, but it was interesting to live it out.
But what about you?
How did you feel about it?’
‘Nervous as fuck — I was certain I wouldn't be able to get it up, I mean just certain , especially as I'm still feeling the effects from getting pissed yesterday — and then, well…aroused, I suppose, when…when I realised you were.’
‘Uh-huh.
Not before.’
‘No!’
‘No.’
‘I mean, I felt awful for long enough; I felt like a rapist.’
‘But you weren't.’
She slides her hand between the cheeks of my bum, then soaps my thighs and down my legs.
‘You were doing something I'd always fantasised about.’
‘Oh great, so that old fuck Jamieson was right and all women secretly want to be raped.’
Yvonne slaps my calves.
‘Don't be stupid.
Nobody wants to be raped, but some people have fantasies about it.
The control isn't some detail, Cameron…knowing it's somebody you can trust isn't just by-the-way; it's everything.’
‘Hmm,’ I say, unconvinced.
‘Men like Jamieson hate women, Cameron.
Or maybe they just hate women who aren't totally in awe of men, women who aren't under their control.’
She runs her hands up my legs to my buttocks again, sliding her fingers between my cheeks, touching my anus and making me go up on the balls of my feet, then her hand runs back down my legs.
‘Maybe men like that should have it happen to them,’ she says.
‘Rape; assault.
See how they like it.’
‘Yeah,’ I say, shivering suddenly despite the heat because we're getting into dodgy territory here.
‘All those wigs and garters and funny gowns; fuckin askin for it, in't they?
Know wot I mean?’
The steam gets to my throat and I cough.
I'm wondering whether I should say anything to her about the police, and about the retired judge Jamieson being ‘assaulted’, whatever that means.
After my drunken afternoon with Al I don't feel the same need to offload as I did before, and I can't decide whether I ought to involve Yvonne or not.
She washes my feet.
‘Or maybe,’ she says, ‘the Greers and the Dworkins are right, and the Pickleses and the Jamiesons are right too, and all men are rapists, and all women want to be raped.’
‘Bullshit.’
‘Mm-hmm.’
‘But I still didn't like being made to feel like I was a rapist.’
‘Well, we won't do that again.’
‘And I still find the idea of you wanting me to do it…unsettling.’
She's silent for a while, then says, ‘The other day’— she's soaping the front of my legs now, from behind —‘when you had to sit through Eldorado in that really uncomfortable position; you enjoyed that, didn't you?’
She's smoothing her sappled hands up and down my thighs.
‘Well…eventually,’ I concede.
‘But if that had been somebody else doing that to you…’ she says softly, so that I can hardly hear her over the quiet thunder of the shower.
She's soaping my balls now, gently palping them, massaging them.
‘…Somebody you didn't know — male or female — tying you up, leaving you helpless, somewhere where shouting couldn't help you, and there was a big sharp knife under the bed…how would you have felt then?’
She stands up and rubs her body up against me, stroking my still mostly limp cock.
I gaze out through the steam and the rivulets of water running down the glass of the shower cabinet.
I'm looking out at the moodily lit bathroom and wondering what I would do if I suddenly saw William appear out there, flight bags in hand, a Surprise, honey, I'm home ! look on his face.
‘Petrified,’ I admit.
‘I'd be scared stiff.
Well, scared soft.’
She's gently pulling on my prick.
It doesn't really want to and I find it difficult to believe and I'm not sure I want to because I feel so fucking drained and sore, but the thing's actually responding, fattening and firming and rising in her kneading, soap-slick hands.
She puts her chin on my shoulder and a sharp fingernail against my jugular.
‘Turn round, bitch-boy,’ she hisses.
‘Oh ha-bloody-ha.’
Yvonne wakes me up after an hour's sleep and tells me I have to leave.
I turn over and pretend I'm still asleep but she pulls the duvet off me and switches the lights on.
I have to dress in my sweaty, dirty clothes and go back down to the kitchen, grumbling while she makes me a coffee, and I complain about my wet boots and she gives me a fresh pair of William's socks to wear and I put them on and drink my coffee and whine about never being allowed to spend the night and tell her how just once I'd like to wake up here in the morning, and have a nice, civilised breakfast with her, sitting on the sunny balcony outside the bedroom windows, but she makes me sit down while she laces my boots up, then takes my coffee cup off me and sends me out the back door and says I've got two minutes before she arms the alarm and puts the infrared lights on stand-by so I have to go back the way I came, over the estate wall and through the wood and down into the stream where I get both feet wet and cold and I fall going up the bank and get all muddy and eventually drag myself up and through the hedge, scratching my cheek and tearing my polo-neck and then trudging across the field through heavy rain and more mud and finally getting to the car and panicking when I can't find the car keys before remembering I put them in the button-down back pocket of the jeans for safety instead of the side pocket like I usually do, and then having to put some dead branches under the front wheels because the fucking car's stuck and finally getting away and home and even in the street light I can see what a mess of the pale upholstery my muddy clothes have made.
I feel too tired to sleep so I play some Despot when I get home but my heart's not in it and the Empire is still in a tattered-looking state after all the earlier disasters and I'm almost wondering if I should start again but that would mean going back to the fucking dawn of civilisation and the temptation in Despot is always to swap PoV, which people who don't know the game always think sounds  sort of innocent, like some detail, but it isn't: you're not just swapping point of View, you're swapping your current Despotic power Level for something less, even if it's a regional lord or other king or a general or royal relation close to the throne, and it is not to be done lightly because as soon as you renounce the current Despot's PoV the computer takes over and it's a smart fucking piece of software.
Try to swap too late, hold on too long and you get assassinated and that's it; that's you back to the cave with twenty other flea-bitten reduced-statures and the bright idea of bringing some fire into the cave !
Swap too soon and the program takes over and performs some miracle that pulls the ass of the Despot you just abandoned out of the fire and next thing you know the secret police are banging down the doors and hauling you and your family off into the night and oblivion; the machine thereupon promptly declares itself the winner and it's back to that fucking cave again.
I give up after an hour of civilisational water-treading, hit Store and slope off to bed.
I've smoked six fags without really meaning to.
I'm still heading for the hills.
I get up bright and late.
I phone Andy and confirm it's still all right to visit, then I ring Eddie and get the next three days off, tell the cops — they're based at Fettes, though the DI has gone back down to London, and no they're still not giving me back my new portable yet — and (after I've cleaned the car up a bit) head out of the city and across the grey bridge in a day of squally, buffeting rain that has the bridge's 40-limit signs on, high-sided vehicles banned and the 205 dancing its Dunlops sideways as the gusts hit.
Then it's up the M90, skirting Perth and heading northwards on the A9 with its frustrating mix of dual and single carriageways and its dire-warning signs about unmarked police cars before the fun begins at Dalwhinnie.
Nirvana, Michelle Shocked, Crowded House  and Carter USM provide the sound track.
The rain eases as I head west; I catch the last of a wide, bloody-looking sunset over Skye and the Kyles and the floodlights turning Eilean Donan's grey stones green; I make it to Strome in four hours twenty minutes from home, arriving just as the stars are coming out above in the purple spaces between the dark, heavy clouds.
‘You total bastard!
You total utter and complete bastard!
That's how you fucking do it!
Bastard!’
Compensation and redemption; education, even.
I'm in the dark hotel at the side of the black loch and it's close to midnight and I'm drunk but not stoned and so's Andy and his pal Howie and I'm sitting in the old ballroom on the lower ground floor, looking out over the waters to where grey ghostly moonlit mountains rise, tops glowing softly, capped with snow, and I'm playing computer games .
In fact I'm playing Xerium , of all things, and blow me down, blow me up if I haven't just found out how to get over the Mountains of Zound at long, long last.
It's easy but sneaky; you ferry a dump of fuel, shielding, a nuke and a missile, load up on fuel and a nuke, fly out and up eight clicks, drop the nuke at the foot of the mountains, power-dive back down to base, load the shielding, fuel to the max with just one missile aboard (meanwhile the nuke explodes, shaking the ground; you don't want to be  fuelling at this point), then you climb like fuck, get to ceiling and then hover in the air above the rising mushroom cloud !
The cloud comes up beneath you and carries you up with it over your normal ceiling.
The shielding protects you — though you still need to do some fancy flying to stay stable within the radioactive thermals — then as the cloud dissipates you cut out and down, across the mountains — they look tiny!— swoop across the closed valley, loose the missile when the base's defence radar picks you up and use the last of  your fuel to escape over the far side while the missile takes out the base.
Simple!
‘Bastard,’ I say, gliding the ship down to a fuel-dump and a gentle landing.
I shake my head.
‘Riding the fucking mushroom cloud; never even occurred to me.’
‘You're not gung-ho enough,’ Andy tells me, refilling my whisky glass.
‘Aye; you've got to be a real man to play this game,’ Howie says, winking and taking up his glass.
He's a brawny Highland lad from one of the nearby villages, one of Andy's drinking partners.
A bit rough and ready and with a highly incorrect attitude to women, but amusing, in a raw kind of way; a man's man.
‘You have to be slightly crazy to play Xerium ,’ Andy says, sitting back in his seat.
‘You have to be…just…crazy…enough.’
‘Aye,’ Howie says, draining his whisky glass.
‘No, no, thanks, Drew,’ he says as Andy goes to refill his dram too.
‘I'd better be away,’ he says, standing.
‘Can't be late for my last day with the Forestry.
Nice to meet you,’ he says to me.
‘Maybe see you later.’
He shakes my hand; serious grip.
‘Right,’ Andy says, standing too.
‘I'll see you out, Howie.
Thanks for coming round.’
‘Not at all, not at all .
Good to see you again.’
‘…wee going-away party tomorrow night?’
‘Aye, why not?’
They wend off across the dully shining floor of the ballroom, heading approximately for the stairs.
I shake my head at the Amiga screen.
‘Riding the fucking mushroom cloud,’ I say to myself.
Then I get up out of the creaking seat and stretch my legs, taking my glass over to the floor-to-ceiling windows which form one wall of the ballroom and look out over the gardens to the railway line and the shore of the loch.
The clouds have shrunk to wisps and the moon stands somewhere overhead, filling the view with silver.
A few lights burn further down the loch to the right, but the mass of mountains on the far side rises  dark into the starry sky, grey becoming white at their snow-dusted summits.
The ballroom smells damp.
It is illuminated only by the light shining from the stairwell and the desk lamp on the old trestle table which holds the computer.
Torn, bleached-looking curtains hang at the sides of the six tall window bays.
My breath smokes in front of me and mists on the cold glass.
All the panes are dirty and some are cracked.
A couple have been replaced with hardboard.
In two of the window bays there are buckets to catch drips but one of them has overflowed and caused a puddle to form around it, discolouring and springing the parquet flooring, which looks burned in other places.
Striped, faded wallpaper has unrolled down the walls in places to hang like giant shavings off a piece of planed wood.
The ballroom is scattered with cheap wooden chairs, tables, rolls of ancient, mouldy-smelling carpets, a couple of old motorbikes and lots of bits of motorbikes standing or lying on oil-stained sheets, and what looks and smells like an industrial-standard deep-fat frier with the associated hoods, filters, fan housing and ducting.
The hotel lies at the foot of a steep road which leads down through the trees from the main road.
With the hill and the dark masses of the trees behind it to the south, the place doesn't get any sunlight in winter and not that much even in summer.
The main road used to come here and the ferry took you over to the north side of the loch, but then they up-graded the way round the loch from a track to a road and the ferry stopped.
The Inverness-Kyle railway still runs past and the train still halts if anyone requests it, but with the ferry gone and the road traffic diverted the place has gone to seed; there are a few houses, a craft shop, the railway platform, a wharf and an abandoned compound owned by Marconi, and the hotel.
That's it.
There's a sign at the top of the road that's been there for years, ever since they opened the new road, and it says ‘Strome Ferry — no ferry’, and that just says it all.
A door closes in the distance, somewhere overhead.
I drink my whisky and look out at the inky loch.
I don't think Andy ever meant  to do anything with this place.
Like the rest of his friends, I assumed he was going to run it, put money into it; develop it.
We all imagined he had some secret new money-spinning idea and soon we'd all be amazed at what he'd done to the place, and coming here to marvel at the crowds he'd managed to attract…but I don't think he was ever looking for a site for some viable business venture; I think he was just looking for somewhere suited to his burned-out, fed-up, pissed-off mood.
‘Right,’ Andy says in the background.
He comes in from the stairwell and closes the double doors.
‘Fancy some narcotics?’
‘Oh!
You have some?’
‘Yeah, well,’ Andy says, coming to stand near me and look out over the water.
He's about my height but he's filled out a bit since he came here and he has a kind of stoop now which makes him look smaller and older than he is.
He's wearing thick old cords worn smooth at the bum and knee but good-quality once, and what looks like a load of shirts and holey jumpers and cardigans.
He's got a week's growth of beard which seems to be permanent, judging from the times I've seen him in the past.
‘Howie's like a lot of them up here,’ he says.
‘They like a drink but they have a weird attitude to anything else.’
He shrugs and takes a silver cigarette case from a pocket in one of his cardigans.
‘There are a few travellers live in the area; they're cool.’
‘Hey,’ I say, remembering.
‘Did the police call you?’
‘Yeah,’ he says, opening the cigarette case to reveal a dozen or so neatly rolled spliffs.
‘Somebody called Flavell; asked about when I called you back the other night.
I told him.’
‘Right.
I think I'm supposed to go and report to the local polizei tomorrow.’
‘Yeah, yeah, it's a fucking police state,’ he says tiredly, offering the spliff case to me.
‘Anyway; fancy a blow, yeah?’
I shrug.
‘Well, I don't normally, you understand.’
I take one of the Js.
‘Thanks.’
I shiver.
I'm wearing my jacket and my Drizabone but I still feel freezing.
‘But can we go somewhere warm ?’
Andy, the ice-boy, smiles.
We sit in the lounge off his bedroom, on the top floor of the hotel, smoking Js and drinking whisky.
I know I'm going to suffer for this tomorrow — later today — but I don't care.
I tell him about the whisky story and the chill-filtering and the colouring but he already seems to know it all.
The lounge is moderately spacious and somewhere between shabby and cosy: scuffed velvet curtains, heavy old wooden furniture, lots of plump embroidered cushions, and — on a massive table in one corner — an ancient IBM PC; it has an external disk drive and a modem connected and the casing is sitting slightly askew.
An Epson printer sits alongside.
We're sitting round a real fire burning logs, and a fan heater's whining away in the centre of the room's dark, threadbare carpet.
I'm warm at last.
Andy sits in an ancient bulging armchair, its fake brown leather rubbed through to the fabric net underneath in places and burnished to a deep black shine on the arms; he nurses his whisky and looks into the fire most of the time.
His concession to the warmth of the room has been to take off his topmost cardigan.
‘Yeah,’ he's saying, ‘we were the blank-cheque generation.
I remember thinking in ‘79 that it was time to really go for something, to finally try something different; to be radical.
It seemed like ever since the ‘sixties there had been just one brand of government in two slightly different packages and nothing much ever changed; there was this feeling that after the burst of energy in the early-mid-'sixties everything had been going downhill; the whole country was constipated, bound up with rules and regulations and restrictive practices and just general, endemic, infectious ennui.
I never could decide who was right, socialists — even revolutionaries — or the arch-capitalists, and it seemed we'd never find out in Britain because whatever way the popular vote went it never really brought any real change of direction.
Heath wasn't particularly  good for business and Callaghan wasn't particularly good for the working class.’
‘I didn't think you ever thought much of revolution,’ I tell him, sipping my whisky.
‘I thought you were always a devout capitalist.’
Andy shrugs.
‘I just wanted change.
It seemed like what was needed.
It didn't really matter which direction it came from.
I never said much because I wanted to keep my options open.
I'd already decided I wanted to go into the Army and it wouldn't have been a good idea to have anything on my record about supporting some left-wing group.
But it had occurred to me that if there was ever any…well, I don't know; armed revolt, popular uprising…’
He laughs lightly.
‘I can remember when that didn't seem so unlikely, and I thought, well, if anything like that does ever happen, and they're right and the establishment is wrong, then it wouldn't do any harm for there to be people like me in the Army who were basically in sympathy with the…movement, whatever.’
He shakes his head, still staring at the fire.
‘Though I guess that sounds pretty dumb now, doesn't it?’
I shrug.
‘Don't ask me; you're talking to somebody who thought the way to make the world a better place was to become a journalist.
Marks me down as a prime strategic thinker, and no mistake.’
‘Nothing wrong with the idea,’ Andy says.
‘But if you're disillusioned now it's partly because of what I'm talking about; the radicalism of Thatcher that seemed so fresh.
That promise, that lean, trimmed-down fitness we could all look forward to; here was the chance to follow one dynamic plan, pushed by somebody who wasn't going to chicken out halfway through.
Stripping away all the inefficiencies, the cosy deals, the feather-bedding, the smothering worst of the nanny-state; it was a breath of clean new air, it was a crusade; something we could all take part in, all be a part of.’
‘If you were rich to start with, or determined to be a bigger bastard than your mates.’
Andy shakes his head.
‘You've always hated the Tories too much to see any of that clearly.
But the point is it doesn't matter who was  right, and even less who would have been right; all that matters is what people felt, because that's what produced the new ethos of the age; consensus had led to impasse, care to sterility, so: deliver a shock to the system, take the sort of radical risk with the country that you have to take with a business at least once in its history if it's to succeed; go for growth, take the monetarist shilling.’
He sighs, takes out the cigarette case again and holds it out to me.
I take a spliff.
‘And I was one of those who did,’ he says, lighting the J with his Zippo.
‘I was a loyal trooper in the children's crusade to recover the lost citadel of British economic power.’
He watches the fire while I smoke the spliff.
‘Though of course before that I'd already done my bit: I was one of Our Lads, I was an Expeditionary, part of the Task Force that recaptured Maggie's surrendered popularity.’
I don't know what to say, and, in a recently introduced policy initiative that has come with my advancing years, I don't say anything.
‘Well, here we are,’ Andy says, sitting forward and slapping his hands on his knees, then taking the J when I tap him on the elbow.
‘Thanks.’
He tokes on the spliff.
‘Here we are and we've had our experiment; there's been one party, one dominant idea, one fully followed plan, one strong leader — and her grey shadow — and it's all turned to shit and ashes.
Industrial base cut so close to the bone the marrow's leaking out, the old vaguely socialist inefficiencies replaced with more rabid capitalist ones, power centralised, corruption institutionalised, and a generation created which'll never have any skills beyond opening a car with a coat hanger and knowing which solvents give you the best buzz with a plastic bag over your head before you throw up or pass out.’
He sucks hard on the number before holding it out to me.
‘Yeah,’ I say, taking it.
‘But it's not like it was all your fault.
You did your bit but…
Islagiatt.’
‘Yeah, it seemed like a good idea at the time…’
‘Christ, man, I didn't think any of you guys should have been out there, but I don't think I could have done what you did, in the Falklands.
I mean, even if there had been some war I did believe worth fighting, if I'd been called up or something, I'm a coward, I'm just not physically capable.
You were.
You did it; fuck the rights and wrongs of the war, once you're in there, under fire, and your mates are getting blown away around you, you have to be able to function.
At least you did; I'm not sure I could.’
‘So what?’ he says, looking at me.
‘So I'm more of a fucking man because I learned how to kill people, and did?’
‘No, I just mean —’
‘Anyway,’ he says, looking away again.
‘A lot of good any of that did when we had a captain who couldn't fucking hack it, didn't have the guts to admit it, and had to send good men into a fucking killing ground to prove how fucking brave he really was.’
Andy lifts a log from the hearth and puts it on the fire, hitting the other logs with it and making them spark and blaze.
‘Yeah,’ I say.
‘Well, I can't —’
‘And you're wrong,’ he says, getting out of his seat and going to the corner of the room.
There's a half-open hatch there leading into what looks like a deep, oddly cube-shaped cupboard; it's a dumb waiter.
He pulls the top part of the metal cover further up, and the lower half sinks at the same time; he reaches in and gathers an armful of logs, bringing them over to the hearth.
‘We all have responsibility, Cameron.
You can't escape it.’
‘Chayzuz, Gould, you take a hard line, man, so ye dae,’ I say, trying to lighten things up but sounding pretty pathetic even to myself.
Andy sits, takes the offered spliff and arranges the logs neatly round the edge of the hearth, to dry.
He glances at me.
‘Yeah, and a long memory; I still haven't forgiven you for not trying to rescue me on the ice that time.’
He takes a long draw on the J, while I sit there thinking, Oh shit, then he hands the number back to me again with a big grin on his face.
‘Only kidding,’ he says.
‘I've been out-machoing men and bedding women with that story for twenty years.’
Andy shows me to my room, a floor down, at about four in the morning.
It has a fan heater and an electric blanket on the single bed.
Before I go to sleep I wonder about whether I should have said anything to him about Mr Archer and his phone calls and Ares.
I came up here thinking I would; I assumed I'd need to offload on somebody, but somehow it never seemed to be the right time to introduce the subject.
Never mind.
It feels good just to have had a talk.
As I drift off I have the start of the running-through-the-woods dream again but I get away from it and don't remember anything else.
The next day while Andy's still asleep I take (a) some painkillers and (b) the car into Kyle of Lochalsh to tell the local police I'm here.
Driving into the town I spot an Escort with a blue light on the roof and pull up behind it.
A sergeant appears from what a plate beside the door indicates is the dentist's and I go up to him and tell him my name and that I've been told to report my movements by Detective Inspector McDunn.
The gaunt, grey-haired sergeant fixes me with a studiously suspicious look and takes a note of my name and the time.
I get the impression he thinks I'm a harmless crank.
Anyway, he doesn't say much; maybe his mouth is still sore from  his visit to the dentist's.
I can't wait around to try and engage him in further conversation because my bowels suddenly decide they want to wake up too, and I have to make a dash for the nearest bar and the toilets.
God, I hate it when my shit smells of whisky.
Andy has a party that night, partly for me and partly because his pal Howie is leaving for a job on the rigs the following day.
We go for a walk up into the hills in the afternoon; me puffing and panting and coughing after Andy as he strides quickly, easily up the rutted forest tracks.
Back at the hotel, I help him clear up the lounge bar, which still bears the debris from Andy's last party a few months earlier.
The bar is still stocked, though there is no draught beer, only cans.
Andy seems to be assuming he'll be providing all the booze for the party, so I gather he's not quite as skint as I've heard.
Maybe a couple of dozen people show up for the party; about half locals — mostly men, though there's one married couple and a pair of single girls — and half travellers, New Age hippies from various scattered buses and vans parked in lay-bys and the highway equivalent of oxbows, where corners or short, twisty lengths of old roads have been replaced with more direct stretches.
In terms of people mixing, it's a party that at best emulsifies rather than combines; there's a hostility between some of the Highland lads (clean-shaven, short-haired) and the travellers (the opposite) that gets worse as everybody gets more drunk.
I get the impression the indigenous locals know the travelling people keep disappearing to have some blow, and resent it.
Andy seems not to notice, talking to everybody, regardless.
I do my best to mix as well.
At first I get on best with the Highland laddies, matching them dram for dram and can for can, taking their cigarettes and suffering their remarks on the lines of ‘No I still smoke’ when I offer them my Silk Cuts but gradually as we get drunker I start  to feel uncomfortable with their attitude to the travellers and even more so to women, and Howie, the guy I met last night, talks about how he used to slap the wife around and now the bitch is in one of these fucking women's refuges and if he ever finds her he'll fucking kick seven kinds of shit out of her.
The others suggest this isn't such a good idea but I get the impression they think this mainly because he'd only end up in prison.
I find myself gravitating towards the travellers.
At one point I see Andy standing staring out the windows of the lounge, towards the dark loch, his eyes wide.
‘You all right?’
I ask him.
He takes a moment to answer.
‘We're ten metres above mean sea-level here,’ he says, nodding out to the shore.
‘You don't say.’
I light a cigarette.
‘The deck on the QE2 on that level we called the Exocet Deck, because that's the height the missile rides at.’
Ah, Falklands Lore.
‘Well,’ I say, peering out at the darkness and the far side of the loch, ‘unless you have an irate neighbour with particularly good contacts in the arms trade —’
‘The only thing I ever have nightmares about,’ Andy says, his gaze still directed at the unseeable loch, his eyes still wide.
‘Isn't that ridiculous?
Nightmares about being blown to fuck by a missile, ten years ago.
I wasn't even on that deck; we were billeted two up from there…’
He shrugs, drinks and turns to me, smiling.
‘You see your mum much?’
‘Eh?’
I say, confused at this sudden change in direction.
‘No, not recently.
She's still in New Zealand.
How about you?
Been back to Strathspeld?’
He shakes his head and I get a shiver, remembering just that gesture of his, repeated and repeated so that it became like a nervous tic after a while, back in Strathspeld, after Clare's funeral in ‘89; a gesture of disbelief, refusal, non-acceptance.
‘You should go,’ he tells me.
‘You should go and see them.
They'd appreciate that.’
‘We'll see,’ I say.
A gust of wind throws rain against the window and shakes the frame; it's loud and surprising and I flinch but he just turns slowly and looks out into the darkness with what could almost be contempt before laughing and putting an arm round my shoulder and suggesting we have another drink.
Later a storm breaks over the hotel; lightning flares above the mountains across the loch, and the windows rattle as the thunder booms.
There's a power cut; the lights go out and we light candles and gas lamps and end up — a hard core of seven of us; Andy, me, Howie, another two local lads and a couple of the traveller boys —down in the snooker room where there's a beat-up looking table and a leak in the ceiling that turns the whole of the stained, green-baize surface into a millimetre-shallow marsh, water dripping from each pocket and dribbling down the bulky legs to the sopping carpet, and we play snooker by the light of the hissing gas lamps, having to hit the white ball really hard even for delicate shots because of the extra rolling resistance the water causes, and the balls make a zizzing, ripping noise as they race across the table and sometimes you can see spray curving up behind them and I'm feeling really drunk and a bit stoned from a couple of strong Js smoked out in the garden earlier with the travellers but I think this dimly lit water-hazard snooker is just hilarious and I'm laughing maniacally at it all and I put an arm round Andy's neck at one point and say, You know I love you, old buddy, and isn't friendship and love what's it's really all about? and why can't people just see that and just be nice to each other? except there are just so many complete bastards in the world, but Andy just shakes his head and I try to kiss him and he gently fends me off and steadies me against one wall and props me up with a snooker cue against my chest and I think this is really funny for some reason and laugh so much I fall over and have distinct problems getting up again and get carried to my room by Andy and one of the travellers and dumped on the bed and fall instantly asleep.
I dream of Strathspeld, and the long summers of my childhood passed in a trance of lazy pleasure, ending with that day, running through the woods (but I turn away from that memory, the way I've learned to over the years); I wander again through the woods and the small, hidden glens, along the shores of the ornamental lochan and the river and its loch and I'm standing near the old boathouse in that defeatingly bright sunlight, light dancing on water, and I see two figures, naked and thin and white in the grass beyond the reed beds, and as I watch them the light turns from gold to silver and then to white, and the trees seem to shrink in on themselves, leaves disappearing in the chill coruscations of that enveloping white blaze while the view all around me becomes brighter and darker at once and all is reduced to black and white; trees are bare and black, the ground smother-smoothed in white and the two young figures are gone, while one even smaller one — booted, gloved, coat-tails flying behind — runs laughing across the white level of the frozen loch.
Someone calls out.
LUX EUROPAE
Twelve hours later I'm in the fucking Channel Islands still nursing a hangover and thinking, What in the fuck am I doing here?
‘Eh?
What?’
‘Wake up, Cameron; there's a phone call.’
‘Oh.
Right.’
I try to focus on Andy.
I can't seem to get my left eye open.
‘Is it important?’
‘Don't know.’
So I get up and pull my dressing-gown on and head down to the cold, dusty lobby where the phone is.
‘Cameron.
Frank here.’
‘Oh, hi.’
‘So, are you enjoying your wee hol in the Highlands?’
‘Oh yeah’ I say still trying to persuade my left eyelid to lift.
‘What's the problem, Frank?’
‘Well, your Mr Archer phoned.’
‘Oh yeah?’
I say warily.
‘Yes.
He said you might like to know’— I hear Frank rustling some paper —‘Mr Jemmel's real name is J. Azul.
That's the initial J, then A-Z-U-L.
And that Azul knew the full story but he was leaving on a foreign trip…well, this afternoon.
That was all he'd say.
I tried to ask him what he was talking about, but —’
‘Wait a minute, wait a minute,’ I say, pulling my left eyelid up and hurting my eye and starting that eye watering.
I take a deep breath, trying to wake myself up.
‘Say all that again.’
‘Mis-ter,’ Frank says slowly.
‘Ar-ch-er…phon-ed…’
Frank repeats the message.
Meanwhile I'm thinking.
Leaving this afternoon…leaving from where?
‘Okay,’ I say, when Frank's finished talking to me as though I'm a Sun reader.
‘Frank, could you do me a big favour and see if you can find who this guy Azul is?’
‘Well, I'm quite busy you know, Cameron.
We don't all treat deadlines with —’
‘Frank,please .
The name rings a bell; I think I've seen it…
Christ, I can't remember, my brain's not working.
But please, check it out, Frank, will you?
Please?
I'll owe you one.
Please.’
‘All right, all right .’
‘Thanks; if you find anything call me right back, okay?
Will you?’
‘Yes, yes, all right.’
‘Great.
Brilliant.
Thanks.’
‘But if I'm ringing you I just hope you answer faster than you did yesterday.’
‘What?’
‘Your Mr Archer rang yesterday.’
‘Yesterday?’
I say, feeling my stomach churn.
‘Yes; lunch-time.
Ruby took the message.
I was out but when I got  back I tried calling but there was no answer.
I tried your mobile as well but I didn't think it would work up there in the mountains and sure enough all I got was the recording saying try again later.’
‘Oh, Christ.’
‘Anyway, another thing —’
He's going to come out with another of his ridiculous spell-check semi-jokes; I can't fucking believe it.
Meanwhile my mind's racing, or at least trying to race; right now it feels like it's stuck at the side of the track trying to get its legs out of its tracksuit bottoms and hopping around and falling down while the race takes place elsewhere.
‘…
What if it's a common name?’
Frank asks.
‘What if half the people in Beirut or somewhere are called Azul?
I mean it sounds like a sort of—’
‘Frank, listen,’ I say, suddenly inspired, and sounding a lot more sober and calm than I feel.
‘I think I remember where I know the name from.
I saw it in the back of Private Eye .
Something to do with…
I don't know; the sort of thing that gets into the back of the Eye .
please, Frank.
He might be connected with defence, aerospace, intelligence or the arms trade.
Try Profile; just type in ‘Get Azul’ and —’
‘I know, I know.’
‘Thanks, Frank.
I'm going to get dressed now.
If I don't hear from you in about half an hour I'll ring anyway.
Bye.’
Christ; those five murdered guys, not to mention all the others McDunn's investigating, and this guy leaving this afternoon.
Rang yesterday.
Christ, I hate deadlines!
I'm panicking; I can feel it.
My heart is racing.
I'm trying to think but I don't know what to do.
Decide!
I decide: When in doubt it's vitally important to keep moving .
Velocity is important.
Kinetic energy frees the brain and confuses the enemy.
I'm gulping hot coffee and pulling on my coat; my bag's sitting on the reception desk in the hotel lobby and Andy's standing, hunched and blinking and bleary-eyed, watching me stuff toast into my mouth and slurp coffee from a handle-free mug.
Andy is looking at my bag.
One of my socks is poking out from where the two zips meet, like a floppy white hernia.
Andy pulls one of the zips open, pokes the sock back in and then recloses the bag.
‘The phone often goes off,’ he says apologetically.
‘probably the storm last night.’
‘Never mind.’
I glance at my watch.
Past time to phone Frank.
‘Listen,’ Andy says, scratching under his chin and yawning.
‘The police might want to talk to you —’
‘I know; I'll let them know where I am, don't —’
‘No, I mean the local cops.’
‘What ?
Why?’
‘Oh,’ he sighs.
‘There was a bit of a rumble last night when the boys left, outside.
Looks like Howie and his pals jumped the two traveller guys on the road; landed one in hospital, apparently.
Cops are looking for Howie.
Anyway, you were asleep when it happened but they might want to have a word, so —’
‘Jesus, I —’ I begin.
The phone rings.
I grab it and yell, ‘What?’
‘Cameron; Frank.’
‘Oh, hi.
Have you found anything?’
‘I think so.
Could be a Mr Jemayl Azul,’ he says.
He spells out the first name and I'm thinking Jemayl/Jemmel, uh-huh.
‘British citizen,’ Frank goes on.
‘English mother, Turkish father.
Born 17.3.49, educated Harrow, Oxford and Yale.’
‘But is he in defence or —?’
‘Has his own arms company.
Connected with the Saudis but he's sold arms just about everywhere, including Libya, Iran and Iraq.
He's bought up a lot of small UK firms in the past, mostly to close them down; been the subject of a question in the House.
The Israelis accused him of selling nuclear information to the Iraqis in 1985.
You were right about him being mentioned in the Eye ; appeared a few times and I got the cuts up…’
More paper rustling.
‘According to the report here, one of the aliases he used in share deals and bank accounts was Mr Jemmel.
How's that?’
Frank sounds pleased with himself.
‘Brilliant, Frank, brilliant,’ I tell him.
‘So where is he?’
‘Addresses in London and Geneva, an office in New York…but based on Jersey, in the Channel Islands.’
‘Telephone number?’
‘I checked: unlisted.
And just an answering machine at his company address.
But I called a pal of mine in St Helier who works on the local rag and he reckons your man's at home.’
‘Right.
Right…’
I say.
I'm thinking.
‘What about an address?’
‘Aspen, Hill Street, Gorey, Jersey.’
‘Okay.
Okay.’
I'm still thinking.
‘Frank, that's brilliant, an incredible help.
Could you put me through to Eddie?’
‘What ?’
Eddie says, when I tell him.
‘Inverness to Jersey.
Come on, Eddie; I'm onto something here.
I'd pay for it myself but my card's up to the limit.’
This had better be good, Cameron.’
‘Eddie, this could be fucking enormous, I'm not kidding.’
‘Well, so you say, Cameron, but your record overseas isn't terribly encouraging…’
‘Come on, Eddie, that's cheap.
And anyway, Jersey's barely overseas and I'm giving up a day's holiday here.’
‘Oh, all right, but you're going economy.’
‘Some life,’ Andy says, putting my bag into the rear of the 205.
‘Yeah,’ I say, getting into the car.
I can feel my headache  attempting to reassert itself.
‘Looks exotic on occasion; doesn't feel it.’
I close the door and wind the window down.
I'm not at all sure I'm fit to drive but I have to if I'm going to get to Inverness in time for the connecting flight.
Andy says, looking dubious, ‘You sure you know what you're doing?’
‘Covering the story,’ I tell him, and grin.
‘See you soon.’
I make Inverness Airport in ninety minutes, through showers of hail towed under tall, grey clouds.
Sound track by Count Basie and Islam's answer to Pavarotti in the even more enormous shape of Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan; voice like a tripped-out angel in a dream even though I have no idea what he's singing about and always sneakingly suspect it's something on the lines of ‘Hey, let's string up Salman Rushdie, yeah-yeah’.
The ticket's waiting for me at the desk.
I'm still officially on holiday so I force myself not to read any newspapers.
I think about buying some fags but the headache's still there behind my eyes and I have the feeling smoking a cigarette would make me want to throw up.
Of course what I really need is something chemical and crystalline but I don't have any and wouldn't know where to start looking for it in Inverness.
I feel the need to do something so I buy a dumb little hand-held game and sit playing it while I wait.
The flight's delayed but only slightly; I change at Gatwick in breezy sunshine and the 146 touches down on Jersey in relatively balmy conditions.
I even manage to hire a car with the credit card, which seems like a blessing.
The Nova comes with a map; I drive through the neat little lanes and some straighter, faster roads, feeling even in those few miles that the place is too damn clean and twee and crowded after  the West Highlands.
Gorey is easy to find, out on the east coast, looking out over the sands and round to the point where the castle I always thought was in St Helier actually is.
Hill Street takes a little longer, but Aspen is conspicuous; a long white villa set just below the crest of a low, wooded ridge, surrounded by white walls with ornamental black railings and little ball-head shrubs standing in wooden tubs.
Terracotta tiled roof.
It looks cool.
I imagine its value is probably pretty cool too.
There are tall black iron gates but they're hooked open so I just drive through and up a drive of pink bricks to the door.
I ring the bell and wait.
There are no other cars in the drive but there's a garage block attached to the house with two double doors.
The sun's dipping down over the trees and a breeze gets up, rustling the leaves on the ornamental shrubs and blowing some grit into my left eye, making it water again.
I ring the bell once more.
I look through the letter-box but I can't see anything; I reach in and feel a box on the far side of the thick door.
After a few minutes I take a look round the place, stepping under Moorish archways and over low white walls, past an astroturf tennis court and a swimming pool about the same size, uncovered and still.
I kneel and test the water with one hand.
Warm.
I try to look in the windows of the house but they're either covered with those plastic roll-down external shutters you usually see in France or closed off inside by Venetian blinds.
I go back to the car, thinking maybe Mr Azul's only out for a short while.
Of course, maybe I've missed him entirely and he's already set off on whatever trip Mr Archer seemed to know about.
I'll give it half an hour, maybe an hour or so, then I'll call the local paper and ask for Frank's contact.
I consider playing the hand-held I bought in Inverness but I'm either not hooked on it yet or my jaded palate has produced game-boredom already.
I'm thinking there might be something wrong with my plan to wait as I close my eyes (only to rest them), but even as I yawn and  put my hands into my armpits I think a spot of rest isn't such a bad idea so long as I don't fall asleep.
Andy runs out across the ice.
I am five years old and he is seven.
Strathspeld is everywhere white; the sky is still and shining, hiding the sun in a dazzling, brilliant haze, its light somehow distanced by the intervening layer of high cloud overlooking a chill wilderness of snow.
The mountaintops are smothered, black crags violent spattered marks against that blankness; the hills and forests are blanketed too, the trees are frosted and the loch is hard and soft together, iced over then snowed upon.
Here, beyond the gardens of the lodge and the woods and ornamental ponds, the loch narrows and becomes a river again, bending and funnelling and quickening as it heads towards the rocks and falls and the shallow gorge beyond.
Usually from here you can hear the thunder of the falls in the distance but today there is only silence.
I watch Andy run out.
I shout after him but I don't follow him.
The bank on this side is low, only half a metre above the white plain of the snow-covered river.
The grass and reeds around me are flattened under the sudden, overnight fall of snow.
On the far side, where Andy is heading, the bank is tall and steep where the water has cut into the hill, removing sand and gravel and stones and leaving an overhang of earth and exposed, dangling tree-roots; the dark gravel space under that ragged overhang is the only place I can see where there is no snow.
Andy is yelling as he runs, coat-tails flapping out behind him, gloved hands outspread, his head thrown back, the ear flaps on his hat snapping and clapping like wings.
He's almost halfway across and suddenly I go from being terrified and annoyed to being exhilarated, intoxicated; overjoyed.
We were told not to do this, told not to come here, told to sledge and throw snowballs and  make snowmen all we wanted, but not even to come near the loch and the river, in case we fell through the ice; and yet Andy came here after we'd sledged for a while on the slope near the farm, walked down here through the woods despite my protests, and then when we got here to the river bank I said well, as long as we only looked, but then Andy just whooped and jumped down onto the boulder-lumped white slope of shore and sprinted out across the pure flat snow towards the far bank.
At first I was angry at him, frightened for him, but now suddenly I get this rush of joy, watching him race out there into the cold level space of the stilled river, free and warm and vivacious in that smoothed and frozen silence.
I think he's done it, I think he's across the river and safe and there's a buzzy glow of vicarious accomplishment starting to well up within me, but then there's a cracking noise and he falls; I think he's tripped and fallen forward but he isn't lying flat on the snow, he's sunk up to his waist in it and there's a pool of darkness spreading on the whiteness around him as he struggles, trying to lever himself out and I can't believe this is happening, can't believe Andy isn't going to jump free; I'm yelling in fear now, shouting his name, screaming out to him.
He struggles, turning round as he sinks deeper, chunks and edges of ice rearing into the air and making little puffs and fountains of snow as he tries to find purchase and push himself out.
He's calling out to me now but I can hardly hear him because I'm screaming so hard, wetting my pants as I squeeze the screams out.
He's holding his hand out to me, yelling at me, but I'm stuck there, terrified, screaming, and I don't know what to do, can't think what to do, even while he's yelling at me to help him, come out to him,get a branch , but I'm petrified at the thought of setting foot on that white, treacherous surface and I can't imagine finding a branch, can't think what to do as I look one way towards the tall trees above the hidden gorge and the other along the shore of the loch towards the boat-house but there are no branches, there's only  snow everywhere, and then Andy stops struggling and slips under the whiteness.
I stand still, quietened and numbed.
I wait for him to come back up but he doesn't.
I step back, then turn and run, the clinging wetness round my thighs going from warm to cold as I race beneath the snow-shrouded trees towards the house.
I run into the arms of Andy's parents walking with the dogs near the ornamental ponds and it seems like an age before I can tell them what's happened because my voice won't work and I can see the fear in their eyes and they're asking, ‘Where is Andrew?
Where is Andrew?’ and eventually I can tell them and Mrs Gould gives a strange little shuddering cry and Mr Gould tells her to get the people in the house and phone for an ambulance and runs away down the path towards the river with the four Golden Labradors barking excitedly behind him.
I run to the house with Mrs Gould and we get everybody —my mum and dad and the other guests — to come down to the river.
My father carries me in his arms.
At the riverside we can see Mr Gould on his stomach out on the ice, pushing himself back from the hole in the river; people are shouting and running around; we head down the river towards the narrows and the gorge and my father slips and almost drops me and his breath smells of whisky and food.
Then somebody calls out and they find Andy, round the bend in the river, down where the water reappears from a crust of ice and snow and swirls, lowered and reduced, round the rocks and wedged tree-trunks before the lip of the falls, which sound muted and distant today, even this close.
Andy's there, caught between a snow-covered tree-trunk and an iced-over rock, his face blue-white and quite still.
His father splashes deep into the water and pulls him out.
I start crying and bury my face in my father's shoulder.
The village doctor was one of the house guests; he and Andy's father hold the boy up, letting water drain from his mouth, then  lay him down on a coat on the snow.
The doctor presses on Andy's chest while his wife breathes into the boy's mouth.
They look more surprised than anybody when his heart restarts and then he makes a gurgling noise in his throat.
Andy is wrapped in the coat and rushed to the house, submerged to the neck in a warm bath and given oxygen when the ambulance arrives.
He'd been under the ice, under the water, for ten minutes or more.
The doctor had heard about children, usually younger than Andy, surviving without air in cold water, but never seen anything like it.
Andy recovered quickly, sucking on the oxygen, coughing and spluttering in the warm bath, then being dried and taken to a warmed bed and watched over by his parents.
The doctor was worried about brain damage but Andy seemed just as bright and intelligent afterwards as he'd been before, remembering details from earlier in his childhood and performing above average in the memory tests the doctor gave him and even doing well in school when that started again after the winter break.
It was a miracle, his mother said, and the local newspaper agreed.
Andy and I never did get properly told off for what happened, and he hardly ever mentioned that day to me unless he had to.
His father didn't like talking about it much either and used to be slightly dismissive and jokey about it all.
Mrs Gould gradually talked less about it.
Eventually it seemed it was only I who ever thought about that still, cold morning, recalling in my dreams that cry and that hand held out to me for help I could not, would not give, and the silence that followed Andy disappearing under the ice.
And sometimes I felt he was different, and had changed, even though I knew people changed all the time and people our age changed faster than most.
Even so, I thought on occasion there had been a loss; nothing necessarily to do with oxygen starvation but just as a result of the experience, the shock of his cold journey, slipping away beneath the grey lid of ice (and perhaps, I told myself in later years, it was only a loss of ignorance, a loss of folly, and so no bad thing).
But I could never again imagine him doing something as spontaneously crazy, as aggressively, contemptuously fate-tempting and unleashed as running out across the frozen ice, arms out, laughing.
You're already wearing your moustache and wig and glasses and you have clip-on sunshades over the lenses because it is quite a bright day.
You ring the doorbell, watching down the drive for any cars while you pull on your leather gloves.
You're sweating and nervous and you know you're out on a limb here, you're in the process of taking some terrible risks and the luck, the flow that comes from being justified and in tune and not taking too much for granted, not being contemptuous or disrespectful of fate; all that's in danger here because you're pushing the envelope, you're maybe relying on one or two too many things going perfectly.
Even getting it all set up to get you this far may have taxed your fortune to the limit already and there's still a long way to go.
But if you're going to fail you'll do it full-face on, not flinching, not whining.
You've done more than you thought you'd ever get away with and so in a sense it's all gain from here, in fact it's been all gain for some time and so you can't complain and you don't intend to if fate deserts you now.
He comes to the door just like that; no servants, no security phone, and that by itself gives you the green light; you haven't the time for any finessing so you just kick him in the balls and follow him inside as he collapses, foetal on the floor.
You close the door, take off your glasses because your vision is so distorted, and kick  him in the head; far too softly, then still not hard enough, as he scrabbles round on the floor, one hand at his crotch and the other at his head, making a spitting, wheezing noise.
You kick him again.
This time he goes limp.
You don't think you've killed him or severed his spine or anything but, if you have, that can't be helped.
You make sure he can't be seen from the letter flap, which is covered by a sealed box, then you look round the hall.
Golf umbrella.
You take that.
Still nobody coming.
You walk quickly through, see the kitchen and go in there, pulling down the Venetian blinds.
You find a breadknife but you keep the umbrella too.
You find some tape in a kitchen drawer and go back to the front hall, turning him round so that you're between him and the door.
You tie his hands and wrists together.
He's wearing expensive-looking slacks and a silk shirt.
Crocodile slip-ons and monogrammed socks.
Manicure and a scent that you don't recognise.
Hair looks slightly damp.
You take off both his shoes and stuff both socks into his mouth; they're silk, too, so they ball up very small.
You tape his mouth closed, put the roll of tape in one pocket, then leave him there to search the rest of the house, pulling down the blinds in each room as you go.
In the kitchen again, you find the door to the cellar.
On the first floor you hear music and the sounds of water.
You creep along to an open doorway.
Bedroom; probably the master bedroom.
Brass bed; huge, maybe even gold-plated.
Disturbed bedclothes, broad sunlit balcony beyond windows and pastel-pink vertical blinds.
The sounds are coming from the en-suite bathroom.
You go into the bedroom, checking the position of the mirrors; none of them ought to show you to anybody in the bathroom.
You're listening as you approach the bathroom door.
The music is loud.
It's a Eurythmics song called Sweet Dreams are Made of This .
A power cable stretches from a socket in the wall into the bathroom.
that's interesting.
The voice sings along with the song, then turns into a hum.
Your heart sinks.
You were hoping he was alone in the house.
You look  through the crack at the door hinge.
The bathroom is big.
In one corner there is a sunken jacuzzi with a young person in it, moving sinuously in the bubbling waters.
Caucasian, with short black hair.
You can't tell whether the person is male or female.
The research you did on Mr Azul didn't cover his sexuality.
The ghetto-blaster lies less than a metre away from the lip of the jacuzzi.
There is at least another couple of metres of flex coiled on the floor.
The young man or woman sings along with the song again again, putting their head back as they do so.
Probably female; neck smooth, no real Adam's apple.
You look again at that power cable.
Your mouth is dry.
What to do?
It could be so quick, so easy and it would simplify things so much.
It is almost as though fate is saying, Look, I've made it easy for you; just get on with it, do it.
Whoever or whatever they are they're associating with this man and if they don't know what he does then they should.
But you're not sure.
This violates the code, this goes against what you originally decided were your operational parameters.
There have to be rules, laws, for everything; after all, there are even rules for war.
Maybe this is fate testing you, offering you a litmus test, an apparently simple way round a problem that will prove you, find you out.
If you take the easy way you will have failed, and nothing will save you then, not your skill, not your determination or righteousness, and not your luck because that will have turned against you.
The young person in the tub looks happy enough for now.
You go to the bed, put down the umbrella and start looking in the drawers and cupboards built into the wall units surrounding the head of the bed.
You keep glancing to the bathroom door.
The drawers slide smoothly in and out without a sound; one of the perks of picking on the well-off rather than the chipboard classes.
You find a gun.
Smith & Wesson.38.
Loaded.
Box of fifty  rounds.
You permit yourself an almost inaudible sigh and grin to yourself.
You lay the knife beside the umbrella, heft the gun and put it under the duvet to click the safety off.
Peek in the drawer again.
No silencer; that would be too much to ask for.
But then in another drawer you find something maybe even more useful.
You stare at the gear in the drawer, a glow in your belly spreading through you.
You have made the right choice and you are being rewarded.
You glance over the thick tubes that make up the emperor-size brass bedstead, and smile.
You take the bondage hood out of the drawer.
It zips up the back and its only feature is a nose-shaped crease with a couple of little nostril slits at the base.
You take out your penknife and cut a couple of eye-holes, continually glancing at the bathroom door.
You try the hood on, then take it off and slit some more leather off the eye-holes.
You put it on again, zipping it up halfway at the back.
It smells of sweat and that scent Mr Azul favours.
You take one of the pairs of handcuffs from the drawer and go into the bathroom, pointing the gun at the figure in the tub.
‘Jem,’ she says, ‘what are you —?’
You decide to use your Michael Caine voice.
It doesn't sound very much like Michael Caine, but then it doesn't sound like your own voice either and that's all that matters.
‘It's not fucking lover-boy, dear, now get out of the fucking bath and do as you're told and you won't get hurt.’
It's not too bad; the mask helps disguise your voice too.
She stares at you, mouth open.
It's a bad time for the doorbell to go, but that's what happens.
She looks past you.
‘Make a noise, darling,’ you say quietly, ‘and you're fucking history, understand?’
The doorbell goes again.
The Eurythmics song finishes and you put a foot on the ghetto-blaster's power cable and drag it smartly across the bathroom tiles, pulling the lead from the back of the machine.
You half expect the next song to  start anyway because there are batteries in it, but, instead: silence.
The girl stares at you.
You watch her.
It all feels strangely academic, as though you don't really care what happens next.
If she does make a noise you probably won't shoot her, and anyway there's a chance she couldn't make enough of a noise to be heard outside the front door; it's a big house and although there are a lot of hard, sound-reflective surfaces in it, you're not convinced a scream would make it all the way to whoever's outside, either down the stairwell or through the double-glazed balcony windows.
Plus, of course, you might have time to get over to her and hit her, knock her out before she could even gather a decent breath, but it's dangerous, edge-working stuff and you'd rather not have to think about that.
The doorbell doesn't go a third time.
You pull a towelling robe from the back of the door and throw it at her.
She half catches it as it lands to one side of the jacuzzi.
‘Right.
Put that on now, come on.’
You expect her to crouch and try to put the robe on before she's fully out of the water, or to turn her back to you, but instead there's something like a sneer on her face as she stands up facing you and wraps the robe around herself with a kind of disdain.
She has a good body, and that single vertical tuft of pubic hair you need if you're a model or the possessor of a high-cut swimsuit.
She puts her head back with a nervous, resigned sigh when you put the gun to her head but she doesn't try anything as you cuff her hands behind her back.
You tape her mouth then you walk her down to the kitchen and down into the cellar.
As you pass through the hall you notice that Mr Azul is just where you left him.
The cellar provides lots of rope.
You tape her fingers together and then tie her — sitting on the floor — to a stout wooden workbench.
You remove anything sharp from the workbench surface and check there's nothing within reach of her legs.
You take some of the rope with you.
You go back up to Mr Azul, and he's gone.
You go stupid on yourself for a moment, as the luck wobbles, threatens to fly away and leave you; you stare at the place where he was, lying curled up, tied up in front of the door; you stare at the empty stretch of carpet, dumbly, as if staring will help.
Then you turn and run into the main lounge.
He's there, still curled up and still secured by the tape, but he must have wriggled his way through to here while you were down in the cellar; he's knocked over a table with the phone on it and he's just turning the phone the right way up as you enter the lounge and see him.
He wriggles, getting his face over the buttons on the base of the phone.
He stabs at the buttons three times, then wriggles over to the handset and makes muffled shouts through the gag until you cock the gun and he hears it and looks round at where you stand, next to the wall, waving the telephone's wall-plug.
You haul him upstairs and throw him on the bed; he struggles and tries to shout.
It's getting dark, so you turn the pink pastel vertical blinds closed and pull the curtains before putting on the lights.
Mr Azul screams through his silk socks and masking-tape.
You hit him.
He's only groggy, not out, but you're able to secure him to the bed with the other set of handcuffs and the leather straps from the same drawer the hood came from.
You're satisfied he's tightly held; the bed is sturdy and the straps are supple but quite thick.
They fit perfectly.
He struggles a little.
Then you take the rope you brought from the cellar and measure out four lengths, cutting them with your penknife.
You tie one length round Mr Azul's upper right arm, as close to his armpit as possible, over his silk shirt; you kneel on the bed and haul with all your might and the rope bites deep into the sheen of the pale silk shirt; Mr Azul cries out behind his gag; a strangled, anguished shriek.
You do the same to his other arm.
You tie his legs too, fitting the rope up to his crotch and tying  it tight, bunching the fabric of the slacks.
Mr Azul bucks up and down on the bed in a bizarre parody of sexual energy.
His eyes are popping and sweat stands out on his skin.
His face is going red as his heart struggles to pump blood down arteries blocked off by the ropes.
Then you take out the little plastic box from your jacket and show him the syringe needle.
He's still bucking up and down and he's shaking his head too now and you're not sure he understands, but it doesn't matter all that much.
You prick him once on each arm and leg.
This is a refinement you thought of only recently and are quietly proud of.
It means that even if he is discovered in time, before necrosis sets in, he will be HIV-positive.
You leave him there and go down to check the woman is all right.
Mr Azul's screams sound harsh and hoarse and far away.
It's sunset when you leave, locking the quiet house securely behind you.
The sun flames orange and pink behind the trees above the house, the breeze is cool rather than cold, scented with flowers and the sea, and you think what a pleasant if rather bland place this would be to settle down.
I jolt awake with a bad taste in my mouth and my left eyelid stuck down again.
It's almost dark.
I look at my watch.
Where the fuck is this guy?
I take another look round the house; no lights.
Back in the car, I try to use the mobile but the batteries are flat and the Nova doesn't seem to have a cigarette lighter.
I head for St Helier.
‘Shit.’
I've just tried the local newspaper but Frank's pal has gone out and they won't give me a contact number.
I'm standing in a phone box near the harbour.
I watch a white Lamborghini Countach trundle past on the street outside and shake  my head in disbelief.
A Lambo.
More than two metres broad and barely one high.
Just the car to have on an island full of lots of narrow, high-hedged twisty roads and a 60-miles-per-hour speed limit.
I wonder if he ever gets the beast out of second gear.
Maybe I should phone the police: hello hello I've just spotted a cretin recklessly in charge of an obscene amount of money is there a reward?
(Tempting.)
Every bastard's out.
Frank isn't at home, Azul's unlisted, I try the local paper here but they can't or won't help and the airlines refuse to give out information on passengers.
I put the phone down.
‘Shit!’
I shout.
It sounds very loud in the phone box.
I phone Yvonne and William's house but there's only William's voice on the answer-machine.
I remember Yvonne saying something about being away on a job for the next few days.
I think about phoning her mobile but she hates me doing that so I don't.
Oh, bugger this.
If I was some fucking private eye or something I'd head back out to Mr Azul's big house and break in somehow and find something really interesting or a body or a beautiful woman (or just get slugged on the back of the head and wake up wise-cracking).
But I'm tired, I've still got a headache, I feel beat and out of ideas and I feel embarrassed dammit.
What in the fuck am I doing here?
What was I thinking of?
Hell, this seemed like such a good idea this morning.
I can still make a flight back to Blighty which will connect with the last plane to Inverness.
Forget covering the story.
Sometimes a tactical retreat is the only course to follow.
Even Saint Hunter would agree.
If I feel the need to do something I can always exercise my creative abilities trying to think of a story that'll appease Eddie.
Fat chance.
I take the Nova back to the airport.
An hour to kill.
Time to hit the bar.
I start off with a Bloody Mary as this is breakfast in a sense, then cleanse the palate with  a bottle of Pils.
I buy a packet of Silk Cut and carefully smoke a cigarette — making sure that I'm actually enjoying it, not just doing it out of habit — while managing to fit in a couple of large and very refreshing G&Ts before the flight's called and there's just time for a single knocked-back whisky to provide a bit of nominal support for the Scottish export drive.
I board the plane feeling no pain, eat the evening meal and continue with the G&T theme, land in Gatwick and make the connection via the smoking area of the bar and another gulped Gordon's, then pass on the second offered dinner but not the accompanying booze and quietly pass out somewhere over the West Midlands, to be woken by a dishy blonde with an impudent, dimpled smile and we're here we've landed we've arrived, we're on the stand at the airport and I'd ask her what she's doing later because I'm drunk enough to not care when she says ‘No’ as she probably will, but I know I'm too tired and besides my left eyelid's stuck again and I suspect it makes me look a bit like Quasimodo, so I don't say anything except, ‘Uh, thanks,’which is cool or sad, I'm not sure which.
I walk into the terminal thinking, Well, at least there isn't that smell of sewage around you sometimes get when you arrive in dear old Embra; I'm not sure I could handle that right now.
I walk through the lounge thinking something looks wrong somehow, then stop and stand still where the lounge opens out into the main terminal building, suddenly filled with horror and confusion; it's all too small and not shaped right!
This isn't Edinburgh!
Those amiable but blatantly incompetent buffoons have brought me to the wrong fucking airport!
Dickheads!
Can't they even navigate , for fuck's sake?
Christ, I bet there isn't even a flight back from…
Where the hell am I?
I see the sign saying Welcome to Inverness just as I remember where I left the car and where I left from this morning and just before I turn and stamp to the nearest desk and demand in my highest dudgeon to be taken to Edinburgh on a charted Lear if  necessary or limoed immediately to the highest-starred hotel within a reasonable radius for a free overnight dinner, bed and breakfast and unlimited bar tab.
Narrow escape from Terminal Embarrassment.
People are walking past looking at me oddly.
I shake my head and set a course for the car park.
It's kind of late now and I'm in no condition to drive so when I get the 205 I only take it as far as the outskirts of Inverness where I stop at the first lit Bed and Breakfast sign I see and talk politely and slowly to the pleasant middle-aged couple from Glasgow who run the place and then say goodnight, close the door of my room and fall fast asleep on the bed without even taking off my jacket.
FRIENDLY FIRE
I head south after what I think's called a hearty breakfast and an even heartier cough.
I fuel up at a wee petrol station just before the A9 and phone Fettes while the tank's filling.
Sergeant Flavell sounds a little odd when I talk to him and tell him I've been to Jersey for the day but I'm on my way back to Edinburgh.
I ask him if I can have my new lap-top back and he says he isn't sure.
He suggests I come straight to Fettes; they want to talk to me.
I say okay.
South on the A9, sound track Michelle Shocked, The Pixies, Carter and Shakespear's Sister.
I catch a bit of radio while I'm changing cassettes just north of Perth and hear something called I'll Sleep When I'm Dead by Bon Jovi which isn't a patch on Uncle Warren's song of the same name and makes me more than reasonably annoyed.
Into Edinburgh by late lunch-time, past the signs trumpeting the up-coming Euro-summit.
I don't know how they've done it but the typography on the signs makes me want to pronounce the word Edin-burg, and I live in the place, for God's sake.
Christ in a bucket: independent bastarding deterrent, The Genuine Shit Article, cold fucking filtering, Edin-burg, Edin-borow, Sleep when I'm a de-rigueurly long-haired white-skinned head-banging high-pitched middle-aged sub-grunge light-metal Zep-clone.
What a pile of shit everything is.
On Ferry Road, within sight of Fettes School's preposterous spire and only minutes from the police HQ, I have the first cigarette of the day, not because I really want it, just to feel bad.
(Uncle Warren knows a thing or two.)
This turns out to be smart thinking in a way because when I get to Cop Central they promptly arrest me.
The hotel is dark and very quiet.
The cellars are full of junk, most of which might have been useful once but all of which is now covered in water or mud or fungus.
Some of the timbers under the floor are white with fuzzy rot.
On the lower ground floor you pass through the snooker room, the ballroom and a store room.
The table in the snooker room is waterlogged, its baize stained and its wooden sides cracked.
The old motorbikes, tables, chairs and carpets in the ballroom look like forlorn toys in some long-neglected doll's house.
Rain beats softly against the windows: the only sound.
Outside, it is black dark.
The stairs from here to the top floor stretch upwards around the dilapidated grandeur of the stairwell.
On the next floor up the reception area is dusty and bare, the bar smells of sour booze and stale cigarette smoke and the empty dining room is redolent of dampness and decay.
The kitchen is cold and hollow and echoing.
There is one old domestic stove, powered by bottled gas, and one sink.
There's an apron hanging on a nail.
You take the apron and put it on.
The next two floors hold bedrooms.
There is dampness here too, and in some of the rooms the ceiling has fallen in, the plaster and  lath lying draped over the heavy, old-fashioned furniture like some clumsy travesty of a dust-sheet.
The rain is hitting the windows harder now, and the wind is getting up, whistling through cracks in the panes and the window-frames.
The top floor feels a little less damp, a little more warm, though the wind and rain still sound loud outside and above.
At one end of the dark corridor, past the wedged-open fire door, a door lies ajar.
The living room inside is lit by the remains of a log fire, collapsing now into ashes.
A couple of logs lie on the hearth, drying, and the air smells of their pine scent and cigarette smoke.
An old coal scuttle to the side of the fireplace holds a can of paraffin, almost full.
In the corner of the room the dumb waiter contains a selection of logs of various sizes, most of them still damp.
You take the biggest of the logs, which is about the size of a man's arm, and walk softly across the room to the bedroom door.
You go through and stand listening to the rain and the wind, and — just audible — the noise of a man breathing slowly and rhythmically in the bed.
You hold the log out in front of you as you walk towards the bed.
He moves in the darkness, something you hear more than see.
You stop and stand still.
Then the man in the bed starts to snore.
Rain drums on the window.
You smell whisky and old tobacco smoke.
You get to the bedside and raise the log over your head.
You hold it there.
This is different, somehow.
This is somebody you know.
But you can't think about that because that isn't the point; although you know it does matter, you can't allow it to matter, you can't let something like that stop you.
You bring the log down with all your might.
It hits his head and you don't hear the noise it makes because you cry out at the same time, as though it's you in the bed, you being attacked, you being killed.
There's a terrible, sucking, bubbling noise from the figure in the bed.
You raise the log and bring it down again, calling out once more.
The man in the bed doesn't move or make a sound.
You turn on the torch.
There is a lot of blood; it looks red where it seeps into the white sheets, black where it quietly pools.
You take the apron off and cover his shoulders and head with it.
Then you go downstairs to get the gas bottle out of the old stove in the kitchen.
The twice-soaked bed linen lights quickly, paraffin overcoming blood.
You leave the gas bottle on the floor at the foot of the bed and walk quickly away along the shorter length of corridor and step through the emergency exit out into the loud darkness of the night.
You run down the metal fire escape on the gable end of the building.
You stop at the top of the road and look back, to see the flames just starting to become visible over the edge of the hotel roof, dancing orange into the night.
Maybe you hear the gas bottle explode a couple of minutes and a couple of miles later, when you're on the loch-side road heading away, but it's blowing quite hard by then and you're not sure.
It's been three days now I'm not sure though I could be wrong because I haven't slept very well I have nightmares of a man and they think it's me but it isn't, is it?
Is it?
I'm starting to wonder.
He has a gorilla mask on and he talks with the voice of a baby and he has a huge syringe and I'm tied to the seat screaming .
I can't take it.
They keep questioning me, always asking where I was what I did why I did it, did all of them where I was who I was with who am I trying to kid why don't I just admit I did it well if I didn't do all these things, who did?
I'm in London I'm in the nick I'm in fucking Paddington Green for Christ's sake, the high-security station they use for the Provos and they think I'm so dangerous so much a security risk they've got me here and even holding me under the Prevention of Terrorism Act Jesus God because some of them still aren't convinced they aren't dealing with some unholy alliance  of the IRA, Welsh Nationalists and uppity jocks.
They brought me down that day from Edinburgh, bundled me into a transit van with seats but no windows, handcuffed to a big quiet London lad who wouldn't talk to me at all and didn't even say much to the other two cops in the back of the transit just sat staring ahead and we seemed to drive all night just stopping once at some service station on the Ml, took a while to arrange everything, then they came in with a selection of cans of soft drinks and sandwiches and pasties and pork pies and chocolate and we all sat there munching then they asked me did I need the toilet and I said yes and they opened the door and it was straight over the grass into the gents' toilets, two cops guarding the door and some men, looked like truckers, standing watching me, waiting for their turn after I'd had my private visit; only wanted a pee but I couldn't do it even though the big lad wasn't actually watching just having him standing there handcuffed to me was enough so they checked the stalls and then took the cuffs off me and I had to leave the door open a crack while I went, then back out and I see the other cop cars Christ a Range Rover and a Senator too I'm a fucking VIP, then it's into the van and on with the journey to London where the questioning starts; they're concentrating on Sir Rufus's murder, for now, because they found a card a fucking business card in the woods near the burned cottage; not mine that would have been too obvious but a card from a guy I know on Jane's Defence Weekly with some scribbled notes on the back:
Ctrl + Alt 0 = PoV chnge
Shft + Alt = Chn of Cmnd zoom (bounces)
Milk Cheez Bred Shavng Foam
They ask me, Is that your writing? and it is of course it is those are Despot control codes from when the computer's mouse was misbehaving and that's the way I always spell when I do a shopping list.
I vaguely recall writing down the codes months ago and losing whatever it was I wrote them on.
I stare at the muddied, warped little  card sealed in a deal-sized plastic bag, recognising my own writing and feeling my mouth go even drier than it already is and I can only gibber something about, Well, it looks like my writing but, I mean, and anyway, somebody, anybody could have taken that, I mean…but they just look quietly pleased and the questions go on.
And all I can think is Don't confess, don't confess, don't confess .
There are detectives and DCIs and Chief Supers and Commanders every fucking where; more tecs and CID guys and Anti-Terrorism Squad chaps and regional guys than you can shake a nightstick at, all asking questions, all asking the same fucking questions and me trying to give the same fucking answers; seeing DI McDunn, sucking saliva through his teeth and letting me share.his B&Hs, is like meeting an old pal even though he's got all his questions too.
It's a relief when the Terrorist Squad boys seem to lose interest but that still leaves all the rest and I can't think I can't think straight I can't sleep.
It's bad enough at first but then it gets worse even as they keep me because they found more , they found two more and that was while I was here for Christ's sake while they held me while things were still happening more stuff came in while they were questioning me and they looked at me with disbelief horror disgust and I was going What?
What is it?
Now what?
What am I supposed to have done now?
And they told me about Azul, in Jersey, and before that I think it was before that they showed me the forensic photographs of all of them: Bissett skewered on the railings, grotesque and spread and limp; the blood-smeared vibrator used on the retired judge, Jamieson; the drained shapeless white body of Persimmon, tied to his grid above a pool of blood, then nothing when there should have been something; then what was left of Sir Rufus Carter, blackened bones, distorted and bent, the black skull's jaw hinged down in a blind scream but the flesh all gone very much a dental-records job and it was all black, the nails, the wood and the bones too but it's their mouths their jaws I remember, their silent screams, hanging slack or jammed open and it gets worse because they show me the fucking video they show me the video they think I made or that I  think they think I made but I didn't; they make me watch it and it's horrific; there's a man and he's dressed in black or dark blue and he has a gorilla mask on and he keeps sucking on this little bottle he's carrying which must be helium because it gives him that baby voice disguising his own voice and he has this fat little guy strapped to a chrome seat, his mouth taped, one arm tied down onto the arm of the chair, shirt rolled up and the little guy's shrieking as hard as he can but it sounds quiet because the noise is having to come down his nose while the man in the gorilla mask looks from the camera to the guy in the seat and holds up this huge fucking syringe like something from a nightmare from an old movie from a horror film and I can feel my heart beating wildly because that's what this is .
This is a horror movie a fucking horror movie this lunatic is making his own horror film and you can't even tell yourself Hell it's only a story aren't the special effects good it isn't real because that's exactly what it is and the gorilla man is explaining in that hideous high-pitched baby's voice what he has in this bottle and in this syringe and I throw up halfway through but they pause the video for me.
After it's over we cut to another scene and there's somebody who might be the little guy again and he's still strapped to a chair but this time it's a tall hospital chair with wheels and a little fold-away table in front of him and the straps holding his torso would be easy to undo but his hands are limp.
There's some sort of board behind his head and a towel or something round his forehead holding his head upright but the eyes Christ the eyes there's nothing there and McDunn says Persistent Vegetative State they call it apparently; Persistent Vegetative State and it looks it man it looks it.
And then of course there are the other two.
First it's Azul and his girlfriend.
She's traumatised and dehydrated but otherwise unharmed but he's got soul brother's limbs where his own ought to be; necrosis like frostbite, blood-death at the extremities but the extremities start at shoulder and groin; he's alive but if you were him you'd rather not be.
Arms salesman; okay the Avenger the Equaliser the Total Fucking Nutter went for the legs too but  still, and the editor spiked, and the rapist-lenient judge raped and the pornographer poisoned and stroked and the man who was so callous about the bloodshed in the Iran/Iraq war forced to watch his penned animals die like cattle like soldiers like cattle and then bled to death in his own private fountains of blood and the businessman who put profits before safety and not only helped kill a thousand people but then tried to get out of paying the survivors and dependants any compensation gets his own gas explosion — blevey is the technical term apparently — and fuck me whoever he is (assuming he is a he), he's got a sense of humour or at least irony why he's produced what's almost a snuff video effectively a snuff video if you mean brain-death anyway it's the closest anyone will admit to ever having seen or found one even the Obscene Pubs Squad who've been looking for years but although everybody assumes they exist nobody's ever seen one until old gorilla man comes along and just makes his own, specifically to warn off any other porn merchants thinking of dealing in snuff!
It's hilarious, it's really ironic and you explain all this to McDunn and you laugh because it actually isn't the fault of the police you're not sleeping it's the nightmares where you're stalked by a gorilla with the voice of a baby and a huge syringe and he wants to fuck you with it, isn't that hilarious?
You can't sleep you're actually providing your own sleep deprivation and you say hey, next thing you know I really will be falling down the stairs! but he doesn't seem to get the joke and then it's back to the cell and then the interview room with the barred, opaqued windows so you can't see out and they switch on the tape-machine recording everything as usual and it's getting more bizarre; they get me to do a Michael Caine voice!
They ask me to impersonate Michael fucking Caine, can you believe that?
And then there's this technician or something here and they ask me to breathe in helium from a mask and make me repeat some of the things gorilla man said on the video so I feel like I'm becoming him they're trying to make me him; I don't think I sound the same as the guy on the brain-snuff video but fuck knows what they think there are too many to know what the fuck they think; loads of  them, officers from all over the fucking place with different accents, London, Midlands, Welsh, Scottish, elsewhere, God knows, it's not just Flavell and McDunn though I still see them now and again especially McDunn who looks at me kind of weird most of the time like he can't really believe it was me did all these things and I get this bizarre feeling that he thinks I'm kind of pathetic I mean that in a grudging, still-determined-to-bust-the-fucker way he actually has more respect for gorilla man than he does for me because I've just gone to pieces under the questions and the things they put in my head with those photographs and that video (ha which means gorilla man has already put stuff into my head, already has fucked my brains, filling my head with the idea of that, the vision, the meme of that) and I thought I was some tough cookie but I was wrong I'm just a dunked digestive baby I'm soft I'm flopping I'm disintegrating and that's why unless I'm the best fucking actor he's ever seen McDunn can't accept I was capable of the things gorilla man did, yet so much of the evidence, especially the dates and times that sort of stuff, points at me not to mention that piece of TV-crit I did that reads like a hit-list now.
And it just goes on keeps going on another night another nightmare and then back to the interview room again and the tape machine again and more questions about Stromefirry-nofirry and Jersey and flights and that's when they tell me about the other one that's when they say oh by the way your best friend Andy is dead blown up in the hotel when it burned down; probably beaten to death first head stoved in but of course you probably know all that because you did that too, didn't you?
I lied about something.
Earlier.
I told it the way it felt, not as it actually was.
Or the way it feels and actually is.
Whatever.
‘Andy; Yvonne.’
‘Hi,’ she says, shaking his hand.
‘And that's William out there,’ I tell Andy.
‘With the big sword.’
Andy turns and watches William.
William; masked, clad in white, grasping his sabre and suddenly lunging forward, one leg darting ahead.
His opponent jumps back and tries to fend off the blows with his own sabre but he's off-balance and William presses forward, swinging the sabre in a hacking, sweeping motion, whacking the edge of the heavy curved blade into the side of his opponent's torso.
‘Aw, rats,’ the other guy says, as William stands back, relaxing.
They take off their masks and William comes over to us, mask under his arm, sabre hanging from his hand, his face red and sheened with sweat, glistening in the sports hall's brilliant lights.
I introduce him and Andy.
Andy with his short hair and his blazer and neatly creased jeans, face handsome but a little spotty, expression slightly disdainful and wary.
He's twenty-one; two years older than us, but William looks the more confident and assured.
‘Hi,’ William says, tossing back some blond hair fallen over his forehead.
‘So you're Cam's soldier boy.’
Andy smiles thinly.
‘You must be…
Willy, is it?’
I sigh.
I'd hoped these two would get on.
Yvonne taps William on the shoulder with her mask.
She's been fencing too, her long black hair tied back from her face, her face bright with sweat.
I think she looks like some Italian princess, daughter of an ancient minor house with no real pretensions but still casually opulent; huge faded villas in Rome and on the Grand Canal and in the Tuscan hills.
‘Shower,’ she tells him.
‘We have to get stuff ready for tonight.’
She smiles at me.
‘Quick drink in the bar, ten minutes?’
‘Great,’ I say.
Andy is silent; Yvonne turns to him.
‘Coming to the party?’
‘Yes,’ he says.
‘If that's all right.’
‘Of course.’
She smiles.
‘Ah!
Hot hot hot!’
‘What?’
‘Took the hot chilli…crunched on a whole fucking green chilli…ha…’
Yvonne says, fanning her mouth and hanging onto my arm.
‘Woof; thanks.’
She reaches into my vodka and lemonade and hoiks out an ice cube.
‘Here,’ she says thickly, handing me a joint while she rolls the ice cube round in her mouth and tries to breathe through it at the same time.
I'm grinning widely at her; she's frowning hurtfully at me.
Andy is at my side but then ducks away into the throng.
The music is loud, the campus flat packed with people.
It's a warm May evening, the exams are over and everybody's partying.
The windows are open to the night, spilling the sound of the pretenders' first album out over the slope of grass towards the small loch and the lights of the library and Admin buildings on the far side.
‘Ah, my mouth!’
Yvonne says.
She slaps me on the shoulder.
‘Look more sympathetic, you pig,’ she tells me.
Her eyes are watering.
‘Sorry.’
Andy comes back with a glass of milk.
‘Here,’ he says, offering it to Yvonne.
She looks at him.
He nods at her mouth.
‘Ice won't work,’ he tells her.
‘The…the stuff that causes the heat in chillis’ and I smile, because I just know from the way he phrased that that he knows the technical term but doesn't want to appear too smart-alec ‘isn't soluble in water, but it is soluble in fat.
Try it; it'll work.’
Yvonne looks round.
I offer my hand and she slips the remains of the ice cube delicately into my palm, then sips the milk.
I shrug and put the lozenge of ice back into my drink.
Yvonne finishes the milk.
She nods.
‘That is better.
Thanks.’
Andy gives a small smile, takes the empty glass from her and heads back through the crowds to the kitchen.
‘Hoo,’ Yvonne says, dabbing at her cheeks with a tissue.
She glances after Andy.
‘So boy scouts have their uses after all.’
‘Ask him to show you his Swiss Army knife later,’ I laugh, feeling a little treacherous.
Yvonne's wearing a black scoop-necked T-shirt  and a simple, black ankle-length wrap skirt.
Her hair is tied back from her face and held by a long white lacy ribbon, but tumbles down loose behind.
Her arms look firm and muscled and her tanned breasts are full and high, nipples producing little bumps on the black cotton of the T-shirt.
The final effect is perversely exotic and I feel my usual pang of jealousy.
I glance into my glass and hand her back the J; her eyes close as she draws on it and I put my lips to my glass, slipping that sucked-on sliver of ice into my own mouth and rolling it around there, pretending it's her tongue.
‘But it was true, Labour wasn't working.’
‘Wasn't producing the profits the capitalists want to see, you mean.
The implication of the ad was that Labour had produced mass unemployment and the Tories would cure it.
Not only have they made it worse, they knew they would; even if they genuinely thought their policies were somehow better for Britain as a whole, they knew damn well they'd put hundreds of thousands of people out of work, and Saatchi & Saatchi must have known that, too, if they'd bothered to think.
It was a lie.’
‘It was an election,’ William says, looking tired.
‘What's that got to do with it?’
I exclaim.
‘It was still a lie!’
‘It doesn't matter, and anyway it's just a short-term thing; they will produce more jobs eventually.
They're just getting rid of the dead wood at the moment; there'll be new jobs in new growth industries.’
‘Bull shit !
Even you don't believe that!’
William laughs.
‘You don't know what I believe.
But if that ad helped win the election for Maggie, that's fine by me.
Ah, come on; all's fair in love and war, Cameron.
You should stop whingeing and start trying to make things work.’
‘All is not fair in love and war!
Haven't you heard of the Geneva  Convention?
If Yvonne fell in love with somebody else, would you kill both of them?’
‘Fucking right,’ William says matter-of-factly as Andy appears at our sides holding a can of lager.
Somebody passes him a J but he just hands it on to me.
William shakes his head.
‘You get this all the time, too?’ he asks Andy.
‘What?’
‘Oh, this continual ear-bending about the Tories and what beastly cheats they are.’
‘All the time,’ Andy smiles.
‘They lied to get in,’ I say.
‘They'll lie to try and stay in.
How can you trust them?’
‘I trust them to try and sort out the unions,’ William says.
‘It was time for a change,’ Andy says.
‘Country needs a kick up the fucking bum,’ William agrees, defiantly.
I'm horrified.
‘I am surrounded by selfish bastards I thought were my friends,’ I say, slapping my forehead with the hand holding the J and almost setting my hair alight.
‘This is awful.’
Andy nods.
He drinks from his can and looks at me over the top of it.
‘I voted Tory,’ he says quietly.
‘Andy !’
I say, appalled, almost despairing.
‘Shock therapy.’
He grins, more at William than me.
‘How could you?’
I shake my head and pass the number to William.
Andy looks exaggeratedly thoughtful.
‘It was that advert that did it, I think.
Don't know if you know the one: ‘Labour Isn't Working,’ it said.
Great political advert; succinct, memorable, effective, even mildly witty.
I've got a poster copy of that in my room back at St Andy's.
Did you ever see that advert at all, William?’
William nods, watching me and grinning.
I am trying not to over-react but it's difficult.
‘Very fucking funny, Andy,’ I say.
Andy looks at me.
‘Oh, Cameron, come on.’
His voice pitched  somewhere between sympathy and exasperation.
‘It happened.
Accept it.
It might all end up better than you hoped.’
‘Tell that to the fucking unemployed,’ I say, moving away towards the kitchen.
I hesitate.
‘Either of you two Tory bastards need a drink?’
I'm lying awake in my room in the flat I share a floor down from William and Yvonne's.
Took some speed a friend turned up with so I can't get to sleep.
Stomach a bit churny too; too many voddies and lemonades probably, and the punch at the party was evil.
The flat I share looks in the opposite direction to theirs, across the access road and the lawns to the old estate wall and the tall old trees rising on the ridge beyond.
The window is open and I can hear the sound of the wind in the branches.
It will be dawn soon.
I hear the front door of the flat open and close, then a few seconds later the door to my room opens.
My heart beats hard.
A dark figure kneels at my bedside and I can smell perfume.
‘Cameron?’ she says quietly.
‘Yvonne?’
I whisper.
She puts her hand behind my head, then her lips to mine.
I'm in the middle of the kiss before it occurs to me I might be dreaming, but I know immediately I'm not.
I put one hand to the back of her neck, then to her shoulder.
She shrugs off her dressing-gown and slips into the little single bed beside me, warm and naked and already wet.
She makes love quickly, strongly, almost silently.
I try to keep quiet too, and — because I had a quick, quiet wank earlier — don't come too quickly.
She gives a brief, cut-off little cry like a chirp as she comes, and sinks her teeth into my shoulder.
It is quite sore.
She lies on top of me, breathing hard, head on my shoulder for a few minutes, then she stirs, pulls herself up so that I flop out of her and her hard little nipples stroke my chest.
She puts her lips to my ear.
‘Taking advantage of you, Cameron,’ she purrs, barely audible.
‘Hey,’ I whisper, ‘I'm a man of easy virtue.’
‘William drank too much; fell asleep at a really frustrating point.’
‘Ah-hah, Well; any time.’
‘Mm-hmm.
This never happened, all right?’
‘Between these four walls.’
She kisses me, then she's out, slipping on the dressing-gown and padding away and clicking the door closed behind her.
I can hear gentle snoring coming from the room next to mine; one of my flat-mates.
The only extra sound-proofing on the breeze blocks between his room and mine is a couple of layers of paint, which is probably why Yvonne was being quiet.
I lift my head up and look down to the floor at the foot of the bed, where Andy is lying curled up in his sleeping bag, unseen in the shadows, which is why I was being quiet.
‘Andy?’
I whisper very quietly, thinking that maybe he slept through it all.
‘Lucky fucking bastard,’ he says in a normal voice.
I lie back, laughing silently.
I can feel blood on my shoulder, where her teeth broke the skin.
Another morning, another interview, interrogation, little chat…
I sit down in the grey plastic chair in the featureless room with McDunn and a man from the Welsh squad; a big blond brindle guy in a tight grey suit; he has a rugby player's neck and steely eyes and huge hands that are clasped on the table, lying there like a mace of flesh and bone.
McDunn's eyes narrow.
He makes that sucking noise through his teeth.
‘What you been doing to your eyes, Cameron?’
I swallow, take a long sigh and look at him.
‘Crying,’ I tell him.
He looks surprised.
The Welsh boyo looks to one side.
‘Crying, Cameron?’
McDunn says, his dark, heavy-looking face creasing into a frown.
I take a deep breath, trying to control things.
‘You said Andy was dead.
Andy Gould.
He was my best friend.
He was my best friend and I didn't…fucking…kill him, all right?’
McDunn looks at me, as though slightly puzzled.
The Welsh lad's got this steady gaze on me like he wants to use my head as a rugby ball.
Another deep breath.
‘So I've been grieving for him.’
And another.
‘Is that all right?’
McDunn nods slowly, slightly, a distant look in his eyes like he's not really nodding at what I've just told him; hasn't been listening to a word I've said, in fact.
The Welsh guy clears his throat and picks up his briefcase.
He takes out some papers and another tape recorder.
He passes an A4 sheet over to me.
‘Just read out the words on this sheet of paper, all right, Colley?’
I read the words through first; looks like it's the statement our man phoned in after Sir Rufus was flame-grilled; Welsh Nationalist extremists apparently claiming responsibility.
‘Any particular voice?’
I ask.
‘Michael Caine, John Wayne, Tom Jones?’
‘Let's try your own voice first, eh?’ steely-eyes says.
‘Then we'll try you with a Welsh accent.’
He smiles, the way I imagine a prop forward smiles just before he bites your ear off.
‘Cigarette?’
‘Ta.’
Afternoon session.
McDunn again; McDunn seems to be settling out as the Colley specialist.
He lights a cigarette for me, holding it in his mouth.
My hands aren't shaking so bad right now so maybe this isn't strictly necessary but I don't care.
He hands the fag to me.
I take it and it tastes good.
I cough a bit but it still tastes good.
McDunn looks on sympathetically.
I actually find that I appreciate  this.
I know how they're supposed to work, I know all about the importance attached to establishing a rapport and initiating trust and building confidence and all that shit (and I'm almost flattered they haven't done the old good-cop bad-cop routine, though maybe they just don't do that at all any more because everybody knows about it from the TV), but I really do feel something for McDunn: he's like my lifeline back to reality, my ray of sanity in the nightmare.
I'm trying not to get too dependent on him but it's hard not to.
‘So?’
I say, sitting back in the grey plastic seat.
I'm wearing a blue prison-issue shirt — open-neck, of course— and the jeans I was wearing when they arrested me.
They don't hug so well without the belt; bum's a little saggy, to tell the truth, but fashion isn't my top priority these days.
‘Well,’ McDunn says, looking at his notebook, ‘we've found people who think they remember seeing you in the Broughton Arms Hotel on the night of Sunday the twenty-fifth of October, when Sir Rufus was murdered.’
‘Good, good,’ I nod.
‘And the times for you getting down to London for the attack on Oliver, if you include the times you — or whoever — were seen in the toilets at Tottenham Court Road, are looking very tight; there was a delay on all the flights from Edinburgh into Heathrow that day…makes it impossible, really.’
‘Great,’ I say, rocking back and forward in my seat.
‘Brilliant.’
‘Unless,’ he says, ‘you had a double in Edinburgh or a lot of people are lying, it means you'd have to have an accomplice in London; somebody you'd hired to…ah, make the collection.’
McDunn looks at me levelly.
I still can't read him; I'm not able to tell whether he thinks this is likely or not, whether he thinks this is evidence I'm not his man or he still thinks I am but I had help.
‘Well, look,’ I say, ‘put me on an identity parade —’
‘Now, now, Cameron,’ McDunn says tolerantly.
This is something I've suggested before, something I keep on suggesting because it's all I  can think of.
Will the limbless Mr Azul think I'm the guy he saw at the front door?
What about rent boys from the toilets at TCR?
The cops think I'm the right build and they suspect gorilla man wears a wig and false moustache sometimes and maybe false teeth too.
They've taken some very carefully set-up photographs with a big fucking camera and I suspect — from an aside or two they probably didn't expect me to understand — that these snaps will be the basis for some computer manipulation to see how well I fit the bill.
Anyway, the upshot is McDunn doesn't think it's time for a parade yet.
He looks wise and fatherly and says, ‘I don't think we want to be bothered with that, do you?’
‘Come on, McDunn, give me a shot; I'll try anything.
I want out of here.’
McDunn taps the fag packet round and round on the table a couple of times.
‘Well, that's up to you, isn't it, Cameron?’
‘Eh?
What do you mean?’
Oh, he's got me now; I'm interested, I'm leaning forward, elbows on table, face forward.
Hooked, in other words.
Whatever he's going to try and sell me, I'm buying.
‘Cameron,’ he says, like he's just come to some big decision, and sucks air through his teeth, ‘you know I don't think it's you.’
‘Oh, great!’
I say, and laugh, sitting back and looking round the room at the bare paint walls and the constable sitting by the door.
‘Then what the fuck am I —?’
‘It's not just me, Cameron,’ he says tolerantly.
‘You know that.’
‘Then what —?’
‘Let me be frank with you, Cameron.’
‘Oh, be as frank as you like, Detective Inspector.’
‘I don't think it's you, Cameron, but I think you know who it is.’
I put my hand to my brow, looking down and shaking my head, then sigh theatrically and look at him, letting my shoulders slump.
‘Well, I don't know who it is, McDunn; if I did I'd tell you.’
‘No, you can't tell me yet,’ McDunn says quietly and reasonably.
‘You know who it is, but…you don't know that you know.’
I stare at him.
McDunn's going metaphysical on me.
Oh, shit.
‘You're saying it's somebody I know.’
McDunn splays one hand, smiling smally.
He chooses to tap his fag packet round and round on the tabletop again rather than speak to me, so I say, ‘Well, I'm not sure about that, but it's certainly somebody who knows me ; I mean, I think that card with my writing on it proves that.
Or, it's something to do with those guys in the —’
— Lake District,’ McDunn sighs.
‘Yes…’
The DI thinks my theory it's the security forces trying to fit me up is pure paranoia.
‘No.’
He shakes his head.
‘I think it is somebody you know, Cameron; I think it's somebody you know well.
You see, I think you know them as well…well, nearly as well…as they know you.
I think you can tell me who it is, I really do.
You only have to think about it.’
He smiles.
‘That's all you have to do for me.
Just think.’
‘Just think,’ I repeat.
I nod at the DI.
He nods back.
‘Just think,’ I say again.
McDunn nods.
Summer in Strathspeld: the first really hot day that year, air warm and thick with the coconut smell of gorse — swathed richly yellow on the hills — and the sweet sharpness of pine resin, lying dropleted on the rough trunks in thick translucent bubbles.
Insects buzzed and butterflies filled the glades with silent flashes of colour; in the fields the corncrake stooped and zoomed, its strange, percussive call stuttering through the scent-laden air.
Andy and I went down by the river and the loch, clambering up the rocks upstream then back down, watching fish jump lazily out on the calm loch, or strike at the insects speckling those flat waters, jaws snapping underneath; dispatching, swallowing, leaving ripples.
We climbed some trees looking for nests but didn't find any.
We took off our shoes and socks and waded among the rushes surrounding the hidden, scalloped bay where the stream draining the ornamental pond near the house splashed down to the loch, a hundred metres up the shore from the old boat-house.
We were allowed to take the boat out ourselves by then as long as we wore life-jackets and we thought we might do that, later; get in some fishing or just some pottering around.
We climbed the low hills northwest of the loch and lay in the long grass under the pines and the birch, looking out over the small glen to the forested hill on the far side where the old railway tunnel was.
Beyond that, over another wooded ridge, unseen and heard only on occasion when the breeze veered from that direction, was the main road north.
Further beyond that, the Grampians' southernmost summits rose green and golden-brown into the blue sky.
Later that evening we were all going into Pitlochry, to the theatre.
I wasn't too impressed with this — I'd rather have seen a film — but Andy thought it was all right, so I did too.
Andy was fourteen, I'd just turned thirteen and was proud of my new status as a teenager (and, as usual, of the fact that for the next couple of months I was only a year younger than Andy).
We lay in the grass looking up at the sky and the fluttering leaves on the silver birch trees, sucking on our reed stalks and talking about girls.
We were at different schools; Andy was a boarder at an all-boys school in Edinburgh and came back only at weekends.
I was at the local high school.
I'd asked my mum and dad if I could go to a boarding school — the one in Edinburgh Andy was at, for example— but they'd said I wouldn't like it and besides it would cost a lot of money.
Plus, there wouldn't be any girls there, didn't that worry me?
I was a bit embarrassed about that.
The comment about the cost confused me; I was used to thinking of us as being well-off.
Dad ran a garage and petrol station on the main road through Strathspeld village and Mum had a wee gift and coffee shop; Dad had been worried after the Six-Day War when they'd introduced the fifty-miles-an-hour speed limit and even issued fuel-rationing books, but that hadn't lasted very long and, even though petrol cost more nowadays, people were still travelling and using cars.
I knew our modern bungalow on the village outskirts overlooking the Carse wasn't as grand as Andy's mum and dad's house, which was practically a castle and stood in its own estate: ponds, streams, statues, lochs, rivers, hills, forests, even the old railway line passing through one corner of it; one big garden in effect and vast compared to our single acre laid to lawn and shrub.
But I'd never thought of us as really having to worry about money that much; certainly I was used to getting more or less what I wanted and had come to think of this virtually as a right, the way only children are apt to if their parents are anything other than actively hostile to them.
It never occurred to me that other children weren't spoiled as a matter of course, the way I was, and it would be years — and my father would be dead — before I understood that the expense of sending me to a boarding school was just an excuse, and the simple, sentimental truth was that they knew they would have missed me.
‘You have not.’
‘Bet you I have.’
‘You're kidding.’
‘I'm not.’
‘Who was it?’
‘None of your business.’
‘Ah, you're making it up, you little tramp; you never did.’
‘It was Jean McDuhrie.’
‘What?
You're kidding.’
‘We were in the old station.
She'd seen her brother's and she wanted to see if they all looked like that and she asked me so I showed her mine, but it was only if she'd show me hers and she did as well.’
‘Dirty wee rascal.
Did she let you touch it?’
‘Touch it?’
I said, surprised.
‘No!’
‘Ah!
Well, then!’
‘What?’
‘You're supposed to touch it.’
‘No, you're not, not if you just want to look .’
‘Of course you are.’
‘Rubbish!’
‘Anyway, what did it look like; was there any hair on it?’
‘Hair?
Ugh.
No.’
‘No?
When was this?’
‘Not long ago.
Last summer maybe.
Maybe before.
Not that long.
I'm not making it up, honest.’
‘Huh.’
I was pleased we were talking about girls because I felt this was a subject where Andy's two extra years didn't really count; I was effectively the same age as him, and maybe I even knew more than he did because I mixed with girls every day and he only really knew his sister Clare.
She was away shopping in Perth with her mother that day.
‘Have you ever seen Clare's?’
‘Don't be disgusting.’
‘What's disgusting?
She's your sister!’
‘Exactly.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘You don't know anything, do you?’
‘Bet I know more than you do.’
‘Crap.’
I sucked on my hollow reed for a while, staring up at the sky.
‘Have you got hairs on yours, then?’
I said.
‘Yeah.’
‘You haven't!’
‘Want to see?’
‘Eh?’
‘I'll show you it.
It's pretty big too because we've been talking about women.
That's what's supposed to happen.’
‘Oh, yeah; look at your trousers!
I can see it!
What a bulge!’
‘Look…’
‘Ah!
Ugh!
Wow!’
‘That's called an Erection.’
‘Wow!
God, mine never gets that big.’
‘Well, it's not supposed to.
You're still young.’
‘Charming!
I'm a teenager, do you mind?’
I watched Andy's cock, huge and golden and purple and sticking out of his fly like a gently curved plant, some sweet exotic fruit growing into the sunlight.
I looked around, hoping there wasn't anybody nearby, watching.
We were only visible from the top of the hill where the railway tunnel was, and usually nobody went there.
‘You can touch it if you like.’
‘I don't know…’
‘Some of the guys in the school touch each other 's.
It's not the same as being with a girl, of course, but people do it.
Better than nothing.’
Andy licked his fingers and started to stroke them up and down over the purple bulge of his cock.
‘This feels good.
Do you do this yet?’
I shook my head, watching the saliva on that full, taut hood glisten in the sunlight.
There was a thickness in my throat and a tight feeling in my stomach; I could feel my own cock throbbing.
‘Come on; don't just lie there,’ Andy said matter-of-factly, leaving his cock alone and lying back in the grass, putting his arm behind his head and staring up at the sky.
‘Do something.’
‘Oh, God, all right,’ I said, tutting and sighing, but really my hand was shaking.
I pulled up and down on his cock.
‘Gently!’
‘All right!’
‘Use some spit.’
‘Good grief, I don't know…’
I spat into my fingers and used them, then found his foreskin was loose enough to be rolled back and forth over the head, and did that for a while.
Andy breathed hard and his free hand went to my head, stroking my hair.
‘You could use your mouth,’ he said, voice shaky.
‘I mean, if you want.’
‘Hmm.
Well, I don't know.
What's wrong with — ah!’
‘Oh, oh, oh…’
‘Yuk.
What a mess.’
Andy took a deep breath and patted my head, chuckling.
‘Not bad,’ he told me.
‘For a beginner.’
I wiped my hand on his trousers.
‘Hey!’
I put my face up to his.
‘I've seen Clare's,’ I told him.
‘What!
You —!’
I jumped up and ran laughing down through the grass and the bushes, down into the glen.
He jumped up too, then cursed and hopped about, struggling to get his fly shut before he could chase me.
GROWTH
I remember that, remember the feeling of his warm, cooling, sunlit juice on my hand, slippy becoming sticky, but I can't think about it any more without thinking of gorilla man and the little guy tied to the chair.
I think they were surprised when I threw up; I hope they were, I hope they were surprised and very interested and thought, 'Ullo 'ullo 'ullo it wasn't 'im then after all; he ain't the villain, he's been fitted up so help me…
Oh God, I hope my belly spoke for me better than my fucking brain, in other words.
Not guilty, didn't do it that's why what gorilla man did sickened me; no blood well hardly any blood literally a drop, a drip, a fucking pixel on the screen and the only thing slicing into flesh was a needle, tiny and delicate not a chainsaw or an axe or a knife or anything, but it's that image that idea that old devil meme , I keep dreaming about it, keep having nightmares about it, and I'm the trapped one, I'm the man in the leather-and-chrome chair and he's  there with his gorilla face and his squeaky baby voice, explaining to the camera that what he has in this bottle and in this syringe is sperm; the crazy fucker's loaded it up with jism man looks like half a fucking milk bottle of the stuff and he's going to inject it into the little guy's veins and he ties something round the naked upper arm of the little guy strapped to the chair and pulls it tight and waits for the vein to show while the little guy howls and screams like a child and tries to shake the chair to bits or rip it apart but he's too well strapped in there no purchase no leverage and then the man in the gorilla mask just does it; sinks the needle into the little guy's skin with a bit of blood and empties the whole syringe into him.
I throw up onto the floor and they pause the video for me and somebody goes to get a mop.
After I've stopped chucking and coughing they restart the video and we cut to the other scene and the tall hospital chair and the little guy again with empty eyes and McDunn says his bit about Persistent Vegetative State.
Well, indeed.
They did a DNA-fingerprint test and found he had a bus-load of people in him, linked it to some guy who was in the toilets under Centre Point the day before hiring rent boys but he didn't want the full business just wanted them to wank into this bottle thank you for your contribution young man every little bit helps going to a good home thank you mind how you go…
I'm thinking.
‘This is the trickle-down effect in action, is it?’
‘No, this is the show-off effect in action,’ Clare tells me, having to shout over the din.
Everybody else seems to be cheering.
Andy and William are standing on a seat; Andy leans out over a table laden  with glasses, a champagne bottle in one hand and his other arm held by William, who leans out the opposite way to balance him.
The table Andy is perched over is stacked with several hundred champagne glasses, forming a glittering pyramid rising a couple of metres from the table's surface.
Andy is filling the single champagne glass at the apex of the pyramid with champagne; it is overflowing, filling the three glasses beneath it; they in turn are overflowing, filling the glasses on the level beneath them, which are also full and so spilling over to the level underneath, and so on and so on down almost to the bottom; Andy is on his eighth magnum.
He glances down at the final layer of glasses.
‘How we doing?’ he roars.
‘More!
More!’ everybody shouts.
‘William!’ somebody yells from the crowd.
‘Fifty quid if you just let him go!’
‘Don't you fucking dare, Sorrell!’
Andy shouts, laughing, up-ending the magnum over the topmost glass as the bottle empties.
‘Not for a measly fifty,’ William laughs, as he and Andy pull together and draw together, tottering on the seat while Andy throws the emptied bottle to someone in the crowd and is handed another full magnum by his partner in The Gadget Shop, a fellow ex-ad-man who's a few years older than Andy.
It strikes me the symbolism of this whole venture would be better were it he and Andy balancing together on the seat, but I get the impression Andy's partner isn't fully into such flamboyance.
‘Winch me out there, Will!’
Andy bellows.
‘God, though, it's tempting,’ William says, leaning back and letting Andy crane out over the pyramid of glasses again.
‘This is infantile,’ Clare says, shaking her head.
‘What's what?’
Yvonne asks, making her way through the crowd.
She clutches a bottle of champagne.
‘This; infantile,’ Clare says, nodding at the pyramid of glasses.
She sees the bottle in Yvonne's hand.
‘Oh, I say, well done that  woman.’
She holds out her flute.
Yvonne fills the glass.
‘Cameron?’
‘Ta.’
She fills her own glass and stands beside Clare and me, watching Andy pouring the champagne onto the top of the pyramid.
Yvonne's wearing a little black number that to my untutored eye looks like it could have cost ten quid or a thousand; Clare is rather more ostentatious in a short, sparkling, crimson creation that looks like it wants to be a ball-gown when it grows up.
Andy and William are in monochrome; black and white, DJs removed for the bubbly-waterfall operation.
Yvonne grins.
‘Boys,’ she says, sounding long-sufferingly affec-tionate.
I look around.
When Andy invited me to the launch of the The Gadget Shop I naively assumed it would be in the shop itself, in Covent Garden.
But that didn't measure up to Andy's sense of showmanship; it wasn't glitzy enough, dramatic enough, or even big enough.
Instead, he hired the Science Museum.
Part of it, anyway.
That got people interested.
A shop is just a shop, and even a shop selling expensive executive toys is still just a shop, but a museum is, well, glamorous.
People reckon the Natural History Museum is the most glamorous — partying in the shadow of all those dinosaurs in that huge space is just the business — but for The Gadget Shop the Science Museum along the road was the obvious venue, as well as being cheaper.
Besides, everyone who matters has already been to some sort of bash at the Natural History Museum; this is new.
There's a full-size hovercraft held tipped on wires directly above us; a virtually circular thing with a tiny cabin and a huge fluted central air-intake.
I vaguely recall making an Airfix kit of that thing when I was a kid.
It floats above us, gleaming in the darkness as if supported on a cloud of talk and booze while the people below swarm and chat and roar Andy on; the champagne — already dripping down off the edges of the table onto the temporary matting  beneath from spillages — is almost overflowing the second-last level of glasses.
‘More!
More!’ people yell.
‘Oh, less, less,’ Clare mutters, sniffing.
‘Nearly there yet?’
Andy shouts.
‘More!
More!’ everybody roars.
I look at them all.
These are people like me.
Christ.
Media people, people from the advertising company Andy has just left, a few politicians — mostly Tory or Social Democrats though there are a couple of Labour guys — bankers, lawyers, business advisers, investment experts, actors, TV people — at least one film crew, though their lights are switched off for now — various other city types, a scattering of people who are, well, just professionally famous, and the remainder seemingly either part of some enormous floating meta-party or hired from some agency to impersonate people having a whale of a time: Rent-a-Hoot or something similar.
I'm mildly surprised we haven't had a kiss-o-gram, but maybe that's a little lo-rent for Andy.
Clare told me he'd taken rather a lot of convincing — once he'd determined to do the slightly naff champagne-pyramid stunt in the first place — not to try doing it with proper champagne flutes but to use the perry glasses like everybody else did; too tall, too unstable otherwise.
‘You're very quiet, Cameron,’ Yvonne says, smiling at me.
‘Yeah,’ I say helpfully.
‘I think Cameron,’ Clare says, sniffing, ‘disapproves.’
She draws out the ‘oo’ sound in the word.
Clare is a tall, auburn girl with striking angular looks she shares with her brother, but whereas Andy is — at the moment — bulkily fit-looking and tanned, Clare is just thin, and luminously pale.
I reckon she's overly keen on coke and spends too much time in clubs, but maybe I'm just jealous; my cub-reporter status on the Caley and the triumph-of-miniaturisation salary that goes with it make habits that expensive out of the question.
Clare has always had rather more in the way of aristocratic pretensions than Andy, who has that aura of classless broth-of-a-boyhood that usually only the congenitally rich can carry off convincingly.
Clare works for an estate agent so far up-market it's mostly estates they deal in, not humble houses, no matter how extensive; if it doesn't boast a couple of salmon rivers, a few square miles of trees and a brace of hills, lochs or lakes, then they just aren't interested.
‘Cameron’ Clare continues, ‘is content to lurk here on the sidelines radiating self-righteous socialist disapproval and imag-ining how after the revolution we'll all have to pull ploughs, eat raw turnips and take part in interminable self-criticism sessions long into the candle-lit night on the collective farm, aren't you, Cameron?’
‘You don't pull ploughs,’ I reply.
‘You push them.’
‘I know, dear — there is a farm next door to us back on the dear old homestead and Daddy does usually describe himself as a farmer — but I meant that we capitalist parasites would be taking the place of the oxen, not the horny-handed salt-of-the-earth types cracking the whip over them.’
‘Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you,’ I tell her, ‘but I'm afraid you're assuming a rather more lenient revolution than the one I had in mind.
I had you down as bone-meal actually, come the day.
Sorry.’
I shrug, watching Andy start to pour what everybody nearby seems to agree will be the last magnum required before the glass pyramid is finally full of champagne.
Clare looks at Yvonne.
‘Cameron always did take a hard line on these things,’ she tells her.
‘Oh well, might as well enjoy ourselves while we can before the commissars take their gloating revenge.
I'm off to powder my nose; would you like to come?’
Yvonne shakes her head.
‘No, thanks.’
‘I'll leave you with young Hot-to-Trotsky here, then,’ Clare says, patting Yvonne on the shoulder and winking at me as she sidles off through the cheering crowd.
The pyramid is still not quite full.
‘One more bottle!
One more bottle!’ everybody is shouting.
I turn to Yvonne.
‘So, how's the venture-capital business these days?’
‘Venturesome,’ Yvonne says, flicking back her shoulder-length black hair.
‘How's the newspaper business?’
‘Folding.’
‘Oh; ha ha.’
I shrug.
‘No, I'm enjoying it.
Money's not brilliant but sometimes I see my name on the front page and I feel almost successful for a while, until I come to something like this.’
I nod at Andy, taking yet another opened magnum and leaning out over the glass-stacked table.
His task is almost finished; the pyramid is nearly full.
Yvonne glances at the pyramid with what might be contempt.
‘Oh, don't let your head get turned by all this shit,’ she says.
The tone of her voice surprises me.
‘I thought you'd love all this,’ I tell her.
She looks slowly around, at the people and the place.
‘Hmm,’ she says, and packs a disconcerting amount of cold equivocation into that single sound.
She fixes her gaze on me.
‘But don't you just long for a neutron bomb sometimes?’
‘Constantly,’ I tell her, after a pause.
She nods, eyes narrowed, for a moment, then she shrugs, turning to me and grinning.
‘Hot-to-Trotsky?’ she asks, looking after Clare, still heading, thinly majestic in the thick of the crowd, for the ladies.
‘I made the mistake of trying to get Clare into bed once,’ I confess.
‘Cameron!
Really ?’
Yvonne looks delighted.
‘What happened?’
‘She just laughed.’
Yvonne tuts.
She glances round.
‘I'd have given you a reference, Cameron,’ she says quietly.
I smile and drink my champagne, remembering when Andy came to Stirling for Yvonne and William's party, five years ago.
It seems like a lot longer.
‘Did you ever tell William about that?’
I ask her.
Yvonne shakes her head.
‘No,’ she says.
She shrugs.
‘Maybe when we're older.’
I think about telling her that Andy was there, in his sleeping bag, listening the whole time, but while I'm thinking about it something goes wrong; there must have been a flaw in one of the glasses, or the weight is just too much, because there's a cracking sound and one side of the pyramid starts to collapse, sending an avalanche of falling glass and frothing champagne spilling crashing down off the table and smashing, bouncing and splashing onto the mats and the floor below.
Andy goes, ‘Aww…’ and holds his arms straight out.
People cheer.
Still thinking.
Four years later Clare and her latest fiancé were spending a weekend at Strathspeld when she died of a heart attack.
I heard the news from a guy I knew who still lived in the village.
I couldn't believe it.
A heart attack.
Overweight male execs squeezing themselves behind the wheel of their Mercs; they died of heart attacks.
Arthritic working-class guys raised on a diet of fish and chips and fags;they died of heart attacks.
Not young women in their mid-twenties.
Christ, Clare was even fit at the time; she'd given up doing coke and taken up healthy shit like running and swimming.
It couldn't be a heart attack.
And that was exactly what the doctor thought; that was precisely what helped kill her.
The local doc — the guy who'd helped save Andy after he almost died under the ice all those years earlier — was on holiday at the time and there was a locum, a deputising doctor in charge of the practice, except from what the locals muttered later it  seemed he'd treated his stay in Strathspeld as a holiday, too, and spent more time on river banks with a rod in his hands than at bedsides toting a stethoscope.
The family called him when Clare started to complain of chest pains in the late afternoon but he didn't come out; told them she'd just strained something; rest and painkillers.
They called him twice again, and eventually he appeared that evening once it was explained the family wasn't used to this sort of treatment (and once he realised the best salmon stream in the area ran through the estate).
He still couldn't find anything wrong, and left again.
They called an ambulance when Clare became unconscious and her lips turned blue, but by then it was too late.
Andy and his partner had sold The Gadget Shop chain the previous year; Andy was still thinking about what he wanted to do next — now he was rich — and was deep in the desert on a trans-Saharan expedition when Clare died.
The funeral was private, family only; Andy got back just in time.
I rang the house a week later and talked to Mrs Gould, who said Andy was still there.
She thought he would like to see me.
A grey day in a cold April, one of those winter's-end days when the land looks exhausted and worn and it seems like all the colour is gone from the world.
The cloud was thick and low and moving slowly on a damp, chilling wind, a lidding expanse hiding the sky and the snow on the distant hills.
The trees, bushes and fields were all the same dun shade, as though a thin layer of dirt had been sprayed everywhere, and wherever you looked there seemed to be mud or rotting leaves or bare, dead-looking branches.
I thought that, if I'd just come from the Sahara to here, I'd head back as soon as possible, family duties or not.
I stopped at the house to give my condolences to Mr and Mrs Gould.
Mrs Gould was covered in flour and smelled faintly  of gin.
She was a tall, nervous woman who'd gone grey early; she always wore large bifocals and usually dressed in tweeds.
I'd never seen her without a single string of pearls, which she fingered constantly.
She apologised for the mess, wiping her hands on her apron and then shaking my hand while I said how sorry I'd been to hear.
She looked around the hall distractedly, as if wondering what to do next, then the door to the library opened and Mr Gould peeked out.
He was about the same height as his wife but he looked stooped now, and he was wearing a dressing-gown; normally he was the epitome of tweedy country-squiredom, an archetypal laird in three-piece suit, clumpy shoes, checked shirt and cap; he resorted to a beaten-up, much reproofed Barbour when the weather turned particularly foul.
I'd never seen him in anything as soft-looking, as human as the pair of scruffy trousers, open-necked shirt and dressing-gown he wore then.
His strong, square face looked drawn and his thinning brown hair hadn't been combed.
He came out of the library when he saw it was me, shook my hand and said ‘Terrible thing, terrible thing’ a few times, while Beethoven sounded loudly from the opened library door and his wife tutted and tried to smooth his errant hair.
His eyes kept looking away over one of my shoulders or the other, never meeting my gaze, and I got the impression that like his wife he was constantly waiting for something important to happen, expecting someone to arrive at any moment, as though they both couldn't believe what had happened and it was all a dream or a ghastly joke and they were just waiting for Clare to come gangling through the front door, kicking off muddy green wellies and loudly demanding tea.
Andy was out shooting.
I could hear the shotgun barking as I walked through the dim, dripping woods from the house, staying off the muddy path as much as possible and walking on the  flattened, exhausted-looking grass at its side to keep my shoes from clogging up.
The field was surrounded by trees and looked out towards the river upstream from the loch.
The river wasn't visible, but there had been a lot of rain over that week and one corner of the field had flooded, leaving a shallow temporary loch reflecting the tarnished dark silver of the clouds; its waters were still and flat.
There was a stretch of curved gravel, edged with planks, near this end of the field; six posts stood along the front edge of the gravel stand, and on top of each post there was a little flat piece of wood like a tray.
Twenty yards in front of the gravel pathway was a low mound where the launcher mechanism for the clays sat.
There were two other mounds about the same distance away to either side.
I could hear the little generator puttering away inside the central mound as I got closer, clearing the trees and looking across and down at where Andy stood.
I watched for a moment.
Andy wore cords, shirt and jumper and body-warmer; a cap hung from the top of one of the nearby posts.
He was very tanned.
A big box of shells sat opened on top of the post in front of him; a foot switch at the end of a long, snaking flex operated the catapult in the pit.
He slotted six cartridges into the long-barrelled pump-action gun and turned to aim.
His foot tapped once, and the clay shot out of the hide, spinning away into the greyness in a day-glo orange blur.
The gun roared and the clay disintegrated somewhere out over the field.
When I looked carefully I could see lots of orange fragments scattered over the sodden grass and glistening brown earth of the field.
The generator revved up and down, providing power to the automatic launcher; it had some sort of randomly set variation built into where it was aiming because the clays came out at a different angle and heading each time.
Andy got them all with his first shot except for the last one.
He even tried to reload fast enough to have another crack at it, but it thumped into the wet heather near the river before he could get the shell into the gun.
He shrugged, put the cartridge back into the box, checked the gun and turned to look at me.
‘Hi, Cameron,’ he said, and I knew then he'd been aware of me all the time.
He put the pump-action down carefully on an oiled gun bag lying on the gravel.
‘Hi,’ I said, walking up to him.
He looked tired.
We shook hands a little awkwardly, then hugged.
He smelled of smoke.
‘Fucking squaddie culture, yeah; adoration of the fucking Maggie and pit bulls and getting some scoff down your neck and let's get pissed on lager and all moon together from the bus and camouflage jackets in the high street and yeah-well-I'm-inarestid-in-martial-arts-in't-I?
I'm not a fucking Nazi I just collect militaria I'm not a fucking racist I just hate blacks and gun magazines instead of magazines for guns wanking over the glossy photos of chromed Lugers I'll bet; half of them think Elvis is still alive, buncha fucking stupid little cunts !
The dip-shit little bastards deserve the fucking Micks turning them into mince; saw the inside of an armoured car once; been blown to buggery; thrown a hundred feet into the air and then rolled all the way down a hill; we took turns looking inside just to prove we were real men; looked like the inside of a fucking slaughter-house…’
I sat with Andy while he ranted on.
We were drinking whisky.
He had a big room on the second floor of the house at Strathspeld; we'd played here as kids, making models, fighting wars with toy soldiers and the train set and Airfix tanks and forts made from Lego; we'd conducted experiments with our chemistry sets, raced our Scalextric cars, flown gliders out the window down to the lawn and shot at targets in the gardens with our air rifles and killed a couple of birds and smoked a few packets of illicit fags from the same window.
We'd smoked untold spliffs here, too, listening to records with pals from the village, and with Clare.
‘Why are people so fucking incompetent ?’
Andy screamed  suddenly, and threw his whisky glass across the room.
It hit the wall near the window and smashed.
I remembered the disintegrating pile of champagne glasses in the Science Museum, only four years earlier.
The whisky left in the glass he'd thrown made a pale brown stain on the wall.
I focused on the liquid as it slowly dribbled down.
‘Sorry,’ Andy muttered, not sounding sorry at all, getting unsteadily out of his seat and going to where the bits of glass lay broken on the carpet.
He squatted and started to pick them up, then let them drop back to the floor and just crouched there and put his hands over his face and started to cry.
I let him cry for a bit and then went over to him and squatted down beside him and put my hand over his shoulders.
‘Why are people so fucking useless ?’ he sobbed.
‘Fucking let you down, fucking can't do their fucking job!
Fucking Halziel; Captain fucking Michael fucking Lingary DSO — cunts!’
He pushed away from me and stood up and stumbled over to a wooden chest, tearing one of its drawers right out so that it crashed to the carpeted floor and a load of jumpers fell out.
He got down on his knees behind the drawer and I heard tape rip.
He stood up holding an automatic pistol and started trying to slot a magazine into the grip.
‘Fucking brain-ectomy coming up, Doctor fucking Halziel,’ he said, still crying and still trying to get the magazine to fit into the gun.
Halziel, I thought.
Halziel.
I recognised Lingary's name from the times Andy had talked about the Falklands; he'd been Andy's CO, the one Andy blamed for the deaths of some of his men.
But Halziel…
Oh yeah, of course: the name of the locum who'd let Clare die.
The guy the locals thought was more interested in fishing than doctoring.
‘Fucking load, cunt!’
Andy screamed at the gun.
I got up, suddenly feeling cold.
I hadn't felt like this when I'd seen him firing the shotgun.
It hadn't occurred to me to feel frightened of him then.
Now it did.
I wasn't at all sure I was doing the right  thing but I got up and started towards him as he finally got the clip to slide into the gun and snick home.
‘Hey, Andy,’ I said.
‘Man, come on…’
He glared up at me as though seeing me for the first time.
His face was red and blotchy and streaked with tears.
‘Don't you fucking start, Colley, you little cunt; you let me down too, remember?’
‘Hey, hey,’ I said, putting my hands out, and retreating.
Andy crashed into the door, opened it and almost fell out into the landing.
I followed him down the stairs, listening to him curse and shout; in the front hall he tried to get a jacket on over his clothes but couldn't get it to fit over his hand holding the gun.
He hauled the front door open so hard that when it hit the stop the stained-glass panel shattered.
I looked woozily around for Mr and Mrs Gould but there was no sign of them.
Andy slammed the heel of his hand off the half of the storm door that was still closed, then fell out into the night.
I went after him; he was trying to get into the Land Rover.
I stood beside him while he cursed at the keys and thumped the side window.
He put the gun sideways in his mouth to give him two free hands and I thought about trying to grab it off him but I thought I'd probably kill one of us and even if I didn't I was no match for him and he'd just take it off me again.
‘Andy, man,’ I said, trying to sound calm, ‘come on; this is crazy.
Come on.
Don't be insane, man.
Killing this dickhead Halziel isn't going to bring Clare back —’
‘Shut up!’
Andy yelled, throwing the keys down and grabbing me by the collar and slamming me back against the side of the Landie.
‘Shut the fuck up, you stupid little shit!
I fucking know nothing'll bring her back!
I know that!’
He banged my head against the Land Rover's side window.
‘I just want to be sure that there'll be one stupid incompetent fuck less in the world!’
‘But —’ I said.
‘Ah, fuck off!’
He hit me in the face with the gun; an inefficient, glancing blow  with more chaotic anger than directed malice behind it; I fell down, correspondingly, more because I felt I ought to than because I was actually knocked out.
Still hurt, though.
I lay on the gravel, face up.
It was only then I realised it was raining.
I worried distantly about being shot and killed.
Then Andy slammed the gun side-on against the Land Rover and kicked the door.
‘Christ!’ he bellowed.
He kicked the door again.
‘Christ!’
I was getting wet.
I could feel water seeping through my jumper and making my back damp.
Andy bent down and looked at me.
His eyes screwed up.
‘You all right?’
‘Yeah,’ I said wearily.
He flicked something on the gun and stuffed it down the back of his cords, then held a hand out to me.
I put my hand up to his.
I remembered William and Andy, balanced on the chair under the old hovercraft.
He pulled me up.
‘Sorry I hit you,’ he said.
‘Sorry I was a prat.’
‘Oh, man, Christ…’
He put his head on my shoulder, breathing hard but not crying.
I patted his head.
Still thinking.
Yvonne and I at South Queensferry a couple of summers ago, across the road from the Hawes Inn at the slipway underneath the tall stone piers of the rail-bridge, the mile-wide river bright before us, people promenading along pavements and down the pier, an occasional smell of frying onions from the snack bar beside the Inshore Lifeboat shed.
We were there to witness William getting  to grips with his brand-new Jet Ski; this process seemed to consist largely of getting on, powering away, trying to turn too fast and falling off in an extravagant splash.
His big blond head kept coming up, shaking once and then bobbing through the water as he struck out for the machine.
There were another three Jet Skis buzzing around on that part of the river and a few water-skiers with their big-engined speedboats, all creating a fair old racket, but we could still hear William laughing; the guy thought buying a frighteningly expensive piece of machinery and spending most of your time falling off it into the water was just the most enormous wheeze.
‘What do you actually use these things for?’
I asked.
‘What, Jet Skis?’
Yvonne said, leaning on the sea wall and clinking ice around in her fruit juice.
‘Fun.’
She watched William bank into a turn, narrowly miss another Jet Ski and plough into the wash of a water-ski boat, sending William — in a new variation on his repertoire of falls — somersaulting over the handlebars of the Jet Ski and flopping on his back into the water in a cloud of spray.
His laughter whooped above the revving motors.
He waved to show he was all right, then swam back to the floating machine, still laughing.
Yvonne put her sunglasses on.
‘They're for fun; that's what they're for.’
‘Fun,’ I said, nodding.
William was still laughing.
I watched Yvonne watching him.
He waved again as he got onto the Jet Ski.
She waved back.
Listlessly, I thought.
Yvonne was slim and muscled in shorts and T-shirt.
Her breasts were pushed up by the wall she was leaning against.
We had been lovers for a year or so.
She shook her head gently as William gunned the machine's engine again.
I leant on the wall beside her.
‘Do you ever think about leaving him?’
I asked her quietly.
She paused, turned to me, put her sunglasses down her nose and looked at me over them.
‘No?’ she said.
And there was a question in her voice; it was asking me why I'd asked such a thing.
I shrugged.
‘I just wondered.’
She waited for a family to pass by, eating ice-creams, then she said, ‘Cameron, I've no intention of leaving William.’
I shrugged again, sorry I'd asked now.
‘Like I say, it just occurred to me.’
‘Well, un-occur it.’
She glanced at where William was bumping enthusiastically across the waves, miraculously still upright.
She put a hand out and briefly touched my arm.
‘Cameron,’ she said, and her voice was tender, ‘you're the excitement in my life; you do things for me William couldn't even imagine.
But he's my husband, and even if we do stray now and again, we'll always be an item.’
She narrowed her eyes then added.
‘…probably.’
She looked at him again as he executed a slower turn, wobbling but upright.
‘I mean, if he ever gave me AIDS I'd give him a Colombian necktie —’
‘Eugh,’ I said.
I'd seen a photograph of one of those; they cut your throat and pull your tongue out through the slit.
Surprisingly big, the human tongue.
‘You told him that?’
She laughed once.
‘Yeah.
He said if I left him he'd demand custody of the Merc.’
I turned and looked at the subtly tarted, much breathed-upon 300 sitting at the kerb, then made a show of sizing up Yvonne.
I shrugged.
‘Fair enough,’ I said, turning to look out across the water and drinking my pint.
She kicked me on the knee.
Later, when we were helping William take the Jet Ski out of the water, some very loud people — all wearing black leather jackets with BMW logos — arrived with a gleaming black Range Rover and a big black ski boat.
They demanded that everybody get out of their way so they could launch their boat, while people who'd been there for the best of the tide were already bringing their craft out.
Their triple-engined ski boat had blocked the exit to the road and when people asked them to move it the BMW people started arguing.
I even heard one of them claiming to have booked the slipway.
There was impasse for about ten minutes.
We got the Jet Ski  onto its trailer but William's Merc was one of the cars trapped on the slip; he tried to reason with the BMW people, then sat in the car and sulked.
Yvonne seemed silently furious, then announced she was going up to the lifeboat shed to buy some souvenir crap or whatever.
‘When in doubt, shop,’ she told us, slamming the car door.
William sat tight-lipped, looking in his rear-view mirror at the argument continuing further up the slip.
‘Bastards,’ he said.
‘People are so fucking inconsiderate.’
‘Shoot the lot of them,’ I said, thinking about getting out and having a cigarette (no smoking on the champagne-hued leather of the Merc).
‘Yeah,’ William said, hands kneading the steering wheel.
‘People might be a bit more polite if everybody carried guns.’
I looked at him.
It was all sorted out after some confusion and a lot of ill-feeling; the BMW people moved their boat forward so cars and trailers could get past it to the road.
We picked Yvonne up at the top of the slip by the RNLI shed where they sold stuff to help pay for the lifeboat.
She didn't seem to have bought much; she tossed me a box of matches as she got into the car.
‘Here,’ she said.
I studied the matchbox.
‘Wo.
Hey, you sure about this?’
I looked back as we powered away up the hill through the trees, heading for Edinburgh.
There was another commotion going on down on the slip; the BMW people were gesticulating wildly and pointing at the tyres on one side of the trailer holding the big ski boat, which appeared to be listing slightly in that direction now.
It looked like it was all getting rather heated again down there; then the leaves got in the way and we couldn't see any more.
I was sure I'd seen a punch thrown.
I turned back to find Yvonne's grinning face looking past me in the same direction.
She looked suddenly innocent and sat back in her seat, humming.
I remembered the time Andy and I had let down all the wheels of his dad's car, folding matches in half and sticking them into the tyre valves.
I opened the box of matches Yvonne had given me, but you couldn't have told whether there were a couple of them missing or not.
‘Looks like they had some sort of problem with their trailer there,’ I said.
‘Good,’ William said.
‘Probably a puncture,’ Yvonne sighed.
She glanced at William.
‘We do have lockable tyre valves on this thing, don't we?’
William in the woods, outskirts of Edinburgh, almost within sight of the estate where his and Yvonne's new house is, toting a paint gun on another of these stupid but grudgingly-sometimes-fun-in-a-terribly-boyish-sort-of-way paint-ball games (his computer-company boys and girls versus the crack troops of the Caledonian news room).
My gun jammed and William recognised me and came forward laughing and firing shot after shot at me while I waved and tried to duck and these yellow paint balls went splat, splat, thunking into my hired camouflage trousers and combat jacket and smacking into my visored helmet while I waved at him and tried to get the damn gun to work and he just walked forward slowly shooting me; bastard had his own paint gun and he'd probably had it souped up; knowing William, that was almost inevitable.
Splat!
Splat!
Splat!
He was getting closer and I was thinking, Christ does he know about me and Yvonne?
Has he guessed, has somebody told him, is that what all this is about?
It was pretty fucking annoying even if it wasn't; I really wanted to get the bastard because we'd been having this stupid argument before we'd started about how greed really was good and how William had been so disappointed at how poorly the argument was put across by the Gekko character in Wall Street .
‘But it is good,’ William protested, waving his gun around.
‘That's how we measure fitness to survive these days.’
We were being shown round the paint-ball site, having flagpoles and log barricades and that sort of stuff pointed out to us.
‘It's natural ,’ William insisted.
‘It's evolution; when we still lived in caves we used to go out and hunt and whoever brought back the mammoth or whatever ate the best meat and got to fuck the women, and all that was good for the human race.
Now it's got a bit more abstract and we use money instead of animals but the principle's the same.’
‘But it wasn't just individuals who hunted animals; that's exactly the point,’ I told him.
‘It was all about cooperation; people worked together and got results and shared the spoils.’
‘I agree,’ William agreed.
‘Cooperation is great .
If people didn't cooperate you couldn't lead them so easily.’
‘But —’
‘And you'll always need leaders.’
‘But greed and selfishness —’
‘— have produced everything you see around you,’ William said, waving the paint-ball gun around again.
‘Exactly!’
I exclaimed, throwing my arms out wide.
‘Capi-talism!’
‘Yes!
Exactly!’
William echoed, also gesturing with his hands.
And we stood there, me with a great big frown on my face, quite mystified that William couldn't see what I was getting at…and William smiling but looking equally puzzled that I appeared to be incapable of understanding what he meant.
I shook my head, exasperated, and brandished my paint-ball gun.
‘Let's fight,’ I said.
William grinned.
‘I rest my case.’
So I really wanted to nail the bastard — preferably with the cooperation of my team-mates just to prove the point — but the fucking technology let me down and the gun jammed and he had me pinned, firing shot after shot at me, and finally I gave up trying to un-jam the gun and made to throw it at him though I could hardly  see because there was yellow paint all over my visor, but he ducked and tripped and sat down on a trunk, holding his stomach, and the bastard was laughing his socks off because I looked like a giant dripping banana, only I'd just realised the gun wasn't jammed after all, the safety catch was on.
I must have knocked it or something and I'd a couple of shots left and I ought to have shot the swine but I couldn't, not while he was sitting there killing himself laughing.
‘Bastard!’
I yelled at him.
He twirled his paint gun around one gloved finger.
‘Evolution!’ he shouted.
‘You learn a lot when you live with a liquidator!’
He started laughing again.
Later at the buffet lunch in the marquee he barged to the front of the queue saying, ‘Oh, I don't believe in queuing!’ and when somebody behind him objected, convinced her with a sort of apologetic bashfulness that actually he has diabetes, you see, and so needs to eat right now .
I cringed, blushed, and looked away.
Still thinking; thinking about all the times I've seen people I know do something for revenge, or do anything vindictive or sneaky or smart or even threaten to.
Hell, everybody I know's done something like that at some time or another but that doesn't make them a murderer; I think McDunn's crazy but I can't tell him that because, if he's wrong about that and I'm wrong about it being something to do with those guys who died in the Lake District a few years ago, then there's only one suspect left and that's me.
The trouble is my theory's looking shakier all the time because McDunn's convinced me it really was all just a smoke-screen: there is no Ares project, never was any Ares project, and Smout in his prison in Baghdad isn't connected to the guys that died; it was just somebody coming up with a clever conspiracy theory, just a way of getting me to go to remote places and wait for phone calls and deprive me of an alibi while gorilla man did something horrible to somebody else  somewhere else.
Of course McDunn points out that I could still be the murderer; this could all be a story I've made up.
I could have recorded the mysterious Mr Archer's phone calls and had them directed to the office while I was there.
They found most of the equipment to do just that in my flat when they searched it: an answer-machine, my PC and its modem; another lead or two and it would have been easy to set it up if you knew what you were doing, or just used trial and error and were patient.
McDunn really wants to help, I can see that, but he's under pressure, too; the circumstantial evidence against me is so strong people who don't know the details of the case are getting impatient over the lack of progress.
Apart from that fucking business card they have no forensic evidence; no weapons, bloodstained clothes or even minutiae like hairs or fibres to link me with any of the attacks.
I suspect they don't think I'd be identified by any of the witnesses or I'd have been on an identity parade by now, but it just all looks so obvious: it must be me.
Lefty journalist goes loco, wastes right-wingers.
Apparently I've missed some good headlines while I've been in here.
Actually, I missed some good ones in the couple of days' holiday I took; if I'd just bothered to look at a single fucking news-stand after I left Stromeferry I'd have seen this story starting to break about this guy —‘The Red panther’ the tabloids decided on eventually — murdering these right-leaning pillars of the community.
McDunn doesn't want to charge me with any of the other murders but they're going to have to make a decision before too long because my initial time under the PTA is nearly up and the Home Secretary isn't going to grant an extension; I'll have to appear in court soon.
Hell, I might even get a lawyer.
I'm still terrified, even though McDunn's on my side, because I can see he's not so hopeful any more and if they take him off this I might get the bad cops, the ones that just want a confession and Christ I'm in England, not Scotland, and despite the McGuire Seven and the Guildford Four they still haven't changed the law: down  here you can still be convicted on an uncorroborated confession even if you try to retract it later.
I'm getting paranoid about that, determined not to sign anything, worried that maybe I already have when they first brought me here and said it was just a receipt for personal effects or a legal-aid application or whatever, and I worry about them getting me to sign something when I'm tired and they've been interviewing me in shifts and all I want to do is go to bed and sleep and they say oh do us all a favour and sign this and you can sleep, come on now; it's just a formality you can always deny it later, change your mind, but you can't you can't of course, they're lying and you can't; I even worry about signing something in my sleep, or them hypnotising me and getting me to do it that way; hell, I don't know what they get up to .
‘Cameron,’ McDunn says.
It's day five; the morning.
‘They want to charge you with all the murders and assaults and take you to court, day after tomorrow.’
‘Oh, Jesus.’
I accept a fag; McDunn lights it for me.
‘You sure you can't think of anything?’
McDunn asks.
‘Anything at all?’
He makes that sucking noise with his teeth again.
It's starting to annoy me.
I shake my head, rubbing my face in my hands, not caring that the smoke from the fag goes in my eyes and my hair.
I cough a bit.
‘Sorry.
No.
No, I can't.
I mean, I've thought of lots of stuff, but nothing —’
‘But you're not telling me about it, are you, Cameron?’ the DI says, sounding regretful.
‘You're keeping it all locked up inside you; you won't share it with me.’
He shakes his head.
‘Cameron, for God's sake, I'm the only one who can help you.
If you have any suspicions, any doubts, you have to let me know about them; you have to name names.’
I cough again looking down at the tile floor of the room.
‘This might be your last chance, Cameron,’ McDunn tells me softly.
I take a deep breath.
‘If there's anybody you can think of, Cameron, just give me their name,’ McDunn says.
‘It'll probably be easy to eliminate them from the enquiry; we aren't going to frame anybody or hassle anybody or pull anything heavy.’
I stare at him, still uncertain.
My hands are still splayed over my lower face.
I take another drag on the fag.
Fingers shaking again.
McDunn continues.
‘There are, or were, people on this case who are very good, dedicated, and enthusiastic officers, but the only thing they're enthusiastic about nowadays is getting you charged with the rest of the attacks and getting you into the dock.
I've persuaded the people who matter that I'm the best man to work with you to help us clear this up, but I'm like a football manager, Cameron; I can be replaced at a moment's notice and I'm only as good as the results I get.
At the moment I'm not getting any results, and I could go at any time.
And believe me, Cameron, I'm the only friend you've got in here.’
I shake my head, frightened to speak in case I break down.
‘Names; a name; anything that might save you, Cameron,’ McDunn says patiently.
‘Is there anyone you've thought of?’
I feel like a worker in Stalinist Russia denouncing his comrades but I say, ‘Well, I thought of a couple of friends of mine…’
I look at McDunn to see how I'm doing.
There's a concerned-looking frown on his dark, heavy face.
‘Yes?’
‘William Sorrell, and…well, it sounds daft, but…his wife, umm, Yvo —’
‘Yvonne,’ McDunn says, nodding slowly and sitting back.
He lights a fag.
He looks sad.
He taps the cigarette packet round and round on the table surface.
I don't know what to think or feel.
Yes, I do: I feel sick.
‘Are you having an affair with Yvonne Sorrell?’
McDunn asks.
I stare at him.
I really don't know what to say now.
He waves his hand.
‘Well, maybe it doesn't matter.
But we've looked into Mr and Mrs Sorrell's movements.
Discreetly, once we knew they were friends of yours.’
He smiles.
‘Always have to be alive to the possibility it's more than one person, Cameron, especially with a group of crimes spread out over so much territory, and fairly complicated ones at that.’
I nod.
Looked into.
Movements looked into.
I wonder how discreet is discreet.
I want to cry very much now because I think I'm admitting to myself that, no matter what happens, lift is never going to be the same again.
‘As it turns out,’ McDunn says, while the fag packet goes tap, tap , ‘although they are both away from home a lot, their movements are very well documented; we know pretty well what they were doing during all the attacks.’
I nod again, feeling like my guts have been ripped out.
So I've denounced them and there wasn't even any point to it.
‘I thought of Andy,’ I tell the floor, looking down there, avoiding McDunn's eyes.
‘Andy Gould,’ I say, because — apart from everything else — Andy stayed with me during the summer, round about the time the card with my writing on it went missing.
‘I thought it might be him, but he's dead.’
‘Funeral's tomorrow,’ McDunn says, flicking ash and then inspecting the glowing end of his cigarette.
He scrapes it round the edge of the light metal ashtray until the tip of the fag is a perfect cone, then smokes it carefully.
My ash falls on the floor.
I sweep it to nothing with my foot, guiltily.
God, I could use some dope; I need to mellow out, I need to calm down.
I'm almost looking forward to prison; plenty of dope in there, if I'm allowed to mix with other inmates.
Christ, it's going to happen.
I'm accepting it, I'm coming to terms with it.
Christ.
‘Tomorrow?’
I say, swallowing.
I'm trying not to cry and I'm trying not to cough, either, because that might make me cry.
‘Yes’ McDunn says tapping ash carefully off his cigarette again.
‘Burying him tomorrow, at the family estate.
What's it called again?’
‘Strathspeld,’ I tell him.
I look at him but can't tell if he really forgot the name or not.
‘Strathspeld.’
He nods.
‘Strathspeld.’
He rolls the word around his mouth, as if savouring a good malt.
‘Strathspeld on the Carse of Speld.’
He sucks air through his teeth again.
I wish he'd get his teeth seen to; do they have special police dentists or do they have to go to the ones everybody else goes to and hope the dentist doesn't have some…have some grudge…some grudge against…?
Wait a minute.
Wait a fucking minute here…
And I know.
It's like a speck of dust drifts down and goes into my eye and I look up to see where it came from and I'm hit by this tonne of bricks; it hits me that hard.
I sit there for a second thinking, No, it can't be…
But it is; it won't go away, and I do know, and I know that I know.
I know and I feel sick but it's something just to feel this certain about anything again.
I can't prove anything and I still don't understand it all, but I know , and I know that I have to be there, have to get to Strathspeld.
I could just tell them to get there, be there, keep watch there, because he's bound to be there, has to be there, there of all places.
But I can't let it happen like that, and whether they get him or not — and I doubt they will — I have to be there.
So I clear my throat and look McDunn in the eyes and say, ‘All right.
Two more names.’
Pause.
Swallow, something sticking in my throat.
Jesus, am I really going to say this?
Yes, yes I am: ‘And I've got something else for you.’
McDunn tips his head to one side.
His brows say, ‘Oh yes?’
I take a deep breath.
‘I want something from you, though.’
McDunn frowns.
‘What would that be, Cameron?’
‘I want to be there tomorrow, at the funeral.’
McDunn frowns more deeply.
He looks down at the fag packet and taps it round another couple of revolutions on the table.
He shakes his head.
‘I don't think I can do that, Cameron.’
‘Yes, you can,’ I tell him.
‘You can because of what I've got for you.’
I pause, take another breath, the air catching in my throat.
‘It's there, too.’
McDunn looks puzzled.
‘And what would that be, Cameron?’
My heart is hammering, my hands are balled into fists.
I swallow, throat dry, tears finally coming into my eyes and eventually I squeeze the words out:
‘A body.’
CARSE OF SPELD
I run down the hill, into the sunlit glen and then up the far side, with Andy crashing through the bushes, heather and-ferns behind me.
I shake my hand free of most of his semen and deliberately let my hand brush across the leaves and blades as I dash past, wiping the rest off.
I'm laughing.
Andy's laughing too, but shouting threats and insults as well.
I run up the hill, seeing movement ahead and assuming it's a bird or a rabbit or something, and almost run straight into a man.
I stop.
I can still hear Andy pumping up the hill behind me, tearing through the bushes and yelling curses.
The man is dressed in walking boots, brown cords and a shirt and green hiking jacket.
He wears a brown rucksack on his back.
He has red hair and he looks furious.
‘What do you boys think you were doing?’
‘What?
Eh?
Ah…?’
I say, looking back to see Andy coming up the hill behind me, suddenly slowing and looking wary as he sees the man.
‘You!’ the man shouts at Andy.
His voice makes me jump.
I hide  my sticky hand behind me, as if it's brightly stained.
‘What were you doing there with this boy, eh?
What were you doing?’ he shouts, looking around.
He puts his thumbs between the shoulder straps of his rucksack and his jacket and sticks his chest and chin out.
‘Come on!
What d'you think you were doing, eh?
Answer me, boy!’
‘None of your business,’ Andy says, but his voice is shaky.
I can smell something funny.
I worry that it's coming from my sticky hand and I'm frightened that the man will smell it.
‘Don't you talk to me like that, boy!’ the man yells, glancing round again.
He spits as he shouts.
‘You've got no right being here,’ Andy says, sounding frightened.
‘This is private property.’
‘Oh, is it?’ the man says.
‘Private property, is it?
And that gives you the right to do dirty, perverted things, does it?’
‘We —’
‘Shut it, laddie.’
The man takes a step forward, looking over my head at Andy.
The man's so close I could touch him.
I get that smell even stronger.
Oh God, he's bound to smell it now.
I feel myself trying to shrink, cowering.
The man thumps himself in the chest with one finger.
‘Well, let me tell you something, sonny,’ he tells Andy.
‘I'm a policeman .’
He nods, drawing back and upright again.
‘Aye,’ he says, eyes narrowing.
‘You may well look frightened, boy, because you're in deep bloody trouble.’
He looks down at me.
‘Right; this way, come on!’
He takes a step away.
I'm trembling, rooted to the spot.
I glance back to see Andy looking uncertain.
The man grabs my arm and pulls me.
‘I said come on, boy!’
He drags me after him through the woods.
I start crying and try to break away, struggling weakly.
‘Please, mister, we weren't doing anything!’
I wail.
‘We weren't doing anything!
Honest!
We weren't doing anything, honest we weren't!
Please!
Please let us go, please; please let us go, we won't do it again, honest; please, please, please…’
I look back through my tears at Andy, who's following, looking  desperate and uncertain, biting on one knuckle as he follows us through the bushes.
We're near the summit of the hill, deep in the bushes under the thin cover of trees; the smell is very strong and my knees feel like the bones are gone.
If I wasn't being held up by the man's gripping hand hauling me through the ferns I feel like I'd fall down.
‘Leave him!’
Andy shouts, and I think he's going to burst into tears like me.
He seemed so old a few minutes ago and now he's like a little kid again.
The man stops, whirls me round and holds me against his chest.
He feels very warm behind me and the smell is even stronger.
Andy comes to within a couple of yards.
‘Come here!’ the man shouts.
I can see spittle arc out from above me as he shouts.
Andy looks from him down to me; I can see his jaw trembling.
‘Come here !’ the man screeches.
Andy comes forward a couple of feet.
‘Take off those trousers!’ he hisses at Andy.
‘Go on; I saw you!
I saw what you were doing!
Take off those trousers!’
Andy shakes his head, backing off.
I start to sob.
The man shakes me.
‘Right!’ he says.
He leans over me, puts his big fingers to the zip of my jeans and starts trying to pull the zip down.
I'm struggling and howling but I can't get free.
The smell is all around me; it's him; it's his sweat, his smell.
‘Leave him, you bastard!’
Andy shouts.
‘You're not a policeman!’
I can't see what Andy's doing because the man's body is in the way, but then Andy hits into him, bowling him backwards and he shouts and I wriggle away from them; I scramble off through the ferns on all fours and then stop and look back and the man's got Andy, he's struggling with him, leaning over him, folding him, pressing him down, and Andy's breathing hard, grunting, trying to break free.
‘Bastard!
Leave me alone !
You're not a policeman!
You're not a policeman!’
The man doesn't say anything; he pushes Andy down into the ferns, and gets a hand free and punches Andy in the face.
Andy goes  limp but then moves weakly; the man is breathing very hard and when he looks at me his eyes are wide and staring.
‘You!’ he gasps.
‘You; just stay there!
Stay there, d'you hear?’
I'm shaking so hard I can hardly see straight.
Tears fill my eyes.
The man pulls Andy's trousers down; I can see Andy looking round groggily.
His gaze fastens on me.
‘Help,’ he croaks.
‘Cameron…help…’
‘Cameron, is it?’ the man says, glancing at me and pulling down his own trousers.
‘Well, you just stay there, Cameron; you just stay there, right?’
I shake my head and back off.
‘Cameron!’
Andy wails; the man is struggling with his underpants as Andy tries to get out from under him.
I'm stumbling backwards, almost falling; I have to turn to stop myself tripping and the turn becomes a run and I can't stop myself, I just have to escape; I race away through the woods, tears burning on my face, sobbing hysterically, the breath whistling and whooping in and out of me, hot and desperate and livid in my throat; ferns whip at my legs and branches lash at my face.
I gave McDunn the two names last night and told him the respective professions of their owners, then clammed up, just refused to say any more about them or about the body.
There was a lot of tooth-sucking for a while as he tried to get me to say more and that was almost funny, given that it was the tooth-sucking that made me think of it in the first place, suddenly thinking.
The dentist!
Recalling going into Kyle, while I was at Stromefirry-nofirry, and remembering that nightmare vision of the burned-black man after the blevey — Sir Rufus with his black bones, black nails, black wood and his black jaw hinged back and very much a dental-records job — and thinking, How did they identify Andy?
The names worked even better than I expected.
I can see a way out  now.
I feel like Judas, but there's a way out; not with any honour, perhaps, but I've looked at myself pretty closely over the last few days and I've had to admit to myself that I'm not quite as wonderful a guy as I liked to think I was.
I've imagined myself in situations like this, made up speeches in my head, speeches about truth and freedom and protection of sources, speeches I imagined delivering from the witness box just before the judge sentenced me to ninety days or six months or whatever for contempt of court, but I was kidding myself.
Even if it's true that I would have gone to prison to protect somebody else or make some dubious point about the freedom of the press, I know I'd only have been doing it to make myself look good.
I'm just like everybody else: selfish.
I can see a way out and I'm taking it, and the fact it's a kind of betrayal doesn't really matter.
Besides, I'm paying for the betrayal by telling them about the body.
By itself it doesn't prove a thing, but it's my way of getting them to take me to Strathspeld for the funeral; I can look McDunn in the eye and tell him the truth and he knows it's the truth and he'll take me.
I think.
And, perhaps, with this act of treachery I can finally buy my freedom from the burden of buried horror that bound me to Andy twenty years ago, so that— dispossessed of that trespass — I'm left free to betray him again, now.
McDunn's in very early this morning; we're here in the same old interview room.
The place is familiar, becoming home, taking on a tinge of spurious cosiness.
McDunn's standing behind the table, smoking.
He waves me to sit in the chair and I do, yawning.
I actually slept fairly well last night, for the first time since I got here.
They've both disappeared,’ McDunn says.
He's staring at the table.
He draws on the B&H.
I'd quite like a cigarette, too, even though it's still early and I've barely got over the morning cough but McDunn seems to have forgotten his manners.
‘Halziel and Lingary,’ he says, staring at me, and he looks really concerned, worried and harried and tired for the first time; yes, it's all change here in Paddington Green.
‘They've both disappeared,’ the DI tells me, sounding shaken.
‘Lingary just yesterday, Doctor Halziel three days ago.’
He pulls the seat back and sits in it.
‘Cameron,’ he says.
‘What body?’
I shake my head.
‘Take me there.’
McDunn sucks his teeth and looks away.
I just sit there.
I feel in control at last.
I suppose in theory I could be lying through my teeth and have some other reason for wanting to go to Strathspeld — maybe I'm just getting homesick for Scotland —but I'm certain he knows that I'm not lying and that there is a body; I think he can see it in my eyes.
McDunn breathes hard, then glares at me.
‘You do know, don't you?
You know who it is.’
He sucks on his teeth.
‘Is it who I think it is?’
I nod.
‘Yes, it's Andy.’
McDunn nods grimly.
He frowns.
‘So who was it in the hotel?
There's been nobody reported missing up there.’
‘There will be,’ I tell him.
‘Guy called Howie…
I can't remember his second name; begins with a G. He was supposed to leave for Aberdeen the day I left, to start some job on the rigs.
Anyway, a few of us had a drink in the hotel that night, and apparently there was a fight; this was after I got drunk and got put to bed.
Andy told me Howie and another two locals jumped a couple of travellers who'd been at the party as well.
The local cop was called and he was looking for Howie.’
I hold my hands out.
‘I mean, this is all stuff that Andy told me, so it could be just a story, but I'd bet that up to that point it's all true.
I think Andy offered to let Howie hole up in the hotel while the cops were looking for him, and everybody else up there just assumes Howie's offshore at the moment.’
I tap my fingers on  the table and look at McDunn's cigarette packet, hoping he'll get the hint.
‘Grissom,’ I tell McDunn, suddenly remembering.
Couldn't think of it all night but now I have, just by talking about it.
‘That's who it was.
Howie Grissom; his second name was Grissom.’
There's a terrible sick, empty feeling in my guts.
My hands are shaking again and I put them between my legs.
I give a small laugh.
‘I even saw the local cop outside the dentist's, day of the party.
I just assumed he was there to get a tooth filled or something, but Andy must have broken in and switched the records then.’
‘We're checking the dental records of the body from the hotel with the Army's records,’ McDunn says, nodding.
He glances at his watch.
‘Should have something this morning.’
He shakes his head.
‘And why those two?
Why Lingary and Doctor Halziel?’
I tell the DI why; I tell him about two more betrayals; about the commanding officer who had let men die to cover up his own inadequacy (or at least Andy believed he had, which was all that mattered), and I tell him about the locum doctor who couldn't be bothered to attend a patient and then, when he eventually did pay a visit, just assumed her pain was something trivial.
McDunn finally offers me a cigarette.
Oh, joy.
I take it and suck hard, coughing a bit.
‘I guess,’ I tell him, ‘he's getting personal now because his usual targets have become more wary.’
I shrug.
‘And maybe he's guessed I'll put you onto him, or that you'll just work it out for yourselves, so he's settling old scores while he can, before they're warned, too.’
McDunn is staring at the floor and turning the gold B&H packet over and over on the table.
He shakes his head.
I get the impression he agrees with what I'm saying and he's just shaking his head at the sheer extent of human deviousness and spite.
I think in a strange sort of way I feel sorry for McDunn.
There's a pause while a young constable comes in with some tea; the man at the door gets his cup, and McDunn and I sip ours.
‘So Detective Inspector’ I say sitting back in my chair.
Hell, I'm almost enjoying this, sick feeling or not.
‘Are we going there or not?’
McDunn sucks his lips in and looks pained.
He nods.
I trip on something in the ferns, twisting in mid-air as my ankle gives underneath me and I slam backwards into the ground, winding myself.
I lie there, gulping for air, terrified of the man coming to get me while I lie there helpless; then I hear a scream.
I get to my feet.
I look down at what I tripped over; a fallen branch, about the size of a man's arm.
I stare at it, thinking down the depth of years to that frozen day by the river.
Get a branch.
The scream again.
Get a branch.
I'm still staring at the branch; it's like my brain's screaming at me inside my own head and I don't know what else it is that's listening, except it isn't listening; my brain's screaming Run!
Run ! at me but the message isn't getting through, there's something else in the way, something else pulling me back, back to Andy and back to that frozen river bank; I hear Andy crying out and I can still see him reaching towards me and he's about to slip away from me again and I can't do anything…but I can, this time I can; I can do something and I will.
I take hold of the branch and pull it ripping out of the grass and ferns.
I start to run again, back the way I've just come, the branch held out in front of me in both hands.
I can hear Andy's muffled shouting; for a moment I think I've lost them and run past them somehow; then I see them, almost straight ahead.
The man is moving up and down over Andy, his backside looks large and white against the green of the ferns; he still has the rucksack on and it looks weird, frightening and comical at the same time.
He has one hand over Andy's face, clamped  tight; his head is turned away from me, red hair fallen down over one ear.
I put the branch two-handed over my right shoulder as I run up to them, jump over a small bush and then as I land at their side bring the branch swinging down.
It whacks into the man's head with a dull, hollow sound, jerking his head to one side; he grunts and starts to get up, then goes limp.
I stand over him.
Andy is wheezing, struggling for breath; he pulls himself out from underneath the man; there is blood round his backside.
He pushes the man away; the man flops onto his side, then rolls forward onto his face again, groaning.
Andy sucks breath, staring at me; he pulls his trousers up, then he puts out his hand and takes the branch from me.
He raises it over his head and brings it crashing down on the back of the man's head; once, twice, three times.
‘Andy!’
I shout.
He raises the branch again, then drops it.
He stands there, shaking, then hugs himself, chin on his chest, staring down at the man, his head and whole body trembling.
There is blood leaking from the back of the man's head, beneath the red hair.
‘Andy?’
I ask him.
I put my hand out to him but he flinches.
We both stand and stare at the man, and at the blood spreading amongst the red hair.
‘I think he's dead,’ Andy whispers.
I put one shaking hand out and roll the man over.
His eyes are half-open.
He doesn't seem to be breathing.
I hold one of his wrists for a while, trying to find a pulse.
‘What are we going to do?’
I ask, letting the man roll forward onto his face again.
Sunlight dapples the grass and ferns around us.
Birds call from the trees above and I can hear the distant sound of traffic on the main road, through the forest.
Andy is silent.
‘We'd better tell somebody, don't you think?
Andy?
We'd better tell somebody, eh?
We'd better tell…tell, tell, tell your mum and dad.
We'll have to tell the police; even if he is…even if he was…
I mean, this was self-defence, they call it, it was self-defence.
He, he, he, he was trying to kill us, kill you; it was self-defence, we can say that, people'll believe us, it was self-defence; self-defence — Andy turns to me, face set and pale.
‘Fucking shut up.’
I shut up.
I can't stop shaking.
‘Then what are we going to do?’
I wail.
‘I know,’ Andy says.
A civvy Granada to Heathrow.
London on a bright November morning.
People and cars and buildings and shops.
I watch the real life go by outside like it's something from an SF movie; I can't believe how alien it all looks, how strange and foreign.
I feel a bizarre sense of loss and yearning.
I watch the men and women as they crowd along the streets or sit in their cars and vans and buses and trucks, and their freedom seems inestimably precious, exotic and vicariously intoxicating.
To be able just to walk, or drive, wherever you want; Christ, I've been away from all this for less than a week and I feel like somebody coming out after thirty years.
And I know these people don't feel free, I know they're all hurrying along or sitting there worrying about their jobs or their mortgages or being late or an IRA bomb in the nearest litter-bin, but I look at them and feel a terrible sense of loss, because I think I've surrendered all this; the ordinariness of life, the ability just to be part of it and take part in it.
I want to hope that I'm being melodramatic and everything will settle back to the way it used to be, before all this ghastliness, but I doubt it.
In my guts I feel that, even if everything goes the best it possibly can for me, my life has changed completely and forever.
But fuck it; at least I'm back in the real world, and with a modicum of control.
I'm discreetly handcuffed to Detective Sergeant Flavell —McDunn has the key — and we have a couple of burly plain-clothes men with us I strongly suspect are tooled up, but the pressure seems to be off me  a bit.
I don't think I'm suspect numero uno any more; I think McDunn at least believes me and that's enough for now.
The unfortunate Captain — later Major — Lingary (retired) and Doctor Halziel have done me a lot of good by disappearing so mysteriously.
I try not to think what Andy might be doing to them.
I try even harder not to think about what he might do to me if he ever got the chance.
We're on the dear old elevated section of the M4 where lorries are so apt to break down when there's a call for McDunn; he takes the handset, listens and sucks his teeth for a bit, then says, ‘Thank you.’
He puts the phone down and looks back at me.
‘Army records,’ he says.
He turns back to face the front as we head through the late-morning traffic.
‘The body in the hotel was not Andrew Gould's.’
‘Did they check the records against the ones in Howie's file?’
I ask.
McDunn nods.
‘They match Gould's.
Not perfectly; he's had work done since, but they say they're ninety-nine per cent sure.
They were switched.’
I sit back, smiling; for a while there's a glow in my belly which displaces the sickness.
For a while.
McDunn gets on the phone to somebody from Tayside police and tells them to contact the Goulds and stop the funeral.
Lunch for five at 35,000 feet, then Edinburgh from the air: greyly grand and a tad misty.
We land just after one o'clock and get straight into a Jag jam-sandwich (so a ford at both ends — ha!).
The XJ speeds north over the road-bridge, no lights or siren on but we clip along and it's the smoothest fucking motorway journey I've ever had; just a total hassle-free zone creaming along around the ton with no worries about unmarked police cars and hoo-wee the traffic in front of us just fucking evaporates; man, just brakes (and wobbles sometimes as the guy probably gets the cold sweats and the wo-where'd-my-stomach-go? feeling), swings meekly left and brakes again; you've never seen a beefy BMW 5-series duck in so fast in your life; might as well all be driving 2CVs.
It's beautiful.
We take a leg each and drag the man face-down through the ferns towards the northeast end of the hill.
His cord trousers are still rolled down round his ankles and get in the way and we have to stop and turn him over and pull the trousers back up, fastening them by one button.
His cock is small now and there is dried blood crusted on it.
We pull him away beneath the trees; in his other hand, Andy is still holding the branch we hit him with.
We come to a thicket under the trees; a cluster of rhododendron and bramble bushes.
Andy clears a way through the undergrowth and we drag the man beneath the thorns and soft fruit of the brambles and the glossy leaves of the rhodies, into the green darkness; his rucksack catches on the branches above and Andy takes it off him, pushing it ahead of us.
We come to a stubby cylinder of undressed stone; the second of the two chimneys from the old railway tunnel under the hill.
We make good time on the road from the motorway; people actually help you overtake when you're in a cop car.
Unbelievable.
I almost wish I'd become a cop-car driver instead of a journalist now; this is such sweet driving.
Still, maybe it kind of takes some of the sport out of it.
At Gilmerton, where the three wee blue Fiat 126s used to live, there's a Sapphire Cosworth orange-and-white squatting just off the road by the junction; it flashes its lights at us as we pass.
There's another patrol car at the turn-off to Strathspeld.
‘Kind of high-profile here, aren't we?’
I ask McDunn.
‘Mm-hmm,’ is all he'll say.
We come to the village.
I look up at our old house; bushes and trees are taller.
Satellite dish.
Conservatory on one side.
I watch the familiar shops and houses go by; Mum's old gift shop (now a video shop); the Arms, where I had my first pint; Dad's old garage, still doing business.
Another police car, parked on the village green.
‘Will the Goulds be at the house?’
I ask.
McDunn shakes his head.
‘They're in that hotel we just passed.’
I'm relieved.
I don't think I'd know what to say to them.
Hi; the good news is I didn't kill your son, in fact he isn't dead at all, but the bad news is he's a multiple murderer.
Five minutes later we're at the house.
The gravel circle outside the house looks like the car park at a cop convention.
I hear a clattering in the air as McDunn gets out of the Jag and I look up over the trees into high, bright overcast.
Fuck me, they've even brought a chopper.
McDunn stands talking to some heavily brassed uniformed cops on the steps of the front door.
I look round the old place; the window surrounds have been painted, the flower-beds look a bit unkempt.
Nothing else has changed; I haven't been here since that day a week after Clare died, and it had the same muddily washed-out look about it then.
McDunn comes back towards the car, catches Havell's eye and beckons him.
We get out and follow McDunn into the house.
Nothing much different inside, either; still looks and smells the same: polished parquet flooring, sumptuous but fading old rugs, assorted mostly very old furniture, lots of big houseplants on the floor and time-dulled landscapes and portraits on the wood-panelled walls.
We walk under the angle of the main staircase, into the dining room.
The place is full of cops; there's a map of the estate on the table, almost covering it.
McDunn introduces me to the other officers.
I have never had so many hard, suspicious looks in my lift.
‘So, where's this body?’ one of the uniformed guys from Strathclyde asks.
He's here because they've loaned the helicopter.
‘Still here,’ I tell him.
‘Unlike…unlike the man you're looking for.’
I look at McDunn, the one friendly-ish face in here and the only one I can look at without feeling like a five-year-old who's just wet his pants.
‘I thought the idea was to let the funeral go ahead, or at least make it look like it was; he was bound to be here.
You might have caught him then.’
McDunn's face gives a good impression of being stone-clad.
‘That was not felt to be the most suitable way of proceeding in this matter,’ he says, sounding like a police spokesman for the first time.
There's a sensation of well tailored black uniforms rustling in the room and I get the impression from the general atmosphere and a few exchanged looks that this is a contentious point.
‘We're still waiting for this body,’ says the man with the braid from Tayside, the boys officially in charge.
‘Mr Colley,’ he adds.
I look down at the map of the estate.
‘I'll show you,’ I tell them.
‘You'll need a…crowbar or something, about fifty metres of rope and a torch.
A hacksaw might be handy, too.’
Andy reaches up to the iron grating and pulls at it.
‘This one comes away,’ he grunts; his voice is still shaky.
I help him; we lift the rusting grating up at one end but the far side is still secured by an iron pin and we can't shift it any further.
Andy takes the branch we hit the man with and wedges it under the grating; part of it sticks through but there's a stump where a smaller branch has broken off and the grating rests on that, held a half-metre or so off the stone rim.
Andy throws the man's rucksack into the shaft, then bends and takes the man under one armpit, trying to heave him up.
‘Come on!’ he hisses.
We haul the man up, his back against the stone of the vent, his head flopping down onto his chest.
There's a little blood on the stones of the chimney.
Andy takes the man's calves under his armpits and lifts; I get underneath and force the man's shoulders up; his head goes over onto the stone rim of the vent, beneath the grating.
We both push and heave and the man's shoulders scrape over the rim; his arms drag up and over as Andy pushes, grunting, feet slipping on the old leaves and soil.
I push the man's behind up, liking with all my might.
The man's trousers snag on the stone and start to come down again, then  the branch holding the grating shifts and the iron grid falls down, thumping into the man's chest.
‘Shit,’ Andy breathes.
We struggle to lift the grating up and wedge the branch underneath again.
The man's head is poised over the shaft, drooping down into it.
We push his legs but they buckle at the knees, so we have to hold them up above our heads as we push to make them stay straight, then as we shove and his trousers are rolled down by the rim of stone, his arms flop over the far side of the shaft rim and it suddenly gets easier to push him.
He slides out of our grasp, slipping into the shaft with a scraping noise.
His trousers bunch round his ankles again, then catch round his boots and disappear over the edge of the chimney, kicking up at the last moment and hitting the grating; the branch slips and the grating slams down.
The branch falls through it into the shaft and drops after the man.
We stand there for a second or two.
Then there is — unless we each imagine it — a very faint thump.
Andy suddenly jerks into motion and scrambles up onto the rim of the chimney.
He stares through the grating, down into the darkness.
‘Can you see him?’
I ask.
Andy shakes his head.
‘But let's get some branches anyway,’ he says.
We prop the grating open with another branch and spend the next half-hour pulling fallen branches and logs from all over that part of the hill, dragging them into the clump of bushes and throwing them into the shaft; we snap dead branches off trees and bushes and haul and peel living ones off; we scrape together armfuls of dry leaf litter and throw those over the edge of the chimney, too; everything goes under the grating and down into the shaft.
We still can't see anything down there.
Eventually a large branch with lots of other branches on it and lots of leaves — half a bush, practically — snags only a few metres down the shaft and we stop, breathless, sweating, trembling from exertion and delayed shock.
We let the grating fall back and throw  the last branch down into the darkness; it catches on the branches stuck near the top of the shaft.
We sit on the dead leaves at the foot of the vent, backs against the stone.
‘Are you all right?’
I ask Andy after a while.
He nods.
I put a hand out to him but he flinches again.
We sit there for some time but I keep glancing up, and gradually become terrified that the man is somehow not dead or has become a zombie and is climbing back up the shaft towards us, to push the grating up and put his already rotting hands down and grab us both by the hair.
I stand up and face Andy.
My legs are still shaky and my mouth has gone very dry.
Andy stands too.
‘A swim,’ he says.
‘What?’
‘Let's —’ Andy swallows.
‘Let's go for a swim.
Down to the loch, the river.’
He glances back at the stones of the air shaft.
‘Yeah,’ I say, trying to sound cheerful and unconcerned.
‘A swim.’
I look at my hands, all scraped and dirty.
There's some blood on them.
They're still shaking.
‘Good idea.’
We crawl out of the undergrowth into the bright day.
There are a few minutes, perhaps not more than three or four, when I exist in a bewildering storm of hope, joy, incomprehen-sion and dread, when they don't find the body at the bottom of the shaft.
We walked here through the gardens and the woods, past the hill where Andy and I lay in the sunlight all those summers ago, into the little glen, then up through the bushes and the dead auburn wreckage of the ferns, to the trees at the summit of the small hill.
A damp wind blew from the west, shaking drips off the high, bare trees and taking the sound of the main road away.
There are about twenty of us altogether, including half a dozen  constables carrying the gear.
I'm still very much attached to Sergeant Flavell.
I'd naively thought they could mount some low-profile operation to catch Andy watching his own funeral; I'd imagined cops slinking through the undergrowth, whispering into radios, gradually closing in.
Instead we're here mob-handed, crashing through the undergrowth towards a dead body.
Except it isn't there.
I tell them it is; I tell them there's a man's body at the bottom of the air shaft and they believe me.
It takes them long enough to cut a way through to the chimney of the air shaft, sawing through the rhodie branches and tearing away the brambles and other undergrowth; then they lever off the iron grating over the shaft without any difficulty, and one of the younger cops, in an overall and a hard hat, wraps the rope around himself — proper climbing rope they had in the back of one of the Range Rovers — and abseils down into the darkness.
McDunn's listening on a little radio handset.
It crackles.
‘Lot of branches,’ the cop on the end of the rope says.
Then: ‘Down, on the bottom.’
The helicopter clatters overhead.
I'm wondering where Andy is by now when I hear the guy in the shaft say, ‘Nothing here.’
What?
‘Just a load of branches and stuff,’ the cop says.
McDunn doesn't react.
I do; I stare at the radio.
What's he talking about?
I feel dizzy.
It did happen.
I remember it.
I've lived with it ever since, had it at the back of my head ever since.
I know it happened.
I feel like the woods are revolving around me; maybe if I wasn't still handcuffed to the sergeant, I'd fall over.
(And I remember the man saying, can remember his voice perfectly, hear him again as he says, ‘I'm a policeman !’)
Some of the other cops gathered round the air shaft are wearing knowing looks.
‘Wait a minute,’ the cop in the tunnel says.
My heart thuds.
What has he found?
I don't know if I want him to find him — it — or not.
‘There's a rucksack here,’ the voice on the radio says.
‘Large day-pack size, brown…looks full.
Fairly old.’
‘Nothing else?’
McDunn asks.
‘Just the branches…can't see to the end of the tunnel in either direction.
Patch of light in the distance…eastwards.’
‘That's the other air shaft,’ I tell McDunn.
‘Back that way.’
I point.
‘Want me to have a look round, sir?’
McDunn looks at the Tayside chief, who nods.
‘Yes,’ McDunn says.
‘If you're sure it's safe.’
‘Safe enough, I think, sir.
Untying.’
McDunn looks at me.
He sucks his teeth.
I avoid the eyes of the other cops.
McDunn's eyebrows rise a little.
‘He was there,’ I tell him.
‘It was Andy and I. This guy attacked us; abused Andy.
We hit him with a log.
I swear.’
McDunn looks unconvinced.
He peers over the edge of the stonework, down into the shaft.
I'm still feeling dizzy.
I put a hand out to the stones of the air-shaft chimney, to steady myself.
At least the rucksack's there.
It did happen , for Christ's sake; it wasn't an hallucination.
The guy was probably dead when we tipped him into the shaft — we just assumed he was at the time though the older I got the less sure of that I was — but even if wasn't, he must have been killed when he hit the bottom; it's thirty metres at least.
Could Andy have decided since that the body wasn't well enough concealed, and come back and removed it; hauled it up, taken it away and buried it?
We'd never talked about that day, and we never again came near this old air shaft; I don't know what he might have done since but I'd always assumed he was like me and just tried to forget about it, pretend it never happened.
Denial.
Hell, sometimes it's best.
‘— ear me yet?’ the radio crackles.
‘Yes?’
McDunn says.
‘Found him.’
It will take a while to get the body out; they have to get more guys down there, take photographs; the usual shit.
Most of us return to people know, other people know; the police know, it's no longer just between me and Andy, it's public.
I do feel some relief, no matter what happens now, but I still feel I have betrayed Andy, regardless of what he's done.
The man's body was under the other air shaft.
The poor duck must have crawled all that way, a hundred metres or more to that second patch of light; our bright idea of putting the branches down after him to cover him up was pointless; for all these years it would only have needed some more kids to have come along with torches or bits of burning paper to discover the body.
They reckon there was a load of fallen branches lying under the air shaft before we pushed the guy down it; according to the young cop who first went down it looked like he'd crawled out from the middle of the pile.
Even so, I don't know how he survived that fall; God knows what he broke, how he suffered, how long he took to crawl there to the other slightly brighter patch of light; how long he took to die.
Part of me feels sorry for him, despite what he tried to do, what he did do.
God knows, maybe he'd have ended up killing Andy, killing both of us, but nobody deserves to die like that.
On the other hand there's a part of me that rejoices, that is glad he paid the way he did, that for once the world worked the way it's supposed to, punishing the wrongdoer…and that saddens and sickens me too, because I think that this must be the way Andy feels all the time.
It's strange to be in Strathspeld, to be in the house and not have seen Mr and Mrs Gould.
Some of the cops have gone; there are only ten cars and vans on the gravel drive now.
The chopper went to refuel, came back and buzzed around some more and then returned to Glasgow.
Apparently they had road blocks and patrols on roads all over the area, and they searched the grounds of the house.
Fat chance.
Back at the house, in the library, I tell a DI from Tayside all that happened that day, twenty years ago.
McDunn sits in, too.
It isn't as painful as I thought it would be.
I tell it just as it happened, from where we ran up the hill almost straight into the man; I leave out what Andy and I were doing just before, and the man's line about dirty, perverted things.
I can't tell that with McDunn sitting there; it would be like telling my father.
Actually, I guess I wouldn't want to tell it to anybody, not so much because I'm ashamed (I tell myself) as because it's private; one last thing I can hide that's between me and Andy only, so letting me feel that there is one thing at least in which I've not betrayed him utterly.
Sergeant Flavell has been released from me to take notes; I'm attached to myself now, wrists cuffed together.
The aged, respectable leather-bound tomes of the Gould family library look down upon the nasty tale I have to tell with musty distaste.
Outside, it's dark.
‘Think I'll be charged?’
I ask the two DIs.
I already know there's no time limit between committing a murder and being charged with it.
‘Not for me to say, Mr Colley,’ the Tayside guy says, gathering up his notebook and tape recorder.
McDunn's mouth twists down at the edges; he sucks through his teeth, and for some reason I feel encouraged.
They've ordered food from the Strathspeld Arms; the same food the funeral guests would have eaten.
A bunch of us eat in the dining room.
I'm handcuffed to one of the London burlies now and we both have to eat with one hand.
I'd kind of been hoping they'd take the cuffs off me altogether by now but I suppose they're thinking that the body in the shaft doesn't prove anything by itself, and that  Andy could still be dead, or he could be alive and he — or somebody else — could have kidnapped Halziel and Lingary to provide cover for me.
McDunn comes in as I'm chasing bits of quiche around my plate with my fork.
He comes up to me, nods to the burly and unlocks the cuffs.
‘Come here,’ he tells me, putting the handcuffs in his pocket.
I wipe my lips and follow him to the door.
‘What is it?’
I ask him.
‘It's for you,’ he says, striding across the hall towards the phone, where the handset's lying on the table and an officer is attaching a little device like a sucker to the phone; a wire leads from the sucker to a pro Walkman.
The officer starts the machine recording.
McDunn glances back at me before stopping at the phone and nodding down at it.
‘It's Andy.’
He hands me the phone.