

CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
(A) INTRODUCTION
Note
Constitutional law is the law relating to the constitution.
While this statement may be true, it is not particularly helpful.
To study constitutional law we need to discover what a constitution is.
There are many competing definitions.
While many clubs, organisations and other groupings have constitutions, our concern is with the constitutions of nation-states.
Thomas Paine,Rights of Man in The Complete Works of Thomas Paine , pp. 302–303.
A constitution is not the act of a government, but of a people constituting a government, and a government without a constitution is power without right…
A constitution is a thing antecedent to a government; and a government is only the creature of a constitution.
It was Paine's belief that England lacked a constitution, as he stated at p. 370 that ‘the continual use of the word ‘constitution’ in the English parliament shows there is none and the whole is merely a form of government without a constitution, and constituting itself with what power it pleases’.
Paine admired, by contrast, the recent American Constitution.
C. H. McIlwain, Constitutionalism Ancient and Modern (1947), pp. 8–10
…
[T]he analysis Paine made of the early American constitution was remarkably acute.
The significant points in that analysis are these:
That there is a fundamental difference between a people's government and that people's constitution, whether the government happens to be entrusted to a king or to a representative assembly.
That this constitution is ‘antecedent’ to the government.
That it defines the authority which the people commits to its government, and in so doing thereby limits it.
That any exercise of authority beyond these limits by any government is an exercise of ‘power without right.’
That in any state in which the distinction is not actually observed between the constitution and the government there is in reality no constitution, because the will of the government has no check upon it, and that state is in fact a despotism.
One thing alone Paine fails to make fully clear.
If a government exercises some ‘power without right,’ it seems to be necessarily implied that the people have a corresponding right to resist.
But is this a legal or is it only a political right?
Is such resistance a legalized rebellion or merely an extralegal revolution?
Or, further, is it possible to incorporate in the framework of the state itself some provision or institution by which a governmental act or command ultra vires may be declared to be such, and subjects therefore exempted from its operation and released from any legal obligation to observe or obey it?
In short, can government be limited legally and effectively by any method short of force?
To these questions Paine gives no clear answer.
It might be assumed that forcible resistance to power without right must itself be legal and not revolutionary; but in every case there seems no recourse except to force of some kind.
The one conspicuous element lacking in Paine's construction therefore seems to be the element of judicial review.
Writing when he did, and as he did, to justify an actual rebellion, it is perhaps not strange that he was thinking primarily of politics rather than of law, that the ‘rights’ he had in mind were the rights of man rather than the rights of the citizen, or that the sanction for these rights should be extralegal action rather than any constitutional check.
Paine, like many idealists in a hurry, was probably impatient of the slowness of legal remedies for existing abuses.
But others, who were more constitutionally minded than he, had begun to feel that any such remedies, to be truly effective, must ultimately have the sanction of law.
Years before, Lord Camden had insisted that the principles of the law of nature must be incorporated in the British Constitution if they were to be observed, and that they actually were so incorporated.
The necessary inference from such a principle as his is that the interpreters of law should be the.ones to define the rights of individuals and to trace the bounds of legitimate government over them.
The protection of rights became for him, and for all who thought as he did, the enforcement of ‘constitutional limitations.’
Question
What did Paine mean by ‘antecedent’?
Did he mean that the constitution must exist prior in time to the government or that the principles of the constitution should be superior in character, and binding in authority, to the actions of government?
If the former is correct, does the United Kingdom have a constitution?
(See the discussion which follows.)
If the latter is correct, could the United Kingdom ever have constitutional government?
(See chapter 2.)
Note
Paine expressed a concept of constitutions which involved ‘the conscious formulation by a people of its fundamental law’(McIlwain, op. cit., p. 3).
This would find expression in a written document or documents.
The alternative view sees constitutions not as a conscious creation but rather as an evolutionary consequence made up of ‘substantive principles to be deduced from a nation's actual institutions and their development’(McIlwain,ibid .).
This could include an unwritten or uncodified constitution.
This view was expressed by Bolingbroke.
Bolingbroke, A Dissertation upon Parties (1733–34) in The Works of Lord Bolingbroke (1841), II, p. 88
By constitution we mean, whenever we speak with propriety and exactness, that assemblage of laws, institutions and customs, derived from certain fixed principles of reason, directed to certain fixed objects of public good, that compose the general system according to which the community hath agreed to be governed…
We call this a good government, when…the whole administration of public affairs is wisely pursued, and with a strict conformity to the principles and objects of the constitution.
Question
When Paine stated that a governmental act contrary to the constitution is an act of ‘power without right’, did he thereby imply that such an act would be unconstitutional?
In Bolingbroke's terms such an act would warrant the conclusion that the government is not a good one; is this the same thing?
Note
It can be argued that, according to Bolingbroke's definition, the United Kingdom has a constitution, as there are laws, institutions and customs which combine to create a system of government to which the community agrees, or at least, from which it does not appear to dissent.
This is the traditional view of most constitutional lawyers.
Constitutional theorists have further refined their analysis of constitutions, creating other points of comparison.
For example, K C Wheare, Modern Constitutions (1966), Chapter 2, proposed six classifications of constitutions:(1) written and unwritten;(2) rigid and flexible;(3) supreme and subordinate;(4) federal and unitary;(5) separated powers and fused powers;(6) republican and monarchical.
If Wheare's definitions are applied to the United Kingdom, it may be said that there is an unwritten constitution in the sense that it is uncodified.
There is no supreme or fundamental constitutional law, and the processes for changing the constitution are flexible.
The state is a unitary, monarchical one where powers are fused, there being a parliamentary executive as opposed to a presidential executive.
While most writers on the constitution are satisfied that, by comparison with the various definitions, the United Kingdom does have a constitution, some writers insist that there is no constitution.
F. F. Ridley, ‘There is no British Constitution: A Dangerous Case of the Emperor's Clothes’ 41 Parliamentary Affairs (1988) pp. 340–343, 359–360
Having a constitution seems to be a matter of self-respect: no state is properly dressed without.
Every democracy except Britain, New Zealand and (with qualifications) Israel seems to have a written constitution, plainly labelled.
Not to be left out of the world of constitutional democracies, British writers define constitution in a way which appears to give us one too, even though there is no document to prove it.
The argument is that a constitution need not be embodied in a single document or, indeed, wholly written.
We say instead that a country's constitution is a body of rules — some laws, some conventions — which regulate its system of government.
Such a definition does not, however, bridge the gap between Britain and the rest of the world by providing us with a substitute for a documentary constitution: it simply shifts the ground, by using the word in an entirely different way.
We see this ambiguity in K C Wheare's now classic book on constitutions.
The word constitution is commonly used in at least two senses in ordinary discussion of political affairs.
First of all, it is used to describe the whole system of government, the collection of rules which establish and regulate it.
These rules are partly legal and partly non-legal.
When we speak of the British constitution that is the normal, if not the only possible meaning the word has.
Everywhere else it is used in the sense of legal rules embodied in one document.
But that is not the real distinction.
Foreign usage is not particularly concerned with the documentary character of a constitution.
It appears in that form, but that is not its essential.
Everywhere save Britain the constitution is defined as a special category of law.
British usage dissolves the distinction between constitutional law and other laws because British courts recognise no such distinction.
British political scientists, for their part, dissolve the distinction between law and other rules of behaviour because they are not much interested in law: for them, the constitution is practice.
Books of an old-fashioned sort with British Constitution in their title describe significant laws, conventions and institutions.
This approach is now dismissed as formalistic by political scientists who regard such accounts as incomplete, if not misleading.
They are right if their aim is to describe a system of government.
In no country are all the important laws that shape the system of government embodied in a constitutional document.
Nor can the operation of constitutional law be understood without reference to the practice of politics.
Such arguments, however, miss the essential character of constitutions altogether.
The wide focus of political scientists is right if their aim is to describe a system of government.
Equating it with a study of the constitution, however, may owe less to a desire for realism than to a lack of concern about legal matters.
This is often justified on the grounds that law is not a distinct and important element in understanding systems of government, but there are professional reasons too.
Political studies did not originate in law faculties, as in continental Europe, and never subsequently developed any real interest in law.
As a result, we get books called The British System of Government or, more fashionably, The British Political System, where politics is added to institutions.
What such books include when they claim to describe the British ‘constitution’ depends on what their authors consider important to the framework of the system: what the ‘constitution’consists of thus emerges from a survey of the system and is not determined by an independent, non-political definition that precedes it.
Much the same applies to books by lawyers.
Works entitled Constitutional Law cover a selection of laws that appear important to the author, together with important conventions and often a reduced version of the topics treated by institutionally oriented political scientists.
Since there appear to be no consequences in judicial practice if the label constitutional is applied to a particular law, it is in the end no more than a convenient way for textbook writers to organise their material, just as they produce books on industrial law or commercial law.
That emerges clearly from one textbook definition of the study of constitutional law as ‘that body of knowledge dealing with the law of the constitution in a broader sense…matters pertaining to the organisation of government and its relation to citizens’.
That may cover almost anything, indeed F W Maitland said that ‘there is hardly any department of law which does not, at one time or another, become of constitutional importance.’
Though there is broad agreement on the contents of such books on constitutional law, in the last resort it depends on what academic lawyers consider relevant — and a quick survey of standard textbooks will show that at the margins there are significant variations in what is brought into the orbit of the British ‘constitution’.
In the absence of legal criteria that distinguish constitutional law from other laws, the definition becomes so broad that it defines nothing at all.
In the context of the British legal system, the term constitutional law is thus literally meaningless.
Borrowing from political science for their definition of the British constitution, however, academic lawyers hardly even really address the question whether in legal, or indeed logical, terms Britain has a constitution at all.
Such accounts of the British ‘constitution’ are only superficially the result of the absence of a constitutional document.
Because we feel uneasy about our difference from other democracies which do have labelled constitution, we turn to what is now a peculiarly British usage of the word to prove that we are not really different at all.
One purpose of this article is to show that Britain is different, and different in ways that are important politically as well as in law.
It is to show that Britain does not really have a constitution at all, merely a system of government, even if some parts of it are more important to our democratic order than others or are treated (perhaps: were treated until Mrs Thatcher's time) with greater veneration.
It may be embarrassing to explain that, as in the nursery tale, the Emperor has no clothes after all, that the constitutional attire his courtiers claim to see is empty words, but that is the essential of this article.
Unless we face up to that fact, moreover, any discussion of how we can safeguard certain democratic arrangements that we regarded as part of the British ‘constitution’ in the past (e.g. the independence of local government) or entrench others (e.g. a Bill of Rights) against an ‘elective dictatorship’will run into the sand.
Constitutions and their Characteristics
Use of the word constitution as the manner in which a polity is organised, the main characteristic of its governmental system, is undoubtedly the historic one.
By the end of the eighteenth century, however, the word came to have another meaning.
The American War of Independence and the French Revolution marked a turning point after which the new meaning became universal, Britain excepted.
It applied to a special form of law embodied as a matter of convenience in a single document.
As used elsewhere, it is now a term of law not politics.
Constitutions there have certain essential characteristics, none of them found in Britain.
Without these characteristics, it is impossible to distinguish a constitution from a description of the system of government in a way that is analytically precise.
Without them, it is impossible to say that a country has a constitution in the current international sense of the word.
More important, lest this be thought a linguistic quibble, without them a system of  government lacks the legitimacy a constitution gives and a political system the protection it offers.
The characteristics of a constitution are as follows.
(1)
It establishes, or constitutes, the system of government.
Thus it is prior to the system of government, not part of it, and its rules can not be derived from that system.
(2)
It therefore involves an authority outside and above the order it establishes.
This is the notion of the constituent power (‘pouvoir constituant’— because we do not think along these lines, the English translation sounds strange).
In democracies that power is attributed to the people, on whose ratification the legitimacy of a constitution depends and, with it, the legitimacy of the governmental system.
(3)
It is a form of law superior to other laws — because (i) it originates in an authority higher than the legislature which makes ordinary law and (ii) the authority of the legislature derives from it and is thus bound by it.
The principle of hierarchy of law generally (but not always) leads to the possibility of judicial review of ordinary legislation.
(4)
It is entrenched (i) because its purpose is generally to limit the powers of government, but also (ii) again because of its origins in a higher authority outside the system.
It can thus only be changed by special procedures, generally (and certainly for major change) requiring reference back to the constituent power.
James Bryce made all these points at the turn of the century.
Defining a constitution as a framework of political society organised through law, he distinguished between ‘statutory’ and ‘common law’types of constitutions.
Of the former, he wrote: ‘The instrument in which a constitution is embodied proceeds from a source different from that whence spring other laws, is regulated in a different way, and exerts a sovereign force.
It is enacted not by the ordinary legislative authority but by some higher and specially empowered body.
When any of its provisions conflict with a provision of the ordinary law, it prevails and the ordinary law must give way.’
Bryce's alternative, the idea of a common-law constitution, is perhaps another way of saying that the British ‘constitution’ just grew, as the common law itself.
His definition of a statutory constitution does, however, allow us to distinguish constitutional law from other law by clear criteria, thus giving the term not just a specific meaning, but a meaning with consequences.
Though he, too, declared the distinction between written and unwritten constitutions old-fashioned, it is a pity that his summary has not served as a starting point for subsequent commentaries on the British ‘constitution’.
…
[T]he term British constitution is near meaningless even as used by British writers.
It is impossible to isolate parts of the system of government to which the label may authoritatively be attached.
There is no test to discriminate between constitutional and less than constitutional elements since labelling has no defined consequence, unlike countries where constitutions are a higher form of law.
If used descriptively, as Wheare and others suggest, it is simply a fancy-dress way of saying the British system of government and at best redundant.
More dangerous, those who talk of a British constitution may mislead themselves into thinking that there are parts of the system to which a special sanctity attaches.
But in that normative sense the term is equally meaningless.
When significant parts of the system are reformed, we have no test to tell us whether the outcome is an improper breach of the constitutional order, a proper amendment, or whether the reformed institutions were not part of the ‘constitution’ at all.
I may be told that this is an academic quibble since our democratic politicians know what is of constitutional significance in our way of government, approach such matters differently from other reforms, and are politically if not legally constrained.
That, however, is not the case.
Our system of government  is being changed, with increasing disregard for tradition, the only unwritten rules to which one might appeal as ‘constitutional’ principles.
There is cause for concern about the muddled way we think about the British ‘constitution’; there is even greater cause for concern about the political consequences of its nature.
It is sometimes said that our ‘constitution’ is now under stress as major changes occur far more rapidly than before in its written and unwritten parts.
Is this due to changing ideas about how the British system of government should be organised, widely held, or is it simply that the government of the day is using its power to change the system in the pursuit of its own political goals?
Is the constitutional order evolving or is it under attack?
We have moved from consensus to conflict in politics: have we moved in that direction, too, as regards our constitutional order, taking that to mean the broad principles underlying the way government is organised and power exercised?
Many old principles no longer command universal agreement and there are well-supported demands for new principles.
We have had debates on the entrenchment of rights; on federalism or regional devolution as against the unitary state; on the case for consensus rather than majority as a basis for government, on the relative weight of national versus local mandates and the independence of local government, on the duty of civil servants; on electoral reform with all its implications for the operations of government; on who should define the national interest; on open government and official secrecy; on complementing representative democracy by referenda and other forms of participation — and much else.
Political disagreement and disagreement on the proper constitutional order are linked.
An ideologically-committed government, deter mind to implement its policies, will support different constitutional principles from those who want consensus policy-making; those concerned primarily with individual freedom and the rights of the public will support different principles from those who want strong government and so on.
Since opinion is now deeply divided on so many issues, one can probably no longer talk of the constitutional order as if it were a reflection of public opinion.
There are no grounds for complacency about British democracy.
Questions
1.
Is there any truth in the following statement by Sidney Low, in The Governance of England (1904), p. 12: ‘British government is based upon a system of tacit understandings.
But the understandings are not always understood’?
2.
Is there some inherent virtue in a system of government derived from a constitution, which is lacking in a country which does not have such a codified constitution?
Indeed, why are constitutions enacted?
See Wheare below.
K. C. Wheare,Modern Constitutions (1966), pp. 4–8
[W]hat a Constitution says is one thing, and what actually happens in practice may be quite another.
We must take account of this possible difference in considering the form and worth of Constitutions.
What is more, we must be ready to admit that although almost all countries in the world have a Constitution, in many of them the Constitution is treated with neglect or contempt.
Indeed in the middle of the twentieth century it can be said that the majority of the world's population lives under systems of government where the government itself and particularly the  executive government are of more importance and are treated with more respect or fear than the Constitution.
It is only in the states of Western Europe, in the countries of the British Commonwealth, in the United States of America, and in a few Latin-American states that government is carried on with due regard to the limitations imposed by a Constitution; it is only in these states that truly ‘constitutional government’ can be said to exist…
Since the Constitution of a country is only a part of that country's whole system of government, does it make any difference whether a country has a Constitution or not?
The short answer is that in many countries the fact that there is a Constitution does make a difference.
This brings to light a characteristic which most Constitutions exhibit.
They are usually endowed with a higher status, in some degree, as a matter of law, than other legal rules in the system of government.
At the least it is usually laid down that the amendment of the Constitution can take place only through a special process different from that by which the ordinary law is altered…
It is natural to ask…why it is that countries have Constitutions, why most of them make the Constitution superior to the ordinary law, and, further, why Britain, at any rate, has no Constitution, in this sense, at all.
If we investigate the origins of modern Constitutions, we find that, practically without exception, they were drawn up and adopted because people wished to make a fresh start, so far as the statement of their system of government was concerned.
The desire or need for a fresh start arose either because, as in the United States, some neighbouring communities wished to unite together under a new government; or because, as in Austria or Hungary or Czechoslovakia after 1918, communities had been released from an Empire as the result of a war and were now free to govern themselves; or because, as in France in 1789 or the U.S.S.R. in 1917, a revolution had made a break with the past and a new form of government on new principles was desired; or because, as in Germany after 1918 or in France in 1875 or in 1946, defeat in war had broken the continuity of government and a fresh start was needed after the war.
The circumstances in which a break with the past and the need for a fresh start come about vary from country to country, but in almost every case in modern times countries have a Constitution for the very simple and elementary reason that they wanted, for some reason, to begin again and so they put down in writing the main outline, at least, of their proposed system of government.
This has been the practice certainly since 1787 when the American Constitution was drafted, and as the years passed no doubt imitation and the force of example have led all countries to think it necessary to have a Constitution.
This does not explain, however, why many countries think it necessary to give the Constitution a higher status in law than other rules of law.
The short explanation of this phenomenon is that in many countries a Constitution is thought of as an instrument by which government can be controlled.
Constitutions spring from a belief in limited government.
Countries differ however in the extent to which they wish to impose limitations.
Sometimes the Constitution limits the executive or subordinate local bodies; sometimes it limits the legislature also, but only so far as amendment of the Constitution itself is concerned; and sometimes it imposes restrictions upon the legislature which go far beyond this point and forbid it to make laws upon certain subjects or in a certain way or with certain effects.
Whatever the nature and extent of the restrictions, however, they are based upon a common belief in limited government and in the use of a Constitution to impose these limitations.
The nature of the limitations to be imposed on a government, and therefore the degree to which a Constitution will be supreme over a government, depends upon the objects which the framers of the Constitution wish to safeguard.
In the first place they may want to do no more than ensure that the Constitution is not altered casually or  carelessly or by subterfuge or implication; they may want to secure that this important document is not lightly tampered with, but solemnly, with due notice and deliberation, consciously amended.
In that case it is legitimate to require some special process of constitutional amendment say that the legislature may amend the Constitution only by a two-thirds majority or after a general election or perhaps upon three months' notice.
The framers of Constitutions often have more than this in mind.
They may feel that a certain kind of relationship between the legislature and the executive is important; or that the judicature should have a certain guaranteed degree of independence of the legislature and executive.
They may feel that there are certain rights which citizens have and which the legislature or the executive must not invade or remove.
They may feel that certain laws should not be made at all…
In some countries only one of the considerations mentioned above may operate, in others some, and in some, all.
Thus, in the Irish Constitution, the framers were anxious that amendment should be a deliberate process, that the rights of citizens should be safeguarded, and that certain types of laws should not be passed at all, and therefore they made the Constitution supreme and imposed restrictions upon the legislature to achieve these ends.
The framers of the American Constitution also had these objects in mind, but on top of that they had to provide for the desire of the thirteen colonies to be united for some purposes only and to remain independent for others.
This was an additional reason for giving supremacy to the Constitution and for introducing certain extra safeguards into it.
Note
While endless argument could be engaged upon on the question whether or not the United Kingdom has a constitution, perhaps a more profitable issue for consideration is whether the system of government in the United Kingdom displays congruence with certain values, principles and concepts associated with constitutional government in a liberal democratic state.
Wheare's remarks above should be noted, namely, that in many countries the constitution is ‘treated with neglect or contempt’.
Thus the existence of a Constitution of itself may not be a guarantee against repressive or totalitarian governments which disregard individual liberty and abrogate human rights.
V. Bogdanor (ed.),
Introduction to Constitutions in Democratic Politics (1988), pp. 3–7
Constitutions are not, of course, confined to democratic states.
Indeed, the vast majority of the 159 member states comprising the United Nations possess codified constitutions, although less than a third of these can fairly claim democratic credentials.
The latter can, declares S E Finer with pardonable exaggeration, be counted on one's fingers and toes.
Conversely, three countries which are indubitably democracies Britain, Israel and New Zealand — lack…codified constitutions.
In the modern world, constitutions are almost ubiquitous and they are indeed part of the tribute which vice pays to virtue.
For there is a conceptual connection, not so much between the constitution as a document and democracy, but between modern constitutionalism and the idea of a liberal democracy.
Whether a country has a codified constitution is hardly something of great importance to the political scientist.
Whether it achieves the aims which constitutions are intended to help achieve, is a matter of far greater moment.
For codified constitutions are, after all, valued as a means to the end of limiting governmental power; and, in a democracy, limiting also the power of the people to whom government is responsible.
The Founding Fathers in drawing up the American Constitution had, after all, two aims, not one.
The first was to draw up a structure of government which could serve to protect the people from government, from the danger of a tyranny of the majority in the legislature; but the second aim was to protect the people from themselves.
Thus, the relationship between constitutionalism and liberalism…is by no means a simple or straightforward one.
To live under an effectively working constitution is not the same as living under a regime of moral laissez-faire.
Constitutional government presupposes a certain set of virtues amongst the ruled; and these virtues must include self-restraint, a willingness not to push the pursuit of one's aims beyond a certain point.
In the 1930s, Mr Justice Stone declared that the United States Supreme Court ought not to see itself as the sole guardian of the constitution.
While the other branches of the Constitution were limited by institutional restraints, by checks and balances, the only restraint which limited the Court was its sense of self-restraint.
By analogy, one might argue that in a democracy in which the people are, in effect, sovereign, the only effective restraint in the last resort is likely to be that of the people over themselves.
Constitutions thus both liberate and bind; they provide for a framework of ordered freedom within a set of rules which prevents both majorities and their elected representatives from doing what they might otherwise wish to do.
The term ‘constitution’, as S E Finer shows, is to be understood in positivistic terms as a code of rules which aspire to regulate the allocation of functions, powers and duties among the various agencies and officers of government, and defines the relationships between these and the public.
Yet, even defined in these terms, the existence of a constitution, in so far as it is observed, serves to limit power.
For, to allocate functions, powers and duties is also, ipso facto, to limit power.
There must be some gain to the citizen, however minimal, in living under a constitution which regularises the way in which power is exercised; even where government is authoritarian, it matters that it is not arbitrary.
Yet, a number of democratic constitutions today contain more than a mere organisation chart of functions and powers; they contain Bills of Rights, which may also include a charter of social and economic rights, something characteristic of constitutions of the twentieth century, although generally honoured more in the breach than in the observance.
…
[I]n the case of Britain and Israel, two countries without codified constitutions, such pressure as exists to adopt one is based less on the desire to possess a clear-cut organisational chart delimiting the institutions of government than on a feeling that rights would be better protected under a codified constitution than they are at present.
The concept of a constitution is closely bound up with the notion of the limitation of government by law, a source of authority higher than government and beyond its reach.
An enacted constitution is a means — although, as the examples of Britain, Israel and New Zealand show, not an essential means — of securing this end.
The law, it is suggested, is logically prior to government, and therefore constitutes a standard by which the actions of government are to be evaluated.
It is…this ‘appeal to a pre-existing law’ which ‘is the essence of constitutionalism’.
Yet analysis of constitutions cannot be restricted simply to the document called ‘the Constitution’, or to constitutional law.
For a working constitution in a democracy implies reference to certain norms and standards which lie beyond and outside the  document itself, and which cannot easily be inferred from it by someone who is not steeped in the history and culture of the country concerned.
When conduct on the part of a government or some other public body is dubbed ‘unconstitutional’, what is often meant is not necessarily that the law has been broken, but rather that the action is out of keeping with the style or, more broadly, the ‘way of life’ of a country…
This kind of appeal to constitutional conventions — can, of course, also be raised in countries without codified constitutions.
When, in Britain, it is suggested that the policies of the Conservative Government towards local authorities since 1979 raise constitutional questions, what is meant is not that these policies are in any sense illegal, but rather…that they breach hitherto accepted understandings, albeit tacit, as to how relationships between central government and local authorities should be ordered.
These tacit understandings, which, in Sidney Low's graphic phrase, are so often misunderstood, may not be written down; yet they exert a normative influence upon those concerned with central/local relations comparable to, and perhaps greater than, the influence exerted by a constitutional document.
What makes Britain together with Israel and New Zealand, constitutional democracies, despite the absence of codified constitutions, is this very fact that their governments in general feel under pressure to conform to such norms; when accused of unconstitutional action their defence is not that the term ‘unconstitutional’ is without meaning, but that their actions can, despite appearances, be defended in constitutional terms.
Thus, in addition to the basic meaning of ‘constitution’— a document containing, at the very least, a code of rules setting out the allocation of functions, powers and duties among the various agencies and officers of government — there is a wider meaning of constitution, according to which every democratic state has a constitution.
This wider meaning comprehends the normative attitudes held by the people towards government, their conception of how power ought to be regulated, of what it is proper to do and not to do.
There are, as it were, pre-constitutional norms regulating government, and it is upon these that the health and viability of democratic systems will depend.
(B) CONSTITUTIONALISM
Governments wield considerable power.
Constitutions, while they may create the institutions of government and allocate power to these institutions, also generally seek to control or restrain the exercise of power.
The principle of constitutionalism rests on this idea of restraining the government in its exercise of power.
Constitutionalism, therefore, is to be set in contradistinction to arbitrary power.
M. J. C. Vile,Constitutionalism and the Separation of Powers (1967), p. 1
Western institutional theorists have concerned themselves with the problem of ensuring that the exercise of governmental power, which is essential to the realization of the values of their societies, should be controlled in order that it should not itself be destructive of the values it was intended to promote.
The great theme of the advocates of constitutionalism, in contrast either to the theorists of utopianism, or of absolutism, of the right or of the left, has been the frank acknowledgment of the role of government in society, linked with the determination to bring that government under control and to place limits on the exercise of its power.
C. J. Friedrich,Limited Government: A Comparison (1974), pp. 13–14
Constitutionalism by dividing power provides a system of effective restraints upon governmental action.
In studying it, one has to explore the methods and techniques by which such restraints are established and maintained.
Putting it another, more familiar, but less exact way, it is a body of rules ensuring fair play, thus rendering the government ‘responsible.’
There exist a considerable number of such techniques or methods.
The question confronts us: how did the idea of restraints arise?
And who provided the support that made the idea victorious in many countries?
There are two important roots to the idea of restraints.
One is the medieval heritage of natural-law doctrine.
For while the royal bureaucrats gained the upper hand in fact, the other classes in the community who had upheld the medieval constitutionalism the barons and the free towns, and above all the church — developed secularized versions of natural law.
At the same time, they clung to residual institutions, such as the parlements in France.
After the task of unification had been accomplished, and the despotic methods of absolutism could no longer be justified, these elements came toward with the idea of a separation of power.
Both the English and the French revolutions served to dramatize these events.
The other root of the idea of restraints is shared by medieval and modern constitutionalism and is peculiar to some extent to Western culture.
It is Christianity, and more specifically the Christian doctrine of personality.
The insistence upon the individual as the final value, the emphasis upon the transcendental importance of each man's soul, creates an insoluble conflict with any sort of absolutism.
Here lies the core of the objection to all political conceptions derived from Aristotelian and other Greek sources.
Since there exists a vital need for government just the same, this faith in the worth of each human being is bound to seek a balance of the two needs in some system of restraints which protects the individual, or at least minorities, against any despotic exercise of political authority.
It is quite in keeping with this conflict that the apologists of unrestrained power have, in all ages of Western civilization, felt the necessity of justifying the exercise of such power, a necessity which was not felt elsewhere.
Nor was it felt by all in the West.
Bacon and Hobbes, Bodin and Spinoza, and even Machiavelli insisted that some sort of inanimate force, such as reason, natural law, or enlightened self-interest would bring about a self-restraint.
But a deep-seated distrust of power was part of the tradition that taught that ‘my Kingdom is not of this world,’ and that states are usually just ‘great robber bands,’since they lack justice.
Hence self-restraint of the ruler must be reinforced by effective institutions: restraints upon the arbitrary exercise of governmental power.
Modern constitutionalism then has always been linked with the problem of power, in theory as well as in practice.
Historically, it constitutes a reaction against the concentration of power that accompanied the consolidation of modern states, dynastic and national.
Its theorists have insisted on the importance of limiting and defining the power acquired by monarchs.
Whilst Hobbes described the rational structure of such a concentration of power and developed it into a veritable philosophy of power, Locke, taking up the challenge, demanded that the exercise of this power, although it was derived from the ultimate and unified source of all power the people remain divided by virtue of a fundamental decision.
Questions
1.
Which of the ideas of self-restraint or institutional restraint is the dominant one in the British system of government?
2.
In the United Kingdom there is no codified constitution expressly imposing limits on governmental power.
Is governmental power limited in other ways?
Note
In the United Kingdom, where Parliament is supreme and may enact, amend or repeal any law it chooses, there is no distinction between ‘ordinary’ laws and ‘constitutional’laws.
Laws of constitutional significance are not accredited ‘fundamental’ status they have no special sanctity.
No special procedures are required for amending or repealing such laws.
Indeed, in the absence of a codified constitution, it is arguable that it is impossible to state what laws are of constitutional significance without reference to constitutions elsewhere to see what kinds of matters are dealt with therein.
A further consequence is, as Bogdanor states in ‘Britain: the Political Constitution’ in Bogdanor, Constitutions in Democratic Politics, p. 56, that ‘the term ‘unconstitutional’cannot in Britain mean contrary to law; instead it means contrary to convention, contrary to some understanding of what it is appropriate to do.
But, unfortunately, there is by no means universal agreement on what the standards of appropriateness are or ought to be.’
Should this be a matter of concern?
Is it not sufficient to entrust Parliament with the task of ensuring that constitutionalism is respected in the United Kingdom?
J. Elster, ‘Introduction’ in Constitutionalism and Democracy (Elster and Slagstad, eds, 1988), pp. 8–9
Why would a political assembly want to abdicate from the full sovereignty which in principle it possesses, and set limits on its own future actions?
In an intergenerational perspective, the question is what right one generation has to limit the freedom of action of its successors, and why the latter should feel bound by constraints laid down by their ancestors.
A natural (although possibly misleading) point of departure is to consider individual analogies.
Why, for instance, would two individuals want to form a legal marriage instead of simply cohabiting?
What possible advantages could they derive from limiting their future freedom of action and by making it more difficult to separate should they form the wish to do so?
One obvious answer is that they want to protect themselves against their own tendency to act rashly, in the heat of passion.
By raising the costs of separation and imposing legal delays, marriage makes it less likely that the spouses will give way to strong but temporary impulses to separate.
By increasing the expected duration of the relationship, legal marriage also enhances the incentive to have children, to invest in housing and make other long-term decisions.
These decisions, in turn create bonds between the spouses and reinforce the marriage.
These answers have partial analogues in the constitutional domain.
It is a truism that constitutional constraints make it more difficult for the assembly or the society to change its mind on important questions.
Groups no less than individuals (although not in quite the same sense as individuals) are subject to fits of passion, self-deception and hysteria which may create a temporary majority for decisions which will later be regretted.
But then, one may ask, why could the members of the assembly not simply  undo the decisions if and when they come to regret them?
The presumption must be, after all, that the assembly knows what it is doing, not that it needs to be protected against itself.
Part of the answer to this question is suggested by the marriage analogy.
The expected stability and duration of political institutions is an important value in itself, since they allow for long-term planning.
Conversely, if all institutions are up for grabs all the time, individuals in power will be tempted to milk their positions for private purposes, and those outside power will hesitate to form projects which take time to bear fruit.
Moreover, if nothing could ever be taken for granted, there would be large deadweight losses arising from bargaining and factionalism.
Another part of the answer is that not all unwise decisions can be undone.
Imagine that a majority  untrammelled by constitutional constraints decides that an external or internal threat justifies a suspension of civil liberties, or that retroactive legislation should be enacted against ‘enemies of the people.’
In the first place, such measures have victims whom one cannot always compensate at later times.
Examples abound: the internment of the American Japanese during the Second World War, the excesses during the Chinese Cultural Revolution, the (Berufsverbot) against Communists in several countries.
When society again comes to its senses, the victims may be dead or their lives destroyed.
In the second place, the temporary suspension of rights easily leads to the permanent abolition of majority rule itself and to its replacement by dictatorship.
It suffices to cite the years 1794 and 1933.
This is possibly the central argument for constitutional constraints on democracy: without such constraints democracy itself becomes weaker, not stronger.
Question
If Elster's analogy is not false, does it mean that the United Kingdom system of government lacks legitimacy?
(C) LEGITIMACY
Why, following a revolution, does a government which has effective power backed up with military force, seek to make a constitution?
Fried rich, in Limited Government: A Comparison , p. 118, states that such a response is ‘motivated by the belief that such a constitution, if popularly approved, would give them the right to rule, over and above the mere power to do so’.
If a government has the right to rule it is regarded as legitimate, and this, in turn, provides it with authority.
Legitimacy, therefore, is a quality which is valuable to government.
S. E. Finer,Comparative Government (1970), pp. 30 31
The stable and effective exercise of a government's power is that which derives from its authority.
By this I mean that the commands to do or to abstain proceed from persons who no matter whether this is logical or reasonable or justifiable by any objective criterion — are believed to be persons who have the moral right to issue them: so that, correlatively, those to whom the commands are addressed feel a moral duty to obey them.
Authority represents a two-way process: a claim to be obeyed, and a recognition that this claim is morally right.
No public recognition of a claim means no authority.
Where a population recognizes a moral duty to obey, there is no need for the government to reason with it, persuade it, bribe it or threaten it, though all these exercises of power may be necessary for the marginal recalcitrants.
The mere recognition of a duty to obey achieves for the government what an overwhelming application of violence would not satisfactorily achieve.
As Rousseau said: ‘The strongest is never strong enough unless he succeeds in turning might into right and obedience into duty.’
As human nature goes, fear is certainly the father of power, but authority is its mother.
To inculcate the population with the belief that their rulers have the right to demand obedience and they the corresponding duty to give it is the principal art of government.
Question
What, then, is legitimacy, and how is it acquired?
J. H. Schaar, ‘Legitimacy in the Modern State’ in Legitimacy and the State (Connolly, ed., 1984) pp. 107–111
Start by comparing the traditional and common meanings of legitimacy with the usage of leading modern social scientists.
The Oxford English Dictionary says the following:
Legitimacy:(a) of a government or the title of a sovereign: the condition of being in accordance with law or principle…(b) conformity to a rule or principle; lawfulness.
In logic, conformity to sound reasoning.
Legitimate:(a) etymologically, the word expresses a status, which has been conferred or ratified by some authority;(b) conformable to law or rule.
Sanctioned or authorized by law or right, lawful, proper;(c) normal, regular; conformable to a recognized standard type;(d) sanctioned by the laws of reasoning; logically admissible or inferable.
The most relevant entries from Webster's Unabridged are:
Legitimate:(1) lawfully begotten…(2) real, genuine; not false, counterfeit, or spurious;(3) accordant with law or with established legal forms and requirements; lawful;(4) conforming to recognized principles, or accepted rules or standards.
Now, three current professional definitions:
(1) Legitimacy involves the capacity of the system to engender and maintain the belief that the existing political institutions are the most appropriate ones for the Society.
(2) In the tradition of Weber, legitimacy has been defined as ‘the degree to which institutions are valued for themselves and considered right and proper’.
(3) We may define political legitimacy as the quality of ‘ought Ness’ that is perceived by the public to inhere in a political regime.
That government is legitimate which is viewed as morally proper for a society.
The contrast between the two sets of definitions, the traditional and lexical on the one side and the current scientific usage on the other, is basic and obvious.
The older definitions all revolve around the element of law or right, and rest the force of a claim (whether it be a claim to political power or to the validity of a conclusion in an  argument) upon foundations external to and independent of the mere assertion or opinion of the claimant (e.g. the laws of inheritance, the laws of logic).
Thus, a claim to political power is legitimate only when the claimant can invoke some source of authority beyond or above himself.
History shows a variety of such sources: immemorial custom, divine law, the law of nature, a constitution.
As Arendt has pointed out, ‘In all these cases, legitimacy derives from something outside the range of human deeds; it is either not man-made at all…or has at least not been made by those who happen to be in power.’
The new definitions all dissolve legitimacy into belief or opinion.
If a people holds the belief that existing institutions are ‘appropriate’ or ‘morally proper’, then those institutions are legitimate.
That's all there is to it.
By a surgical procedure, the older concept has been trimmed of its cumbersome ‘normative’ and ‘philosophical’parts, leaving the term leaner, no doubt, but now fit for scientific duty.
It might turn out that Occam's Razor has cut off a part or two that will be missed later on…
Legitimacy, then, is almost entirely a matter of sentiment.
Followers believe in a regime, or have faith in it, and that is what legitimacy is.
The faith may be the product of conditioning, or it may be the fruit of symbolic bedazzlement, but in neither case is it in any significant degree the work of reason, judgement, or active participation in the processes of rule.
In this analysis, people do not attribute legitimacy to authority because they recognize its claim to a foundation in some principle or source outside itself.
This emerges clearly in Lipset's treatment of the specific institutional arrangements and procedures which are conducive to legitimacy: cross-pressures; widespread and multiple membership in voluntary associations; the two-party system; federalism, territorial rather than proportional representation.
In a most confusing way, an analysis of something called legitimacy first equates legitimacy with opinion, then goes to a restatement of the standard liberal-pluralist description of the structure of power…turns next to a discussion of stability, and finally resolves stability into passivity or acquiescence caused by cognitive confusion, conflict of interest, and inability to translate one's desires into political decisions due to certain institutional arrangements.
Obviously, we are no longer talking about faith or belief at all, let alone legitimacy, but about confusion and indifference, stability and efficiency.
There is where the contemporary social treatment of legitimate power rests.
A fuller view is needed.
No matter where we go in space, nor how far back in time, we find power.
Power is ancient and ubiquitous, a universal feature of social life…
Force can bring political power into being but cannot maintain it.
For that, something else is required: ‘Will, not force,’ said T H Green, ‘is the basis of the state’.
Once power is established and set on course, as it were, then obedience is largely a matter of habit.
But there are two critical points in the life of power when habit does not suffice.
The first is at its birth, when habits of obedience have not formed.
The other comes when the customary ways and limits of power are altered, when subjects are presented with new and disturbing uses of power and are asked to assume new burdens and accept new claims.
At those two points and most of the states of our day, old and new, are at one or the other of the two theory must be called in to buttress and justify obedience.
There is no denying a certain pragmatic or expediential element in all theories of legitimacy.
Such theories are never offered idly, they never appear accidentally.
Rather, they appear when the uses of power are matters of controversy, and they are weapons in the struggles of men to enjoy the benefits and escape the burdens of power.
This is not to say that all theories of legitimacy are only or merely ‘rationalizations’; rather, it is to say that they have an element of rationalization in them.
Theory, then, by making power legitimate, turns it into authority.
All theories of  legitimacy take the form of establishing a principle which, while it resides outside power and is independent of it, locates or embeds power in a realm of things beyond the wills of the holders of power: the legitimacy of power stems from its origin.
In addition, most theories of legitimacy simultaneously attempt to justify power by reference to its ends.
As was suggested by the earlier quotation from Arendt, the originating principles have been many and diverse.
So too have the ends.
But in our time this great complexity has been reduced, in virtually all states, to a gratifying simplicity: for power to become authority, it must originate in ‘democratic consent’ and aim at the ‘common good’or ‘public interest’…
Question
If a government, using its majority in Parliament, passes appropriate laws empowering it to do specified acts, are its activities thereby rendered legitimate because they are done in accordance with the law, regardless of how oppressive or repugnant those laws might be?
See chapter 4 and also the extract which follows.
P. McAuslan and J. F. McEldowney, ‘Legitimacy and the Constitution: the Dissonance between Theory and Practice’ in Law, Legitimacy and the Constitution (1985) pp. 11–14
Legitimacy…does not deal so much with whether activities of government are lawful as whether they accord with what are generally perceived to be or what have for long been held up to be, the fundamental principles of the constitution according to which government is or ought to be conducted.
Lawfulness is clearly an issue in so far as one of the fundamental principles of the British, no less than most other constitutions, is that government action should take place under the authority of, and in accordance with law the narrow literal meaning of the rule of law — so that repeated unlawful actions or a perceived casualness towards the duty to comply with the law would in itself begin to raise doubts about the legitimacy of governmental action.
The rule of law is generally thought to have a broader ‘political’ meaning which covers the same ground as, if it is not quite synonymous with, the concept of limited government.
This meaning embraces such matters as fair and equitable administrative practices; recognition of the rights of political opposition and dissent; complying with constitutional conventions; adequate means of redress of grievances about governmental action affecting one.
Thus a government which while adhering to the rule of law narrowly defined, flouted all or most of the practices generally thought to be covered by the rule of law broadly defined would also give rise to doubts about its legitimacy.
One of the clearest and best examples of a government on the whole scrupulous to comply with the rule of law narrowly defined yet consistently flouting it, as to the majority of its citizens, when broadly defined is the government of the Republic of South Africa, in relation to its non-white citizens.
What makes the issue of the legitimacy of our constitutional arrangements so problematic is the general open ended-ness of those arrangements; that is, the difficulty of knowing whether a practice or non-practice is or is not constitutional.
Even where practices may not differ over time, or place, there may be an inconsistency about them or a lack of knowledge about them, or a long-standing dispute about them, which could make it equally difficult to argue that following or not following a practice was or was not constitutional or legitimate.
Probably the best  example of this is the use of the royal prerogative, and the extent to which the courts may pass judgment on any particular use.
Notwithstanding that the royal prerogative as a source of power for the government antedates Acts of Parliament, has been at the root of a civil war and a revolution in England and has been litigated about on countless major occasions in respect of its use both at home and overseas, its scope is still unclear as is the role of the courts in relation thereto.
The use by the Prime Minister of powers under the royal prerogative to ban trade unions at the Government Communication Headquarters at Cheltenham in 1983 was contested both for its lawfulness — that is whether such powers could be used and if so whether they were used correctly — and also for its legitimacy that is whether, even if the constitutional power existed, this was a proper and fair use of the power.
It can be seen that questions of lawfulness and legitimacy shade into one another here though the answers do not: the lawfulness of the action taken, confirmed by the House of Lords in 1984 (Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1984]3 All ER 935) did not and does not dispose of its legitimacy.
The G.C.H.Q. case is valuable for another point.
We have pointed out that lawfulness is not to be confused with legitimacy.
No more is constitutionality.
What the Prime Minister did was not merely lawful; she exercised the constitutional powers of her office in the way in which those powers had always been exercised.
That is, the use of the royal prerogative as the legal backing for the management of the public service, the principle that a civil servant is a servant of the Crown and holds office at the pleasure of the Crown is one of the best known principles of constitutional law, hallowed by usage and sanctioned by the courts.
What is in issue from the perspective of legitimacy is whether the particular use made of that undoubted constitutional power, the manner of its use, and the justification both for the use and manner of use — that considerations of national security required both a banning of trade unions and no consultation with affected officers before the ban was announced was a fair and reasonable use of power?
Did it accord with legitimate expectations of fair and reasonable persons or was it a high-handed exercise of power of a kind more to be expected of an authoritarian government than one guided by and subscribing to principles of limited government?
In considering the issue of legitimacy in relation to our constitutional arrangements and the exercise of governmental power, what has to be done is to examine a range of practices, decisions, actions (and non-practices, -decisions and -actions) statements and policies which between them can amount to a portrait of power, so that we can form a judgment or an assessment of that power set against the principles of limited government outlined and discussed so far.
It is not every failure to comply with law or every constitutional and non-constitutional short cut which adds up to an approach to powers which give rise to questions of legitimacy.
If that were so, there would scarcely be a government in the last 100 years which could be regarded as legitimate, but it is those uses of power and law which seem to betray or which can only be reasonably explained by a contempt for or at least an impatience with the principles of limited government and a belief that the rightness of the policies to be executed excuse or justify the methods whereby they are executed.
If, as we believe to be the case, powers are being so exercised, then the issue of constitutional legitimacy which arises is quite simple: what is the value or use of a constitution based on and designed to ensure the maintenance of a system of limited government if it can, quite lawfully and even constitutionally, be set on one side?
Have we not in such circumstances arrived at that ‘elective dictatorship’ of which Lord Hailsham gave warning in 1977:
It is only now that men and women are beginning to realize that representative institutions are not necessarily guardians of freedom but can themselves become  engines of tyranny.
They can be manipulated by minorities, taken over by extremists, motivated by the self-interest of organised millions.
Occasionally the people from whom legitimacy ultimately derives, pass judgment on government.
McAuslan and McEldowney, ibid., p. 1
Mr Clive Ponting's acquittal by a jury in February 1985, after he had admitted to passing official Government papers to a person not authorised to receive them, the very essence of section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911, and despite the most explicit summing up by the trial judge that they should convict, raises the question of what motivated the jury.
It would suggest that when faced with a choice between a case which rests on constitutional theories about limited government derived from a ‘higher law’ which controlled what government could legitimately do, and a case which rested on actual practices of government bolstered by actual law, the jury preferred the theory of what the constitution ought to be to the practice of what it is.
Little wonder that, as one newspaper put it, Ministers were aghast at the verdict.
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines ‘aghast’ as meaning terrified.
This essay will seek to show Ministers would indeed have good reason to be terrified if ordinary people began preferring constitutional theory to government practice and acted on their preferences in their judgment of politicians.
More particularly the jury's verdict in the Ponting trial may be seen then as the response of ordinary people to trends in government practices which seem to them to be, in perhaps indefinable ways, wrong.
Questions
1.
In this case it was a jury of 12 which, by its verdict, appeared to be commenting on the legitimacy of governmental action in attempting to mislead the Foreign Affairs Select Committee about the circumstances surrounding the sinking of the General Belgrano, an Argentinian warship, during the Falklands Campaign in 1982.
These 12 jurors may, or may not, have been representative of the views of the public.
Are there more representative ways in which public sentiments regarding governmental action may be expressed?
2.
Is majority rule under a system of parliamentary democracy a sufficient guarantee of legitimacy?
What does majority rule mean in the context of the United Kingdom?
(D) DEMOCRACY
In the opening sentences of Le Contrat Social (1762) Rousseau stated:
Man is born free and everywhere he is in chains.
One thinks himself the master of others, and still remains the greater slave than they.
How did this change come about?
I do not know.
What can make it legitimate?
That question I think I can answer.
The answer he gave was that the only ground of legitimacy is to be found in the general will of the people, as only the people can say who has the right to rule them.
Thus it is the people who give legitimacy to a constitution sovereignty resides with the people and, in turn, where the constitution sets up a system of elected representative government, that government acquires its authority both from the constitution and the people who elect it.
Does the constitution in the United Kingdom (if there is one) have a democratic basis?
Is the system of government democratic?
A starting point is to examine what a liberal-democracy is.
C. B. Macpherson,The Real World of Democracy (1966), pp. 4–11
[O]ur liberal-democracy, like any other system, is a system of power; that it is, indeed, again like any other, a double system of power.
It is a system by which people can be governed, that is, made to do things they would not otherwise do, and made to refrain from doing things they otherwise might do.
Democracy as a system of government is, then, a system by which power is exerted by the state over individuals and groups within it.
But more than that, a democratic government, like any other, exists to uphold and enforce a certain kind of society, a certain set of relations between individuals, a certain set of rights and claims that people have on each other both directly, and indirectly through their rights to property.
These relations themselves are relations of power they give different people, in different capacities, power over others…
[L]iberal-democracy and capitalism go together.
Liberal-democracy is found only in countries whose economic system is wholly or predominantly that of capitalist enterprise.
And, with few and mostly temporary exceptions, every capitalist country has a liberal-democratic political system…
The claims of democracy would never have been admitted in the present liberal democracies had those countries not got a solid basis of liberalism first.
The liberal democracies that we know were liberal first and democratic later.
To put this in another way, before democracy came in the Western world there came the society and the politics of choice, the society and politics of competition, the society and politics of the market.
This was the liberal society and state.
It will be obvious that I am using liberal here in a very broad sense.
I use it in what I take to be its essential sense, to mean that both the society as a whole and the system of government were  organized on a principle of freedom of choice…
To make this society work, or to allow it to operate, a non-arbitrary, or responsible, system of government was needed.
And this was provided, by revolutionary action in England in the seventeenth century, in America in the eighteenth, in France in the eighteenth and nineteenth, and by a variety of methods in most other Western countries sometime within those centuries.
What was established was a system whereby the government was put in a sort of market situation.
The government was treated as the supplier of certain political goods not just the political good of law and order in general, but the specific political goods demanded by those who had the upper hand in running that particular kind of society.
What was needed was the kind of laws and regulations, and tax structure, that would make the market society work, or allow it to work, and the kind of state services — defence, and even military expansion, education, sanitation, and various sorts of assistance to industry, such as tariffs and grants for railway development that were thought necessary to make the  system run efficiently and profitably.
These were the kinds of political goods that were wanted.
But how was the demand to call forth the supply?
How to make government responsive to the choices of those it was expected to cater to?
The way was of course to put governmental power into the hands of men who were made subject to periodic elections at which there was a choice of candidates and parties.
The electorate did not need to be a democratic one, and as a general rule was not; all that was needed was an electorate consisting of the men of substance, so that the government would be responsive to their choices.
To make this political choice an effective one, there had to be certain other liberties.
There had to be freedom of  association — that is, freedom to form political parties, and freedom to form the kind of associations we now know as pressure groups, whose purpose is to bring to bear on parties and on governments the combined pressure of the interests they represent.
And there had to be freedom of speech and publication, for without these the freedom of association is of no use.
These freedoms could not very well be limited to men of the directing classes.
They had to be demanded in principle for everybody.
The risk that the others would use them to get a political voice was a risk that had to be taken.
So came what I am calling the liberal state.
Its essence was the system of alternate or multiple parties whereby governments could be held responsible to different sections of the class or classes that had a political voice.
There was nothing necessarily democratic about the responsible party system.
In the country of its origin, England, it was well established, and working well, half a century or a century before the franchise became at all democratic.
This is not surprising, for the job of the liberal state was to maintain and promote the liberal society, which was not essentially a democratic or an equal society.
The job of the competitive party system was to uphold the competitive market society, by keeping the government responsive to the shifting majority interests of those who were running the market society.
However, the market society did produce, after a time, a pressure for democracy which became irresistible…
So finally the democratic franchise was introduced into the liberal state.
It did not come easily or quickly.
In most of the present liberal-democratic countries it required many decades of agitation and organization, and in few countries was anything like it achieved until late in the nineteenth century.
The female half of the population had to wait even longer for an equal political voice: not until substantial numbers of women had moved out from the shelter of the home to take an independent place in the labour market was women's claim to a voice in the political market allowed.
So democracy came as a late addition to the competitive market society and the liberal state.
The point of recalling this is, of course, to emphasize that democracy came as an adjunct to the competitive liberal society and state.
It is not simply that democracy came later.
It is also that democracy in these societies, was demanded, and was admitted, on competitive liberal grounds.
Democracy was demanded, and admitted, on the ground that it was unfair not to have it in a competitive society.
It was something the competitive society logically needed…
What the addition of democracy to the liberal state did was simply to provide constitutional channels for popular pressures, pressures to which governments would have had to yield in about the same measure anyway, merely to maintain public order and avoid revolution.
By admitting the mass of the people into the competitive party system, the liberal state did not abandon its fundamental nature; it simply opened the competitive political system to all the individuals who had been created by the competitive market society.
The liberal state fulfilled its own logic.
In so doing, it neither destroyed nor weakened itself; it strengthened both itself and the market society.
It liberalized democracy while democratizing liberalism.
Question
If this view is correct, did, or does, the ‘constitution’ in the United Kingdom have a democratic basis, i.e. was, or is, its legitimacy to be found in the general will of the people?
See Ridley below.
F. F. Ridley, ‘There is no British Constitution: A Dangerous Case of the Emperor's Clothes’, 41 Parliamentary Affairs (1988), pp. 340, 343–345
The first characteristic of a constitution…is that it constitutes — or reconstitutes — a system of government…
[I]n constitutional theory a governmental order derives its legitimacy from the constituent act which establishes it…
Democratic constitutions universally state the principle of popular sovereignty and their legitimacy now rests on popular enactment.
This follows the American tradition: ‘We the people of the United States…do ordain and establish this constitution’.
Similar words are found almost everywhere.
Some may invoke a higher sanctity for parts of the constitution than the will of the people.
Thus the American Bill of Rights is founded on the Declaration of Independence's self-evident truths that all men are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, but that does not alter the source of the constitution's authority…
The people are generally called on to elect a special constituent assembly mandated to draft a constitution, though this may not always be the case — as in General de Gaulle's constitution for the Fifth Republic.
Although the American constitution was ratified by state legislatures, in more recent times the people are almost universally called on to ratify it in a referendum…
Britain never developed this idea of popular sovereignty in constitutional terms, even if we sometimes talk of the sovereignty of the electorate in political terms.
Even if the latter were true, it would merely allow the people to choose their government: it does not base the governmental order, the British ‘constitution’, on their authority and thus only gives them only half their right.
(Moreover, since a parliamentary majority can change that order, prolong its own life, alter the franchise or reform the electoral system, even the political rights of the electorate depend on Parliament.)
What we have, instead, is the sovereignty of Parliament.
Parliament determines and alters — the country's system of government.
If we ask where that power comes from, the answer is broadly that Parliament claimed it and the courts recognised it.
The people never came into the picture.
The liberal (middle-class) democracies established in Europe had, despite their generally limited franchise, to base their constitutions on the principle that ultimate authority was vested in the people.
Britain seems to be the sole exception to this democratic path.
Question
If, as it is argued, the ‘constitution’ of the United Kingdom had no democratic basis, is the system of government nevertheless democratic?
See Finer below.
S. E. Finer,Comparative Government (1970), pp. 63–66
(1) The primary meaning of democracy is government which is derived from public opinion and is accountable to it.
As to accountability; this implies that it is not  sufficient for a government to justify its existence because at some time in the past it was representative of popular opinion; for the two may have diverged since then.
‘Accountability’ entails that a government must continuously test its representative Ness, that is to say whether its claim that it is ‘derived from public opinion’is still valid.
(2) This public opinion, it must therefore be presumed, is overtly and freely expressed.
For if it is not, how can anybody know that the government is still ‘derived from public opinion’, i.e. is still representative?
But ‘overtly and freely to express opinion’ implies some opportunity and machinery for making that opinion known, and therefore implies some kind of a suffrage, some kind of a voice or vote…(3) In matters of contention between sections of public opinion it is the majority opinion that prevails.
These three characteristics must, it seems, form part of any definition of democracy…
Thus the first assumption of liberal-democracy is that it is a democracy in the sense expressed above.
But liberal-democracy is a qualified democracy.
In this type of government there are other presuppositions or assumptions beyond the one which we have already stated.
The first of these is that government is limited.
This implies that the government is operating in a world of autonomous, spontaneously self-creating, voluntary associations.
In such conditions the government operates only at the margin of social activity.
That it ought to interfere and regulate or even suppress these autonomous, self-creating, voluntary associations is a matter for it to prove: it is not assumed…
The authority of government therefore is limited; and this can be expressed by saying that certain rights of the individual and of the private association are safeguarded.
A kind of ring fence is drawn around them and the onus lies on the government to show whether, why and to what extent this ought to be breached.
The second qualification to democracy in this particular ‘liberal’ form is that society is recognized as being pluralistic…
To recognize society as being pluralistic, therefore, carries the additional assumption that the government sets out to rule, not in the interest of any one group or alliance of groups, but in the common interest of all…
This highlights the third qualification: the liberal-democratic type of government is one in which it is denied that there is any objective science of sociely or of morals.
On the contrary, it is assumed that in the last resort truth is a matter of individual consciences where all consciences are held, by an act of faith, to be equal either in the sight of God or in the sight of man.
Two working conclusions follow from this, namely, toleration and the qualification of majority rule.
Why toleration?
Because if there is no objective science of society and morals, then clearly no group, not even the government, has any moral justification for imposing any creed, philosophy, religion or ideology upon the rest of society.
Again, since it is assumed by this act of faith that all individuals are equal in the sight of God, man or both, then dissent must be tolerated and each has the right to put his own point of view.
Again, since truth is held to be individual and also fallible, rulership will be both conditional and also temporary; because clearly the views as to what is true and therefore proper for government to act upon will change from time to time as opinion fluctuates amongst the body of the people.
So, this qualified form of democracy entails that the government is representative of and responsive to public opinion; and that where this opinion is not unanimous it is representative of and responsive to the majority.
But these majorities will usually be constantly changing…
But even majority rule is seriously qualified in the liberal-democracy…
But being a liberal-democracy also implies that the minorities must be given a chance to become a majority; and that means, therefore, that they must be given a chance status and a  means to convert the majority.
In order to make this possible, certain guarantees and machinery would have to be established.
Note
Where there is a permanent majority, however, representative democracy may fail to provide legitimation either of a government or of the system of government.
See Barker, below.
R. Barker,Political Legitimacy and the State (1990), pp. 141–143
It is difficult to determine in any precise way the contribution of elections to the maintenance of legitimacy.
By comparing the history of Northern Ireland with that of the rest of the United Kingdom it is clear that the mere fact of elections is not sufficient.
If the result is never in any doubt, so that it is not ‘the people’ but always and only a section and that the same section of them which confers consent on government, then those who feel themselves permanently excluded will also feel no great obligations to the regime.
No legitimacy without representation…
On the other hand, so long as the electoral system appears to give due weight to most parties, the fact that individual votes may often have little effect does not deter them from being cast.
Voters turn out in large numbers in safe seats where their individual support or opposition to the sitting candidate can make no difference whatsoever to the result.
Voting has a ritual aspect, whereby citizens formally and publicly show their preferences for one party over others, and hence their willingness to accept the result of the contest, and their legitimation of that result.
It enables people to identify with those who lead or govern them, to see politicians and rulers as both special and, at the same time, exemplifying the character of their followers…
Thus two broad sanctioning functions can be identified in voting.
First of the policies of particular governments, second of the governing system in general, of the state.
These may of course in practice be confused or entangled with each other, as they are in Northern Ireland, or as they are in any state where the elections are largely or wholly a political ritual or a way of mobilizing mass support or approval for a regime in which party and state are indistinguishable, and electoral choice between contestants for office non-existent.
Once this occurs the democratic process can have an important function in failing to legitimize the state, and in providing justification for a rejection by groups of subjects not only of particular governments, but of more general constitutional arrangements.
The predictable ineffectiveness of the nationalist vote in Northern Ireland can be used to justify rejection not just of a particular government but of the whole constitutional structure which maintains the inclusion of Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom rather than in a new all-Ireland state.
In a smaller way after 1987 the emergence of a Scottish electorate overwhelmingly hostile to a Conservative government in power on the basis of English electoral success can sustain nationalist arguments for the general illegitimacy of the constitutional arrangements of the United Kingdom.
Note
The theory of limited government appears to demand more than simple majority rule.
It is important to examine whether the system of government in the United Kingdom has advanced beyond this idea of the ‘rightness’ of  the majority.
This involves an examination of how elections operate, how governments acquire power, and how they use that power.
Do they claim authority simply on the basis of electoral victory to do as they please, including changing the constitutional framework, or do they find themselves restrained from so acting by certain fundamental principles?
(E) LIMITED GOVERNMENT
The concept of limited government comprises two ideals, that of accountability of government for the exercise of its powers, and that of limits placed on the exercise of those powers.
What, then, are the conditions for accountable or, as it is often termed, responsible government?
Jack Lively,Democracy (1975), pp. 43–44
What then are the conditions necessary for the existence of responsible government?
What is needed to ensure that some popular control can be exerted over political leadership, some governmental accountability can be enforced?
Two main conditions can be suggested, that governments should be removable by electoral decisions and that some alternative can be substituted by electoral decision.
The alternative, it should be stressed, must be more than an alternative governing group.
It must comprehend alternatives in policy, since it is only if an electoral decision can alter the actions of government that popular control can be said to be established…
To borrow the economic analogy, competition is meaningless, or at any rate cannot create consumer sovereignty, unless there is some product differentiation.
In detail there might be a great deal of discussion about the institutional arrangements necessary to responsible government, but in general some are obvious.
There must be free elections, in which neither the incumbent government nor any other group can determine the electoral result by means other than indications of how they will act if returned to power.
Fraud, intimidation and bribery are thus incompatible with responsible government…
Another part of the institutional frame necessary to responsible government is freedom of association.
Unless groups wishing to compete for leadership have the freedom to organize and formulate alternative programmes, the presentation of alternatives would be impossible.
Lastly, freedom of speech is necessary since silent alternatives can never be effective alternatives.
In considering such arrangements, we cannot stick at simple legal considerations; we must move from questions of ‘freedom from’ to questions of ‘ability to’.
The absence of any legal bar to association will not, for example, create the ability to associate if there are heavy costs involved which only some groups can bear.
Nor will the legal guarantee of freedom of speech be of much use if access to the mass media is severely restricted.
This could be summed up by saying that responsible government depends largely upon the existence of, and free  competition between, political parties.
Whether the British system of government creates the conditions for responsible government is doubted in some quarters.
Lord Hailsham spoke of elective dictatorship.
Lord Hailsham,The Dilemma of Democracy (1978), pp. 21–22
The old party structure, which for so long guaranteed the evolutionary character of our society, seems to me to have broken down…
[I]t seems to me that we are moving more and more in the direction of an elective dictatorship, not the less objectionable in principle because it is inefficient in practice, and not the less tyrannical in its nature because the opposed parties, becoming more and more polarized in their attitudes, seek with some prospects of success to seize the new levers of power and use them alternately to reverse the direction taken by their immediate predecessors.
All the more unfortunate does this become in the presence of narrow majorities, each representing a minority of the electorate, sometimes a small minority, and when at least one of the parties believes that the prerogatives and rights conferred by electoral victory, however narrow, not merely entitle but compel it to impose on the helpless but unorganized majority irreversible changes for which it never consciously voted and to which most of its members are opposed.
It seems to me that this is a situation the reverse of liberal and even the reverse of democratic, in the sense in which the word has hitherto been understood.
Fundamental and irreversible changes ought only to be imposed, if at all, in the light of an unmistakable national consensus.
It follows that, if I am right, the overriding need of the moment is to pursue policies and enact legislation to ensure that a like situation to the present is never allowed to recur.
It is true that the present nature of the threat can be seen to come from the left.
But this need not necessarily be so, and almost certainly it will not always be so…
My thesis is that our institutions must be so structurally altered that, so far as regards permanent legislation, the will of the majority will always prevail against that of the party composing the executive for the time being, and that, whoever may form the government of the day will be compelled to follow procedures and policies compatible with the nature of Parliamentary democracy and the rule of freedom under law.
Questions
1.
Lord Hailsham wrote in 1978; has anything changed since then to contradict his thesis, or have subsequent events confirmed his worst fears?
See also Leslie Wolf-Phillips below.
2.
N. Johnson, ‘Constitutional Reform: Some Dilemmas for a Conservative Philosophy’ in Conservative Party Politics (Layton-Henry, ed., 1980), at p. 139, stated: ‘A relative majority in the House of Commons may rest on a minority position in the country.
Government on these terms is tolerable if the party in power recognises that there are limits to what it is entitled to do.’
Is there any evidence that such limits have been recognised in the last 12 years?
Leslie Wolf-Phillips, ‘A Long Look at the British Constitution’ 37 Parliamentary Affairs (1984), pp. 385, 398–401
The idealised view of the British system is that, under a head of State insulated from politics, generally admired, and with long and varied experience, the government of the day is led by a Prime Minister whose party has been given a parliamentary majority by a mature electorate which has participated in free and open elections.
Parliament debates the great issues of the day, controls national expenditure and taxation, criticises government policy as an aid to its improvement, scrutinises the work of the central administration, and ensures the redress of collective and individual grievances.
The Prime Minister heads a government composed of a Cabinet of her senior ministers and about eighty non-Cabinet ministers all bound to a policy implicitly approved by the electorate; the Prime Minister and all her colleagues must justify their actions and their policies before parliament, and if parliament withdraws its confidence, they must resign and face the stern judgment of the electorate upon their stewardship.
Each minister has departmental responsibility and can be called to account for the working of his department before parliament; if incompetence or maladministration be proved then the minister will be called upon to resign either by the Prime Minister or by the direct action of parliament.
The Queen as Head of State gives overall stability to the political system and the Prime Minister as Head of Government is one who has served a long apprenticeship in parliament in high office of state and who is the elected leader of a party which has the confidence of the nation.
The ‘Unwritten Constitution’ has the virtue of flexibility and permits the wide use of constitutional conventions, both permitting and facilitating evolutionary consensual change.
Finally, the House of Lords provides a forum removed from party ties and considerations, where the experienced and distinguished perform functions of assistance, advice, continuity and, when needed, a measure of restraint on the popularly-elected transient majority in the House of Commons.
What is the reality?
The extension of the franchise, the growth of national mass parties and the development of the mass media have changed the nature of general elections, which have become largely personalised into a contest between party leaders.
The majority of the electorate are only marginally politically conscious, and the personalisation of political issues and allegiances reflect this marginality.
The voting pattern for the parties is so uniform throughout the country that the influence on a constituency of a particular candidate is insignificant; candidates without the support of a major party can expect to fail and minor or ad hoc or single-interest parties can expect to be swept aside…
Elections cannot be, and should not be regarded as, a means for approving the details of comprehensive manifestoes and the electors often seem to vote against a party rather than for the winning party…
The only mandate that most electors consider they have given to newly-elected Members of Parliament is to support the party and its leader; certainly, the Prime Minister expects, and usually gets, the support of the mass of the parliamentary majority party and the entire hundred or so members of the Government that is formed.
The supremacy of the Prime Minister is further enhanced by the authority to obtain (or threaten to obtain) a dissolution of parliament, the possibility of rebel Members being disowned and replaced by their constituency parties, the feelings of loyalty to one's party and the fear of giving aid and comfort to the opposition parties.
Whatever the formal constitutional conventions and party rules, the Prime Minister is normally in effective control.
Not only does he or she have the authority to appoint and dismiss or advance or relegate ministers, but there is also access to the patronage system for honours, awards and selection of candidates for high public office.
The appointments and preferments policies of the present Prime Minister has shown the influence that can be borne in these matters.
The former belief that the Prime Minister was prim us inter pares (first among equals) has given way to the realisation that the office-holder is primum mobile (the first mover).
The Prime Minister dominates the cabinet, its members wait upon a summons; there is control and prior approval of the agenda from the Prime Minister; the skilful exploitation of collective responsibility by the Prime Minister can neutralise and isolate a recalcitrant cabinet  minority which has no choice but to ‘shut up or get out’; the Prime Minister has wide access to a network of policy-making cabinet committees, and ‘deals’ can be made in inter-departmental committees, cabinet committees, or between the Prime Minister and individual ministers.
Business laid before the full cabinet has often been the subject of previous informal agreement between the Prime Minister and certain colleagues in order that opposition may be outmanoeuvred…
In brief, the actual Westminster model is that of authoritarian single-party governments in a House of Commons dominated by the Prime Minister and composed largely of disciplined parties with most votes in the House of Commons being highly predictable; every three or four years there is a general election held under a crude simple majority electoral system with minimal participation by the electorate in the choice of who shall be their candidate, though they do have the choice between the candidates who are selected by the party activists; between 20%, and 30% of the electorate do not vote at all .
Governments rarely fall as a result of a vote in the House of Commons and resignations under ministerial responsibility are almost as rare.
The vast majority of legislation proposed by the government of the day is passed; it is rare, indeed it is well-nigh impossible, for legislation to be passed of which the government does not approve.
Orthodox constitutional theory bestows on individual members the right of independent action and does not regard them as the representative of the party without which they would not have been elected; over-solicitude for the wishes of their constituents would probably lead them into conflict with the party in parliament.
The parties at large are not seen as the formers of policy for the government; that is a task reserved for the parliamentary members of the governing party.
Note
In what other ways may the powers of government be limited?
At the outset it must be recognised that there are three institutions of government, each with specific functions.
The legislature has the function of making new law or amending or repealing existing law.
The executive has the administrative function of conducting government in accordance with the law.
The judiciary has the function of interpreting the law and applying it to specific cases.
In 1690 John Locke identified a danger arising from the possession of more than one power.
In his Second Treatise of Civil Government , Chapter XII, par a. 143, Locke stated:
It may be too great a temptation to human frailty, apt to grasp at power, for the same persons who have the power of making laws, to have also in their hands the power to execute them, whereby they may exempt themselves from obedience to the laws they make, and suit the law, both in its making and execution, to their own private advantage.
This idea was developed further by Montesquieu, the French philosopher, who expressed the view that it was the separation of powers of government which ensured the liberty of the English.
He expressed the doctrine in L'Esprit tea Lois , Book XI, Chapter VI (2nd edn, vol. 1, p. 220) as follows:
When the Legislative Power is united with the Executive Power in the same person or body of magistrates, there is no liberty because it is to be  feared that the same Monarch or the same Senate will make tyrannical laws in order to execute them tyrannically.
There is no liberty if the Judicial Power is not separated from the Legislative Power and from the Executive Power.
If it were joined with the Legislative Power, the power over the life and liberty of citizens would be arbitrary, because the Judge would be Legislator.
If it were joined to the Executive Power, the Judge would have the strength of an oppressor.
All would be lost if the same man, or the same body of chief citizens, or the nobility, or the people, exercised these three powers, that of making laws, that of executing public decisions, and that of judging the crimes or the disputes of private persons.
This was a somewhat idealised view which did not truly reflect the political reality in England at the time.
Montesquieu's views, however, were particularly influential in the eighteenth century as a reading of the Constitution of the United States of America reveals.
C. F. Strong,Modern Political Constitutions (1972), pp. 211–212
Now, in no constitutional state is it true that the legislative and executive functions are in precisely the same hands, for…the executive must always be a smaller body than the legislature.
But it is not to this distinction that the theory of the separation of powers points.
The application of the theory means not only that the executive shall not be the same body as the legislature but that these two bodies shall be isolated from each other, so that the one shall not control the other.
Any state which has adopted and maintained this doctrine in practice in its full force has an executive beyond the control of the legislature.
Such an executive we call non-parliamentary or fixed.
This type of executive still exists in the United States, whose Constitution has not been altered in this particular since its inception.
But France, which, as we have said, applied the doctrine in its first constitutions born of the Revolution, later adopted the British executive system, and this feature appeared in the Constitutions of the Third and Fourth Republics, and again, though greatly modified, in that of the Fifth Republic.
The system is one in which a cabinet of ministers is dependent for its existence on the legislature of which it is a part, the members of the executive being also members of the legislature.
This system, generally known as the Cabinet system, has been, in its broad features, adopted by most European constitutional states, and it matters not at all whether they are called monarchies or republics.
It is also characteristic of the governments of British Commonwealth countries, old and new.
The non-parliamentary system, on the other hand, is peculiar to the United States and those Latin American Republics which have founded their constitutions upon that of their great neighbour.
Note
There is, accordingly, no separation of powers in the United Kingdom as Montesquieu expressed the doctrine.
The government is made up of members of the legislature; ministers may have both legislative and adjudicatory functions; while Parliament may dismiss a government through a vote of no  confidence, government, to a large extent, controls the legislative work of Parliament.
However, in one area, separation appears to exist.
G Marshall,Constitutional Theory (1971), pp. 103–104
A separation between the judicial and the legislative and executive branches obviously exists in both Britain and the United States in the sense that in practice the judges are secure in their offices and have an independent status.
But whether the separation of powers doctrine implies the existence of that degree of checking or controlling which has come to be known as judicial review in the American sense is not easy to decide.
The right to invalidate legislation obviously in one sense invades the principle that each department has an independent sphere of action and a right to take its own view on matters of constitutionality.
On the other hand, the controlling or checking functions of the judicial branch can only consist in impartial application of the law, and where constitutional law places restrictions on legislative power, a duty to declare the law seems to imply a duty to declare when such restrictions have been violated, whether by the legislature or by anyone else.
Note
In the United States the Supreme Court in Marbury v Madison (1803) 1 Cranch 137, decided that it had the power to declare both the acts of Congress and of the President to be unconstitutional.
In the United Kingdom courts have refused to adjudicate upon the validity of Acts of Parliament, but they have developed the doctrine of judicial review by which the exercise of power by other authorities may be reviewed in the courts.
R v London Transport Executive, ex parte Greater London Council [1983]QB 484 Court of Appeal
KERR LJ:…
Authorities invested with discretionary powers by an Act of Parliament can only exercise such powers within the limits of the particular statute.
So long as they do not transgress their statutory powers, their decisions are entirely a matter for them, and — in the case of local authorities — for the majority of the elected representatives; subject, however, to one important proviso.
This is again to put it broadly — that they must not exercise their powers arbitrarily or so unreasonably that the exercise of the discretion is clearly unjustifiable.
This is an imperfect and generalised paraphrase of the well-known statement of Lord Greene MR in Associated Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 KB 223, 229, which has come to be known as the Wednesbury principle and applied in countless cases.
If an authority misdirects itself in law, or acts arbitrarily on the basis of considerations which lie outside its statutory powers, or so unreasonably that its decisions cannot be justified by any objective standard of reasonableness, then it is the duty and function of the courts to pronounce that such decisions are invalid when these are challenged by anyone aggrieved by them and who has the necessary locus stand I to do so.
The role of the courts in the constitution was further elucidated in the following cases.
Duport Steels Ltd v Sirs [1980]1 WLR 142 House of Lords
Private steel companies sought injunctions against the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation who were calling on workers in the private sector of the steel industry to come out on strike to support workers in the public sector who were striking over pay.
The correct interpretation of s. 13(1) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 (as amended in 1976) was central to the case.
Section 13(1) conferred immunity from liability in tort for an act done by a person ‘in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute’.
The Court of Appeal reversed the judge's decision to refuse the injunctions sought.
LORD DIPLOCK:…
My Lords, at a time when more and more cases involve the application of legislation which gives effect to policies that are the subject of bitter public and parliamentary controversy, it cannot be too strongly emphasised that the British constitution, though largely unwritten, is firmly based upon the separation of powers; Parliament makes the laws, the judiciary interpret them.
When Parliament legislates to remedy what the majority of its members at the time perceive to be a defect or a lacuna in the existing law (whether it be the written law enacted by existing statutes or the unwritten common law as it has been expounded by the judges in decided cases), the role of the judiciary is confined to ascertaining from the words that Parliament has approved as expressing its intention what that intention was, and to giving effect to it.
Where the meaning of the statutory words is plain and unambiguous it is not for the judges to invent fancied ambiguities as an excuse for failing to give effect to its plain meaning because they themselves consider that the consequences of doing so would be inexpedient, or even unjust or immoral.
In controversial matters such as care involved in industrial relations there is room for difference of opinion as to what is expedient, what is just and what is morally justifiable.
Under our constitution it is Parliament's opinion on these matters that is paramount.
A statute passed to remedy what is perceived by Parliament to be a defect in the existing law may in actual operation turn out to have injurious consequences that Parliament did not anticipate at the time the statute was passed; if it had, it would have made some provision in the Act in order to prevent them.
It is at least possible that Parliament when the Acts of 1974 and 1976 were passed did not anticipate that so widespread and crippling use as has in fact occurred would be made of sympathetic withdrawals of labour and of secondary blacking and picketing in support of sectional interests able to exercise ‘industrial muscle.’
But if this be the case it is for Parliament, not for the judiciary, to decide whether any changes should be made to the law as stated in the Acts, and, if so, what are the precise limits that ought to be imposed upon the immunity from liability for torts committed in the course of taking industrial action.
These are matters on which there is a wide legislative choice the exercise of which is likely to be influenced by the political complexion of the government and the state of public opinion at the time amending legislation is under consideration.
It endangers continued public confidence in the political impartiality of the judiciary, which is essential to the continuance of the rule of law, if judges, under the  guise of interpretation, provide their own preferred amendments to statutes which experience of their operation has shown to have had consequences that members of the court before whom the matter comes consider to be injurious to the public interest.
The frequency with which controversial legislation is amended by Parliament itself (as witness the Act of 1974 which was amended in 1975 as well as in 1976) indicates that legislation, after it has come into operation, may fail to have the beneficial effects which Parliament expected or may produce injurious results that Parliament did not anticipate.
But, except by private or hybrid Bills, Parliament does not legislate for individual cases.
Public Acts of Parliament are general in their application; they govern all cases falling within categories of which the definitions are to be found in the wording of the statute.
So in relation to section 13(1) of the Acts of 1974 and 1976, for a judge (who is always dealing with an individual case) to pose himself the question: ‘Can Parliament really have intended that the acts that were done in this particular case should have the benefit of the immunity?’ is to risk straying beyond his constitutional role as interpreter of the enacted law and assuming a power to decide at his own discretion whether or not to apply the general law to a particular case.
The legitimate questions for a judge in his role as interpreter of the enacted law are: ‘How has Parliament, by the words that it has used in the statute to express its intentions, defined the category of acts that are entitled to the immunity?
Do the acts done in this particular case fall within that description?’
LORD SCARMAN:…
My basic criticism of all three judgments in the Court of Appeal is that in their desire to do justice the court failed to do justice according to law.
When one is considering law in the hands of the judges, law means the body of rules and guidelines within which society requires its judges to administer justice.
Legal systems differ in the width of the discretionary power granted to judges: but in developed societies limits are invariably set, beyond which the judges may not go.
Justice in such societies is not left to the unguided, even if experienced, sage sitting under the spreading oak tree.
In our society the judges have in some aspects of their work a discretionary power to do justice so wide that they may be regarded as law-makers.
The common law and equity, both of them in essence systems of private law, are fields where, subject to the increasing intrusion of statute law, society has been content to allow the judges to formulate and develop the law.
The judges, even in this, their very own field of creative endeavour, have accepted, in the interests of certainty, the self-denying ordinance of ‘stare decisis,’ the doctrine of binding precedent: and no doubt this judicially imposed limitation on judicial law-making has helped to maintain confidence in the certainty and evenhandedness of the law.
But in the field of statute law the judge must be obedient to the will of Parliament as expressed in its enactments.
In this field Parliament makes, and un-makes, the law: the judge's duty is to interpret and to apply the law, not to change it to meet the judge's idea of what justice requires.
Interpretation does, of course, imply in the interpreter a power of choice where differing constructions are possible.
But our law requires the judge to choose the construction which in his judgment best meets the legislative purpose of the enactment.
If the result be unjust but inevitable, the judge may say so and invite Parliament to reconsider its provision.
But he must not deny the statute.
Unpalatable statute law may not be disregarded or rejected, merely because it is unpalatable.
Only if a just result can be achieved without violating the legislative purpose of the statute may the judge select the construction which best suits his idea of what justice requires.
Further, in our system the rule ‘stare decisis’ applies as firmly to statute law as it does to the formulation of common law and equitable principles.
And the keystone of ‘stare decisis’ is loyalty throughout the  system to the decisions of the Court of Appeal and this House.
The Court of Appeal may not overrule a House of Lords decision: and only in the exceptional circumstances set out in the Practice Statement of July 1, 1966 (Practice Statement (judicial Precedent)[1966]1 WLR 1234), will this House refuse to follow its own previous decisions.
Within these limits, which cannot be said in a free society possessing elective legislative institutions to be narrow or constrained, judges, as the remarkable judicial career of Lord Denning himself shows, have a genuine creative role.
Great judges are in their different ways judicial activists.
But the constitution's separation of powers, or more accurately functions, must be observed if judicial independence is not to be put at risk.
For, if people and Parliament come to think that the judicial power is to be confined by nothing other than the judge's sense of what is right (or, as Selden put it, by the length of the Chancellor's foot), confidence in the judicial system will be replaced by fear of it becoming uncertain and arbitrary in its application.
Society will then be ready for Parliament to cut the power of the judges.
Their power to do justice will become more restricted by law than it need be, or is today.
Appeal allowed 
R v Her Majesty's Treasury, ex parte Smedley [1985]1 QB 657 Court of Appeal
SIR JOHN DONALDSON MR:…
I think that I should say a word about the respective roles of Parliament and the courts.
Although the United Kingdom has no written constitution, it is a constitutional convention of the highest importance that the legislature and the judicature are separate and independent of one another, subject to certain ultimate rights of Parliament over the judicature which are immaterial for present purposes.
It therefore behoves the courts to be ever sensitive to the paramount need to refrain from trespassing upon the province of Parliament or, so far as this can be avoided, even appearing to do so.
Although it is not a matter for me, I would hope and expect that Parliament would be similarly sensitive to the need to refrain from trespassing upon the province of the courts.
Note
While the courts are chary of ‘trespassing upon the province of Parliament’, because of the doctrine of the supremacy of Parliament, it appears that Parliament is not so willing to accord to the courts a rightful province upon which Parliament should not trespass.
There are signs that government, by means of the legislation it is pushing through Parliament, is doing its utmost to prevent judicial review of governmental action.
C. Graham and J. A. W. Prosser, ‘The Constitution and the New Conservatives’ 42 Parliamentary Affairs (1989), pp. 330, 337
[I]t has become increasingly clear that judicial decisions unfavourable to government will face swift statutory reversal, sometimes with retrospective effect.
This has always been a feature of political life, but has assumed new prominence since 1979.
It has often occurred in the fields of social security and local government, in which the few  local authority victories in the courts have proved extremely short lived.
A special mention should be made of the use of novel forms of clauses designed to exclude any possibility of judicial review.
A striking use of such clauses is in the Local Government Finance Act 1987.
Section 4(1) provides in relation to rate support grant: ‘Anything done by the Secretary of State before the passing of this Act for the purposes of the relevant provisions in relation to any of the initial years or intermediate years shall be deemed to have been done in compliance with those provisions.’
Section 4(6) provides: ‘Subsection (1) above shall have effect notwithstanding any decision of a court (whether before or after the passing of this Act) purporting to have a contrary effect.’
Sections 6(1) and 6(6) have similar effect in relation to the validation of the Secretary of State's past acts in relation to rate capping.
So much for limited government under the law!
Question
If separation of powers as expressed by Montesquieu does not exist, is there nevertheless sufficient separation of functions and a sufficient incidence of checks and balances to guarantee the maintenance of liberty?
(F) THE STATE
The last idea to consider in this chapter is the state.
Wade and Bradley in Constitutional and Administrative Law (1985), p. 3, state that ‘constitutional law concerns the relationship between the individual and the state, seen from a particular viewpoint, namely the notion of law…
Law is not merely a matter of the rules which govern relations between private individuals…
Law concerns the structure and powers of the state.’
If we are to examine the ambit of constitutional law in the United Kingdom, we need to have some notion of what the state is.
C. F. Strong,Modern Political Constitutions (1972), pp. 4–5
[T]he state is something more than a mere collection of families, or an agglomeration of occupational organisation, or a referee holding the ring between the conflicting interests of the voluntary associations which it permits to exist.
In a properly organized political community the state exists for society and not society for the state; yet, however socially advanced a people may be, the society which it constitutes made up of families, clubs, churches, trade unions, etc. — is not to be trusted to maintain itself without the ultimate arbitrament of force.
All associations make rules and regulations for their conduct, and when men are associated politically these rules and regulations are called laws, the power to make these being the prerogative of the state and of no other association.
Thus, in the words of R M MacIver, a ‘state is the fundamental association for the maintenance and development of social order, and to this end its central institution is endowed with the united power of the community.’
But this definition might conceivably cover a pastoral or nomadic society which, indeed, found a bond of union in the patriarch or head of the family who, in some sort, discharged the powers of government.
Such a society, however, lacks territoriality, an indispensable condition of true political  organization, a condition emphasized by H J W Hetherington when he says: ‘The state is the institution or set of institutions which, in order to secure certain elementary common purposes and conditions of life, unites under a single authority the inhabitants of a clearly-marked territorial area.’
But what is this ‘united power of the community’ in the first, this ‘single authority’in the second definition?
It is the power or authority to make law.
So we come to the definition given by Woodrow Wilson: ‘A state is a people organized for law within a definite territory.’
S. E. Finer,Comparative Government (1970), p. 24
The defining characteristics of a state…are:(1) It is a territorially defined association.
(2) It embraces, compulsorily, all the persons in that territory.
(3) It possesses the monopoly of violence throughout this area, by virtue of which it has the capacity, even if not the moral authority, to guarantee the finality of its decision in political disputes arising from the conflict of individuals or groups within its territory.
(4) As a necessary accompaniment of all this, it has a body of persons who exercise this monopoly of violence in its name, namely, the common government.
R. Miliband,(The State in Capitalist Society (1969), pp. 49–54
There is one preliminary problem about the state which is very seldom considered, yet which requires attention if the discussion of its nature and role is to be properly focused.
This is the fact that ‘the state’ is not a thing, that it does not, as such, exist.
What ‘the state’ stands for is a number of particular institutions which, together, constitute its reality, and which interact as parts of what may be called the state system.
The point is by no means academic.
For the treatment of one part of the state usually the government — as the state itself introduces a major element of confusion in the discussion of the nature and incidence of state power; and that confusion can have large political consequences.
Thus, if it is believed that the government is in fact the state, it may also be believed that the assumption of governmental power is equivalent to the acquisition of state power.
Such a belief, resting as it does on vast assumptions about the nature of state power, is fraught with great risks and disappointments.
To understand the nature of state power, it is necessary first of all to distinguish, and then to relate, the various elements which make up the state system.
It is not very surprising that government and state should often appear as synonymous for it is the government which speaks on the state's behalf.
It was the state to which Weber was referring when he said, in a famous phrase, that, in order to be, it must ‘successfully claim the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory’.
But ‘the state’ cannot claim anything: only the government of the day, or its duly empowered agents, can.
Men, it is often said, give their allegiance not to the government of the day but to the state.
But the state, from this point of view, is a nebulous entity; and while men may choose to give their allegiance to it, it is to the government that they are required to give their obedience.
A defiance of its orders is a defiance of the state, in whose name the government alone may speak and for whose actions it must assume ultimate responsibility…
A second element of the state system which requires investigation is the administrative one, which now extends far beyond the traditional bureaucracy of the state, and which encompasses a large variety of bodies, often related to particular  ministerial departments, or enjoying a greater or lesser degree of autonomy public corporations, central banks, regulatory commissions, etc. and concerned with the management of the economic, social, cultural and other activities in which the state is now directly or indirectly involved.
The extraordinary growth of this administrative and bureaucratic element in all societies, including advanced capitalist ones, is of course one of the most obvious features of contemporary life; and the relation of its leading members to the government and to society is also crucial to the determination of the role of the state.
Formally, officialdom is at the service of the political executive, its obedient instrument, the tool of its will.
In actual fact it is nothing of the kind.
Everywhere and inevitably the administrative process is also part of the political process; administration is always political as well as executive, at least at the levels where policy-making is relevant, that is to say in the upper layers of administrative life…
Officials and administrators cannot divest themselves of all ideological clothing in the advice which they tender to their political masters, or in the independent decisions which they are in a position to take.
The power which top civil servants and other state administrators  possess no doubt varies from country to country, from department to department, and from individual to individual.
But nowhere do these men not contribute directly and appreciably to the exercise of state power…
Some of these considerations apply to all other elements of the state system.
They apply for instance to a third such element, namely the military, to which may, for present purposes, be added the para-military, security and police forces of the state, and which together form that branch of it mainly concerned with the ‘management of violence’.
In most capitalist countries, this coercive apparatus constitutes a vast, sprawling and resourceful establishment, whose professional leaders are men of high status and great influence, inside the state system and in society…
Whatever may be the case in practice, the formal constitutional position of the administrative and coercive elements is to serve the state by serving the government of the day.
In contrast, it is not at all the formal constitutional duty of judges, at least in Western-type political systems, to serve the purposes of their governments.
They are constitutionally independent of the political executive and protected from it by security of tenure and other guarantees.
Indeed, the concept of judicial independence is deemed to entail not merely the freedom of judges from responsibility to the political executive, but their active duty to protect the citizen against the political executive or its agents, and to act, in the state's encounter with members of society, as the defenders of the latter's rights and liberties…
But in any case, the judiciary is an integral part of the state system, which affects, often profoundly, the exercise of state power.
So too, to a greater or lesser degree, does a fifth element of the state system, namely the various units of sub-central government.
In one of its aspects, sub-central government constitutes an extension of central government and administration, the latter's antennae or tentacles.
In some political systems it has indeed practically no other function.
In the countries of advanced capitalism, on the other hand, sub-central government is rather more than an administrative device.
In addition to being agents of the state these units of government have also traditionally performed another function.
They have not only been the channels of communication and administration from the centre to the periphery, but also the voice of the periphery, or of particular interests at the periphery; they have been a means of overcoming local particularities, but also platforms for their expression, instruments of central control and obstacles to it.
For all the centralisation of power, which is a major feature of government in these countries, sub-central organs of government…have remained  power structures in their own right, and therefore able to affect very markedly the lives of the populations they have governed.
Much the same point may be made about the representative assemblies of advanced capitalism.
Now more than ever their life revolves around the government; and even where, as in the United States, they are formally independent organs of constitutional and political power, their relationship with the political executive cannot be a purely critical or obstructive one.
That relationship is one of conflict and cooperation.
Nor is this a matter of division between a pro-government side and an anti-government one.
Both sides reflect this duality.
For opposition parties cannot be wholly uncooperative.
Merely by taking part in the work of the legislature, they help the government's business.
As for government parties, they are seldom if ever single-minded in their support of the political executive and altogether subservient to it.
They include people who, by virtue of their position and influence must be persuaded, cajoled, threatened or bought off.
It is in the constitutionally-sanctioned performance of this cooperative and critical function that legislative assemblies have a share in the exercise of state power.
That share is rather less extensive and exalted than is often claimed for these bodies.
But…it is not, even in an epoch of executive dominance, an unimportant one.
Question
Is the government the state, or is it an institution or servant of the state?
See the cases which follow.
D v National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children [1978]AC 171 House of Lords
The mother of a child (alleged by an informant to be the victim of ill-treatment) brought an action against the NSPCC for damages for nervous shock alleged to be the result of the society's investigation pursuant to the informant's complaint.
The mother sought discovery of the identity of the informant.
The NSPCC, an independent body incorporated by royal charter, claimed ‘public interest immunity’ as justifying its refusal to disclose the identity of its informants.
The mother argued that the society could not rely on this defence as it was not part of the state.
LORD SIMON OF GLAISDALE:…
‘[T]he state’ cannot on any sensible political theory be restricted to the Crown and the departments of central government (which are, indeed, part of the Crown in constitutional law).
The state is the whole organisation of the body politic for supreme civil rule and government — the whole political organisation which is the basis of civil government.
As such it certainly extends to local — and, as I think, also statutory bodies in so far as they are exercising autonomous rule.
Chandler v Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]AC 763 House of Lords
The appellants, in seeking to further the aims of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, entered and sought to immobilise an airfield.
The airfield  was a ‘prohibited place’ under s. 3 of the Official Secrets Act 1911.
The appellants were charged with conspiracy to commit a breach of s. 1 of the Act, whereby it is an offence to enter any prohibited place ‘for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State’.
The appellants argued that their actions were not prejudicial to the safety or interests of the state, but rather it was their belief that their actions would be beneficial to the state.
They further argued that ‘State’ means the numerical collection of inhabitants in the geographical area and not the government or organs of government through which the state expresses its intentions.
LORD REID:…
Next comes the question of what is meant by the safety or interests of the State.
‘State’ is not an easy word.
It does not mean the Government or the Executive.
‘L'Etat c'est moi’ was a shrewd remark, but can hardly have been intended as a definition even in the France of the time.
And I do not think that it means, as counsel argued, the individuals who inhabit these islands.
The statute cannot be referring to the interests of all those individuals because they may differ and the interests of the majority are not necessarily the same as the interests of the State.
Again we have seen only too clearly in some other countries what can happen if you personify and almost deify the State.
Perhaps the country or the realm are as good synonyms as one can find and I would be prepared to accept the organised community as coming as near to a definition as one can get.
LORD DEVLIN:…
What is meant by ‘the State’?
Is it the same thing as what I have just called ‘the country’?
Mr Foster, for the appellants, submits that it means the inhabitants of a particular geographical area.
I doubt if it ever has as wide a meaning as that.
I agree that in an appropriate context the safety and interests of the State might mean simply the public or national safety and interests.
But the more precise use of the word ‘State,’ the use to be expected in a legal context, and the one which I am quite satisfied…was intended in this statute, is to denote the organs of government of a national community.
In the United Kingdom, in relation at any rate to the armed forces and to the defence of the realm, that organ is the Crown.
So long as the Crown maintains armed forces for the defence of the realm, it cannot be in its interest that any part of them should be immobilised.
LORD PEARCE:…
I cannot accept the argument that the words ‘the interests of the State’ in this context mean the interests of the amorphous populace, without regard to the guiding policies of those in authority, and that proof of possible ultimate benefit to the populace may for the purposes of the Act justify an act of spying or sabotage.
The protection covers certain specified places which are obviously vital to defence and other places to which the Secretary of State sees fit to extend the protection…
Parliament clearly intended to give stringent protection to such places.
It is hard to believe that it intended to withhold that protection in all cases where a jury might think that the place in question was not necessary or desirable or where the authorities could not by evidence justify their policies to a jury's satisfaction.
Questions of defence policy are vast, complicated, confidential, and wholly unsuited for ventilation before a jury.
In such a context the interests of the State must in my judgment mean the interests of the State according to the policies laid down for it by its recognised organs of government and authority, the policies of the State as they are, not as they ought, in the opinion of a jury, to be.
Anything which prejudices those policies is within the meaning of the Act ‘prejudicial to the interests of the State.’
Questions
1.
In the trial of Clive Ponting the judge directed the jury that the phrase ‘in the interests of the state’ in s. 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911 means ‘in the interests of the Government of the day’.
This view was supported by the Attorney-General, Sir Michael Havers, in a speech in the House of Commons, but was contested by Lord Denning in a speech in the House of Lords.
Who was correct?
See Barker, below.
2.
If the ‘government’ is synonymous with the ‘state’, does this have any consequences for ideas such as constitutionalism and limited government?
See Barker, below.
3.
If the government determines the interests of the state, does this harbour any threat to individual liberty?
R. Barker,Political Legitimacy and the State (1990) pp. 183–184
The Ponting case also illustrates the ways in which the legitimacy of the state may be threatened if any of its various temporary governors act in a way which breaks down the distinction between state and government, and by wrapping the acts of particular governments in the flag of the state, make it impossible to attack one without assaulting the other.
A distinction between the state, as the institution which carries on the function of government, and the government as the politicians currently in office, makes it possible to oppose policies without denying legitimacy, or even to challenge the legitimacy of particular ministerial procedures, without confronting the constitution as a whole.
When that distinction is eroded, so is the possibility of loyal opposition.
Thus a state whose institutions appear to be newly absorbed or influenced by the partisan considerations of government is likely to suffer erosion of legitimacy whenever it is challenged on a particular point.
But so long as the distinction remains, disaffection in so far as it appeals to existing principles of legitimacy, can be both conservative and loyal.
Vivienne Hart has pointed out how many actions, of which she takes populism as her example, which have been presented as subversive of government, are in fact defensive of the constitution in general against the constitutionally subversive, or supposed constitutionally subversive actions of particular governments and politicians.
The view that states imperil their own legitimacy when they offend their own subjects' conservative conceptions of constitutionality is found more amongst other academic students of politics than amongst political scientists themselves.
Patrick McAuslan and John McEldowney write of the contribution to disaffection throughout western Europe of what they term the gap ‘between on the one hand the rhetoric of democracy, of even-handed administration, and of equal opportunities for all, and on the other the increasing centralization and insensitivity of public administration’.
Resistance to government can rest on support for the constitution.
It is both ‘the response of ordinary people to trends in government practices which seem to them to be, in perhaps indefinable ways, wrong’ and a preference for ‘the theory of what the constitution ought to be to the practice of what it is’.
Much that appears as rejection of the legitimacy of the state is in fact quite the reverse.
Moreover because the forms and principles of legitimacy present at any one time are likely to be varied, it is not simply a case of appealing to principles against practices, but can also be a matter of appealing against practices justified by one form of legitimacy to alternative practices justified by other principles.
Note
The issues considered in this chapter have been, to a certain extent, theoretical.
They are, however, issues of continuing relevance to any study of the constitution of the United Kingdom.
Questions which it is worth keeping in mind when reading the remaining chapters in this book would be the following:
(a) To what extent is the doctrine of constitutionalism respected in the United Kingdom?
(b) To what extent does the principle of legitimacy inform constitutional debate?
(c) Is the principle of limited government respected?
To what extent is government made accountable by (i) Parliament,(ii) the electorate, and (iii) the courts?
(d) Is the ‘majoritarian principle’ an adequate substitute for fundamental rights?
(e) Does the absence of a clear concept of the state, separate and distinguishable from government, prejudice individual rights?
THE LEGISLATIVE SUPREMACY OF PARLIAMENT
Note
The doctrine of the legislative supremacy of Parliament is often referred to as ‘Parliamentary Sovereignty’.
‘Sovereignty’ is a word open to misunderstanding and one that is used in the sphere of international law (for example, the dispute with Argentina over the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands), and also in the political arena (for example , in the debates on the United Kingdom's membership of the European Community and on subsequent issues such as the Single European Act 1986 and European Monetary Union, there was considerable rhetoric on sovereignty).
To avoid confusion with these ideas the terms ‘legislative supremacy of Parliament’ or ‘Parliamentary supremacy’will be used.
These terms have the virtue that they express clearly the central legal concept of the doctrine, that is, that under our constitutional arrangements Parliament is legislatively supreme.
In the extracts from cases and other materials which follow, where the term ‘sovereignty’ is used, the judges or writers are using it in the sense of supremacy.
(A) THE LEGISLATIVE SUPREMACY OF PARLIAMENT AS A ‘RULE OF RECOGNITION’
Part of the function of Parliament is to make laws, which it does by enacting statutes.
These laws impose obligations on citizens, and obedience to these obligations is enforced by the courts.
Why is a particular statute regarded as valid?
Why do courts apply the law as declared in statutes and enforce their provisions?
Whence does Parliament derive this power to make law?
H. L. A. Hart,The Concept of Law (1961), pp. 89–107
The Elements of Law
It is, of course, possible to imagine a society without a legislature, courts or officials of any kind.
Indeed, there are many studies of primitive communities which not only claim that this possibility is realized but depict in detail the life of a society where the only means of social control is that general attitude of the group towards its own standard modes of behaviour in terms of which we have characterized rules of obligation…
[W]e shall refer to such a social structure as one of primary rules of obligation.
If a society is to live by such primary rules alone, there are certain conditions which, granted a few of the most obvious truisms about human nature and the world we live in, must clearly be satisfied.
The first of these conditions is that the rules must contain in some form restrictions on the free use of violence, theft, and deception to which human beings are tempted but which they must, in general, repress, if they are to coexist in close proximity to each other …
Secondly, though such a society may exhibit the tension, already described, between those who accept the rules and those who reject the rules except where fear of social pressure induces them to conform, it is plain that the latter cannot be more than a minority, if so loosely organized a society of persons, approximately equal in physical strength, is to endure: for otherwise those who reject the rules would have too little social pressure to fear…
It is plain that only a small community closely knit by ties of kinship, common sentiment, and belief, and placed in a stable environment, could live successfully by such a regime of unofficial rules.
In any other conditions such a simple form of social control must prove defective and will require supplementation in different ways.
In the first place, the rules by which the group lives will not form a system, but will simply be a set of separate standards, without any identifying or common mark, except of course that they are the rules which a particular group of human beings accepts.
They will in this respect resemble our own rules of etiquette.
Hence if doubts arise as to what the rules are or as to the precise scope of some given rule, there will be no procedure for settling this doubt, either by reference to an authoritative text or to an official whose declarations on this point are authoritative.
For, plainly, such a procedure and the acknowledgement of either authoritative text or persons involve the existence of rules of a type different from the rules of obligation or duty which ex hypothesi are all that the group has.
This defect in the simple social structure of primary rules we may call its uncertainty.
A second defect is the static character of the rules.
The only mode of change in the rules known to such a society will be the slow process of growth, whereby courses of conduct once thought optional become first habitual or usual, and then obligatory, and the converse process of decay, when deviations, once severely dealt with, are first tolerated and then pass unnoticed.
There will be no means, in such a society, of deliberately adapting the rules to changing circumstances, either by eliminating old rules or introducing new ones: for, again, the possibility of doing this presupposes the existence of rules of a different type from the primary rules of obligation by which alone the society lives…
The third defect of this simple form of social life is the inefficiency of the diffuse social pressure by which the rules are maintained.
Disputes as to whether an admitted rule has or has not been violated will always occur and will, in any but the smallest societies, continue interminably, if there is no agency specially empowered to ascertain finally, and authoritatively, the fact of violation…
The remedy for each of these three main defects in this simplest form of social structure consists in supplementing the primary rules of obligation with secondary rules which are rules of a different kind.
The introduction of the remedy for each defect might, in itself, be considered a step from the pre-legal into the legal world; since each remedy brings with it many elements that permeate law: certainly all three remedies together are enough to convert the regime of primary rules into what is indisputably a legal system…
The simplest form of remedy for the uncertainty of the regime of primary rules is the introduction of what we shall call a ‘rule of recognition’.
This will specify some feature or features possession of which by a suggested rule is taken as a conclusive affirmative indication that it is a rule of the group to be supported by the social pressure it exerts.
The existence of such a rule of recognition may take any of a huge variety of forms, simple or complex.
It may, as in the early law of many societies, be no more than that an authoritative list or text of the rules is to be found in a written document or carved on some public monument…
In a developed legal system the rules of recognition are of course more complex; instead of identifying rules exclusively by reference to a text or list they do so by reference to some general characteristic possessed by the primary rules.
This may be the fact of their having been enacted by a specific body, or their long customary practice, or their relation to judicial decisions.
Moreover, where more than one of such general characteristics are treated as identifying criteria, provision may be made for their possible conflict by their arrangement in an order of superiority, as by the common subordination of custom or precedent to statute, the latter being a ‘superior source’ of law…
[E]ven in this simplest form, such a rule brings with it many elements distinctive of law.
By providing an authoritative mark it introduces, although in embryonic form, the idea of a legal system: for the rules are now not just a discrete unconnected set but are, in a simple way, unified.
Further, in the simple operation of identifying a given rule as possessing the required feature of being an item on an authoritative list of rules we have the germ of the idea of legal validity.
The remedy for the static quality of the regime of primary rules consists in the introduction of what we shall call ‘rules of change’.
The simplest form of such a rule is that which empowers an individual or body of persons to introduce new primary rules for the conduct of the life of the group, or of some class within it, and to eliminate old rules…
[I]t is in terms of such a rule, and not in terms of orders backed by threats, that the ideas of legislative enactment and repeal are to be understood.
Such rules of change may be very simple or very complex: the powers conferred may be unrestricted or limited in various ways: and the rules may, besides specifying the persons who are to legislate, define in more or less rigid terms the procedure to be followed in legislation.
Plainly, there will be a very close connexion between the rules of change and the rules of recognition: for where the former exists the latter will necessarily incorporate a reference to legislation as an identifying feature of the rules, though it need not refer to all the details of  procedure involved in legislation.
Usually some official certificate or official copy will, under the rules of recognition, be taken as a sufficient proof of due enactment.
Of course if there is a social structure so simple that the only ‘source of law’ is legislation, the rule of recognition will simply specify enactment as the unique identifying mark or criterion of validity of the rules…
The third supplement to the simple regime of primary rules, intended to remedy the inefficiency of its diffused social pressure, consists of secondary rules empowering individuals to make authoritative determinations of the question whether, on a particular occasion, a primary rule has been broken.
The minimal form of adjudication consists in such determinations, and we shall call the secondary rules which  confer the power to make them ‘rules of adjudication’.
Besides identifying the individuals who are to adjudicate, such rules will also define the procedure to be followed.
Like the other secondary rules these are on a different level from the primary rules: though they may be reinforced by further rules imposing duties on judges to adjudicate, they do not impose duties but confer judicial powers and a special status on judicial declarations about the breach of obligations.
Again these rules, like the other secondary rules, define a group of important legal concepts: in this case the concepts of judge or court, jurisdiction and judgment.
Besides these resemblances to the other secondary rules, rules of adjudication have intimate connexions with them.
Indeed, a system which has rules of adjudication is necessarily also committed to a rule of recognition of an elementary and imperfect sort.
This is so because, if courts are empowered to make authoritative determinations of the fact that a rule has been broken, these cannot avoid being taken as authoritative determinations of what the rules are.
So the rule which confers jurisdiction will also be a rule of recognition, identifying the primary rules through the judgments of the courts and these judgments will become a ‘source’ of law…
If we stand back and consider the structure which has resulted from the combination of primary rules of obligation with the secondary rules of recognition, change and adjudication, it is plain that we have here not only the heart of a legal system, but a most powerful tool for the analysis of much that has puzzled both the jurist and the political theorist…
Rule of Recognition and Legal Validity
In a modern legal system where there are a variety of ‘sources’ of law, the rule of recognition is…complex: the criteria for identifying the law are multiple and commonly include a written constitution, enactment by a legislature, and judicial precedents.
In most cases, provision is made for possible conflict by ranking these criteria in an order of relative subordination and primacy.
It is in this way that in our system ‘common law’ is subordinate to ‘statute’…
In the day-to-day life of a legal system its rule of recognition is very seldom expressly formulated as a rule; though occasionally, courts in England may announce in general terms the relative place of one criterion of law in relation to another, as when they assert the supremacy of Acts of Parliament over other sources or suggested sources of law.
For the most part the rule of recognition is not stated, but its existence is shown in the way in which particular rules are identified, either by courts or other officials or private persons or their advisers…
The use of unstated rules of recognition, by courts and others, in identifying particular rules of the system is characteristic of the internal point of view.
Those who use them in this way thereby manifest their own acceptance of them as guiding rules and with this attitude there goes a characteristic vocabulary different from the natural expressions of the external point of view.
Perhaps the simplest of these is the expression, ‘It is the law that…’, which we may find on the lips not only of judges, but of ordinary men living under a legal system, when they identify a given rule of the system…
This attitude of shared acceptance of rules is to be contrasted with that of an observer who records ab extra the fact that a social group accepts such rules but does not himself accept them.
The natural expression of this external point of view is not ‘It is the law that…’ but ‘In England they recognize as law…whatever the Queen in Parliament enacts…’
To say that a given rule is valid is to recognize it as passing all the tests provided by the rule of recognition and so as a rule of the system.
We can indeed simply say that the statement that a particular rule is valid means that it satisfies all the criteria provided by the rule of recognition…
The rule of recognition providing the criteria by which the validity of other rules of the system is assessed is in an important sense, which we shall try to clarify, an ultimate rule: and where, as is usual, there are several criteria ranked in order of relative subordination and primacy one of them is supreme …
Of these two ideas, supreme criterion and ultimate rule, the first is the easiest to define.
We may say that a criterion of legal validity or source of law is supreme if rules identified by reference to it are still recognized as rules of the system, even if they conflict with rules identified by reference to the other criteria, whereas rules identified by reference to the latter are not so recognized if they conflict with the rules identified by reference to the supreme criterion.
A similar explanation in comparative terms can be given of the notions of ‘superior’ and ‘subordinate’criteria which we have already used.
It is plain that the notions of a superior and a supreme criterion merely refer to a relative place on a scale and do not import any notion of legally unlimited legislative power.
Yet ‘supreme’ and ‘unlimited’are easy to confuse — at least in legal theory.
One reason for this is that in the simpler forms of legal system the ideas of ultimate rule of recognition, supreme criterion, and legally unlimited legislature seem to converge.
For where there is a legislature subject to no constitutional limitations and competent by its enactment to deprive all other rules of law emanating from other sources of their status as law, it is part of the rule of recognition in such a system that enactment by that legislature is the supreme criterion of validity.
This is, according to constitutional theory, the position in the United Kingdom.
But even systems like that of the United States in which there is no such legally unlimited legislature may perfectly well contain an ultimate rule of recognition which provides a set of criteria of validity, one of which is supreme.
This will be so, where the legislative competence of the ordinary legislature is limited by a constitution which contains no amending power, or places some classes outside the scope of that power.
Here there is no legally unlimited legislature, even in the widest interpretation of ‘legislature’; but the system of course contains an ultimate rule of recognition and, in the clauses of its constitution, a supreme criterion of validity…
Some writers, who have emphasized the legal ultimacy of the rule of recognition, have expressed this by saying that, whereas the legal validity of other rules of the system can be demonstrated by reference to it, its own validity cannot be demonstrated but is ‘assumed’ or ‘postulated’or is a ‘hypothesis’.
This may, however, be seriously misleading.
Statements of legal validity made about particular rules in the day-to-day life of a legal system whether by judges, lawyers, or ordinary citizens do indeed carry with them certain presuppositions.
They are internal statements of law expressing the point of view of those who accept the rule of recognition of the system and, as such, leave unstated much that could be stated in external statements of fact about the system.
What is thus left unstated forms the normal background or context of statements of legal validity and is thus said to be ‘presupposed’ by them.
But it is important to see precisely what these presupposed matters are, and not to obscure their character.
They consist of two things.
First, a person who seriously asserts the validity of some given rule of law, say a particular statute, himself makes use of a rule of recognition which he accepts as appropriate for identifying the law.
Secondly, it is the case that this rule of recognition, in terms of which he assesses the validity of a particular statute, is not only accepted by him but is the rule of recognition actually accepted and employed in the general operation of the system.
If the truth of this presupposition were doubted, it could be established by reference to actual practice: to the way in which courts identify what is to count as law, and to the general acceptance of or acquiescence in these identifications…
Where…as in a mature legal system, we have a system of rules which includes a rule of recognition so that the status of a rule as a member of the system now depends  on whether it satisfies certain criteria provided by the rule of recognition, this brings with it a new application of the word ‘exist’.
The statement that a rule exists may now no longer be what it was in the simple case of customary rules — an external statement of the fact that a certain mode of behaviour was generally accepted as a standard in practice.
It may now be an internal statement applying an accepted but unstated rule of recognition and meaning (roughly) no more than ‘valid given the systems criteria of validity’.
In this respect, however, as in others a rule of recognition is unlike other rules of the system.
The assertion that it exists can only be an external statement of fact.
For whereas a subordinate rule of a system may be valid and in that sense ‘exist’ even if it is generally disregarded, the rule of recognition exists only as a complex, but normally concordant, practice of the courts, officials, and private persons in identifying the law by reference to certain criteria.
Its existence is a matter of fact.
Question
What is the Rule of Recognition in the United Kingdom?
Dicey,The Law of the Constitution (10th edn 1965), pp. 39–40
The principle of Parliamentary sovereignty means neither more nor less than this, namely, that Parliament thus defined has, under the English constitution, the right to make or unmake any law whatever; and, further, that no person or body is recognised by the law of England as having a right to override or set aside the legislation of Parliament.
A law may, for our present purpose, be defined as ‘any rule which will be enforced by the courts.’
The principle then of Parliamentary sovereignty may, looked at from its positive side, be thus described: Any Act of Parliament, or any part of an Act of Parliament, which makes a new law, or repeals or modifies an existing law, will be obeyed by the courts.
The same principle, looked at from its negative side, may be thus stated: There is no person or body of persons who can, under the English constitution, make rules which override or derogate from an Act of Parliament, or which (to express the same thing in other words) will be enforced by the courts in contravention of an Act of Parliament.
Note
Parliament is the supreme law-maker, but what is Parliament?
The words of enactment at the beginning of every statute are as follows:
Be it enacted by the Queen's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—
Thus it is the Queen in Parliament which enacts legislation.
A measure having received the approval of a majority in both Houses and the Royal Assent is recognised by the common law as an Act of Parliament.
This position has been modified, however, by the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, under which a Bill may be presented for the Royal Assent provided it has been passed by the House of Commons and other procedural requirements  complied with, although it has not been passed by the House of Lords.
If a Bill does not obtain the approval of a majority in each House, or if the Parliament Acts are not complied with, or if the Royal Assent is withheld, the product should not be regarded as an authentic Act of Parliament.
The courts, therefore, recognise as law and accord primacy to those measures which Parliament passes as Acts.
Why is Parliament legislatively supreme, and why are its enactments accorded primacy?
(B) THE POLITICAL CONTEXT
A common view is that the legal concept of the legislative supremacy of Parliament can, and indeed must, be distinguished from the political concept of sovereignty.
This view, however, has been challenged.
T R S Allan suggests that political concepts should inform judicial decisions about the precise meaning of supremacy.
T. R. S. Allan, ‘The limits of Parliamentary Sovereignty’[1985]Public Law 614
No greater testimony exists to the power and resilience of positivism in modern legal thought than the debate between constitutional  lawyers about the nature of parliamentary sovereignty.
At the root of almost all analyses of the nature and scope of the doctrine lies an unquestioned separation of legal from political principle.
The political notion of the ultimate sovereignty of the electorate must be distinguished from the legal doctrine of legislative supremacy: the courts owe their allegiance to the latter and recognise no ‘trust’ between Parliament and people.
Dicey was clear on the point, observing that
‘the courts will take no notice of the will of the electors.
The judges know nothing about any will of the people except in so far as that will is expressed by an Act of Parliament, and would never suffer the validity of a statute to be questioned on the ground of its having been passed or kept alive in opposition to the wishes of the electors.’
The extent of judicial loyalty to statute enjoined by the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty therefore depends on the correct interpretation of the legal principle alone.
It is a matter of accurately formulating the fundamental rule of the legal order.
Its existence may be conceded to be a matter of political fact, but its normative content is a matter of law: the courts are required to enforce the terms of the most recent statement of Parliament's will, expressed in the usual form…
In short, the fundamental rule that accords legal validity to Acts of Parliament is not itself the foundation of the legal order, beyond which the lawyer is forbidden to look.
The fundamental rule, however it should properly be characterised, derives its legal authority from the underlying moral or political theory of which it forms a part.
The sterility and inconclusiveness of modern debate about the nature of sovereignty stems from Dicey's attempt to divorce legal doctrine from political principle.
Legal questions which challenge the nature of our constitutional order can only be answered in terms of the political morality on which that order is based…
The legal doctrine of legislative supremacy articulates the courts' commitment to the current British scheme of parliamentary democracy.
It ensures the effective expression of the political will of the electorate through the medium of its parliamentary representatives.
If some conception of the nature and dimensions of the relevant political community provides the framework for the operation of the doctrine, equally some conception of democracy must provide its substantive political content.
In other words, the courts' continuing adherence to the legal doctrine of sovereignty must entail commitment to some irreducible, minimum concept of the democratic principle.
That political commitment will naturally demand respect for the legislative measures adopted by Parliament as the representative assembly, a respect for which the legal doctrine is in almost all likely circumstances a suitable expression.
That respect cannot, however, be a limitless one.
A parliamentary enactment whose effect would be the destruction of any recognisable form of democracy (for example, a measure purporting to deprive a substantial section of the population of the vote on the grounds of their hostility to Government policies) could not consistently be applied by the courts as law.
Judicial obedience to the statute in such (extreme and unlikely) circumstances could not coherently be justified in terms of the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty since the statute would plainly undermine the fundamental political principle which the doctrine serves to protect.
The practice of judicial obedience to statute cannot itself be based on the authority of statute: it can only reflect a judicial choice based on an understanding of what (in contemporary conditions) political morality demands.
The limits of that practice of obedience must therefore be constituted by the boundaries of that political morality.
An enactment which threatened the essential elements of any plausible conception of democratic government would lie beyond those boundaries.
It would forfeit, by the same token, any claim to be recognised as law.
Although, therefore, Dicey's sharp distinction between the application and interpretation of statute suffices for most practical purposes, it ultimately breaks down in the face of changing views of the contours of the political community or of serious threats to the central tenets of liberal democracy.
Presumptions of legislative intent, which draw their strength from judicial perceptions of widely held notions of justice and fairness, cannot in normal circumstances override the explicit terms of an Act of Parliament.
This is because a commitment to representative government and loyalty to democratic institutions are themselves fundamental constituents of our collective political morality.
Judicial notions of justice must generally give way to those expressed by Parliament where they are inconsistent.
The legal authority of statute depends in the final analysis, however, on its compatibility with the central core of that shared political morality.
If Parliament ceased to be a representative assembly, in any plausible sense of the idea, or if it proceeded to enact legislation undermining the democratic basis of our institutions, political morality might direct judicial resistance rather than obedience.
No neat distinction between legal doctrine and political principle can be sustained at this level of adjudication.
Questions about the scope and limits of the doctrine of sovereignty are necessarily questions about the proper relations between the courts and Parliament.
Such questions cannot be settled by resort to competing formulations of some supposed pre-existing legal rule: it is the scope and content of that rule which is itself in issue.
Answers can only be supplied as a matter of political morality and in terms of the values which the judges accept as fundamental to our constitutional order.
Dicey's insistence on distinguishing legal from political sovereignty entails an equivalent separation of law and convention.
Neither distinction can be sustained when the courts are required to determine the limits of parliamentary sovereignty.
The nature and limits of parliamentary sovereignty are constituted, in the same way that conventions are constituted, by the political morality which underlies the legal order.
In this sense, the legal doctrine of sovereignty is the most fundamental of our constitutional conventions.
I have argued that the limits of sovereignty are contained in the courts' central commitment to representative democracy: a purported statute which attempted to subvert democracy could derive no legal authority from the doctrine.
Paradoxically, Dicey gives implicit support for this view when he considers the distinction between legal and political sovereignty in the context of conventions.
He observes that, ‘if Parliament be in the eye of the law a supreme legislature, the essence of representative government is, that the legislature should represent or give effect to the will of the political sovereign, i.e. of the electoral body, or of the nation.’
His examination of a number of important constitutional conventions leads him to the conclusion that they are united in character by the possession of a single purpose — to secure that Parliament and government are ultimately subject to the wishes of the electorate.
The right to demand a dissolution is the most striking example, since it represents an appeal from the legal to the political sovereign.
‘The conventions of the constitution now consist of customs which (whatever their historical origin) are at the present day maintained for the sake of ensuring the supremacy of the House of Commons, and ultimately, through the elective House of Commons, of the nation.
Our modern code of constitutional morality secures, though in a roundabout way, what is called abroad the ‘sovereignty of the people’.
Dicey presents conventions as a means of harmonising legal and political sovereignty, which remain conceptually distinct.
A view of legal sovereignty as a component of political morality, however, locates its authority in the source from which the ‘validity of constitutional maxims’ is derived: it is equally ‘subordinate and subservient to the fundamental principle of popular sovereignty.’
A residual judicial commitment to preserving the essentials of democracy does not provide the only constraint on parliamentary supremacy.
The political morality which underlies the legal order is not exhausted by our attachment to democratic government.
It consists also in attitudes about what justice and fairness require in the relations between government and governed, and some of these must be fundamental.
If these attitudes authorise a restrictive approach to the interpretation of statutes which, more broadly construed, would threaten fundamental values, they might equally justify rejection of statutes whose infringement of such values was sufficiently grave.
If an ambiguous penal provision should, as a matter of principle, be narrowly construed in the interests of liberty and fairness, a criminal statute which lacked all precision authorising the punishment of whatever conduct officials deemed it expedient to punish — should, on the same principle, be denied any application at all.
It would be sufficient for the court to deny its application to the particular circumstances of the case before it: there would in practice be no need to make a declaration of invalidity.
The result, however, would be the same: the strength of the principle of interpretation, in effect denying the statute any application at all, would reflect the scale of the affront to the moral and political values we accept as fundamental…
The limits of sovereignty clearly cannot be stated with any precision.
The scope of the legal doctrine, and its implications for constitutional change, cannot be settled except by analysis of the political morality which gives it its authority.
The boundaries of sovereignty must be determined in the light of the prevailing moral and political climate when difficult questions of constitutional authority arise.
No single characterisation or particular formulation of the rule enjoining judicial obedience to statute can supply answers in advance…
Questions
1.
Allan states that a ‘parliamentary enactment whose effect would be destruction of any recognisable form of democracy…could not consistently be applied by the courts as law.’
This begs a question as to what is democracy?
For example, what would the courts do if Party A obtaining 40 per cent of the vote gained 60 per cent of the seats in the legislature because the remaining 60 per cent of the vote was split between three other parties, and then it embarked on a legislative programme which was discriminatory, anti-libertarian and anti-democratic?
What would political morality demand?
How would the judges discover this political morality?
Would it make any difference if Party A fought the election campaign on a manifesto which openly outlined its policies, as opposed to the adoption of these policies after winning the election?
If the judges refused to enforce the offensive legislation and an election was held with the same result followed by a reintroduction of the legislation, what would judges then do?
2.
Is the ‘shared political morality’ of majoritarianism an adequate substitute for constitutionalism?
Does All an suggest that it is?
What do you think he means when he states:
The political morality which underlies the legal order is not exhausted by our attachment to democratic government.
It consists also in attitudes about what justice and fairness require in the relations between government and the governed, and some of these must be fundamental.
Who decides what justice and fairness require?
3.
Simon Lee, commenting on Allan in [1985]PL, at p. 633, states:
The genius of our constitution is that it is geared to the real world.
We all know that Parliament will not pass statutes condemning blue-eyed babies to death, so why worry because it could do so?
If we try to alter our constitution to combat improbable eventualities, we may prevent too much.
But is it not a fact in the real world that we prepare for war during peacetime by keeping our armed forces equipped and ready, rather than disbanding them and waiting until war breaks out before beginning to re-arm and train new forces?
By analogy, if we wait until Parliament does the outrageous will the political climate be conducive to creating effective constitutional protections against the outrageous.
Will the attack on democracy be as outrageous as killing all blue-eyed babies, or will it be a more insidious erosion of rights and liberties over a period of time?
See further, Harlow, ‘Power from the people?
Representation and constitutional theory’ in Law, Legitimacy and the Constitution (McAuslan and McEldowney eta.), p. 62.
Note
What would happen if there was a revolution and the monarchy was overthrown, Parliament dissolved and all its members imprisoned, and new  elections held to a Constitutional Convention which draws up a new constitution with a presidential system of government and a single chamber assembly?
If this new order is accepted by the people and the courts, the currently accepted doctrine of the legislative supremacy of Parliament would become redundant (cf.
Madzimbamuto v Lardner-Burke [1969]1 AC 645, post p. 73).
It is power and politics which operate in such a situation, not legal theory.
Under the old order the new regime would be regarded as illegal, but it will acquire its own legitimacy from the obedience shown to it.
Sovereignty, as a political concept, ultimately resides in the people; if the people accept the new legal order they will thereby give to it validity and legitimacy.
For example, while the Declaration of Independence in 1776 and the enactment of the United States Constitution in 1787 were illegal under the old legal order, they were validated by, and received their legitimacy and authority from, the People of the United States, who accepted them and agreed to abide by the new constitution.
Our constitutional order has evolved from the position where an absolute monarch was supreme, to the current position where Parliament is legislatively supreme.
The biggest jump in this evolutionary process occurred in the seventeenth century with the Glorious Revolution of 1688, which led to the establishment of the doctrine of the legislative supremacy of Parliament.
The ultimate authority for the doctrine stems from the acceptance by the people of William III as the new monarch, and the acceptance by the courts of the new legal order founded on this doctrine as expressed legally in the common law.
(C) THE NATURE OF THE LEGISLATIVE SUPREMACY OF PARLIAMENT
What are the implications of the legislative supremacy of Parliament?
Dicey's statement of the doctrine (ante p. 46) may be converted into three propositions which will be examined in more detail.
They are:
(i) Parliament is the supreme law-making authority.
(ii) The legislative powers of Parliament are unlimited.
(iii) No other body has authority to rule on the validity of its enactments.
Each of these propositions will be examined separately.
(i) Parliament the supreme law-making authority
In the fourteenth century Parliament emerged as an effective, if not supreme, law-making body.
In the seventeenth century James I, by insisting on his right to rule by prerogative, created the conditions in which the battle between the Monarch and Parliament for supremacy was fought in the courts.
The Case of Proclamations (1611) 12 Co Rep 74; 77 ER 1352
The King sought to check the overgrowth of the capital by issuing a proclamation to prohibit the building of new homes in London.
He also sought to preserve wheat for human consumption and issued a proclamation prohibiting the manufacture of starch from wheat.
The Commons complained that this was an abuse of proclamations, and the King sought the opinion of Chief Justice Coke who consulted with his fellow judges.
In the same term it was resolved by the two Chief Justices, Chief Baron, and Baron Altham, upon conference betwixt the Lords of the Privy Council and them, that the King by his proclamation cannot create any offence which was not an offence before, for then he may alter the law of the land by his proclamation in a high point; for if he may create an offence where none is, upon that ensues fine and imprisonment: also the law of England is divided into three parts, common law, statute law, and custom; but the King's proclamation is none of them: also malum aut eat malum in se, aut prohibitum , that which is against common law is malum in se, malum prohibitum is such an offence as is prohibited by Act of Parliament, and not by proclamation.
Also, it was resolved, that the King hath no prerogative, but that which the law of the land allows him.
But the King for prevention of offences may by proclamation admonish his subjects that they keep the laws, and do not offend them; upon punishment to be inflicted by the law, & c .
Lastly, if the offence be not punishable in the Star-Chamber, the prohibition of it by proclamation cannot make it punishable there: and after this resolution, no proclamation imposing fine and imprisonment was afterwards made, & c .
Note
The Stuart kings also claimed to have other prerogative powers of considerable importance, namely a suspending power, which could be used to postpone the operation of a statute for an indefinite period, and a dispensing power, which could be used to relieve offenders from the statutory penalties they had incurred.
It was James II's use of the suspending power in respect of penal laws relating to religion in the Declarations of Indulgence 1687 and 1688 which led to the revolution of 1688.
In the area of taxation it had been established by the time of Edward I that direct taxes could only be levied with the consent of Parliament.
However, the Stuarts claimed they could raise money by means of the prerogative.
First, the prerogative relating to foreign affairs was used to regulate trade by the imposition of duties (see The Case of Impositions (Bate's Case )(1606) 2 St Tr 371).
Secondly, the prerogative power to defend the realm in face of an emergency was used to raise money for the navy.
The King was found to be the sole judge of whether an emergency existed (see The Case of Shipmoney (R v Hampden )(1637) 3 St Tr 825).
The claims by the Stuart kings to rule by prerogative were resolved by the Bill of Rights 1689.
The Bill of Rights 1689
I Will & mary Sess 2 ch 2
Whereas the late King James the second, by the Assistance of divers Evil Counsellors, Judges, and Ministers, imployed by him did endeavour to Subvert and extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Lawes and Liberties of this Kingdome…
And whereas the said late King James the second having abdicated the Government and the throne being thereby vacant.
His Highnesse the Prince of Orange (whom it hath pleased Almighty God to make the glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power) Did (by the advice of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall and divers principall persons of the Commons) Cause Letters to be written to the Lords Spirituall and Temporall being Protestants and other Letters to the several Count yes Citties Universities Burroughs and Cinqe Ports for the chuseing of such persons to represent them as were of right to be sent to Parliament to meet and sitt at Westminster upon the two and twentieth day of January in this Year 1688 in order to such an establishment as that their Religion Lawes and Libertyes might not againe be in danger of being subverted.
Upon which Letters Elections haveing been accordingly made.
And thereupon the said Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons pursuant to their respective letters and Elections being now assembled in a full and free representative of this nation taking into their most serious consideration the best meanes for atteyneing the ends aforesaid Doe in the first place (as their Ancestors in like Case have usually done) for the vindicating and asserting their antient rights and Liberties, Declare.
[1.]
That the pretended power of suspending of Lawes or the execution of Lawes by Regall Authority without Consent of Parliament is illegall.
[2.]
That the pretended power of dispensing with lawes or the Execution of lawes by regall authority as it has been assumed and exercised of late is illegall.
[3.]
That the Commission for erecting the late Courte of Commissioners for Ecclesiastic all Causes and all other Commissions and Courts of like nature are illegall and pernicious.
[4.]
That levying of money for or to the use of the Crowne by pretence of Prerogative without Grant of Parliament for longer time or in other manner, than the same is or shall be granted is illegall.
[5.]
That it is the right of the Subjects to petition the King and all Committments and prosecutions for such petitioning are illegall.
[6.]
That the raiseing or keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace unlesse it be with consent of Parliament is against Law.
[7.]
That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Armes for their defence Suitable to their Condition and as allowed by Law.
[8.]
That Elections of Members of Parliament ought to be free.
[9.]
That the free dome of Speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Courte or place out of Parliament.
[10.]
That excessive Bayle ought not to be required nor excessive fynes imposed nor cruel and unusuall Punishments inflicted.
[11.]
That Jurors ought to be duely impannelled and returned and Jurors which passe upon men in tryalls for high Treason ought to be free holders.
[12.]
That all Grants and promises of fynes and forfeitures of particular persons before conviction are illegall and void.
[13.]
And that for redress of all greivances and for the amending, strengthening and preserving of the Lawes, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.
And they do claime demand and insist upon all and singular the premises as their undoubted Rights and Liberties and that noe Declarations Judgements Doeings or proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said premisses ought in any wise to bee drawne hereafter into Consequence or Example.
To which demand of their rights they are particularly Encouraged by the declaration of his Highnesse the Prince of Orange as being the only Meanes for obteyning a full redress and remedy therein.
Haveing therefore an intire Confidence that his said Highnesse the Prince of Orange will perfect the deliverance soe farr advanced by him and will still preserve them from the violation of their rights which they have here asserted and from all other attempts upon their Religion Rights and Liberties.
The said Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons Assembled at Westminster doe Resolve.
That William and Mary Prince and Princesse of Orange bee and bee declared, King and Queen of England France and Ireland and the Dominions there unto belonging to hold the Crowne and Roy all Dignity of the said Kingdom's and Dominions to them the said Prince and  Princesss during their lives and the life of the Survivor of them and that the Sole and full exercise of the Regall Power be only in and executed by the said Prince of Orange in the Names of the said Prince and Princesse during their Joynt lives And after their deceases the said Crowne and Roy all Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to be to the heires of the body of the said Princesse: And for default of such Issue to the Princesse Anne of Denmarke and the heires of her body.
And for default of such Issue to the heires of the body of the said Prince of Orange.
And the said Lords Spirituall and Temporall and Commons doe pray the said Prince and Princesse of Orange to accept the same accordingly…
Upon which their said Majestyes did accept the crowne and Royall dignitie of the kingdoms of England France and Ireland and the dominions there unto belonging…
And thereupon their Majestyes were pleased that the said lords spirituall and temporall and commons being the two Houses of Parlyament should continue to sitt and with their Majesty's Roy all concurrence make effectuall provision for the settlement of the religion lawes and liberties of this king dome soe that the same for the future might not be in danger againe of being subverted, to which the said lords spirituall and temporall and commons did agree and proceede to act accordingly.
Now in pursuance of the premisses the said lords spirituall and temporall and commons in Parlyament assembled for the ratifying confirming and establishing the said declaration and the articles clauses matters and things therein contained by the force of a law made in due for me by authority of Parlyament doe pray that it may be declared and enacted that all and singular the rights and liberties asserted and claimed in the said declaration are the true auntient and indubitable rights and liberties of the people of this king dome and soe shall be esteemed allowed adjudged deemed and taken to be and that all and every the particulars aforesaid shall be firmly and strictly hold en and observed as they are expressed in the said declaration.
And all officers and ministers whatsoever shall serve their Majestyes and their successors according to the same in all times to come…
(ii) The unlimited legislative powers of Parliament
Several cases have arisen where this idea has been tested.
There is a presumption used by the courts when construing statutes that Parliament does not intend to legislate contrary to the principles of international law, and, as far as possible, a statute will be interpreted in a way which avoids conflict.
What do the courts do, however, when there is a clear conflict between a statute of the United Kingdom Parliament and the principles of international law?
The answer is given in the following case.
Mortensen v Peters (1906) 14 SLT 227 High Court of Justiciary
Mortensen was the captain of a Norwegian trawler charged with illegal trawl fishing in waters within the Moray Firth contrary to a bye-law made by the Fishery Board for Scotland under s. 7 of the Herring Fishery (Scotland) Act 1889.
The Act defined the area for which bye-laws could be made, that is, all of the Moray Firth, although much of it comprised international waters.
The trawler had been fishing five miles off the coast in international waters but within the prohibited area.
Mortensen was convicted by the Sheriff's Court and appealed.
THE LORD JUSTICE GENERAL: My Lords, I apprehend that the question is one of construction and of construction only.
In this Court we have nothing to do with the question of whether the legislature has or has not done what foreign powers may consider a usurpation in a question with them.
Neither are we a tribunal sitting to decide whether an act of the legislature is ultra vires as in contravention of generally acknowledged principles of international law.
For us an Act of Parliament duly passed by Lords and Commons and assented to by the King, is supreme, and we are bound to give effect to its terms…
It is said by the appellant…that International Law has firmly fixed that a locus such as this is beyond the limits of territorial sovereignty; and that consequently it is not to be thought that in such a place the legislature could seek to affect any but the King's subjects.
It is a trite observation that there is no such thing as a standard of International Law, extraneous to the domestic law of a kingdom, to which appeal may be made.
International Law so far as this Court is concerned, is the body of doctrine regarding the international rights and duties of States which has been adopted and made part of the Law of Scotland.
Now can it be said to be clear by the law of Scotland that the locus here is beyond what the legislature may assert right to affect by legislation against all whomsoever for the purpose of regulating methods of fishing?
I do not think I need say anything about what is known as the three-mile limit.
It may be assumed that within the three miles the territorial sovereignty would be sufficient to cover any such legislation as the present.
It is enough to say that that is not a proof of the counter proposition that outside the three miles no such result could be looked for.
The locus, although outside the three-mile limit, is within the bay known as the Moray Firth, and the Moray Firth, says the respondent, is intra fauces terrce .
Now, I cannot say that there is any definition of what fauces terrce exactly are.
But there are at least three points which go far to shew that this spot might be considered as lying therein.
1st.
The dicta of the Scottish Institutional Writers seem to show that it would be no usurpation, according to the law of Scotland, so to consider it.
Thus, Stair, II i. 5: ‘The vast ocean is common to all mankind as to navigation and fishing, which are the only uses thereof, because it is not capable of bounds; but when the sea is inclosed in bays, creeks,or otherwise is capable of any bounds or meiths as within the points of such lands , or within the view of such shores, then it may become proper, but with the reservation of passage for commerce as in the land.’
And Bell, Pr.
S 639: ‘The Sovereign…is proprietor of the narrow seas within cannon shot of the land, and the firths , gulfs, and bays around the Kingdom.’
2nd.
The same statute puts forward claims to what are at least analogous places.
If attention is paid to the Schedule appended to section 6, many places will be found far beyond the three-mile limit —e.g .,
the Firth of Clyde near its mouth.
I am not ignoring that it may be said that this in one sense is proving idem per idem , but none the less I do not think the fact can be ignored.
3rd.
There are many instances to be found in decided cases where the right of a nation to legislate for waters more or less landlocked or land embraced, although beyond the three-mile limit, has been admitted.
They will be found collected in the case of the Direct United States Cable Company v Anglo-American Telegraph Company , L R 2 App Cas 394, the bay there in question being Conception Bay, which has a width at the mouth of rather more than 20 miles.
It seems to me therefore, without laying down the proposition that the Moray Firth is for every purpose within the territorial sovereignty, it can at least be clearly said that the appellant cannot make out his proposition that it is inconceivable that the British legislature should attempt for fishery regulation to legislate against all and sundry in such a place.
And if that is so, then I revert to the considerations already stated which as a matter of construction make me think that it did so legislate.
LORD KYLLACHY:…
A legislature may quite conceivably, by oversight or even design, exceed what an international tribunal (if such existed) might hold to be its international rights.
Still, there is always a presumption against its intending to do so.
I think that is acknowledged.
But then it is only a presumption; and, as such, it must always give way to the language used if it is clear, and also to all counter presumptions which may legitimately be had in view in determining, on ordinary principles, the true meaning and intent of the legislation.
Express words will, of course, be conclusive; and so also will plain implication.
Now it must, I think, be conceded that the language of the enactment here in question is fairly express — express, that is to say, to the effect of making an unlimited and unqualified prohibition, applying to the whole area specified, and affecting everybody — whether British subjects or foreigners.
LORD JOHNSTON:[delivered a concurring judgment]Appeal dismissed 
Note
In Cheney v Conn [1968]1 All ER 779, a taxpayer challenged an assessment of income tax made under the Finance Act 1964 on the ground that part of the money raised would be used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons contrary to a treaty, the Geneva Convention, to which the United Kingdom was party.
Ungoed-Thomas J stated:
What the statute itself enacts cannot be unlawful, because what the statute says and provides is itself the law, and the highest form of law that is known to this country.
It is the law which prevails over every other form of  law, and it is not for the court to say that a parliamentary enactment, the highest law in this country, is illegal.
See also R v Secretary for the Home Department, ex parte Thakrar [1974]QB 684.
If international law can place no limitation on Parliament's powers, can time do so?
In Burmah Oil Co. v Lord Advocate [1965]AC 75, HL, the company was successful in its claim for compensation against the Crown for the destruction of its installations in Burma during the Second World War, the destruction having been ordered by the commander of British forces to prevent the installations falling into the hands of the advancing Japanese forces.
In response to this decision Parliament hastily passed the War Damage Act 1965 with retrospective effect to deny entitlement to compensation for damage for acts lawfully done by the Crown during a war in which the Sovereign was engaged.
(iii) Ruling on the validity of Parliament's enactments
The statement of Dicey above also suggests that no person or body has authority to rule on the validity of Parliament's enactments.
Is it possible to challenge the validity of an Act of Parliament in the courts?
In countries with a written constitution the ordinary courts or a constitutional court will have jurisdiction to determine whether the acts of the legislature are constitutional.
In the United States the Supreme Court, in Marbury v Madison (1803) 1 Cranch 137, declared that it had power to decide whether or not the Acts of Congress conformed with the Constitution.
In the United Kingdom the doctrine of legislative supremacy dictates that Parliament has power to legislate on constitutional matters.
Thus Parliament may change the constitution by Act of Parliament.
This being so, is it possible to challenge an Act on the ground that it is unconstitutional?
Chief Justice Coke was of opinion that the courts could intervene if Parliament enacted outrageous legislation.
He stated in Dr Bonham's Case (1610) 8 Co Rep 114, at p. 118:
In many cases, the common law will control Acts of Parliament, and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly void: for when an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the common law will control it, and adjudge such an Act to be void.
However, this statement precedes the Glorious Revolution of 1688, since when the doctrine of the supremacy of Parliament has developed its modern meaning.
In Ex p.
Canon Selwyn (1872) 36 JP 54 a question arose regarding the validity of the Irish Church Act 1869.
Cock burn CJ stated:
[T]here is no judicial body in the country by which the validity of an act of parliament could be questioned.
An act of the legislature is superior in authority to  any court of law.
We have only to administer the law as we find it, and no court could pronounce a judgment as to the validity of an act of Parliament.
In Pickin v British Railways Board [1974]AC 765, Lord Reid stated:
In earlier times many learned lawyers seem to have believed that an Act of Parliament could be disregarded in so far as it was contrary to the law of God or the law of nature or natural justice, but since the supremacy of Parliament was finally demonstrated by the Revolution of 1688 any such idea has become obsolete.
In Manuel v Attorney-General [1983]Ch 77, Sir Robert Megarry VC stated, at p. 86:
[T]he duty of the court is to obey and apply every Act of Parliament, and…the court cannot hold any such Act to be ultra vires.
Of course there may be questions about what the Act means, and of course there is power to hold statutory instruments and other subordinate legislation ultra vires.
But once an instrument is recognised as being an Act of Parliament, no English court can refuse to obey it or question its validity.
But what happens if there are two Acts on the statute books which conflict with one another?
See the case which follows.
Ellen Street Estates Limited v Minister of Health [1934]1 KB 590 Court of Appeal
The Acquisition of Land (Assessment of Compensation) Act 1919 provided by s. 2 for the assessment of compensation in respect of land acquired compulsorily for public purposes according to certain rules.
Section 7(1) stated ‘The provisions of the Act or order by which the land is authorised to be acquired, or of any Act incorporated therewith, shall in relation to the matters dealt with in this Act, have effect subject to this Act, and so far as inconsistent with this Act those provisions shall cease to have or shall not have effect…’
The Housing Act 1925, s. 46 provided for the assessment of compensation for land acquired compulsorily under an improvement or reconstruction scheme made under that Act in a manner differing in certain respects from that prescribed by the Act of 1919.
Section 7(1) could be construed as applying to previous enactments, but it was argued that it applied also to subsequent enactments.
If this was so, inconsistent provisions in the 1925 Act would be of no effect.
SCRUTTON LJ:…
Such a contention involves this proposition, that no subsequent Parliament by enacting a provision inconsistent with I he Act of 1919 can give any effect to the words it uses.
Sect. 46, sub-s. 1, of the Housing Act, 1925, says this: ‘Where land included in any Improvement or reconstruction scheme…is acquired compulsorily,’ certain provisions as to compensation shall apply.
These are inconsistent with those contained in the Acquisition of Land (Assessment of Compensation) Act, 1919, and then s. 46, sub-s. 2, of the Act of 1925 provides: ‘Subject as aforesaid, the compensation to be paid for such land shall be assessed in accordance with the Acquisition of Land (Assessment of Compensation) Act, 1919.’
I asked Mr Hill [for the appellants]what these last quoted words mean, and he replied they mean nothing.
That is absolutely contrary to the constitutional position that Parliament can alter an Act previously passed, and it can do so by repealing in terms the previous Act — Mr Hill agrees that it may do so — and it can do it also in another way — namely, by enacting a provision which is clearly inconsistent with the previous Act.
MAUGHAM LJ:…
The Legislature cannot, according to our constitution, bind itself as to the form of subsequent legislation, and it is impossible for Parliament to enact that in a subsequent statute dealing with the same subject-matter there can be no implied repeal.
If in a subsequent Act Parliament chooses to make it plain that the earlier statute is being to some extent repealed, effect must be given to that intention just because it is the will of the Legislature.
Appeal dismissed 
Questions
1.
Was this case concerned with the content of the legislation or the form of the legislation?
2.
When Maugham LJ stated that Parliament cannot bind itself as to the form of subsequent legislation, was this obiter or ratio?.
Note
While there may be a reluctance on the part of the courts to rule on the validity of Acts of Parliament, a related issue which has arisen is whether they may adjudicate upon the question whether something purporting to be an Act of Parliament actually is such.
It is the Queen in Parliament which enacts legislation.
Under the common law, for a Bill to become law it must be approved by the Lords and Commons and receive the Royal Assent.
If an Act is challenged on the basis that there have been procedural defects during its passage through Parliament, will the courts look behind the formal words of enactment and inquire whether the requirements of the common law have been satisfied?
Pickin v British Railways Board [1974]AC 765 House of Lords
Pickin was a railway enthusiast who, in 1969, purchased from the owner of a piece of land adjoining a disused railway line, all his estate and interest in the railway land and track.
By s. 259 of a private Act of Parliament of 1836 setting up the railway line, it was provided that, if a line should be abandoned, the lands acquired for the track should vest in the owners for the time being of the adjoining lands.
Pick in brought an action against the Board, claiming that by virtue of s. 259 he was the owner of that land to mid-track.
The Board claimed that it owned the land by virtue of a private Act of Parliament, the British Railways Act 1968.
Pickin claimed that the relevant provision (s. 18) of the 1968 Act was invalid and ineffective to  deprive him of his title, as Parliament had been misled by the Board to obtain the passage of the Act.
In particular the Bill was presented as being unopposed, but notice had not been given to affected landowners as required by Standing Orders.
In addition, the preamble to the Bill contained a false recital that plans of the lands and a book of reference to such plans containing the names of the owners, lessees and occupiers of the said land were duly deposited with the clerk of the county council.
The Board sought to have these claims struck out as frivolous, vexatious and an abuse of the process of the court.
LORD REID:…
The idea that a court is entitled to disregard a provision in an Act of Parliament on any ground must seem strange and startling to anyone with any knowledge of the history and law of our constitution, but a detailed argument has been submitted to your Lordships and I must deal with it.
I must make it plain that there has been no attempt to question the general supremacy of Parliament.
In earlier times many learned lawyers seem to have believed that an Act of Parliament could be disregarded in so far as it was contrary to the law of God or the law of nature or natural justice, but since the supremacy of Parliament was finally demonstrated by the Revolution of 1688 any such idea has become obsolete.
The respondent's contention is that there is a difference between a public and a private Act.
There are of course great differences between the methods and procedures followed in dealing with public and private Bills, and there may be some differences in the methods of construing their provisions.
But the respondent argues for a much more fundamental difference.
There is little in modern authority that he can rely on.
The mainstay of his argument is a decision of this House,Mackenzie v Stewart in 1754.
[In the Court of Appeal Pickin successfully argued that this case was authority for the House of Lords refusing to give effect to a private Act obtained by fraud.]
…
It appears to me that far the most probable explanation of the decision is that it was a decision as to the true construction of the Act…
[I]t seems to me much more likely that Lord Hardwicke LC adopted [the construction argued for by Mackenzie]than that he laid down some new constitutional principle that the court had the power to give relief against the provision of a statute.
If the decision was only as to the construction of a statutory provision that would explain why the case has received little attention in later cases…
In my judgment the law is correctly stated by Lord Campbell in Edinburgh and Dalkeith Railway Co. v Wauchope (1842) 8 Cl & f 710; I Bell 252.
Mr Wauchope claimed certain way leaves.
The matter was dealt with in a private Act.
He appears to have maintained in the Court of Session that the provisions of that Act should not be applied because it had been passed without his having had notice as required by Standing Orders…
Lord Campbell [stated]:
I must express some surprise that such a notion should have prevailed.
It seems to me there is no foundation for it whatever; all that a court of justice can look to is the parliamentary roll; they see that an Act has passed both Houses of Parliament, and that it has received the royal assent, and no court of justice can inquire into the manner in which it was introduced into Parliament, what was done previously to its being introduced, or what passed in Parliament during the various stages of its progress through both Houses of Parliament.
I therefore trust that no such inquiry will hereafter be entered into in Scotland, and that due effect will be given to every  Act of Parliament, both private as well as public, upon the just construction which appears to arise upon it.
No doubt this was obiter but, so far as I am aware, no one since 1842 has doubted that it is a correct statement of the constitutional position.
The function of the court is to construe and apply the enactments of Parliament.
The court has no concern with the manner in which Parliament or its officers carrying out its Standing Orders perform these functions.
Any attempt to prove that they were misled by fraud or otherwise would necessarily involve an inquiry into the manner in which they had performed their functions in dealing with the Bill which became the British Railways Act 1968.
In whatever form the respondent's case is pleaded he must prove not only that the appellants acted fraudulently but also that their fraud caused damage to him by causing the enactment of section 18.
He could not prove that without an examination of the manner in which the officers of Parliament dealt with the matter.
So the court would, or at least might, have to adjudicate upon that.
For a century or more both Parliament and the courts have been careful not to act so as to cause conflict between them.
Any such investigations as the respondent seeks could easily lead to such a conflict, and I would only support it if compelled to do so by clear authority.
But it appears to me that the whole trend of authority for over a century is clearly against permitting any such investigation.
The respondent is entitled to argue that section 18 should be construed in a way favourable to him and for that reason I have refrained from pronouncing on that matter.
But he is not entitled to go behind the Act to show that section 18 should not be enforced.
Nor is he entitled to examine proceedings in Parliament in order to show that the appellants by fraudulently misleading Parliament caused him loss.
I am therefore clearly of opinion that this appeal should be allowed…
LORD MORRIS OF BORTH-Y-GEST:…
The question of fundamental importance which arises is whether the court should entertain the proposition that an Act of Parliament can so be assailed in the courts that matters should proceed as though the Act or some part of it had never been passed.
I consider that such doctrine would be dangerous and impermissible.
It is the function of the courts to administer the laws which Parliament has enacted.
In the processes of Parliament there will be much consideration whether a Bill should or should not in one form or another become an enactment.
When an enactment is passed there is finality unless and until it is amended or repealed by Parliament.
In the courts there may be argument as to the correct interpretation of the enactment: there must be none as to whether it should be on the Statute Book at all.
…
The conclusion which I have reached results, in my view, not only from a settled and sustained line of authority which I see no reason to question and which I think should be endorsed but also from the view that any other conclusion would be constitutionally undesirable and impracticable.
It must surely be for Parliament to lay down the procedures which are to be followed before a Bill can become an Act.
It must be for Parliament to decide whether its decreed procedures have in fact been followed.
It must be for Parliament to lay down and to construe its Standing Orders and further to decide whether they have been obeyed: it must be for Parliament to decide whether in any particular case to dispense with compliance with such orders.
It must be for Parliament to decide whether it is satisfied that an Act should be passed in the form and with the wording set out in the Act.
It must be for Parliament to decide what documentary material or testimony it requires and the extent to which Parliamentary privilege should attach.
It would be impracticable and undesirable for  the High Court of Justice to embark upon an inquiry concerning the effect or the effectiveness of the internal procedures in the High Court of Parliament or an inquiry whether in any particular case those procedures were effectively followed.
[His Lordship referred to Edinburgh and Dalkeith Railway Co. v Wauchope and several other cases and continued.]
Of equal clarity was the passage in the judgment of Willes J in 1871 when in Lee v Bude and Torrington Junction Railway Co. (1871) LR 6 CP 576 (in which case it was alleged that Parliament had been induced to pass an Act by fraudulent recitals) he said, at p. 582:
‘Are we to act as regents over what is done by Parliament with the consent of the Queen, Lords, and Commons?
I deny that any such authority exists.
If an Act of Parliament has been obtained improperly, it is for the legislature to correct it by repealing it: but, so long as it exists as law, the courts are bound to obey it.
The proceedings here are judicial, not autocratic, which they would be if we could make laws instead of administering them.’
…
In the result I have not been persuaded that any doubt has been cast upon principles which are soundly directed as being both desirable and reasonable and which furthermore have for long been firmly established by authority.
I would allow the appeal…
Appeal allowed
Questions
1.
Are Standing Orders of the House of Commons the equivalent of statute law? 2.
Does this case overrule the authority of The Prince's Case (1606) 8 Co Rep 1a, where it was stated that an enactment, even though entered on the parliamentary roll, would not be an Act of Parliament if assented to by the King and the Lords, or the King and the Commons, as the assent of all three is necessary?
3.
When Lord Morris stated ‘It must surely be for Parliament to lay down the procedures which are to be followed before a Bill can become an Act.
It must be for Parliament to decide whether its decreed procedures have in fact been followed’, was he referring to procedures laid down in Standing Orders or in Acts of Parliament?