

What's next?
Fashion, foodies and the illusion of freedom
DIANA SIMMONDS
Has fashion been democratized?
Yes or no?
We think we think about what we wear, how we live and how we live our lives?
But do we?
Perhaps we should think again — maybe for the first time.
Mass production has made fashion available to anyone who can get to their high street chain store or who can get hold of the latest mail order catalogue.
Yet it has not democratized fashion.
Rather, over the past twenty years it has created discrete areas of fashion which do not automatically seek to emulate or follow one another.
For years the fashion press regularly promoted ‘the look’ for the year — or the season.
Once upon a time that was just ‘Paris’ which, in dilute form, finally filtered down to the local ladies' modes.
Then came the mythic sixties when young people suddenly acquired their own cash and really got into looking different from old(er) people and when social class momentarily took a back seat.
A ‘look’ was as promotable to the Mary Quant/Biba/Bus Stop/Tuffin and Foale customers as the upper echelons were sold on Coco Chanel.
There was high fashion, which like haute cuisine was largely indigestible to the majority, and there was swinging youth where, according to the breathless new pop mag pundits, fashion was at.
Everyone else tended to wear clothes and look respectable (Her Majesty the Queen, your mum and her friends, for instance).
Outside London (did anyone live outside London?) the picture was not quite so simple: getting hold of the latest fab gear in 1966 Swindon was akin to finding mange-touts in Caithness in 1985.
Honey magazine recognized this and acted on it in an extraordinary way with the launch of the ‘Honey boutiques’ in  the major conurbations, so that the groovy styles portrayed in the magazine could be had by hitherto deprived readers in whatever part of the sticks they had the misfortune to live, with no more trouble than a Saturday day return fare.
During that time the main emphasis was on the female as fashionable: hemlines rose inexorably with the soaring British economy.
Social commentators noted that this phenomenon was not new: bright colours and rising skirts apparently went with good times whilst body concealment and drab tones accompanied depression.
David Bailey, the photographer whose lens pinned the swinging sixties forever to the wall, noted in 1985 that the mini-skirt was directly attributable to Jean Shrimpton's legs, more of which he exposed with each successive photo session despite Vogue's initial efforts to airbrush in what he'd hiked up.
Nevertheless, Bailey's personal vision of ‘the Shrimp’— her wide-eyed-long-legged form — became synonymous with the times.
The male of the species, displaying peacockery unprecedented for a century or more, was despite paisley, ruffles, velvet and all, secondary.
This position as ‘also attending’ in the daily panoply of style was not for want of effort: ‘the Dedicated Follower of Fashion’was no sartorial doormat; but it was acceptable and expected that the female, complete with which ever secondary sexual characteristic was currently ‘in’, should be the object of absolute scrutiny.
According to the legend, the sixties were awash with new social freedoms and sexual liberation; thus, the mini-skirt inched its way ever further from the Plimsoll line of modern respectability — the knee — and in doing so subliminally exposed with the ostensibly gamine, but essentially coy, knock-kneed fashion poses, the easy availability of the female genitalia
‘The pill’ made such vulnerability permissible: if a girl could no longer be ‘got into trouble’then obviously she would want to participate enthusiastically in the newly fashionable and possible ‘free love’.
No accident that the preceding round of fashion for women had emphasized the breasts (which virtually disappeared as a fashion accessory in the sixties).
After all, if a fellow was not allowed below waist level — and the all-in-one pantie girdle was impregnable without traitorous and lustful help from the inside — then what else was there but hours of despairing mauling of  the mammaries, offered up as they were with the aid of uplift-under-wired-half-cup-sponge-rubber-lace-nylon and steel display cases.
The male meanwhile suffered no such exposure of his obvious masculinity: he was not the object of ‘the look’— that which is sexual and voyeuristic.
Although his trousers might acquire or lose turnups and more or less leg width; his shirt evolve from plain white to a variety of colours and patterns, along with minor (but crucial) alterations to collar cut; and his ties perform similar minuets together with the length of his hair, he did not ever, unless actually appearing on stage in Swan Lake , have to make a big thing of — his big thing.
Of all the fashions of the past that have been dredged up, dusted off, and revamped, only in poor Shirley Conran's imaginatively malnourished Lace-trimmed sexual fantasies has the codpiece ever even looked like making a reappearance; which is curious.
There are only two varieties of western male who routinely and deliberately display what they may or may not have been born with (rumours of radiator hoses and sockfuls of sand abound) and they are the matador and the heavy rock 'n' roller.
The former dons the flamboyantly explicit costume of the fifteenth century to perform the most clear-cut display of male bravado ever devised.
He slowly and deliberately offers his most vulnerable, visible, and precious possession to A Big Black Bull; placing the actual in direct conflict with the symbolic, time after time; tempting the forces of the primeval with the swirling deep pink petals and folds of the gaping and potentially enveloping cape.
No wonder men and women alike roar and wet themselves with fright and delight as the horns scrape past the boldly offered (and  artificially enhanced)raison d'être .
No amount of posturing, thrusting, self-fellating, and general guitar heroics by the pre-synthesizer rock stars can disguise the deep insecurity and essential artificiality of cock rock.
So far, only gay men, who for long have had to think and make choices about maleness, have had the nerve to make a meal of male sexuality.
Women, on the other hand, have a different set of problems.
Their femaleness (sexual availability) is never in doubt.
For decades women have agonized over their breasts — either too big or too small; their overall body shape — no waist, bum too big, legs too short; and the various component parts of face and hair, all of which have to be altered, enhanced or de-emphasized at regular intervals.
After the whambamthankyouma'am of the sixties, the seventies barely existed in their own right, but were more a kind of dream time when no one wanted to admit the good times had gone, or indeed had never really been.
It was also the rising time of the women's liberation movement (mid-century phase) and with it an outspoken refusal of conventional fashion.
Instead the women's movement devised its own strict code of appearance which served to speed up the fragmentation of the fashion scene.
Immortalized wrongly but concretely by the call to burn bras, the women's movement actually advised a policy of refusal of crippling stiletto heeled shoes, distorting and uncomfortable underpinnings and garments as mere titillation.
In a million bathrooms, pores breathed sighs of relief as the trowelled-on layers of moisturiser, foundation, blusher, shaper, powder, eye liner, eye shadow, mascara, lashes, and lipstick were scraped off for the first time in decades.
For the majority, an increasing casualness caused a crisis in the tie industry as young men discarded the item worn by their fathers even for digging the garden or carving the Sunday roast; the latter simultaneously appearing on the endangered species list too, but as victim of inflation rather than fashion.
Young women meanwhile ran the gamut of possibilities from the Third World's untapped richness of natural fabrics and ethnic styles, with varied but usually voluminous results.
All in all, fashion in the seventies, along with just about every other aspect of life in the west, was, by and large, a mess.
Not yet a terrible mess, but a vaguely irritating, vaguely disquieting, formless mess.
And that was rather less than the effect these fashion fancies had on Third World local economies.
A village-based fabric weaving and dyeing business was quite unused to the sudden whims and vagaries of the capitalist fashion industry.
Styles, patterns, colours, decoration, these were perpetual, scarcely changing decade upon decade, until the intervention of the trendsetter, that is; one snap of whose fingers — those sensitive tips continually monitoring the pulse of What's Next — and a community half the world away would be plunged into chaos, ruin, and confusion with bales and bales of unsaleable indigo, mirrored, bell-sleeved embroidered-yoke blouses to show for their efforts.
Even now, in the golden age of Live Aid, Band Aid and copycat conscience jerkers such as Comic Relief, a form of this piracy continues, as will be discussed later.
The final realization of the New Depression, brought quietly into the world in May 1979, with the unsuspecting British electorate as midwife and the Thatcher government as proud foster-parent (the natural parents are holed up even now in the boardrooms of the multi-national corporations), coincided with rumblings of some significance from the separate continental plates of the fashion world: after a decade in the doldrums ‘fashion’ was born again and became a word once more in general use.
At one pole, self-identified as the upper echelon, the top people basked in a golden glow revisited by Brideshead and enshrined as ‘Sloane’.
These were creatures above fashion or so they liked to think — their look characterized by exquisite dullness and a certain cock-eyed practicality, epitomized by the much favoured Barbour jacket.
This tough, all-weather garment, actually designed for field sports wear, features capacious pockets suitable for the stowing of dead birds whilst in Wiltshire, or, more often than not, a hanky, purse and cheque book in town.
All this in a subtle and mandatory shade of duck-pooh green with stormproof waxing de rigueur .
They are also to be seen in neat pleated skirts of the kind to be found at Jaeger and Country Casuals.
Pastel striped shirts worn with a clashing regimental or old school tie are most popular with the men, who also lean towards an extremely good and essentially well-worn tweed jacket when not in City duds, the whole accompanied by much ‘yahing’ in Knightsbridge watering holes.
Their ‘look’ changes almost imperceptibly; between 1975 and 1985 for instance, a major style point can be seen in the daywear of the young (24-year-old) yah female: in 1975 her swanlike neck might have risen from the neat collar of a Jaeger shirt with single strand of pearls and a scarf tied as cravat in attendance.
By 1985 this businesslike severity has given way to a white pie-frill collared blouse from Laura Ashley.
The cravat has gone but the pearls are still there.
This subtle shift has a great deal to do with the current fashion accessory of an eligible husband rather than an eligible boss.
It is also an echo of early Princess of Wales, although she herself — having a much more down-market nose  for fashion — moved on long ago.
Her patronage of Bruce Oldfield notwithstanding, the Princess' instinct for clothes, once freed from the stultifying dullness of her ultra-yah family, has proved to be more High Street than haute couture ; witness the acres of Di-wear replication in major chain stores and at weddings and company dances the length and width of the land (and in Australia and the United States too where she is a considerable star).
Diana is the only Royal to contend with fashion seriously, however, and even her forays, and subsequent influence on the clothes-buying public, are muted in the end by the perceived conventions of regal dress — a curious amalgam of upper-class conservatism and middle-class respectability.
No such inhibitions stunt the growth of the rag trade at the polar opposite point from the basking Sloanes.
The ‘look’ in this stratum is as considered and serious a matter as it is for any Sloane, and just as rigid.
It involves sharply cut three-piece suits, or carefully pressed Italian pastel casuals for the male, and a whole range of feminine clobber in similar icecream pastels for women, including the down-market fashion accent of summer 1984: totally impractical white fabric ankle boots.
Gold jewellery for men and women is important at neck and wrist; supplemented by a fine gold chain around the female ankle to complement the Ambre tan achieved in the Canaries in January or one of the Costas in July or August.
Kevin Keegan, the Liverpool soccer-player, was one of the foremost proponents of this look, and footballers' wives were equally glitzy consorts.
It is a ‘dressed’ look; old jeans and misshapen tee-shirts have absolutely no place here; neither, anymore, does the archetypal Keegan perm and glam-rock hairstyle of the seventies, which has now given way to the smoothly sculpted cut with every hair in its layered place.
It is a harder look that denies unemployment, actual or probable; it refuses the fact of recession and industrial decrepitude; it stares the social lie of mid-eighties Britain right in the eye and lies right back.
The trouble is, for the millions of aspiring nouveau nobodies, the fabric and cut of the smart clothes are most often poor.
The look is dazzling but transient; in three wearings and a press the stiffness has gone from the material and the cool pastels are greyed.
In the sixties, fashion was such that a girl or a fella could afford a new Biba dress or John Stephen shirt every  other week, they cost 35s 9d and who cared if they fell apart at the launderette.
Now, few can afford to discard the eighties equivalent of disposable fashion, the market stall tat from East End sweat shops, but for those with the readies to spend on real flash (these are the ones who know that LV means Louis Vuitton as well as Luncheon Voucher) never has it been more important to make a clear and expensive statement about the level of personal well-being and survival.
For the chinless chap in his chalk-stripe blue suit, strolling to wherever he performs the daily ritual of being ‘something in the City’, or the geezer negotiating the early morning traffic in from Romford in his late model Ford and Italian sweatshirt, their individual style says clearly: I am here and this is where I want to be, you can tell exactly what and where that is from looking at me.
I'm alright Jack.
So be it.
Not so in the seething maelstrom of the middle class which separates the upper and lower.
This is where the action is and where social mobility is the norm rather than the exception.
The industrial revolution spawned the rise and expansion of the middle class to the point where it was cordially loathed from above and despised or aspired to from beneath.
It seemed unstoppable, spreading like green fly and just as blind to the disapproval of fellow citizens.
Indeed, the middle class actually came to believe it had inherited the leafy suburban earth.
Then came the crunch.
When a population gets out of balance with its environment disaster occurs: starvation, ecological collapse, and ultimately, the population falls upon itself for a bit of frantic nibbling and other distressed rat-type behaviour.
By the late seventies the middle class had expanded beyond the point of safety and disaster did strike.
At no time in history has there been more opportunity for a middle-class person to rise, yet, at the same time, the possibility of falling to great depths has similarly increased.
Each week, as another dodgy expenses claim or redundancy/bankruptcy threat has been weathered, the middle-class person breathes a sigh of relief.
However, what many fail to realize is that they are already falling; just because they've passed the nineteenth floor without mishap doesn't mean all will be well when ground zero is reached.
Those who have recognized the cool clear rush of air for what it may presage have already taken steps to ensure the  accurate placement of a safety net.
They too are alright Jack.
Thatcherism has made it compulsory not to care.
The rise and rise of the young conservatives and the ‘new Right’ are proof positive of that.
On the other side of the gender fence, ‘postfeminism’ is the equivalent movement and is having its fifteen minutes in the spotlight.
In all of this — in matters appertaining to ‘taste’, that is — there is a new kind of predatory cruelty in the air, which is now as much a part of the successful survivor (also known as the yuppie) as Paul Smith togs, a Betty Jackson outfit and extruded plastic or brushed aluminium accessories.
This cruelty is all to do with looks and style.
Not necessarily one's own physical good looks — some of the battalions of the style fascists look as if their mothers should have considered smothering at birth — but the look of others who do not look right (a subtle but fundamental difference).
Michael Foot was one of the earliest victims of this phenomenon.
When he attended the Armistice Day service in his donkey jacket, walking stick, and gammy leg, he provoked not only the predictable snorts from the Respectably Dressed camp, but also a less coherent and actually much nastier howling from stylocracy — he looked so awful .
They said he looked so old, so out of it with his old-fashioned long white locks, pathetic specs, stupid limp, and that cringe-making old coat.
Ye gods, no wonder there was a visible shuffle to the right.
No matter that Foot was easily the most honourable and sane person to occupy the post of leader of a major political party since who knew when — he just looked so gruesome.
Funny that no one has ever noticed Mrs Thatcher's knock knees and pigeon toes, but then, the ever considerate television news cameras always film her from the knees up, so who's to know.
Then again, it's worth noting the heart throbs of the British parliamentary throng: the Davids (Owen and Steel), and Michael Heseltine, Cecil Parkinson; power is one answer to George Michael (once of Wham!) it seems.
Cecil and Michael are a good point at which to resume a discussion of the new cruelty (if only because there's nothing chic or otherwise important to be said about either).
This cruelty, coupled with spinelessness in the case of Cecil Parkinson, is manifest in the privatization of care, the abdication of social responsibility, and the continuing failure of an effective  opposition to that thrust.
The reason for that failure can be summed up in one word: ‘Next’.
‘Next’ and its ilk — the new wave of bright, white, high-tech clothing emporia — are where the shoppers are in a generation which has suddenly realized it has arrived.
This generation was the heart and soul of the caring years: they marched for the National Abortion Campaign (NAC) against White and Corrie; they got their picket line bruises at Grunwick, their degrees from Cambridge, Keele or Warwick.
Their collections of fading lapel badges are as much a history of bloody and defiant campaigns as those of any old soldier.
Their uniforms were the practical donkey jacket, the denims, and the comfortably sturdy boots in red, yellow, bright blue or green.
By vociferous and Herculean effort they shifted society — it seemed — towards a more humane and liberal stance, for a brief, golden moment, then Blat.
One morning they woke up to find the Blessed Margaret in charge whilst their own leaders resembled very recently decapitated chickens.
More than that, the caring crème de la crème were also confronted by the result of what had put them at the forefront of that generation in the first place: they were very good at what they did (teaching, lecturing, theorizing, media of all kinds, creativity of all stripes), and they were becoming, perish the thought, Successful.
Which is where ‘Next’ came in.
A 35-year-old high-powered media person might well still be radical after all these years but — denims, a donkey jacket — the collective shudder was almost tangible.
‘Next’ was the answer, emerging as a tasteful, well-designed phoenix from the grey chalk-striped corpse of the executive look.
It provided a subtle bridge to the promised land of successful survival: not overtly trumpeting the triumphant rebirth of conspicuous consumption, but nevertheless easing in an almost unconscious separation from raging youth.
A decade earlier the process might have been dubbed distanciation, instead it passed with the merest ribbing and rueful acknowledgement of the new plumage.
And all those who had silently wished with all their might that they might dare challenge the hegemony of dowdiness took to ‘Next’ like ducks to water.
‘Next’ is not exactly fashion, not what The Face or Vogue would recognize as such anyway, but then successful survivors have far more important things to think about than fashion; it is more a  statement of lifestyle.
It indicates that the wearer understands the notion and the pleasure of quality without being grossly into hedonism; thus the emphasis on fine knits, delicate cottons, good cut and subtle colours.
But it is not about a pair of pure silk knickers at a cost that would keep a Sudanese village in staple meals for a month, rather it is sporting cotton, and giving the rest of the money to Oxfam.
Piquantly, for the caring generation, the desire for natural quality materials has also caused a boom in the leather trade: it is an extremely committed and unusual member of the new elite who can resist the high style leather goods that now abound.
Once upon a time leather was rugged black cowhide; utilitarian, fetishistically zippered and oozing macho anti-social symbolism.
To wear such a garment was an act of aggression in itself.
The significance of the new styling is plain to see: the softest, most delicate skins are lavished on the anti-utility, anti-macho blouson.
The low cut, dropped shoulder — reminiscent of the courtly fop of other centuries — and the sumptuous colours refuse any connection with the tough twentieth of Brando or the Jets.
It is a bold colonization by a group that knows it is — and shows itself to be — in the ascendant.
But in the ascendant from where?
Fashion areas are discrete and not democratized, by and large, but where it counts — in the discerning eye of the beholder — it has become an increasingly troublesome factor in determining who's who.
So how do you underline who and what you are without actually…underlining who you are?
If the exclusive is now commonplace (it isn't really, but unfortunately some people don't know that), and if exclusivity can mean so many different things simultaneously, it has now become necessary to look beyond just fashion in apparel to explore what the class-cultural dynamics now are.
And that brings us to Foodies — which is where the plebs and the klutzes really fall head first into their shortcrust.
To be a Foodie, to be recognized by other Foodies as such — that is the most succulent form of bliss.
To be in the ranks of the Foodie Fascists is, quite frankly, the living end.
Foodie-ism is the logical conclusion of the new Me generation, the I'm-alright-Jacks, the professional ex-carers and the trendy new right.
To be a Foodie requires self-absorption, self-love, self-delusion, self-confidence; in other words selfishness to a  degree unsurpassed in modern times.
Food as a fashion accessory, and a clear statement of social position, began as part of the original Habitat lifestyle of the early seventies.
French (Provencal) and Italian (Tuscany) country cooking came back from villa holidays along with strings of rapidly moulding garlic, terracotta floor tiles and peasant-style crocks; all made possible by Elizabeth David and Terence Conran.
In recent years, however, the impassioned and intelligent dinner conversations held over hearty cassoulets, with rapidly emptying bottles of Beauj' or Burgundy, have become the subject of satire (primarily and most successfully by The Guardian 's cartoonist Posy Simmonds).
There has also been a growing and restless desire for something new — and a fresh way of making that vital statement.
It led, tentatively at first, to High Tech with its borrowings from industrial functionalism; continued with forays into Revived Deco, the fifties and a nod towards Japan, all eventually combining in an apparently homogeneous contemporaneity.
Yet, because of its magpie genesis, the new Look was vulnerable to the sharp-eyed but short of cash.
A further dimension exclusivity — was required and developed around food.
‘Good taste’, ingenuity, intelligence, and energy — the sharply honed attributes of the would-be successful survivor — all were as nought in the absence of one other ingredient: hard cash, and lots of it.
This modern gluttony phase, as distinct from Henry VIII's fourteen courses of boiled, stewed, roasted, or stuffed beasts, has simply inverted excess.
It began when the long-time hegemony of French cuisine (cuisine ancienne ) was threatened by the growing me-consciousness of cholesterol.
Jane Fonda led from the front, to a disco beat, and suddenly Hollandaise was a dirty word.
Nevertheless, the French performed a volte-face worthy of their government's foreign policy habits, and gave the cardiac arrest generation nouvelle cuisine , or cuisine minceur and then cuisine naturelle , as it quickly became when the first fanatical asceticism mellowed.
Design (colour, shape, and form) and minimalism of ingredients were the identifying marks of the new fashion, epitomized by the archetypal and exquisite composition of three pink slices of duck breast laid on a discreet puddle of clear burgundy coloured sauce, fanned by four mange-touts: and one thimbleful of puréed carrot placed thoughtfully beside  a similar amount of finely diced kohlrabi; all on a highly polished hexagonal plate (preferably black).
The latter was the final authenticating stamp of genuine, no-shit, Foodie-ism.
Piquantly enough, Foodie-ism is as prone to the whims and shifts of favour as the fashion industry itself.
The first casualty was the poor Kiwi fruit.
At first it was the darling of the dinner table, its cool green flesh with speckled black centre adorning anything and everything, appropriate or otherwise.
Its forgiving nature and subsequent popularity proved to be the Kiwi's downfall however: ordinary palates quickly developed a taste for it too and, from being a deli or specialist greengrocery item, requiring hours to track down (note the vital equation: time to spare + money to spare = status) it quickly became a supermarket staple in the expanding section of exotics.
So speedily did this reversal occur that A la Carte magazine, the glossy guide to fashionable guzzling, was neatly caught twixt correct positions in just one issue.
They carried an authoritative piece on how Nobody but Nobody was even thinking Kiwi any more, let alone giving them fridge room.
Then, some way further on, in a feature of self-congratulation and vicarious identification, the svelte couple whose lifestyle and dinner party habits were being extolled in full double page (low cholesterol) spread colour for emulation by fellow believers, were clearly seen in full frontal and blatant use of the Kiwi —plus ça change , as Clarence Birdseye might have said.
Nevertheless, the unfashionable explosion of popularity was just as well for the Kiwi growers of the world, unlike those previously mentioned victims of a passing fad, the madras cotton producers of India.
It is in the area of food, its fashions, and the politics of the industry, that the question of the democratization of fashion — has it happened, yes or no?— can be most sharply seen and answered.
And the answer is: no, it has not been democratized, and much more important, the question is irrelevant.
While fashion, be it in clothing, home environment, or food, remains the domain of capital and thus primarily the old world, any movement or change within it is meaningless when considered only in relation to itself.
The faddish demands of consumers in the moneyed classes wreaks havoc in communities thousands of miles from those modish dinner tables and wardrobes.
Tender green beans grow in soil which could be better  employed providing food for Kenya's peasants.
Instead their ill-paid labour means that the beans can be air-freighted at considerable cost to arrive at supermarkets with flavour and crispness intact.
Multiply those beans by the fruits and vegetables that we now expect to find on supermarket shelves twelve months of the year at affordable (cheap) prices, and the dilemma of a million malnourished and  impoverished producers of luxury foods is reflected in every casual purchase.
It is currently fashionable to forswear flesh eating in the interests of animal rights or a lower cholesterol level.
Yet the popularity of vegetarianism owes much to the great variety of vegetables and fruits and lower costs achieved by the expanding exploitation of the Third World as a market garden.
Questions of health or the rights of animals must be regarded sceptically — unless of course the health and human rights of the labourer in the rice paddy or soybean field count for less — which is probably closer to the truth.
It is all very well to point out how much food is munched by an animal in order for it to develop a nice juicy back leg or plump shoulder, but what is rarely taken into consideration is the amount of fertile soil and poorly paid labour required to produce the well-fleshed habitués of vegetarian eateries.
Plato said,inter alia , ‘There is no such thing as a free lunch’.
And if that is so, then we must consider the question: who pays for our cheap food?
And our cheap clothes for that matter.
Fashion garments may and do cost a great deal, but break down the component parts of that price and the sum paid for the natural fibre fabrics begins to look a little odd.
Nowhere was this cock-eyed way of running a world more poignantly overlooked than in the Band Aid, Live Aid efforts to help the hungry.
It isn't that famine in Africa is actually anything new; the emaciated, wide-eyed child of a decade of Oxfam advertisements is far too familiar to allow that.
But the scale of the tragedy exposed by Michael Buerk and his BBC camera crew, and the response it provoked in the no-bullshit, energetic, passionately caring rock musician Bob Geldof meant that old-world attitudes towards the plight of helpless peoples have been given the biggest jolt since the anti-slavery campaigns of the nineteenth century.
Bob Geldof's initiative resulted in the biggest ever sum of  money being wrung out of the haves on behalf of the have-nots; in itself and in isolation an admirable achievement.
But Live Aid et al cannot be seen in isolation, and that is where it is revealed as less than world-shifting.
Geldof insisted, time and again, that Live Aid was not political.
By that he sought to avoid alienating the apolitical majority.
In that act of letting the congenital non-participants off the hook, a once-in-a-generation chance of politicizing those millions was lost.
In turn it meant that governments were let off the hook, because the potentially irresistible pressure of millions of outraged citizens demanding meaningful action and the changes of policy necessary to effect permanent change, was never harnessed and never applied.
Instead, governments were able to get away with lending fleets of military transport planes and the real benefactors were the armed forces for whom it was a giant PR exercise and useful practice.
At the same time Common Market food surpluses moulder away all over Europe, and Geldof rounding upon and ranting rudely at those responsible — on the floor of the European parliament — didn't even provoke a blush from those portly and clarety gents.
Unwanted sugar is purchased from the Caribbean islands and stockpiled by the United States, who would rather spend billions of dollars annually in this way (to keep the region ‘stable’) than help those nations develop an alternative and more useful crop — food, for instance.
Meanwhile, for one glorious day, millions were able to ‘take action’ and assuage a whole year's guilt in one go, by writing a cheque, phoning in a credit card number, or trotting along to the local collection point with cash.
In return, the nasty pictures of miserable walking skeletons were taken away.
(And when they reappeared on screen, another wave of the plastic wands did the trick again.)
What no one had to do in all this was think.
It didn't occur to the purchaser of the pure cotton Live Aid souvenir tee-shirt to ponder the fact that the Sudan provides a huge amount of the raw cotton demanded by the cheap tee-shirt industry, yet millions of Sudanese citizens have never had a square meal in their lives.
It is this attitude of institutionalized and traditional myopia that could lead to an annual monster Aid event, and the continuance, in slightly altered guise, of the Third World as helpless victim that we know and understand.
Not thinking — the energetic refusal to consider anything — is, perhaps, the final and most fundamental characteristic of the successful survivor.
The resurgence of ‘fashion’ as a topic high on the agenda, the preoccupation with food and clothing as matters of status and importance, provides as big and as successful a distraction now as it ever did.
It cancels out thought, and in consequence, any possibility of examining the root selfishness.
There is a direct parallel between the enormously exaggerated zoot suit of the thirties and forties and the similar styles of the mid-eighties: extravagant quantities of fabric displayed in great draped jackets with huge, padded shoulders.
Both fashions occurred in an era of desperate shortage and hardship for millions; zoot-suited dandies were beaten by angry mobs on the streets of New York and the style was finally banned.
But although it could be seen as the fashion of protest —‘what could be more defiant at a time of recession and social decay than seemingly lavish, luxurious clothes?’
So the argument goes, and it certainly looks more radical than the tired old tat of punk — yet it seems just as likely that there is an unconscious impulse to flaunt having in the faces of those who do not.
(And even the most deprived European is rich in the eyes of a citizen of rural Africa, India or South America.)
It means that fashion and ‘style’ will continue to be taken ridiculously seriously.
It also means that any kind of thought not in tune with these imperatives is, by definition, unfashionable and will not prosper; which just happens to suit our masters and mistresses very well indeed.
Monetarist economics requires that peoples be dependent.
The more a government squawks about ‘individual freedoms’, ‘non-intervention by the state’, ‘private enterprise’, and the other great rallying calls of capital, the more certain one can be of the total control by that state of its citizens.
Self-sufficiency is anathema to capitalism and, despite the already mentioned exhortations, is not what is required.
A self-sufficient community is a thrombosis, a deadly block to the essential free flow of profits.
Before the intervention of the pale-skinned colonists from the north, such social systems were common in the Third World.
They had to be: their needs were tailored to the environment and their capabilities for life within it, rather than an acquisition target that related to profitability and plain old materialism.
It meant that colonial administrations had an  extremely difficult time controlling these peoples.
Crucially, they found it almost impossible to make them work for a wage.
Unfortunately, the savage wretches had no use for paper money, nor for the apparatus and infrastructure of a moneyed society.
Nevertheless, it was not long before control was achieved, and the method used was that which had already and long ago done for the peoples of the old world.
If a person does not want something, the quickest way to instil the necessary desire is to create urgent and inescapable need.
One by one, colonial powers imposed taxes that were only payable in hard cash, and the way of life of the gatherer-hunter, the nomad, and the pastoralist was immediately and fatally unbalanced.
Dependence was imposed and the rest is history and green beans, cotton tee-shirts, patronage, and serfdom.
In the old world continual distraction has become the major weapon of control — bread and circuses — or the modern equivalent: football, royalty, and fashion.
And fashion is, perhaps unexpectedly, the most powerful of these devices, as it permeates every aspect of daily life via advertising and the media.
Is it Martinique or the Seychelles this year?
Does your kitchen look like an operating theatre, or are you still cooking in a replica Sienese farmhouse?
And how could you buy your kid New Balance trainers when everyone is wearing Reeboks right now?
This self-obsession, the looking inwards and away from the real world, represents a full circle turned in approximately twenty years, and this time it has official sanction and encouragement.
In post-industrial Britain both the self-satisfied and the desperate are able to feel justified in clinging on to what they have, or grabbing what they haven't; at no time — even in the middle of the Live Aid telethon — is there a suggestion that there might be more to life than such behaviour.
And those in power (or waiting for power) are not about to suggest alternatives.
Their power rests on the continuing ability of the old world to refuse to think, see or care about the Third World.
And what better way than to render all of those things unfashionable.
The mere existence of fashion as an industry and integral part of capitalism means it is, by definition, undemocratic; and so further underlines the impossibility and futility of the question.
‘Sitaki mafi zako bwana’(Don't give me your shit mister — Swahili slang), as my ayah once said to a door-stepping American missionary.
Mills and Boon
The marketing of moonshine
DEBORAH PHILIPS
Mills and Boon has become a generic term for a mass popular fiction for women, and with that metonym has defined an area of study of popular cultural forms.
Over the past few years, that area has rightly moved from a marginalized position in cultural theory to become a focus for discussions around language, female desire and popular narratives.
Early studies of the contemporary romance form tended to offer somewhat disbelieving accounts of the readership figures for a fiction in which marriage was invariably offered as the solution for female anxiety; as in David Margolies' attempts to do this in his application of the tools of literary criticism to the most consistently successful publishing concern in the world.
Recent feminist analysis has been more sophisticated, concentrating on the nature of the texts themselves, and on readership surveys; most notably in Rosalind Coward's psychoanalytic account of the pleasure of the text and in Tania Modleski's sophisticated reading of the Harlequin Romance, the Canadian branch of Mills and Boon.
All these studies acknowledge that Mills and Boon is a ‘phenomenon in publishing’ but little work has been done on the marketing and production side of a phenomenon which claimed a readership of 250 million worldwide during 1984.
Studies of the book trade and of the commerce of publishing are of little help here, referring to the romantic paperback variously as ‘non-books’, ‘formula fiction’, and ‘products manufactured on an assembly line’ by ‘fiction factories’.
While Mills and Boon themselves rigorously deny that they produce ‘formula fiction’, they remain unique as a publishing house.
The only publishing  company to sell on the basis solely of their imprint, their sales figures alone are enough to make them a publishing phenomenon.
In 1984 the Mills and Boon/Harlequin imprint sold 20 million ‘units’(as they refer to their books) to 8.5 million readers in the United Kingdom and Ireland, a figure which is inevitably an underestimation of the actual readership.
Any second-hand bookseller or charity shop can testify to a roaring trade in the once read and discarded romance volume.
Mills and Boon titles are distributed to and translated by thirteen local language paperback companies; particularly successful export markets are those in the Middle East, North Africa, South Africa, Australia and Europe.
With figures like these, analyses of textual pleasures are not enough; some attention to the context in which the texts are produced, reproduced and circulated is necessary.
Mills and Boon is but one of perhaps a dozen companies in what their company profile describes as ‘the competitive and fast-growing world of romantic fiction’.
The distribution between these various companies, and their international markets is not, however, straightforward.
Mills and Boon is the world's largest publisher of romantic paperback fiction, claiming a 65 per cent share of the United Kingdom market.
It is also the longest established.
Founded in 1908 by Mr Gerald Mills and Mr Charles Boon, Mills and Boon began life as a general fiction publishing house, with such luminaries on its list as Jack London, P.G.
Wodehouse and Horace Walpole.
The success of Secrets in 1910 (author now generally forgotten) shifted their emphasis, however, to the marketing of popular fiction, and launched a cultural phenomenon.
This story, of Mary, in love with a lowly clerk (tall, dark, handsome and actually an aristocrat in disguise) owed a great deal to the sagas of class confusion and frustrated passions to be found in contemporary fiction magazines and the ‘penny dreadful novelette’, both in its packaging and plot.
Secrets went on to lend its name to a women's fiction weekly, and for Mills and Boon it laid the basis for a house style.
A recent exhibition of Mills and Boon front covers over seventy-five years of publishing demonstrates that the packaging of their company image, ‘the rose of romance’, has not varied very much since.
The front cover of Secrets depicts Mary  in dishevelled crinoline anxiously awaiting, while Gothic script informs the reader that ‘for too long — for too long they had savoured those anxious moments….’
Most of the titles have continued to work on a similar principle, whereby the title and image work towards a paradoxical suggestive propriety.
While the one may hint at sensuality, the other is conventionally chaste.
Thus, the 1932 title Wife to Christopher is coupled with an image of a rumpled and  pyjama-ed ingénue confronting a stern male profile, while the suggestiveness of Savage Love (1982) is tempered by a cover depicting a squeaky clean couple keeping their distance in a daisy field.
From 1910 to 1984, the basic structuring of the iconography has remained remarkably consistent, despite Mills and Boon's own assurance that ‘tastes in romantic fiction have altered considerably’.
The look of the covers is central to the consistency of the brand name, ensuring that each volume conforms to expectations and that it is concocted to the same recipe.
Almost invariably, the cover imagery depicts the male figure in a state of total preoccupation with the woman, while she gazes beyond the frame, engaging the viewer (you, the reader) in a complicit acknowledgement of her sexual power over him.
Within this structure, details of dress and hairstyle may vary.
The illustrations draw on the imagery of contemporary popular culture and the titles refer to current popular fictions, popular song for example, as in the 1940s reference to the Andrews Sisters' song ‘I'll be With You’.
The heroine of the forties is likely to look like Rita Hayworth; by the sixties she is close to Audrey Hepburn; and in the seventies, Julie Christie.
The narratives too have a consistent patterning, as the many textual analyses of the genre have demonstrated; from Richard Hoggart's 1957 account of ‘Sex in Shiny Packets’ to Modleski's Barthesian reading of the codes of the contemporary romance.
Modleski offers a useful precis of the plot structure:
the formula rarely varies: a young inexperienced, poor to moderately well-to-do woman encounters and becomes involved with a handsome, strong, experienced wealthy man, older than herself by ten to fifteen years.
The heroine is confused by the hero's behaviour, since, though he is obviously interested in her, he is mocking, cynical, contemptuous, often hostile, and even somewhat brutal.
By the end however, all misunderstandings are cleared away and the hero reveals his love of the heroine.
In this construction, gleaned from a close reading over a range of texts, Modleski comes close to the guidelines offered by Mills and Boon themselves:
a simple tale introducing only a few characters besides the hero and heroine is often very successful….
If the hero is meant to be a man of authority used to being obeyed, he should be shown as such and the other characters should react to him accordingly…
Mills and Boon, however, rigorously deny any charge of producing ‘formula fiction’; their instructions to potential authors, as they insist, and as some critics have noted with surprise, add up to little more than an encouragement to ‘freshness and originality of approach’.
‘Some people’ the editorial department writes reproachfully, ‘have even tried to reduce [the success of Mills and Boon]to a formula’.
Nonetheless, the recommendation to a standard length (about 190 printed pages, between 50,000 and 55,000 words) belies the claim that ‘originality, imagination and individuality are the most important qualities in a romance writer’.
The tipsheet clearly expects that the aspiring author of romantic fiction is also a reader of the genre, and thus is familiar with its conventions: ‘Think of what you as a reader would like to read.’
The PR department endorses this: ‘You cannot develop a love of writing them if you have not loved reading them’; the conventions of the form are internalized to such an extent by both authors and editors that they are no longer acknowledged as such; they are simply assumed.
The handbook, however, that is recommended for potential writers,You Can Write a Romance and Get it Published , breezily enjoins its readers to ‘Remember that these are formula books tried and proved to be successful’ and proceeds to outline the characterizations and plotting that are expected of the successful romance.
Nonetheless, Mills and Boon are perfectly right in declaring that there is no explicit formula for their texts, for there is no need for one.
With an annual rate of 5,000 unsolicited manuscripts, 90 per cent of which are turned down  for publication, the editors are in a good position to choose exactly what is required for ‘the rose of romance’ brand-name.
Editorial decisions are backed by extensive market research, and manuscripts selected and edited according to‘whether the story lives up to the high standards that Mills and Boon readers have set for us…we can't please every one of our readers all the time, but it isn't for want of trying!’
A ‘Mills and Boon Romance’ is defined in editorial terms more by virtue of what it is not, than by its own narrative conventions, which are unstated; ‘we reject anything that is obviously not a romance’, the PR office states, but when pressed on what constitutes ‘romance’, their response is ‘no murder, blood, guts or gore, and nothing pornographic either; there's nothing romantic about pornography’.
For the critic concerned to identify the narrative structures of the contemporary romance form, there is actually no need to apply a semiological analysis to the twelve volumes of a Mills and Boon monthly output, or to draw upon the morphology of the folk-tale, as some theorists have undertaken.
What either of these methods might produce would not be far removed from the Silhouette ‘tipsheet’ for authors.
Silhouette is an American company, producing the transatlantic version of the Mills and Boon romance, and not unrelated to the British company, or to the Canadian equivalent, Harlequin.
They are, however, rather more explicit in their demands of the romantic novel.
The heroine of the romance novel is presented at a moment of transition in her life, an isolated figure; the romance narrative depicts young women at a point of defining themselves as adult women, a definition that must come from the heroine in the absence of any supportive network:
The Silhouette heroine is young (18–24)…
She is basically an ingenue….
Though she wants to work and often plans to after marriage…her home and children always come first.
She is almost always a virgin….
She is usually without parents or a ‘protective’ relationship….
She is starting a career, leaving college, unhappy with her present job or too caught up with her work — anyway, she's open to change and accepts adventure, though often not by choice.
Other women in the narrative may not be friends, but are always constructed as rivals for male attention: ‘She does not consider  herself a beauty and this element is used to play off against the beauty of the other woman (women)….’
The Other Woman has a category to herself in Silhouette's construction of the necessary elements of the romance novel, an indication of the extent to which she is considered to be an essential ingredient: ‘The Other Woman Usually means over sophisticated, well groomed.
She NEVER gets our hero.’
‘Our hero’(possessed by the reader?) has the single defining characteristic that he is financially viable, and therefore a desirable proposition in the heroine's search for professional, personal and economic status:
The Hero Older, arrogant, self-assured, masterful, hot tempered, he is capable of violence, passion and tenderness….
He is always older than the heroine, usually in his early or mid-30s, rich, successful in the vocation of his own choice…he is above all virile.
Whether stated or unstated, these conventions remain true for all Mills and Boon, Silhouette, and Harlequin romances.
The conventions are so rigorous that any break with them would require a new genre; the editorial leaflet makes this clear enough:
Sex and romance are the key ingredients to these books and these elements cannot be stressed too strongly.
Nothing in these romances should be vulgar or explicit….
It is all right for the hero and heroine to go to bed together, although if they actually make love before they are married, a wedding should follow immediately.
Bringing them to the brink of consummation and then forcing them to retreat either because of an interruption or because one or both of the lovers suffer from doubt or shame is an appropriate Silhouette device.
Clearly, one of the invincible conventions of the ‘Romance’ label is that desire should not be consummated before at the very least a proposal of marriage has been secured by the heroine —‘the only pain permitted is the sweet pain of unfulfilled desire’…
The consummation of that desire, and the admittance of ‘erotic sensations’ on the part of the heroine represents such a break with the romance genre that it requires a new form, the  development of a sub-genre.
Silhouette also provides this with their new ‘Desire’ label, which was developed in response to‘consumer demands for a new series’.
The ‘Desire’ volume is distinguished from the ‘Romance’with a different packaging and series brand-name.
Like the ‘Romance’ format, it issues twelve volumes monthly.
The ‘Desire’ heroine is constructed as older, more assured of her status, and, therefore, more open to sexual advances:
a mature, capable woman in her twenties who has a strong sense of her own individuality….
Desire intends to mirror real lives of modern women….
Sexual encounters — which may include nudity and lovemaking even when the protagonists are not married — should concentrate on highly erotic sensations…
The existence of the ‘Desire’ category in the publishing of romantic fiction acts as a filter and displacement for those elements that could challenge the conventions of the romance, thus leaving the romantic formula unchanged.
The resources which go to make such a development possible are bound up with the processes of the marketing and the production of the romance volume.
Any cultural practice involving consumer goods is based on a commodity relation.
For Marx, a commodity is: an object outside us, a thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort or another.
The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no difference.
The use-value of ‘fancy’ is clearly there for the Mills and Boon novel, which further satisfies Marx's criteria for the ‘commodity’in completely obliterating the actual process of production.
The writer of the novel is an absent category.
Mills and Boon are bought and sold on the basis of a brand-name, not an individual author.
However it may be constructed, the romance formula can ensure such a consistency of product that the texts are marketed through a standing order principle through retail outlets, ranging from supermarket checkouts to station bookstalls.
The language of the marketing echoes exactly that of any supermarket brand-name: ‘our readers perceive us as a brand of books with a special flavour and image’.
Like Cadbury's chocolate, the recipe and packaging of the Mills and Boon volume may not have altered much since its  inception, but the methods of marketing and distribution have changed dramatically since the early days of the twopenny library.
The publishing history of Mills and Boon emulates precisely that of the developments in mass market publishing in Europe and America; it may be an extreme but the dating of shifts in their ownership and distribution structure conforms to the major historical changes in the publishing industry.
From the small private London company of 1908, Mills and Boon have become part of a million-dollar industry.
What made this possible was the ‘paperback revolution’, usually dated from the Allen Lane publication of the Penguin titles in 1935.
The ‘revolution’ refers not only to the paper binding of volumes (which had already occurred in the nineteenth century) but much more to a shift in distribution methods, away from specialist outlets for books.
The postwar expansion in the book market allowed for a wider distribution (with paper covers, at lower prices) and books became a commodity to which the newly developed sales techniques and marketing methods could be applied.
Those small owner publishers who could not cope with the new financial pressures were forced to expand, to merge with other larger companies, or go bust.
It was in the thirties, with the expansion of the commercial library (Boots lending library, for example) that Mills and Boon concentrated their attention on the production of romance fiction, published in cheap brown bindings.
As the lending library market began to subside under an increasing onslaught of cheap paperback titles, Mills and Boon themselves moved into paperback production.
And it was with this development that the company expanded internationally; it prompted Harlequin, a Canadian based publishing house to approach Mills and Boon for the North American rights to some of their titles.
This proved to be so commercially successful that it became a reciprocal arrangement, with Mills and Boon importing Harlequin titles.
This arrangement still stands, although a clear distinction between the two companies can no longer be made; in 1972 Harlequin and Mills and Boon merged, and with that merger, the mass market for paperback romance really took off; between 1972 and 1974, sales of Mills and Boon titles rose from 27 million to 40 million.
The merger of Mills and Boon and the Harlequin imprint acts as a paradigm for the sequences of company mergers and takeovers that took place in the sixties and seventies in publishing in Britain and America, a period in which the ownership structures of publishing underwent a profound shift away from specialist producers and distributors of books, towards groups of publishing houses owned largely by corporate organizations whose primary interests were not in publishing.
Between 1958 and 1970, there were 307 publishing mergers in America alone, of which 224 were ultimately to be owned by communications groups.
By the mid-seventies, almost all hardback and paperback publishers were owned by conglomerates, and by 1976 there was no independent paperback publisher.
In 1976, 81 per cent of total American paperback sales were controlled from eight large houses.
Companies involved in the takeover of paperback houses in America between 1970–7 included: the Hearst Corporation, RCA, CBS, Warner Communications and Gulf and Western; all mass communications conglomerates, with interests in film, television and newspapers.
This trend towards the concentration of publishing into corporate organizations meant a centralization and Americanization for most European publishers too.
In Britain, the early 1970s had marked a crisis in publishing with rising print and production costs.
With cutbacks in library purchases of books, no publisher could afford to withstand the commercial potentials that the mergers represented, nor the opportunities for synchronizing publicity that the video, television, press and film links of the communications corporations could provide.
For Harlequin, this shift in the production and distribution of books was marked by the Torstar Corporation taking over a 52 per cent share of their company stock in 1975.
The Torstar Corporation, a Canadian based communications organization, was itself an amalgamation; in 1967, the Toronto Star Ltd and Charth Investment and Publishing Company Ltd had merged to form the largest communications conglomerate in Canada.
It is, according to the Torstar 1983 business profile:
a broadly based information and entertainment communications company.
Its operations include The Toronto Star, Canada's leading metropolitan daily newspaper, Harlequin  Enterprises, publisher of romantic fiction; Metroland Printing and Publishing, commercial printers and publishers of community newspapers and consumer advertising supplements; the Miles Kimball Company, direct mail marketers of gift items; Comac Communications, publisher of controlled circulation magazines; and Infomart, pioneers in developing two-way electronic data-based communications.
Property : Owns real estate for parking, storage, garage etc…
By 1981 Torstar had acquired the whole of Harlequin Enterprises Ltd, and as part of the Harlequin Overseas subsidiary, Mills and Boon was included in the deal.
Or, as the Mills and Boon press office prefers to put it, the company ‘came under the wing of the Canadian-based Torstar group’.
In 1984, Torstar's net income was $5,337,000 Canadian dollars, more than Spar Aerospace (Canada), or Slater Steel Industries, making Torstar one of the largest Canadian profit making enterprises.
And in the same year, Silhouette became part of the group.
The technology that Torstar could bring to the romance form, through its various subsidiaries, allowed for an international distribution and advertising network.
With their commercial interests across the media, coverage for the romance media in women's magazines, television stations, and newspapers was assured.
So, too, were film and video links.
Authors belonging to either Silhouette, Harlequin or Mills and Boon could now be serialized in popular women's fiction magazines, and Anne Mather's Mills and Boon title Leopard in the Snow became a ‘major motion picture’, distributed throughout the United Kingdom and North America as an ‘Anglo-Canadian Co-production’.
It was simultaneous with the involvement of Torstar that romance took off as a ‘publishing phenomenon’, with a confidence that could ensure print runs of several million for each title.
In the two years between 1972 and 1974, the sales of Mills and Boon titles rose by 13 million.
By 1981, a Harlequin trade advertisement could boast that ‘In eight years, sales have increased by 800% and research shows that the romance category can easily double.’
Sales of the Harlequin group worldwide now total over 200 million volumes.
Advertisements for a video series entitled ‘Images of Love’ began to appear in  women's magazines and in trade journals in 1984.
Their description of the titles is reminiscent of the brief for Mills and Boon, Harlequin and Silhouette novels: ‘Soft-centre, not soft-core, these beautifully made films combine strong plots with a good dash of unabashed romance….
Stock Images of Love and we promise you'll be crying.
All the way to the bank.’
If it is true that ‘Bestsellers are not born, they are made.
And they are made largely through promotion…successful promotion through movies, television and various tie-ins in turn, guarantee the sale of books to the public’, then the Torstar corporation has the resources for that promotion.
The company that owns the rights to Leopard in the Snow also owns and controls the newspaper, magazine, television video and film networks appropriate to promotion needs.
For a romance title there is no necessity for ‘a long pitch to convince outsiders from book-clubs to print houses and the movies’, those networks are part of the same corporation.
No Mills and Boon title has less than a print run of almost 100,000, a figure that makes most bestseller lists look like chickenfeed.
Every romance title is a best seller, most are assured of sales of ‘several million books worldwide through the Harlequin network’.
Each title may have a short life-span, but its sales are assured.
In America, it is estimated that 25 per cent of paperback sales are through supermarkets; the romance title is rigorously marketed like any other brand-name; like chocolate bars, the newest variety is given prominence on the sales stands.
In a strict order of preferential treatment, the newest titles are placed on the top rack, and moved down weekly, until the volumes on the bottom rack are superseded and returned to the publisher for pulping.
This method of retail distribution operates throughout Britain and America; titles are sold to newsagents, drugstores and other outlets on a sale or return basis.
It is not true of the romance form that ‘once you've read one you've read them all’.
Mills and Boon are sufficiently confident of the compulsion of the romance formula to offer six free novels as an introduction to their ‘Rose of Romance Book Club’.
The contemporary romance novel is a self-perpetuating genre, both textually and in its modes of marketing, offering in its texts a perpetually unfulfilled ‘Desire’ that can only be answered through the purchase of a new volume.
And the brand name  acts as a reassurance to the reader that the terms of that salacious propriety, Romance, will not vary.
Like the detective novel, the romance abides by a hermeneutic code, in which the outcome is always assured.
For the thriller, the solution to the narrative's enigma is the unveiling of the criminal; for the romance, it is what Germaine Greer described as the ‘Almighty kiss’.
As Yvonne McManus, in her advice to aspiring writers explains: ‘the thing that keeps your reader turning pages is to find out what happens to make them realise they're meant for each other…you've got to keep the reader wondering how it'll all come to pass’.
The advertisement for the video equivalent of the Mills and Boon novel declares: ‘Because they're a branded series, your customers will see one and keep coming back for more (it may be a new concept in video, but publishers like IPC and Mills and Boon have been doing very nicely on it for years)’; thus heralding a new departure for the form.
The pleasures of the romance novel are not dissimilar from those of the chocolate bar; naughty but nice.
The Mills and Boon, Harlequin or Silhouette brand name assures a consistent recipe and packaging, which, like Cadbury's, has remained fundamentally unchanged since the product was first conceived and marketed.
Mills and Boon is a paradigm for understanding the marketing of literature as a commodity, and that market must be accounted for in any understanding of the ‘pleasures of the text’.
Analyses of the texts themselves are insufficient to account for the phenomenal sales figures of the romance genre.
With 250 million volumes sold annually, Mills and Boon is the source of a construction and perpetuation of a particular concept of female desire and sexuality that can always be assuaged through the consummation of a heterosexual romance.
The romance novel is unique in popular culture, as a narrative form that is produced and marketed exclusively for a female audience.
These narratives consistently address material conditions and contradictions in women's lives; and the international sales figures indicate that those contradictions are not restricted to women in the western cultures of Britain and America.
The negotiation of reputation; how not to be defined as either a ‘slag’ or a ‘drag’by men; the juggling of male expectation with the pursuance of a career: these are all questions that the romantic  novel consistently deals with in its narratives.
‘We offer the literature of reassurance’ states the press office for Mills and Boon: a reassurance that has been marketed with resounding success, a success that would not have been possible for Mills and Boon or for Harlequin without the intervention and resources of the Torstar Corporation.
The material conditions of production and distribution have been crucial for the perpetuation of the romance form, and the romance form continues to thrive because it so well answers the commercial demands of a mass-market paperback and communications industry.
Tainted love
The influence of male homosexuality and sexual divergence on pop music and culture since the war
JON SAVAGE
In a then notorious homosexual novel of 1953,The Heart in Exile — whose pink spine was a crucial signifier in those treasonable times — Rodney Garland's hero visits the Lord Barrymore and falls, as one will, into reverie:
The young were living mostly in exile, but exile gave them possibilities of which they had seldom dreamed before.
Everything around them became slightly abnormal, the new occupation, the environment, the dress they wore, the physical and emotional climate.
The concrete things of the past, like postal-addresses, time-tables, road-signs, became less probable and friendships became all-important because it was unlikely that they would last.
Nearly all of them, willingly or unwillingly, became creatures of the moment, living in an everlasting present; the past had vanished, the future was uncertain.
In 1953, such a territory was alien, almost invisible, a schizo-world of as yet unimagined pleasure; yet today it is disturbingly familiar, this condition described by Jameson as living ‘in a perpetual present and in a perpetual change that obliterates traditions of the kind which all earlier social formations have had in one way or another to preserve’.
Although couched in the typically occult language of the time, Garland's prescient account catches society at a crossroads: those young homosexuals adrift in a postwar landscape without signs may now be seen as harbingers of a new way of life and a new economic order — variously described as pop culture, youth culture or the Teen age — which stand at the heart of ‘late, consumer or multinational capitalism’.
Sexuality lies emblazoned across the surface of pop culture in the careless whispers of countless love songs, yet this apparent confirmation of dominant sex codes — heterosexual, same-age, monogamous relationships — cloaks a far more ambiguous relationship to sex and gender that illustrates well the ambiguous standing that pop culture has within our society.
In England pop culture has a simultaneous function — inextricably intertwined to a degree unmatched anywhere else in the world of exploitation and expression: exploitation as the product of an industry at the sharp end of the new conditions of capitalism, expression by virtue of its position — which has occurred by default — as the main area of activity in our society which freely admits voices of both youth and change.
The tension between these two contradictory functions has provided the space within which new signs and new attitudes can break through; it also, depending on which function is in the ascendant, explains pop culture's vacillation to date between empty reaction and charged visions of possible futures.
These complexities are totally lost to the dominant culture.
In this world pop music is isolated and exploited as a younger, sexier version of traditional showbiz, where culture tycoons like Maxwell of the Mirror or Murdoch of the Sun fight for the services of a man, John Blake, whose gossip columns reinforce pop music's most banal surfaces.
Alternatively the pop industry is seen as an amoral instigator — so unlike Fleet Street!— of whichever moral panic is being associated with youth–his week: ‘Never mind morals or standards…the only notes that matter come in wads’ ran an emblematic headline after the public's ‘discovery’of Punk Rock in December 1976.
From this current perspective, pop is either Light Entertainment — taking its place as a cheeky yet responsible apprentice in the adult world of showbiz — or tawdry trash that is beneath contempt.
It isn't important; pop is thus marginalized, and whatever it has to say of greater import is ignored.
Yet this you would expect; it is one of the hallmarks of the dominant culture, after all, that it is about thirty to fifty years behind what is actually occurring in the world in the present time.
The way in which popular culture communicates — when it does — is as important as what it communicates.
At worst this means a culture of style over content, with which we are engaged  at present; at best a visionary flash, the secular equivalent of a miracle, which can transform people's lives.
Pop culture thus works through an amalgam of attitude, inspiration, intuition and detail (for nobody is as obsessive as the true pop fan, whose obsession is rarely given the respect it deserves); crucially, it works best not in public, where the terms of discourse are set by the dominant culture, but in private space.
Hence the failure of most issue-based, formally political pop, hence the way in which popular music and culture as ‘modern leisure, is transformed into the very fabric of personal life, the most significant context in which we have the chance to affirm ourselves’.
What is then ignored in most accounts of consumer capitalism is the way in which consuming can be an active as well as a passive choice, or in this context how people can use pop music.
It is thus fitting that nowhere has pop been so active as in that area so firmly delineated as ‘private’ by the dominant culture and woe betide those who, like politicians in sex scandals, mix the public and the private, or otherwise transgress the narrow boundaries — namely those of sexuality and gender.
It is above all the body, enveloped in sound, in dance, that stands at the cross-roads of popular music and leisure time; here the word ‘Love’ that is omnipresent in the pop lexicon reads not so much as a romantic cliche but as a coded entry into the world of the private, into the world of pleasure and self-discovery.
This is patently not an area that has been officially acknowledged.
Even in its inchoate beginnings, pop culture was forced to turn to the sexually divergent or avant-garde, for it was only in the spaces that they  inhabited that this new world could be recognized and could develop.
Pop's relationship to different ideas of sexuality and gender is thus deep and intricate: although it frequently denies it, it is from the milieux and sensibilities of the sexually divergent that pop culture draws much of its sustenance.
And occasionally, when the market or those subterranean voices demand, they will get their due accord before dropping back out of sight.
For that instant, for many people, the world will have been redefined.
In the perpetual ‘Dunkirk of the spirit’ of the immediate postwar period, ‘dressiness was confined largely to homosexuals.
Since they were cut off from the mainstream anyway, both sexually and socially, they had nothing to lose by outrageousness  in their clothes’.
By 1953, the refusal that such dressiness displayed had spread to a hitherto unexpected and unexplained location: the working-class boys and girls who, congregating around various London centres, had assumed what had been up until a couple of years previously a homosexual style, the Edwardian Look.
This had been floated in 1948 by the clothing establishment as a discreet gentleman's fashion harking back to the golden days before ‘socialism and formica’, but had been quickly coopted and camped up by the gay underground; the more exaggerated aspects of this style caught the first Edwardians' eye and, together with the Western Look that pervaded their favourite culture, American cowboy films, it formed the first youth style proper.
If homosexuals had sartorially predicted the first Teds, then both they and these first teenagers inhabited the same psychic and social space.
Both were lying — as Garland's novel makes clear — beneath the surface of an England where ‘the same mood of an old upper and upper-middle class order safely restored dominated almost every area of national life’.
Under the patriarchy of Winston Churchill, homosexuals and teenagers were not marginal but invisible, except when they surfaced as victims of the latest moral panic, of which there were many in those days.
Both states were regarded as not only undesirable but criminal: after the Burgess/Maclean scandal in 1951, police prosecutions against homosexuals reached a peak in 1953/4, while the scare headlines accorded by the press to the Clapham Common murder in the summer of 1953 lodged in the public's heads the equation that people who wore Edwardian clothes would knife you at the drop of a hat.
Such was the penalty of divergence.
It is worth emphasizing quite how serious a refusal this finery of the first Edwardians represented.
Andy Medhurst locates as ‘the central visual themes of the 1950s male pin-up in Britain what one could call the hegemony of the tweed jacket or the ideology of gentrification’.
The dominant male of the period, like Kenneth More or Michael Dennison, was sexless, full of ‘common sense’, above all, decent: the exaggerated nature of the Edwardians' dress, its appropriation from middle-class roots, and the obsessional nature with which they pursued it, all spoke of people who did not know their place .
Having transgressed these  invisible, but powerful, boundaries, the Teds were fair game for anything that could be thrown at them.
‘A similar interpretation of a sexual twist (homosexuality) in the make up of Teddy Boys could be ascribed to their excessive interest in their own and each other 's clothes and hair-styles, such as the habit of the early Teddy Boys of having their hair waved.’
To contemporary commentators like Fyvel, the only other section of the population who behaved in such a way were the homosexuals; what he didn't know was that this pursuit of pleasure, and concentration on self, were exactly those traits that would become desirable, and eventually, socially acceptable, with the extraordinary success of Elvis Presley and the Teen age that followed.
‘The dam had burst’; the contemporaneous impact of Elvis Presley and Suez in 1956 washed away the vestiges of pre-war England.
The new Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, combined old-style Tory patriarchy with a definitely new-style endorsement — in the famous (and misquoted)‘You've never had it so good’ speech of July 1957 — of the developing consumer culture that was being imported from America, of which the Teen age was an important spearhead.
This new consumer culture sold televisions, washing machines, fridges; the new popular music — whose pulling power Elvis Presley had demonstrated so devastatingly — sold sex.
Public sexuality now belonged to the young, and where they led, the rest of society was to be trained to follow.
But this commercial peg: ‘All industry knows that to please the teenagers is the golden way to big dividends’, contained all manner of occluded and contradictory messages.
It's quite clear, as Little Richard hitches his pants and ecstatically rolls his eyes in ‘Don't Knock The Rock’, that rock 'n' roll represented an explosion of black consciousness into mainstream white American culture.
Loaded as it was with connotations of the body and pleasure — analogous to homosexuals in the United Kingdom, cast as out-groups, as bogeymen by the dominant culture, but attempting to fashion their own, necessarily coded, meanings rock 'n' roll was at first tolerated, because of its economic attractiveness, and then actively suppressed.
But by then the damage was done; the demons had escaped Pandora's box and, not for the first time, the demands of laissez-faire capitalism had subverted traditional moralities.
These nuances were lost in the  United Kingdom, where rock 'n' roll was seen as another exotic American import like chewing-gum or cowboy films; its explosive sexuality was seen as the key selling point of this product like the X-tail-fin on a new Ford — rather than as a process, and was thus isolated and marketed accordingly.
The selling of this new product was accommodated within the existing structures of an industry used to selling the pale imitations of American pop.
This resulted in farce: ‘I have never forgotten seeing footage of a British manager which began on his moccasined feet, wafted over his monogrammed door mat, and ended up opposite the sofa on which lounged five of his charges, scowling greasily’.
Early English pop was riddled with homosexuality and that sensibility which we would now call camp — partly this was due to homosexual familiarity with those areas of human activity which were now being exploited, and partly to the early music industry's seedy beginnings on the fringes of established showbusiness.
This marginality is well described in Peter Wildblood's chapter on ‘Perry and Bella’ in A Way of Life : ‘the strange world of people who for one reason or another are out of step with the times’, or by Colin MacInnes:
‘I heard one of your arias on the steam, last evening’, I told him, ‘Separate Separates’, if I remember.
Very nice’.
‘Which of the boy slaves was it sung it?
Strides Vandal?
Limply Leslie?
Rape Hunger?’
‘No, no…
Soft-Sox Granite, I think it was….’
‘Oh, that one.
A Dagenham kiddy.
He's very new’.
This sensibility, which MacInnes, as a homosexual outsider, was perfectly suited to capture, underlay the kind of sexuality that English pop was selling.
The music industry packaged rock 'n roll — noting the charged effect that Elvis Presley had on his fans — as pop for a new generation of economically enfranchised young women, grafting extreme youth and a generic look greasy hairstyle, sideburns, a sallow pout — onto the ‘romantic’ stylings of earlier idols.
Yet the milieu within which British pop operated undercut then dominant modes of masculinity: ‘Images of men must disavow this element of passivity (caused by putting the body on display) if they are to be kept in line with dominant ideas of masculinity-as-activity’.
As befits the objects of homosexual desire at that time, this new generation of teenybop pop stars were ‘boy slaves’— more Limply Leslie than Rape  Hunger — and failed to emerge from the pin-up process with their masculinity intact.
Instead they took on the passivity of the adored object in an equation — homosexual desire translated into female adoration — that has haunted English pop ever since from the Beatles through the Bay City Rollers to Wham!; as one of Wham's managers, Simon Napier-Bell, makes explicit in his memoir of the sixties:
It was surprising that an industry generating so many millions of pounds was prepared to use little more than the manager's sexual tastes as its yardstick of talent.
Most of the managers were men and most of them liked boys.
A few of the managers were women and one or two of them liked girls
But this ‘feminization’ only went so far: ‘Still only boys for singers?
No signs of any breasted thrushes?’
‘We've tried one or two of them, but the kids just don't want to know.
No, for the minors, it's still males’.
It is now possible to see the desperate farce of late fifties pop as a first tremulous step towards the liberalization to come: the publication of the Wolfenden Report in September 1957 recommended the limited legalization of homosexuality, while a newer generation of pop stars, like Adam Faith or the female icon, Helen Shapiro, pushed in from the margins towards society's centre.
The emergence of the satire movement in the early sixties ‘marked a new stage in the social revolution’: ‘Like the pop artists (and the pop singers yet to come) the satirists formed part of a new generation coming to the surface in English life, one young enough to have been moulded by the garish, anarchic and youth-conscious atmosphere of the late fifties….’
It was fitting, granted pop's liberation of the private, that the sexuality that had lain for so long as‘private’ under the dominant culture now became public with shocking force: ‘I noticed that several of the men and women present had weals across their back and buttocks.
Others had shocking bruises.’
Mandy Rice-Davies and Christine Keeler's revelations about the seamy underbelly of England's public life rocked the government and effectively ended the Tory Party patriarchy: ‘The upper-class…image of Mr Macmillan himself had acted as a catalyst for all the aggression that was to unleash the New England of Mr Wilson and the Beatles.’
Youth and pop music now occupied centre stage in society — to  a degree that is now inconceivable.
The Beatles were courted by leaders of both parties: Harold Wilson won, corralling them at the Variety Club luncheon of 1964, and ensuring their MBEs for export services — in late 1965.
For a while, the most successful pop groups had the power to shift mass consciousness to an unprecedented degree and this confidence expressed itself in a plethora of new sexualities brought into the public eye, offered up for public consumption and then put into practice in people's lives.
The variety of sexual identities then possible took control of the ‘private’ out of the hands of the dominant culture; it is this fact, just as much as the actual physical acts, that made the ‘permissive’society (as it was called by the right) a phenomenon to be at first feared, and finally to be held up as what was wrong with Britain.
Androgyny — of an explicit and active kind — was the key sexuality of the mid-sixties.
It began as fashion — signified by the growth of long hair for men — and ended up as politics.
The explicit blurring of the male and female into a different, ‘third’ sexuality represented a quantum leap from fifties timidities yet it originated from a similarly homosexual milieu and sensibility: the difference was in scale and in sophistication.
This was epitomized by the youth style that underpinned this stage of the sixties: Mod:
The only other person we saw was a tall, well-dressed young negro who bought a pair of the coloured denim hipster trousers.
The negro was obviously homosexual and I realized that homosexuals had been buying that stuff for years.
They were the only people with the nerve to wear it, but in the early sixties the climate of opinion was changing, the Mods were wearing the more effeminate and colourful clothes of Carnaby Street.
Like the Edwardians, the Mods assumed what had been an exclusively and outrageously homosexual style and used it as a key to cross into the ‘private’ space of the body and of self-discovery; unlike their forebears, they were far more intimately involved with black culture, from the new black music of the Tamla and Sue labels, to the ‘bluebeat’clubs that were opening, as an index of Britain's more visible black community.
Most Mods weren't gay — although Peter Burton writes well of the  cross-over between the two sub-cultures — but to any person unfamiliar with their ideas about pleasure and self, they certainly looked it: ‘Mods were more interested in themselves and each other than in girls…there was a time when Mod boys used make-up and mascara’.
Although carefully coded, the Mods' narcissistic flamboyance eventually transgressed the norms of the dominant culture and they became the objects of their very own custom-made moral panics.
The first, the ‘Mods And Rockers’ violence, wasn't new, but the second one, a whole new form of self-discovery, was: drugs.
Parallel with this style ran the cultural and financial activities of Britain's new pop aristocracy.
Starting from the twin poles of the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, the new, more articulate, and assertive, breed of pop musicians used androgyny as their ‘private’ device to achieve their ‘public’ambitions: financial, sexual and social freedom.
The Beatles began in the showbiz style of a previous generation — homosexual manager, ‘variety’ type packaging, ‘romantic’lyrics — but quickly expressed a fresh sexuality that supplemented their huge class impact: ‘neither boys-together aggression nor boy-next-door pathos,’they challenged pop's previous masculine division between Stud and passive Boy Slave.
Similarly, after passing through, in Keith Richard's words, ‘a heavily camp phase’, the Rolling Stones quickly widened out the Beatles' androgyny into something at once more perverse and disturbing.
From the macho stereotyping of their earlier material, coded rhythm 'n' blues threats taken out of context, their polymorphous presence — Jagger's rubber lips, Keith Richard's aggressive stance, Brian Jones' perfect page-boy cut — soon signified a deep and fundamental challenge to the dominant culture.
What had begun as a process — the Mods' narcissism and the Beatles' androgyny illustrating new ways of regarding gender and the self — quickly became a sales device (Beatles' wigs, etc); yet as this public exploration of sexuality met no barriers and the blurring effect of drugs took hold, it turned back, in 1966/7, into an ever deeper examination of more ‘private’ layers of sexual divergence, of which homosexuality had always been the most easily codified.
The Who's ‘I'm A Boy’ turned mod narcissism and profound identity confusion into an almost psychoanalytic parable: as they leered ‘Put this frock on, little  boy’, they confronted you with how rigidly constructed society's ideas of gender were.
Pink Floyd, in the vanguard of the drug evangelists, matched distorted, bending music to a simple, childlike tale of a transvestite, ‘Arnold Layne’; as Syd Barrett's deadpan vocals offered no judgement, the record was quickly banned.
And in late 1966, the Rolling Stones wound themselves up into a pitch of fury with ‘Have You Seen Your Mother, Baby, Standing In The Shadow?’, one of the most nihilistic records ever made.
Peter Whitehead's film for the song intercut footage of a riot at the Albert Hall in September 1966 with blinding, strobe-like cuts of the Rolling Stones dressing up in drag.
As Brian Jones dissolved into an amoral Pan-hysterics at the end of this incantatory footage, the equation was made clear: sexual equals social revolution and something must break.
‘The year 1967 was something of an annus mirabilis as far as liberal legislation in the sphere of sexual mores was concerned.’
Three Acts passed that year put into implicit political terms the principle underlying the mid-sixties statements of ‘public’ androgyny: ‘Excessively polarised personality types thrive in a culture that demands the repression of certain natural tendencies while people are developing the so-called ‘masculine’and so-called ‘feminine’traits which society considers to be appropriate for each sex.’
The Abortion and National Health Service (Family Planning) Acts made conditions significantly easier for women to take advantage of increased social freedoms and to take control over their own sexuality, while the Sexual Offences Act ended a ten-year battle to decriminalize homosexual acts between men.
(as if to attest to their virtual invisibility, homosexual acts between women had never even been covered by the law that was being repealed.)
Within two years, the Divorce Reform and the Equal Pay Acts had been passed, banishing further remnants of Victorian morality and putting the ‘private’ at the cutting edge of reform.
Yet despite the (partly chemically induced) euphoria of pop music in the summer of 1967 — as the youth utopia seemed to be within grasp — that year also represents the highwater mark of the Teen age, of the love affair between the dominant culture and youth.
No longer would youth and its culture have such a power to affect society as it had had for those brief few years from 1963 to 1967: although the sharp end of youth culture was  confusing purchasing power with political power and demanding change, many of its constituents were caught by the freeze that, introduced the previous year, signified the end of the ten-year boom that had thrust youth into prominence.
The youth market, which had been held together in a fragile unity, fragmented: on the one hand into Teenybop, on the other into the Underground.
Revolution was now the buzzword, as pop allied itself with the youth riots that occurred throughout Europe and America in 1968 and 1969; although overtly concerned with inner space, pop went public with a confusing mixture of ideology and rhetoric, to which private concerns like self and sexuality were subordinated.
Indeed the lasting effect of this period is seen better in the political pressure groups — the Gay and Women's Liberation movements — which it spawned than in the actual pop music of the time.
This public libertarianism, whose very real sense of possibility has remained at the heart of every subsequent ‘utopian’ movement (like the early days of Punk Rock), foundered against the worsening economic climate and the ‘tough’mood of the new Conservative government under the ‘abrasive’Ted Heath.
This mood found its youth cult expression in the aggressively proletarian and puritanical skinheads, who turned the body into a walking instrument of violence — the ultimate expression of ‘traditional’ masculine qualities.
‘The survival of Rock has depended on its position as the core of Male Teen Culture.
But the bovver boys have rejected Rock's traditional status which explains the lack of vitality in British Rock in the early seventies.’
Yet it was through the derided Teenybop that the next pop generation came, as young women quickly moved from varieties of Osmond to something a bit meatier — men who instead of masking the femininity of the adored object, flaunted it and made it part of the package.
Glam Rock simultaneously celebrated the new sexual freedoms and, through the very refusal to look outwards from its reflection in the mirror, reflected the harsher social climate within which it operated.
The most important Glam figure, David Bowie, announced his career in January 1972 with a public statement of his homosexuality, but, characteristically, hedged his bets as a ‘bisexual’.
Homosexuality was plundered partly for its shock value but more importantly the sensibility, which quickly permeated Glam Rock, with which it had long been associated: camp.
‘It is one way of seeing the world as an aesthetic phenomenon.
That way, the way of Camp, is not in terms of beauty but in terms of the degree of artifice, of stylisation.’
David Bowie came out properly in a blaze of obvious self-recreation — from Terry Nelhams through Andy Warhol and it touched every suburban heart.
You don't need to be you: you can change your clothes and your name and your hair and be an entirely new person!
Glam's translation of this high art idea of camp into pop (seen at its most powerful in Roxy Music's ‘In Every Dream Home A Heartache’), resulted both in a primitive post-modernism turning yourself and your body into an Art Object with all the irony and the distancing that that implied — and a mocking entry into a ‘public’ private fantasy, as it offered a cultural space for a mass white audience to play with hitherto repressed ideas about self, consumption, and masculinity.
Typically, its social effect was highly ambiguous: this placing of the private at centre stage was in part a flight from harsher social conditions, in part a coded opposition to them: ‘glam rock revelled in a display that was intent on demonstrating that the assumed ‘privacy’ of sexual matters then being so fervently insisted upon by Mrs Whitehouse, was an illusion'.
Yet, in retrospect, Glam dovetailed exactly with developments in consumer capitalism.
From the early 1970s the idea of revivalism in consumption and aesthetic theory had become rampant, as people started to buy things for their ‘kitsch’ value or their references — note the Deco dream world of Biba's store in Kensington High Street as the high water mark of this style in the United Kingdom.
In its total concentration on self, Glam presaged the invasion by capitalism into the hitherto most private areas of people's psyches, in the Me-Decade.
In the United States, homosexuals became an important market and a process which spread over here— a political movement slowly mutated into a consumerist, self-sufficient ghetto: politics replaced by pleasure.
As the style passed, Glam left a couple of stings in its tail.
Two albums by David Bowie suggested possible options for this  concentration on self: ‘Diamond Dogs’(1974) made explicit the equation that the Velvet Underground had hinted at in the mid-sixties, namely that divergent sexuality of every type was only an inevitable consequence of a civilization at the brink of apocalypse.
The world is ending, so anything goes.
And, as importantly, ‘Young Americans’(1975) reintroduced black music, with all its connotations of forbidden pleasure, in the form of disco back into the mainstream white audience.
In the fading days of the postwar consensus, under the Labour patriarchy of that civil servants' union boss Jim Callaghan, Apocalypse seemed more viable than pleasure.
Surrounded by the commercial tat of a failed sexual ‘revolution’, Punk Rock threw sex back into the face of society in an apocalyptic vision; as the name Sex Pistols made clear, sex here was not a means to pleasure, or self-discovery but a weapon: ‘'It's the only way to smash the wretched civilisation.’
I said.
‘Yes.
Sex is the only way to infuriate them.
Much more fucking and they'll be screaming hysterics in next to no time.’'
Despite the myriad perversions emblazoned across Vivienne Westwood's clothes for ‘Sex’, Punk Rock's concerns were not private but public: the Self here was amplified, in songs like ‘I Wanna Be Me’, into a desperate assertion of individuality in a Burroughsian world of collapsing values and dehumanized sex, and the body was not something to be celebrated but — in songs like ‘Bodies’, with its excoriation, ‘I'm not an animal!’— objectified through fear.
Indeed Punk Rock's attitude to the sex act itself was not libertarian but puritan:
I don't believe in sexuality at all.
People are very unsexy.
I don't enjoy that side of life.
Being sexy is just a fat arse and tits that will do anything you want.
I personally look on myself as one of the most sexless monsters ever.
This puritan streak in punk caught the political and cultural shift into ‘hard’ styles only too well: ‘It'll be English (fascism): ratty, mean, pinched, hand in glove with Thatcher as mother sadist over all her whimpering little public schoolboys, the seventies Unity (Mitford) to finally consummate the fascist union.’
As Punk Rock codified from a post-modern art movement — very similar, in late 1976, to a United Kingdom version of Andy Warhol's Factory — into a ‘public’ movement  with a crudely ‘tough’style, it nevertheless delivered a disturbingly accurate political polemic.
Slogans like No Future! accurately presaged the twin dominant political forces of the late seventies and early eighties: Thatcherism and unemployment.
Yet its most sophisticated effect was cultural.
Buried beneath the sensationalism — for Punk Rock's public face was nothing if not lurid — was a considered critique — derived in part from libertarian theories like Situationism, a big influence in the sixties and since — of pop music and youth culture's place at the cutting edge of consumer capitalism.
Pop was no longer a community of youth as it had been in the sixties, nor a means of changing society, but a meaningless marketing exercise which deserved to be exposed for the charade that it was.
Yet Punk was betrayed by its libertarian roots: despite the rhetoric and the packaging, the Sex Pistols were utopian, and their obvious pleasure in and mastery of the pop form inspired countless others to take up instruments and make meaning through music.
Yet it changed pop's possible meanings irrevocably: if pop was about marketing, then it would include the marketing in the actual product (namely — McLaren's ‘Ten Lessons’ in ‘The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle').
Pop would forever carry about an awareness of its commercial process.
And, too, its past: ‘Behind punk's favoured ‘cut-ups’ lay hints of disorder, of breakdown and category confusion: a desire not only to erode racial and gender boundaries but also to confuse chronological sequence by mixing up details from different periods.’
Early Punk clothing mixed up every youth style since the war and joined them together with safety pins; as its radical content faded, this was to supply a rich compost for new styles to grow, as each constituent part — Mod, Ted, skinhead — was unravelled in a series of revivals.
There was no time common to all popular music, as myriad fragments of past, present, and future whirled in a mad dance.
Thus, despite the threat that it had posed to the music industry, for six months from December 1976 to June 1977, Punk Rock was quickly recuperated into a new kind of pop music that accurately reproduced the latest conditions of consumer capitalism.
In the early 1980s, pop as private pleasure as a flight from harsh external reality into self, or as a celebration of the ‘new leisure’ became fashionable again.
One crucial element in this was  the resumption of centre stage by a type of music that had been in the dominant culture throughout Punk rock — black disco music.
‘The Afro-American tendency to extend the body in musical terms signifies in the case of soul and disco an important marriage of pop's romanticism to the contradictory material possibilities of daily life in the contemporary world’.
From a mass popularity in 1975–8, disco had moved beneath the surface to take root in the self-contained homosexual ghetto, which had been quietly developing newer definitions of self and pleasure.
Slowly, homosexuality and the (male) deviant sex it introduced became yet again a metaphor for ideas of the ‘private’, or the hidden — as pop, once more, concentrated on ever more fragmented ideas about private possibilities — introduced, by way of example, ‘case histories’ that could serve as models for this new round of pleasure and fantasy.
What did it feel like, this popular music, as every kind of male sexuality was wheeled out of the closet and onto the marketplace with a febrile flourish?
Constant shift of movement, of interest suddenly taken up and dropped.
Pillars, dance floor; rectangular, well lit area at street side of disco.
Back bar smelling of amyl and sex.
Side pool bar with those who wait on their chairs.
Man in red shirt, jeans, sits leg cocked up, waiting, waiting.
Pair standing up by central pillars begin to argue — older man about 40, haggard looking — younger man on defensive.
Businessman in suit white hair bites his nails nervously….
This description of Heaven, London's biggest gay disco, omits the sense of camaraderie (and occasionally, solidarity) that can exist in gay venues, yet it captures a state akin to that of Jameson's second basic feature of modernism, which he terms ‘schizophrenia’:
the schizophrenic will clearly have a far more intense experience of any given present of the world than we do, since our own present is always part of some larger set of projects which force us selectively to focus our perceptions.
From Frankie Goes to Hollywood — who presented the image of two leather queens — through Marc Almond — in the image of a northern gay boy — through Bronski Beat — presented as ‘out’ political gays — to the rash of transvestite and  transsexual ‘gender bender’stylists like Marilyn and Boy George, sexual divergence has crossed over into the mainstream in a psychological paradigm that services perfectly pop's current industrial situation.
Culture turned completely into commodity must also turn into the star commodity of the spectacular society.
Colin Kerr…predicts that in the second half of this century culture will hold the key role in the development of the economy, a role played by the automobile in the first half (of this century).
The current form in which pop reproduces itself, the music video, is the perfect post-modern form, standing as it does at the vector of the leisure industries' new situation.
With music video, the industrial interdependence of previously separate businesses is enmeshed in a new multi-media agglomerate, as the film, music and television industries combine to develop and exploit this new form.
The music video is an advert turned into product: pop is now culture in the situationist sense, with its own past, its own references, even its own marketing, as part of a seamless package.
With its industrial importance, it can't afford not to be.
Popular music has thus dissolved from a specifically youth-oriented product at the margins of society into a new type of industry which effectively draws areas that were previously considered private and ‘hidden’ in our society into the centre of consumption and governmental strategy.
The dominant culture has caught up!
‘If Britain's economic future too depends on the expansion of the electronic leisure goods industries, on the exploitation of new communications technology, then leisure will continue to be a material as well as an ideological problem’.
As the leisure industries move towards the heart of consumer capitalism's new conditions, then pop's sexuality is increasingly as controlled as it is exploited.
It is thus eminently possible for the homosexual sub-culture to inform and, on occasion, dominate virtually every pop style since the 1950s and none more so than in mid-1980s — but still to find itself politically disenfranchised, socially marginal, and vulnerable to attacks from the New Morality.
So while music video, bar a few exceptions, reinforces the most obvious aspects of the ‘dominant’ sexuality, in the tired arrogance of advertising techniques, an explicitly ‘out-gay’and highly successful pop group like Bronski Beat will split up because their politics can't cope with current pop practices.
The spectre of the homosexual as Bogeyman too (just like in the 1950s) returns with the moral panic over the disease AIDS and the sensational press coverage of the Cyprus ‘Spy’ trial.
In these conditions, the type of homosexuality that is mediated through pop music can only go just so far: in a perfect paradigm, Frankie Goes to Hollywood exploited the gay image of lead singers Paul Rutherford and Holly Johnson — for ‘Relax’— and then dropped it like a hot potato as soon as another marketing device — this time, nuclear war became available for ‘Two Tribes’.
Divergent sexuality, it is clear even now, is only permissible as long as it allows itself to be stolen, as long as it conforms to existing industry patterns and dominant sexual stereotypes.
While male homosexuality has been the main subject of this chapter, it is worth noting that ‘male beauty and narcissism, playing with ‘self’ and sexual ambiguities, still indicates a male privilege in public life.
Pop culture acknowledges the sign of ‘gayness’, but there is not yet a whisper of female sexual autonomy, of lesbianism.’
This opens the door still further.
Despite pop's current cutting adrift of male homosexual signs, it is still possible for sexual analyses and critiques of consumer capitalism, such as can originate in the experience of gay men and women, to emerge from pop's cultural discourse in order to point to the future:
a new consciousness (that) is arising out of a morass of a declining society that has bent too far towards rationalism, towards technology, and toward the acquisition of power through unbridled competition.
The new consciousness takes note that our society has become over-balanced in favour of the so-called masculine qualities of character.
To begin with, it is a question of making sure such messages get through and are acted upon.
Frankie said
But what did they mean?
SIMON FRITH
In Britain 1984 turned out to be the year of the coalminers' strike and Frankie Goes to Hollywood.
Repeating images — the miners' stolid anger, Frankie's smirking leatherware; juxtaposed stereotypes — pickets as hooligans, gays lounging promiscuously in the night.
If pop is a sign of its times, then Frankie's social message during the key political struggle of the 1980s was decidedly oblique.
Frankie were a pop phenomenon just for their sales figures.
Their first two releases were million sellers, ‘Two Tribes’ went straight into the charts at number 1 and was the inescapable sound of the summer; ‘Relax’(in all its remixed varieties) was a permanent hit, the most successful twelve-inch ever.
Welcome to the Pleasure Dome , Frankie's end-of-year double LP claimed record advance orders (though its real sales figures were never made clear), and the group took over the message tee-shirt, using the large print originally designed by Katherine Hamnett for better causes to promote ‘Relax’ and spawning a cacophony of ‘Frankie Says’and ‘Who Gives A Fuck What Frankie Says’slogans.
Walking down Oxford Street in August, watching the tourists snap up the pirate editions of ‘Frankie Says Arm The Unemployed’ I decided this was the final triumph of the ‘new pop’, the eclipse of content by form.
By then Frankie had reached the stage of being famous for being famous.
Their success gave them a power that everyone wanted to share; their commercial momentum carried the whole pop world along.
And theirs was a comforting rags-to-riches story.
Frankie themselves were typical graduates of the 1970s post-punk provincial scene (five lads from Liverpool) in  which Bowie boys became punks and skins, dyed their hair repeatedly, hung out in the gay clubs with the furtiveness that marks everyone on provincial streets in the small hours.
In Holly Johnson's words:
My social security number was written on the side of my head.
Then I had a mini-mohican.
Just a square of blond hair and a beard….
The worst was when I shaved my head and used to paint it red and green.
You used to get people writing into the Liverpool Echo saying, ‘Who's this Martian walking round town.’
I used to get battered….
Decadence was the key word then….
This was the scene — musicians and dance floor posers drawn from the same pool, sex as a slippery transaction — that produced Marc Almond and Soft Cell in Leeds, Boy George, and the early, sleazy Duran Duran in Birmingham.
Frankie had nothing much more to offer till they signed to Zang Tumb Tuum (ZTT) the label (named after a First World War futurist magazine) formed by New Musical Express (NME) theorist, Paul Morley, and Dollar/ABC/Malcolm McLaren producer, Trevor Horn.
Morley had the concept; in Paul Rutherford's words, ‘Morley had his strategy all worked out, he wanted it to be like the Sex Pistols — all the outrage, controversy — but this time with all the sex’, and it was rumoured that he was first interested in Bronski Beat for the Frankie role — they turned him down.
But Horn had the sound, the remarkable ability to create epic spaces in ordinary songs.
Frankie's records made best sense in a cheap British disco, where the elementary chorus chants, the beat machines' seedy grandeur, and the stodgy vocals had distinct echoes of Gary Glitter.
As an NME writer Paul Morley was the most influential theorist of ‘new pop’, combining a traditional reading of music's emotional power with a modernist celebration of that power's fleeting ambiguity.
His problem was to translate theory into practice and so Frankie's success was, for him, a triumph of rock journalism.
But the question remains — was Frankie's undoubted popularity subversive?
I don't think Frankie's radical intentions are in doubt.
‘Relax’ may only have become a scandal when the BBC in belated confusion (and in response to teasing video clips) banned it, but  singers Holly Johnson and Paul Rutherford promote an explicitly gay image, and ‘Two Tribes’was a pointed response to nuclear defence policy.
It was the smoothness of Frankie's success that was unnerving; it was hard to find anyone (other than ZTT) who even at the height of the sales buzz thought that Frankie, or their records, had changed the way they understood their lives.
They were a best-selling group without real fans, more like the Archies than the Sex Pistols, and they lost significance as rapidly as they gained it.
The week after their LP,Pleasure Dome , entered the charts at number one it was displaced by Wham's Make It Big and the Frankie moment was over.
By the time they toured for the first time, in 1985, they seemed silly — nothing dates as fast as an advertisement.
Frankie's fall reflected the way they made it in the first place, through marketing rather than live performance.
Their energy was the energy of pop's sales teams rather than its consumers.
There were, by 1984, more television pop shows than ever before, more knowing pop people in record company control, more competitors for the leisure pound.
Frankie was their triumph and so the final point of their story wasn't its ‘outrage’ but its cosiness.
Frankie's very success made them part of the pop family.
By the end of the year Mike Reid, the deejay who had initiated the BBC ban on ‘Relax’, was the voice over their television commercials.
Frankie, a pleasure-chasing group led by out-front gay men had become family entertainers.
What did it mean?
Frankie were interesting not musically but ideologically.
The story of commercial co-option is familiar in pop history but the terms in which the story is told change, and Paul Morley's words about Frankie were thus more important than Frankie themselves.
The practice of pop involves, by its nature, the practice of theorizing; people need to make sense of the continuing processes of musical evaluation, choice and commitment whether they are musicians, entrepreneurs or fans.
The results may be low theory — confused, inconsistent, full of hyperbole and silence, but still theory, and theory which is compelled by necessity to draw key terms and assumptions from high theory, from the more systematic accounts of art, commerce, pleasure and class that are available.
To understand the Frankie story, then, it is necessary to  understand the low theory that informed it, and to place this theory historically.
To put it very generally, from the mid-1950s (the rock 'n' roll moment) to the end of the 1960s the dominant sensibility in pop was a rock sensibility which had, at its cutting edge, an account of itself which drew on the Marxist critique of mass culture.
From the mid-1970s (the punk moment) to 1984 the dominant sensibility was a pop sensibility which had, at its cutting edge, an account of itself which drew on an avant-garde critique of mass culture; this was the account developed by Paul Morley and the other theorists of the ‘new pop’.
Different sensibilities produce different aesthetics, different criteria of subversion and co-option.
Rock arguments in the late 1960s thus focused on commercial ‘sell-outs’, on the transformation of culture into commodity, on rock's relations to community and community action.
The term which fused aesthetic and political values was ‘authenticity’.
The new pop sensibility, by contrast, took artifice for granted, celebrated cult not community, defined its subversions in self-consciously formalist terms.
I have not got space here to go into the sources of new pop theory — they include avant-garde art music, the new technological and computer processes of mixing and recording sound, art school flirtation with structuralist and post-structuralist theories of representation, punk flirtation with situationist theories of the spectacle — but their combined impact was to focus attention on popular music as a construction of sound and image.
The authority of musicians as such was undermined; political interest moved from the reorganization of production to the disruption of consumption.
Trevor Horn's most interesting project before ZTT was, therefore, Malcolm McLaren's Duck Rock LP.
This was, from a rock perspective, an obvious ‘rip off’(McLaren mixed together African field recordings, New York street and radio noise, studio tricks, and claimed the results as his own) but, from his own pop art position (pioneered by the Sex Pistols), it was a political gesture, exposing the cultural assumptions of our usual sound standards, raising questions about what music, if any, is ‘natural’.
Horn had, in a different way, addressed similar issues in his work with ABC, using the 1980s routine of issuing singles in a variety of mixes not just to exploit the fans but also to expose the  studio processes and calculations kept hidden when records are presented as ‘finished’ goods.
And ABC's Martin Fry — who did write his own music — was no less subversive than McLaren in accounting for his own authority.
Fry drew mocking attention to the fact that what is involved in pop is not simply music, but music as articulated through a performer or, rather, through an image of a performer — and if musical meaning is conventional, not natural, so is our sense of pop personality.
We read qualities like sincerity, anger, sexuality and warmth into performers because of the way they organize the signs of their personality.
The basis of pop performance is not spontaneity (which binds rock to nature) but calculation (which binds pop to culture).
And Fry and the other new pop stars (Human League, Kid Creole, Soft Cell, Culture Club) also realized that pop works not through any old combination of sound, image and personality, but through their combination as a commercial package.
Artistic interest in the making of meaning does not end when the music is made, the record released, the performance over, but is equally invested in the way in which it takes on its public meanings, via the media of television, radio, advertisement, the star system, Fleet Street gossip columns, poster magazines and so forth.
The rise of the video-clip encouraged this blurring of the traditional rock distinction between making music and marketing a commodity.
The new pop groups were expected by their record companies to construct their music as its own advertisement, as a video spot on MTV, Sky Channel, TV-am.
The effect of video-pop was to shift the balance between pop's aural and visual elements (and to favour genres, like teeny bop, in which visuals have always been crucial — hence the ‘second British invasion’ of the American charts and the success of groups like Duran Duran and Wham!); and to raise questions about the construction of pop sexuality.
Pop videos themselves are consistently reactionary in their sexual imagery (and this is an aspect of the cooption of new pop to which I will return) if only because they draw on visual conventions of masculinity and femininity (taken from cinema history and television commercials) that are much more coherent than pop's adolescent ambiguities.
What was more important for new pop sexuality, then, was the rock-despised  ‘artificial’ 1970s genre, disco, which, in its very use of formulas, raised questions about the pop construction, via dance, of the body.
Disco offered an alternative to rock's boy-meets-girl party conventions and Britain's dance-floor poseurs, Bowie boys, and girls initially, became the New Romantics, a movement spawning such ambiguous and even asexual stars as Boy George and Marilyn.
Such dressing-up was, like glam rock before it, a boys' affair.
Male homosexuality, bisexuality and  transsexuality have been coded into pop imagery in ways in which lesbianism and female bisexuality have not.
Female sexuality, it seems, is still defined as ‘natural’; women remain ‘the sex’.
This is obvious in Frankie's videos.
Holly Johnson's and Paul Rutherford's games with masculinity and male pleasure are set in remarkably old-fashioned contexts, in sixties-style ‘liberated’ party settings, women as available, threatening receptacles of desire.
If Frankie, like David Bowie before them, suggest that the most ‘natural’ of rock's meanings, its ‘raunchiness’, is just another (and rather dreary) pose — a pose in which the other boys in the band are, ironically, trapped — women are still excluded from the fun.
As an NME writer at the beginning of the 1980s Paul Morley was the most pretentious and most entertaining of the new pop theorists.
While his colleague Ian Penman explicitly linked his critical judgements to high theory figures like Derrida, Foucault and Barthes, Morley remained true to rock's low theory concern with music's emotional effects; his analyses of the pleasures of the text were subordinated to rhapsodies on the pleasures of the (listening) subject.
The Morley/Penman project had a negative thrust —‘rockist’ duly became a term of abuse as casually applied by pop fans as ‘selling out’had been by 1960s rock fans — but its tone was relentlessly optimistic and Morley was duly rewarded for his faith in market forces (and in Dollar in particular) by being invited into Trevor Horn's record label plans.
It is important to stress, though, that a pop critic's power is limited.
Writers do not influence consumers' tastes, they respond to them; they do not create trends but explain them.
The importance of music press writers like Paul Morley, and of disc jockeys like Peter Powell (or John Peel), is to make available a public language in which private musical judgements can be legitimated.
Writers are important for their interpretation of pop as a theoretical practice, but, almost inevitably, after the event.
Frankie Goes To Hollywood did not become successful because of Morley's sales campaign; rather, his sales campaign became significant because Frankie were successful (and Morley's hubris in thinking otherwise fed into Frankie's fall — new pop was easily co-opted because its radical intentions were of no consequence for its commercial practices).
The important question is not how popular cultural sensibilities shift but why they do.
Ideologies change in response to material circumstances and needs and the 1970 rock/pop shift was not just the result of some random play of stars and influences.
It reflected changing means and relations of cultural production and consumption.
This is not the place to outline these in detail but, to put it simply, in the late 1970s the record industry faced a ‘crisis’(a stagnation in record sales after twenty years of expansion) brought on by two simultaneous developments: on the one hand, an economic recession which hit particularly hard the most important sector of the record buying market, working-class youth; on the other hand, technological developments in the leisure industry which meant either new sorts of competition for people's leisure resources (home computers and video recorders become as significant in young people's lives as record players, for instance) or disrupted record companies' profit-making routines (home taping thus became the industry's chief bogey).
The record industry's response to this situation was not particularly systematic but by now some trends are obvious: the average age of the pop market (and especially the pop single-buying market) is younger than it was; record companies devote more attention to building big mainstream stars than to servicing a variety of musical tastes; stars are now conceived and sold as multi-media performers; there has been a steady decline in the significance of live music making except as a promotional device.
This was the context in which the rock sensibility began to falter (a faltering marked by the ‘crisis’ of punk).
What collapsed was the idea — which emerged in the 1950s and gave cultural shape to the 1960s — that ‘youth’ is a community.
The rock sensibility always included a strand of folk ideology — folk  musicians and folk ways, particularly the celebration of ‘live’ performance, were central to the development of rock in both Britain and the United States.
The sociological fantasy that pop musicians could be some sort of organic intellectuals was remarkably stubborn; it dominated initial left-wing responses to punk, and it was only when the material basis of the fantasy — youth as class — broke down in the late 1970s recession, that different ways of conceiving pop politics began to be attractive.
Youth unemployment, and particularly its denial of school leavers' ‘independence’, also raised new problems of pleasure.
When work can no longer be taken for granted nor can leisure, and this, in turn, calls into question the hedonistic routine on which rock had been based.
Thus, though a record like Wham's ‘Wham Rap!’(a disco-based assertion of the right not to work, to have a good time all the time, ‘You've got soul on the dole!’) was a big hit, it worked as fantasy rather than as any sort of explicit political comment.
The old cliché has it that in hard times pop culture goes soft, entertainment becomes more trivial, more ‘escapist’.
But this is not just a matter of cultural manipulation — rulers laying on circuses when there is no bread.
‘Escape’ from hard times is a cultural necessity and the harder the times the more fantastic and precarious and desperate a business it becomes.
The 1980s working-class youth sub-culture is thus the ‘casuals’ who, at first glance, epitomize the employed half of Thatcher's two nations, neatly dressed in their designer-label sports goods, clutching walkmen and video-tapes.
In truth, though, like the punks and skins, the casuals emerged from the dole queues and football terraces, from the ‘delinquent’ world of drugs and brawls and menace.
The visible affluence of these supposed state dependants implies, in itself, illicit goods, and their flaunting of their ‘free time’ is a reminder that a leisure society creates its own forms of disorder.
The conventional sociological reading of youth sub-cultures as resisting bourgeois cultural hegemony makes no sense of the casuals — they're involved in a stylistic refusal to be excluded from dominant images of the good life.
The casuals realized, quicker than most commentators, that the radical aspect of the Thatcher government's response to the recession is its rejection of the Protestant Ethic.
Leisure is no longer defined as something earned by work; work, rather, is to  be made available by leisure.
For the Tories the long-term solution to the recession lies in the expansion of the leisure goods industries, the development of communication technologies.
This is a fantasy, but a fantasy with immediate ideological consequences; relations of consumption have become as important an aspect of class struggle as relations of production, as important an issue, that is, for state regulation (or lack of regulation), corporate investment and social control.
From the perspective of youth culture and pop music two aspects of this are significant.
The ‘leisure economy’ describes, of course, a situation in which the affluent are serviced by the non-affluent, the ‘new’workers will work directly on other people's pleasures.
What is really new about this vision, though (the non-affluent have always serviced the affluent) is that hedonism becomes the moral dynamo of the economy: pleasures are justified by the work they provide, having fun becomes a moral duty.
This is to reverse the conventional relationship between youth and age.
Youth has always been the ideological sign of pleasure because it is a time of irresponsibility, possibility, change; young people are envied and feared and so feature in the organization of consumption as a recurring adult fantasy.
But in the leisure economy projected for the 1990s young people will be the workers — low paid, low skilled, subservient.
Pleasure will be an adult privilege, a mark of economic power, class status and moral superiority.
Consumption will be organized around fantasies of grown-up success; hence the Yuppie phenomenon in the United States, and hence the casuals, accepting this ideology of leisure, defying their subordinate place in it.
The second point about the leisure economy is that it places people's use of their ‘free’ time at the centre of capitalists' (and governments') concern.
The continued power and prosperity of multi-media entrepreneurs like Rupert Murdoch and Robert Maxwell depends on their goods being ‘entertaining’, and ‘giving the people what they want’ /‘making sure people want what they're given’is not as straightforward a business in this context as it is often presented.
In particular, the more people's leisure choices are ‘privatized’— pushed into the home, made a matter of individual taste — the more they become a matter of public interest.
A Tory economic strategy which rests  on Sunday shopping, cable television and fun parks rests on people behaving in ways in which they have 110 need to at all.
People would not die without computer games, the latest Sylvester Stallone movie or a bank holiday trip to Alton Towers, and ‘the leisure economy’ is thus dependent on essentially unstable, individual, market needs and choices.
From the capitalists' point of view the sensible long-term strategy is to control the means of transmission and distribution (which are necessary, whatever people's tastes) and to leave the risks of cultural production to small, more competitive businesses.
This has certainly been the record industry strategy: in the last ten years the major companies have consolidated their control of the manufacture and distribution of records, tapes and videos while leaving more and more of the musical enterprise to the ‘independents’.
But even in this framework, consumption must be orderly — people can indulge themselves, make free with their time, form their own tastes, but only within limits.
The choices involved must be market choices, and this is the whole thrust of the developing Tory strategy on leisure licences and regulation.
This is the context in which the new pop concern to disrupt consumption can be seen as a valid political project.
The problem (and this brings us back to the Frankie story) is what the disruption of consumption means.
The new pop retained its radical credibility as long as the music business was on the defensive; and in the late 1970s context of falling sales and punk politics there was, indeed, a sense that pop's usual gatekeepers (Artists and Repertoire departments, radio programmers, music press editors) were not in control of what was happening.
But once record companies went back on the sales offensive the new pop was easily coopted.
By the time ZTT was formed the new pop sensibility had been subtly transformed into a commercial sensibility — the way to make sense of the pop process was in terms of market competition and success.
As noted earlier (p. 178), the commercial practices prevailed over any radical intentions.
A good record, by definition, was one which sold; good times were guaranteed by joining in the fun of buying it too.
Peter Powell became the voice of Radio 1;Smash Hits the dominant music magazine; EMI's Duran Duran Britain's biggest group.
But perhaps the easiest way to follow the new pop story is in  the pages of The Face , a magazine founded in 1980 at the conjuncture of music, fashion, art and design.
Its early juxtapositions of discourse were wonderfully exciting; more clearly even than Morley and his colleagues,The Face showed how pop style works — as a production, as a phantasm, as a source of skewed discontent and momentary carelessness.
And then, slowly, the tone changed, grew more consistent, more self-congratulatory.
By the time of the special fifth anniversary issue success was claimed as ‘the credo of the decade’:The Face's own success (a circulation of 80,000 and rising; an incomparable influence on other consumer magazines), success as an intangible personal quality.
The deconstruction of the pop sales process had become a breathy celebration of sales people.
Authority and art are mythical terms again but applied now not to musicians but the designers, copy-writers, businessmen.
Paul Morley, Trevor Horn, and Jill Sinclair were the ‘stars’ of Frankie.
The 1980s pop story is full of ironies.
The new pop stars — self-conscious frauds, tackily glamorous like Boy George — fed a revival of old-fashioned pop gossip, a staple now of the Sun and the Mirror .
The Face , once a cool, mocking style catalogue, now reads like a house journal, a Tatler for the design and fashion scene.
The rise of the video-clip meant not some startling dissolution of media boundaries, but, rather, the incorporation of pop into the aesthetics of advertising.
As already mentioned (pp. 176–7), this had particularly reactionary consequences for sexual representation.
Whatever the sexual ambiguities of the 1980s pop voice, the video-maker's work with the clear gender divisions of their semi-pornographic film models: men at the narrative centre of their three-minute stories, women as the trivialized, undressed, humiliated object of the male gaze.
As the ways in which pop was written about swayed and shifted in the winds of hand-me-down art school theory, the ways in which it was produced seemed more and more familiar.
Cultural theorists fell on pop video with squeals of delight (there is already more high theory of video around than there has ever been of music); pop fans watching the Whistle Test's weekly video vote just groaned.
As Jon Savage has pointed out, pop video is, in fact, a good example of ‘post-modern culture’, the product, in the words of  Fredric Jameson, of ‘a new type of social life and a new economic order — what is often euphemistically called…postindustrial or consumer society, the society of the media or the spectacle, or multinational capitalism’.
New pop was a post-modern form generally — in its cut-up of styles and media, its genre cross-references, its use of pastiche and parody, its dressing up of mass cultural forms with high cultural claims and vice versa .
And the pleasure of the best texts, from ABC to Wham!, from ‘Don't You Want Me’ to ‘Strike’, did lie in their combination of sensual and intellectual intrigue, in fragmentation and distance as well as melody and beat.
But these were surface pleasures and, in the end, the very smoothness of new pop consumption, its implication that all cultural goods, all cultural consumers, are equal, undermined any claims to subversion.
Style offers only an illusion of democracy, an illusion, indeed, that in a capitalist society is a necessary part of the leisure process.
What are concealed are the material inequalities of leisure power, the unequal distributions of cultural capital.
Look carefully at the casuals and see their threads beginning to unravel.
The celebration of youth styles has always meant distant views or excessive close-ups — live on the surfaces and the make-up is soon smudged.
The strength of the rock and roll tradition lay in its fantasy of the streets (and in the development of that fantasy by the suburban youth who dominate pop history).
The new pop music was, by contrast, mall music, shiny but confined.
It is not surprising that the counter-sounds got louder and louder, that new myths developed of roots and region, history, authenticity.
There is a limit to how long people can look as though they're having fun.
‘Relax!’ sang Frankie and there was a strange, desperate tightness to their voice.
Making popular music
The consumer as producer
DAVE LAING
It is a commonplace that production and consumption are interdependent.
Without production of material or cultural goods, there can be no consumption.
Without a demand for, and consumption of, the use-values embodied in those goods, there is no impetus for continuing production.
In certain areas of popular culture, the relation between production and consumption has another aspect.
There, the producers of today are frequently the consumers of yesterday.
Through the experience of consuming music as a listener, many individuals are drawn into producing music of their own.
Folk culture provides the clearest example of this process, since it involves informal but deliberate procedures for the oral transmission of an expanding folksong repertoire from one generation to the next.
In popular music what matters is not the precise transmission of the existing repertoire.
There are important instances of the leap from consumer to producer being motivated by a desire to emulate admired sounds as in the rhythm and blues movement among young white Britons during the early 1960s which involved the Rolling Stones and The Kinks.
But the motivation can equally be one of dissatisfaction with the music presented to consumers.
In this case what results is a revolt of consumers who turn to production of iconoclastic, avant-garde or radical production.
This chapter is concerned with one such burst of production powered by dissatisfaction: the independent recording movement which grew out of the explosion of punk music in Britain in 1976–7.
Like a number of other cultural forms, popular music in the west is dominated by a commercial market system, which itself is dominated by a handful of transnational companies.
But the  most important fact about contemporary popular music is not an effect of that dominance, even though the structure of the music industry is shaped by this fact.
It is the centrality of recordings within popular music today.
For most people, popular music equals recorded music, which they hear at home, in the street, at discos and so on.
The percentage of the population which attends live performances of music more than very occasionally is very small.
Musicians, critics and cultural commentators often compare recorded music unfavourably with live performance.
The arguments are both economic and aesthetic.
The economic position has been put most forcefully by organizations representing professional musicians.
In Britain, the Musicians Union has mounted a campaign under the slogan ‘Keep Music Live’.
It points to the way in which the cheaper discotheque has ousted live bands from many venues where in the mid and late 70s young musicians were able to gain experience and learn their trade.
It has been effectively argued that live performance before an audience can be the most crucial part of a popular musician's growth as an artist.
Unlike classical performers, the education of a jazz or rock musician has very little of the formal teaching situation about it; these players learn ‘on the job’, through the act of performance itself.
But to this assertion of the erosion of the traditional ‘apprenticeship’ system for musicians and of the economic harm done to some younger performers is often added a third reason for denigrating recorded music.
This aesthetic argument claims, quite simply, that recorded music is intrinsically inferior to the ‘real thing’, live performance.
To a large degree, this view is based on a misconception of the relationship between the two types of music.
The anti-recording position assumes that a sound recording is literally a record of a live event, a  memento of it, as a snapshot might be of a holiday or a family event.
Its only value (according to this argument), is to call to mind the initial event.
Such is the case with some folk or jazz records, but the vast majority of rock music performers see recording as equal to, if not more important than, live playing and regard it as a different cultural form demanding different approaches.
Recorded music has now become a separate expressive form, thanks to a range of studio technologies deriving fundamentally from the ability to edit and amalgamate sounds, made possible by the use of magnetic tape.
The result is that today a recording is seldom the transcription of a single musical event.
Instead of being akin to a photograph, it is more comparable to a photomontage.
Arguably, too, the listener to recorded music is in a position to take a more active part in the music, by deciding how and when to listen by being able to ‘edit’ recordings to make up his or her own programmes on cassette tape.
However, until quite recently, the possibility of making recordings in Britain was dominated by a few large companies involved in manufacturing and distributing records as well as originating them.
During the 1960s, there were effectively only four companies in the British record industry, led by EMI and Decca.
During the 1970s, the major American companies, whose music had previously been licensed to the British firms, set up their own branch companies in Europe.
In the 1980s, the economic recession has produced a trend towards takeovers and mergers in the international record industry.
EMI has been absorbed by Thorn, Decca by PolyGram and a merger has been agreed between RCA and the German-owned Ariola.
A proposed merger between PolyGram and WEA was abandoned in late 1984 because of opposition from the anti-monopoly bodies of the American and German governments.
The percentage share of record sales in Britain accounted for by the large international companies is shown in Table 10.1.
While the figures for individual firms fluctuate from year to year (reflecting to some extent the ownership of the biggest hits in each year), the aggregate market share of the five biggest companies has remained remarkably constant over twelve years, at just under two-thirds.
This supports the view that, despite their competitive attitude towards one another, the big companies play similar roles at both artistic and economic levels.
They offer to the consumer the same broad range of musical production and use a similar range of criteria in choosing which specific recordings to make and distribute.
Incidentally, this evidence also tends to undermine arguments that the music industry is in the grip of an increasing momentum towards outright monopoly.
There is no reason to assume that the present static situation will not continue.
Because of their heavy running costs, the big companies have a built-in disposition towards the type of popular music which is capable of the widest-possible appeal.
This usually means a ‘transnational’ appeal, unhampered by a particular orientation towards a single national culture.
The result is often a skilful music which is also somewhat bland.
The most successful example of the last decade has been Abba.
It is also important to add that most large companies also issue recordings of lesser appeal, notably in the classical field.
The initial costs of the latter are generally held to be underwritten by the large surplus generated by any big hit record.
Nicholas Garnham has argued that this provision of a wide-ranging repertoire also has an economic logic.
Discussing the ‘use-values’ of cultural commodities he has written:
These have proved difficult if not impossible to pin down in any precise terms and demand for them appears to be similarly volatile….
Thus the Cultural Industries, if they are to establish a stable market, are forced to create a relationship with an audience or public to whom they offer not a simple cultural good, but a cultural repertoire across which risks can be spread.
Nevertheless, within the large number of recordings issued, decisions are made as to which will be most energetically promoted.
Here, a criterion of ‘commercial appeal’ frequently comes into play, and this is largely conservative in character.
The only guide available to what may be very popular in the future is felt to be what has been very popular in the past.
The result can be an indifference to most innovatory musical work.
During the 1970s, however, countervailing tendencies developed within British popular music culture.
There was a growing availability of low-cost technology for recording.
Previously, an important part of the major companies' dominance had been the sheer cost of making recordings of the ‘professional’ standard deemed to be essential to achieve radio play and hence large sales.
The average cost of recording a pop single was in thousands rather than hundreds of pounds.
Only large record companies had access to sufficient finance to make that kind of investment.
In contrast to the costly and sophisticated technology employed by the major companies were simple but effective ‘home studios’ costing under £1,000 by 1985, the average price of four-track recording machines had come down to £500 and over 20,000 had been sold in Britain.
However, for musicians to take advantage of such technology, they needed to detach themselves from the conviction that high-cost studio technology and expertise was essential for the production of successful and valuable recordings.
Ironically, it was not the record companies who had created the situation in which high-cost technology enjoyed such prestige but the musicians themselves.
The Beatles (not EMI) chose to lavish time and money on the making of the Sgt. Pepper LP, while the Beach Boys' 1966 single ‘Good Vibrations’ was reputed to have been made in four different studios over six months and to have cost £5,000.
These artists, and the ‘progressive rock’ bands who came after them, were captivated by the potentiality of the studio as a place for creating new sounds.
They were also convinced that rock music should be capable of more complex modes of expression.
At its best, this genre produced some of the extended song-cycles of Pink Floyd but at the other extreme were dozens of overblown ‘concept albums’ dealing with elves or spaceships and played on synthesizers and other electronic equipment.
The history of punk as a musical genre is complex and contradictory but its attitude to the prevailing orthodoxies of the record industry and of progressive rock was extremely  simple.
It was one of unremitting hostility.
This meant a reversal of the industry's production values of professionalism and commercial appeal, and of the artistic and ideological preoccupations of progressive rock.
Many punk bands extended this antagonism to all established rock musicians over the age of twenty-five.
Punk prided itself on making recordings with all the rough edges showing.
The effect was to suggest that what mattered most was the urgent need to communicate a message rather than the need to construct a polished work of musical art.
The musicians involved in punk were also intensely wary of what they saw as the control exercised over popular music by the major record companies.
The new music brought with it an ethic of self-reliance, of do-it-yourself.
The notion that the involvement of an established record company was necessary in making a record was firmly rejected.
Some bands who made their own recordings took the opportunity to encourage others to follow their example.
The Desperate Bicycles sang about ‘Xerox rock’, while Scritti Politti printed details of recording and manufacturing costs on the sleeve of their first single.
The studio costs were a mere £138.
The do-it-yourself approach was extended to the sphere of distribution.
This part of the record business, getting the records to the consumers, had been even more strongly dominated by the major companies than had the origin of recordings.
Established smaller labels, such as Chrysalis, Virgin and A & m had been forced to use the distribution networks of major companies.
But the arrival of punk and the flood of self-produced records led to the setting up of new distribution networks which enabled the new labels to keep their distance from the bigger companies.
One estimate is that the new independent labels and distributors accounted, by the mid-1980s for nearly 10 per cent of British record sales.
Those sales have shown a considerable overall decline since the late 1970s, with a fall of some 30 per cent in value following 1979.
Although the value of United Kingdom record sales began to rise again in 1983–5, the overall position still indicates a drop since the 1970s.
Various reasons have been offered for this decline, but the most likely explanation is that the general conditions of recession in Britain have been exacerbated by  other factors peculiar to the recording industry.
These include competition from the new entertainment media of video and computer games and the widespread practice of private copying or home taping.
This involves using cassette players to re-record commercially produced recordings onto tape.
After so-far fruitless attempts to create a ‘scrambler’ signal which could be inserted onto a disc or tape to prevent copying, the record industry has lobbied for a royalty to be placed on blank tapes and tape recording hardware.
The income would then be distributed to performers, composers and record companies.
In February 1985, a government Green Paper 3 accepted the basic proposition that a royalty should be levied on blank tape, but the amount was limited to a maximum of 10 per cent on the retail price of the tape.
The fall in record sales during the 1980s has damaged the newer sector of the industry more than the major companies.
The latter are all part of large conglomerates with large reserves which can be employed to see the industry through the recession.
No such option is available to the more fragile independent sector.
A recognition of the need to maintain that sector and through it the full diversity of recorded music in Britain is one reason why the last few years has seen a new interest in the record industry from public bodies concerned with culture and with employment.
Popular music has received very little assistance from the various Arts Councils whose job is to disburse monies from the state and local authorities.
These bodies regarded the cultural form as part of a commercialized industry and were unwilling to provide grants for activities designed to make a profit.
Another difficulty has been that such councils are attuned to providing finance for the creation of specific works, while the need for support in popular music is not at the point of creation, but for help in reaching audiences.
This was one of the main findings of a report to the Gulbenkian Foundation on research in the mid-1980s by the present author together with Tony Haynes and Julie Eaglen.
More recently, certain local authority organizations have begun to take a direct interest in popular music.
Their motives are various and include concern about employment in general and youth unemployment in particular, and an awareness of the  potential effects of new media, such as cable television, on the quality of life in the locality.
Sheffield City Council and the Greater London Council jointly commissioned a report on cable and community programming, which included wide-ranging discussion of the possible use of these new technologies to aid locally based music as well as the ‘transnational’ kind.
It was published as an Appendix to Hardy, which was itself the result of an inquiry by the Greater London Enterprise Board (GLEB) into the music industry.
This GLEB report focused mainly on the manufacturing aspect of the independent sector and recommended the setting up of a modern plant to make records for the smaller companies.
Elsewhere both Sheffield and Leeds City Councils have actively considered schemes to set up local recording studios, while one London Borough Council is looking at the needs of its local black music scene.
It is important that those involved in these initiatives and others which may follow understand the priorities for assistance to popular music.
What is not required is the traditional form of arts subsidy: the direct grant to an individual or a group.
The most important requirement is to improve for all musicians what might be called the infrastructure of opportunity.
The issue is one of access , particularly for young musicians and for innovators.
The study for the Gulbenkian Foundation found a need for a greater availability of electronic and amplification equipment, of rehearsal space, of cheap recording facilities with expert advice and instruction on how to use them and finally for more places to perform in.
Assistance in all these areas would provide the chance for musicians to develop their own potential and to discover whether there is an audience for their music.
In achieving that assistance, the two parts of the record industry can also contribute.
The independent sector provides some models and much experience for any new initiatives at grassroots level.
And the success of the established record industry's campaign for a royalty on blank tape could also contribute.
In those countries where the royalty has already been introduced one option chosen by some governments has been to use part of the income from the levy to set up a fund to give special help to the national music scene.
In Sweden this is done by a subsidy for recording  projects involving Swedish music, while Finland aims to help new music in general.
In France, the music industry will be required to devote 25 per cent of the tape levy to the ‘encouragement of creativity’, under a law which came into force in January 1986.
Britain currently possesses a large pool of popular music talent, thanks primarily to the ease with which the independent sector has enabled consumers to become producers.
To ensure that this channel of transformation remains open and available, deliberate intervention by public bodies may well be required.
Any radical policy for the record industry should begin from the need to maintain a real plurality in popular music making.
‘If you can't stand the heat, get off the beach’
The United Kingdom holiday business
GRAHAME F. THOMPSON
In the autumn of 1985 a fierce battle emerged between United Kingdom holiday firms in an effort to enhance their share of the 1986 summer holiday market.
This involved in particular two ‘market leaders’, Thomson Holidays and Intasun Holidays.
Each began to cut prices, implicitly challenging the others to follow in a tit-for-tat sequence.
Anything between 30 per cent and 60 per cent was being cut from the price of holidays.
Some of Thomson's holidays to Spain sold for only £25 a week or £35 for two weeks, and 500 Intasun Holidays were offered for £39 each.
Partly as a protest at these ‘irresponsible’ price reductions NAT Travel, a smaller holiday firm, introduced a ten-day coach/camping holiday for £5 at one stage.
People were seen queuing overnight outside travel agents to be able to cash in on a £20 holiday for four!
The holiday sale season (some would argue ‘silly season’) was on.
But behind these bravado tactics lay some intriguing and important features of the development of both United Kingdom holiday firms and of the United Kingdom economy itself.
It is these features that are explored in this chapter.
While the 1985/6 period forms the focus of my analysis this particular episode should not be seen as unique in the context of the United Kingdom holiday industry.
In the early 1970s something of a similar competitive battle emerged in which a series of well known holiday firms at the time either collapsed or got into severe financial difficulties (Clarksons, Horizon Midland, Court Line amongst others).
It was confidently predicted that some firms, particularly the smaller ones, would also go out of business as a consequence of the 1985 round of price cutting.
(This was trumpeted under the holiday industry's  unofficial motto ‘if you can't stand the heat, get off the beach’.)
Indeed, in 1984 some eighteen smallish tour operators failed and in late 1984 an important firm, Budget Travel (the tenth largest at the time) also suddenly went out of business.
Pundits of the travel scene were heard suggesting (and exaggerating) that as many as 200 to 300 travel firms could go bankrupt if things went badly.
In the following sections the components, structure, and tendencies involved with the firms making up the holiday industry are analysed; and recent competitive battles are reviewed.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE INDUSTRY
The United Kingdom tourist industry was worth £11 billion in 1986, half of which was spent on the 10.5 million overseas inclusive tour holidays taken and 7 million independently organized overseas visits.
There were approximately 700 firms offering holidays of some kind to consumers in the United Kingdom in 1986.
However, most of these were very small organizations only arranging a few hundred or perhaps a few thousand holidays a year.
The twelve largest companies in mid-1984 are shown in Table 11.1.
The two main rivals that began to emerge in the early 1980s were Thomson, the traditional market leader, and Intasun, a fast growing holiday and leisure group of companies.
The growth of the top eight firms in terms of the number of air tours authorized by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is shown in Table 11.2.
Whilst the total number of holidays authorized increased by nearly 50 per cent over the period shown both Thomson and Intasun expanded by a greater proportion but with Intasun far outstripping Thomson's growth.
In fact, 1985 was a rather bad year for the overseas travel trade despite a surge of late bookings in the autumn as the indifferent summer took hold.
Two previous years of good domestic summer weather had depressed the anticipated number of overseas holidays and this is probably reflected in the low 1985 figures shown for a number of operators.
The 1986 and 1987 figures show a rapid pick up for the larger firms in particular.
These figures include the number of authorized (or anticipated) holidays.
They are not the same as the actual numbers  arranged by each operator, but they do indicate the broad magnitudes involved.
The shares of the market in terms of actual holidays taken (ex-post market shares) of four of the main operating groups are shown in Table 11.3.
This demonstrates clearly the importance of the two leading companies in their fight for market share.
But the general implications of the table are also important since it demonstrates the relative concentration of supply.
Four firms are responsible for 50 per cent of the market.
Under many circumstances this would be looked upon with some suspicion — giving rise to accusations of severe oligopoly or even near monopoly.
However, the industry is highly competitive, as suggested above.
This is because of two main reasons which are closely linked and which will be considered in more detail later.
One of these involves the ease of entry into the industry.
It is not difficult to set up a holiday firm and expand rapidly.
The other is ease of exit from the industry, not just by a company if it gets into financial difficulties and is forced to leave, but also by any particular customer.
There are many alternative types of holiday on offer and even within the package sector the provision of a financial bond by firms and other guarantees give particular holiday-makers a relatively firm assurance that they will get the holiday they want or one very nearly like it.
However, this being said, the trend towards concentration of capital is very rapid in the industry and this is likely to increase in the near future.
In addition, if widespread liquidations emerge as a result of recent intensified competitive pressure there could be more severe disruption of holiday plans.
The collapse of Budget Travel, for instance, left some 20,000 holiday-makers without adequate holiday cover in 1984 (Table 11.1) and important companies continued to collapse — in 1987, for instance , Biggles and Jetwing collapsed.
Let us now return to Table 11.1 and look at the operational details and financial situation of the companies mentioned there in greater detail.
As far as operational details are concerned perhaps the most interesting feature is the way tour operators are usually part of larger, more diversified, groups.
Inclusive tour operation is thus just one, and sometimes a very small, part of the parent company's business.
This was particularly so in the case of Thomson, British Airways Holidays, Rank Travel, Blue       Sky, Thomas Cook, Global, and Holiday Club International, these all being travel firms operated by large leisure-based parent companies or diversified conglomerates.
Even the tour companies themselves include a range of different brand names under their umbrellas.
Thomson Travel, for instance, includes the Thomson label proper, plus Portland Holidays, Britannia Airways and Lunn Poly the travel agent chain.
Intasun includes the Intasun label, plus Club 18–30, Golden Days, Ski Scene, Lancaster Holidays as well as its own airline, Air Europe.
In 1985 Intasun acquired Global Tours from Great Universal Stores in a further step in its diversification and concentration moves.
In addition, Global itself included such names as Golden  Circle and Overland Holidays, as well as its own name.
Rank Travel was made up of Wings and OSL in 1985, while British Airways Tours included the Enterprise, Sovereign, Flair, Alta (Speed Bird), and Martin Rook holiday names as well as its own airline company, British Air Tours.
The more independent companies shown in Table I were Cosmos and Horizon.
Cosmos has been losing market share and falls out of the top four companies in 1986 as British Air Tours takes over (Table 11.3).
The Horizon Company itself has an interesting history, being a firm that got into financial difficulties as Horizon Midland in the mid-1970s.
When it collapsed, two ‘public’ bodies stepped in to effect a rescue, namely, The Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive (GMPTE), and Nottinghamshire County Council.
These two bodies took a major stake in the company since Horizon, with its associated airline Orion, was one of the main users of Manchester Airport and East Midlands Airport.
Its collapse could have had serious roll-on effects on the finances of these airports, and the relevant local authorities stepped in.
This rescue operation proved reasonably successful, as shown by Table 11.4.
But with a declining profit margin and declining return on capital (particularly in 1985–6), and with the sale by the GMPTE of its shareholding at a considerable profit, Horizon needed a new injection of resources.
To keep up with the competitive pressure put on it from Thomson and Intasun, Horizon was itself diversifying in this period.
Apart from its original holiday retailing company, it has set up a chain of travel agencies, developed a flight training centre in connection with its Orion airline subsidiary, moved into holiday hotel development and even into selling holiday properties abroad.
These later developments were aided by the Bass brewery group taking a 27 per cent stake in the company in 1985 — after it had been sought by Grand Metropolitan, another leisure grouping.
This brought with it Bass's own Holiday Club International and Pontins Holidays.
In addition, Rank Travel was consolidating its holiday interest by buying Blue Sky from British Caledonian (Table 11.1) along with the Arrowsmith company, and organizing these under its Wings Holiday label.
Wings was subsequently sold by Rank to Horizon at about the same time as Horizon was itself purchased more or less outright by Bass for £90 million in May 1987.
Thus there has been some significant organizational development in the industry even since 1985 when Table 11.1 was drawn up.
All this goes to show, however, the great uncertainty associated with the holiday industry.
It exists on relatively thin and unstable margins, requiring the heavyweight financial resources of a larger group if it is to survive for long.
The other main operational feature that Table 11.1 highlights is the way most of the big firms are associated with an airline.
This became an emergent feature of British (and other European) inclusive tour companies in the late 1960s as the expansion of charter non-scheduled activity gained momentum.
It was pioneered by now defunct companies such as Eagle Airways, Court Line, and more recently, Laker Airways.
It represents another arm of holiday firm diversification.
Not all of each airline capacity is restricted to the holidays of its associated holiday company, however.
The airlines also sell their capacity to those firms not operating an airline.
Table 11.5 shows the main operators and their seat capacity in 1985.
Clearly the airlines' authorized capacity does not match up to the company market shares as shown in either Table 11.2 or Table 11.3.
In addition there is a major charter airline shown in Table 11.5 which has not appeared before.
Dan Air offered 22 per cent of capacity in 1985 but is not organizationally linked to any single tour operator and functions as a totally separate company.
The final four columns of Table 11.1 give details of the financial position of the companies as far as this could be discerned from published data.
The first point to make here is that holiday firms are big business.
Thomson Travel, for instance, had a turnover of nearly £500 million in 1984.
Profit margins vary between the firms but are low relative even to the indifferent performance of British firms more generally.
It would be useful to chart these trends over a number of years for each of these firms, rather like the analysis offered for Horizon in Table 11.4.
Overall industry data of this kind are collected in Table 11.6, giving an indication of profitability for the industry as a whole.
This goes to confirm that the figures shown in Table 11.1 are fairly representative of the industry more generally.
This table also confirms the seeming decline in overall profitability during the 1980s and particularly in 1986.
Eight of the top thirty companies in 1986 recorded losses, amounting to £19 million (in 1987 six companies recorded losses totalling £14 million).
While the top three or four companies now seem to be  in reasonable financial shape it is the medium-sized firms in the top thirty that are feeling the pressure.
It is from this group that more collapses are likely or in which reorganizations and consolidations will occur.
GENERAL ORGANIZATIONAL TRENDS
Of the longer term organizational trends that have developed within the travel industry, diversification needs to be broken down into a range of separate forms.
In the first place the industry is typified by two types of integration, vertical and horizontal.
Both of these imply the concentration and centralization of capital.
Vertical integration refers to the way in which travel firms are increasingly organizing all the separate features of a holiday under a single organizational umbrella.
This can involve both forward vertical integration and backward vertical integration.
For instance, if a holiday firm buys into a chain of travel agents, which are traditionally separate retailing agents for holiday sales, this is a case of forward vertical integration since it brings the holiday firm ‘forward’ towards the consumer.
On the other hand, if it integrates with the airline part of the holiday and begins to develop its own hotels and resort complexes this is a case of backward vertical integration, since in this case the holiday firm is pushing its liaisons further back into the supply network of the holiday.
Both of these tendencies were well underway by 1985 with nearly all the large firms included in Table 11.1.
Thomson Travel includes an airline (backward integration) and a chain of travel agents (forward integration).
Intasun and Horizon are taking backward integration even further by not only operating their own airlines but also developing or buying up hotels and holiday centres in the Mediterranean area.
This has been done in the first instance through joint ventures with Ladbrokes and Bass respectively, though Horizon also owned and operated hotels in its own name.
Thomas Cook is a slightly different case in that its origins are at the consumer end — as a travel agent chain — but it has now developed into the provision of holiday sector as well, thus generating backward vertical integration.
On the other hand, a company like Virgin Airways has developed  forward integration by setting up and selling its own holidays (to the United States).
Most of the other companies included in the table are also developing or have already developed liaisons of this type.
The second form of diversification that is underway in the industry is horizontal integration.
This appears when a holiday firm either itself generates, or is absorbed into a sequence of activities parallel to its own business.
Here we might point to the way Holiday Club International has become part of the wider leisure services and manufacturing group Bass Holdings.
Another instance of this would be Rank Travel (OSL, Blue Sky, Wings) and its integration into the diversified leisure activities of the Rank Organization (prior to its sale to Horizon/Bass).
These two cases are examples of the centralization of capital; the way previously separate organizations are brought under a single centralized unit of direction (though they may actually be run rather autonomously in practice).
A different example of the same basic process but one which involves the concentration of capital is given by Intasun's expansion strategy.
This involves the original holiday firm generating parallel activities itself.
Thus Intasun is diversifying into the United Kingdom hotel market.
In 1985 it purchased the Grosvenor and Charing Cross hotels in London and entered into joint ventures with the large American hotel chain Ramada Inns to manage these hotels and others that it intends to buy.
Other examples of this form of diversification would be Midland Bank ownership of Thomas Cook, this firm having traditionally arranged the travel requirements of Midland Bank staff (and those of other corporate institutions), and also being a major issuer of travellers' cheques (a money dealing activity).
What are the reasons for these kinds of diversification?
This has been the subject of endless commentary within the economics profession since these sorts of trends have typified nearly all industrial and service sectors of capitalist economies (and some socialist ones, it might be added).
Perhaps the two main sets of determinants can be summed up under ‘economies of scale’ and ‘economies of scope’.
Economies of scale refer to the way average costs of provision can fall as the scale of output increases.
This is a well known if perhaps exaggerated feature thought to typify the production of  larger and larger levels of output.
Certain necessary fixed costs of overheads can then be spread over a greater number of units of output thus reducing their incidence per unit of output, and also unit attributable costs might be lowered via bulk buying or the better management of production, and by strengthening of purchasing power.
It is probably these potential economies of scale that are involved with elements of vertical integration in particular, and also with the increasing range of types of holidays being offered by firms as discussed below.
Economies of scale are also a feature likely to be associated with the struggle for market share.
The larger a firm becomes the more cost efficient it can become and hence prices can be kept below those competitors.
Clearly, within the scale of output being contemplated by existing holiday firms they feel this potential advantage can give them a decisive competitive edge vis-à-vis their rivals.
Economies of scope refer to the potential cost advantages likely to arise via diversifying strategies involving horizontal integration in particular.
In the case of holiday firms the main element here would seem to be the financial advantages of being part of a larger conglomerate grouping.
Holiday demand is highly sensitive to changes in underlying economic conditions (it is relatively income-elastic for instance) which means it can be subject to rapid changes as the cyclical pattern of economic activity develops.
This implies an oscillating financial performance for the industry as a whole.
Add to this the thin margins on which the industry has traditionally had to rely and a very unstable and uncertain environment for individual firms emerges.
In this context the financial muscle associated with a more diversified grouping, where risks are spread more evenly, can serve to help weather the storm.
It also offers the prospect of an easier means for raising finance when investment is needed.
In practice, of course, economies of scale and economies of scope are processes which are usually run together as any firm diversifies.
There is also no guarantee that these ‘potential’ advantages will actually be realized in practice.
Many a case can be cited where business strategies of this kind have utterly failed.
But one general implication of these tendencies is the increasing concentration of capital.
Thus, what were previously transactions  between different organizational units become transactions internal to a single organizational unit.
‘Externalities’ are turned into ‘internalities’and the ‘market system’is increasingly being undermined by bureaucratic methods of internalized economic allocation within conglomerates or diversified firms.
Given these tendencies and features, what is the typical cost profile of a holiday company?
Only a general indication of this can be given here.
Table 11.7 lays out the main elements and their likely proportional magnitude.
One consequence of competitive price battles could be to raise the overhead and marketing cost element in any firm's budget.
It is estimated that some 30 per cent of the overhead and marketing budget represents the cost of production and distribution of brochures.
Some 40 million glossy brochures pack agents' racks advertising holidays each year.
In the context of the late 1985 competitive battle to gain market share, ‘re-issuing’ of the brochure became a commonplace as price reductions were instituted.
A further organizational trend underway in the tourist industry concerns an aspect of the internal organization of travel firms themselves.
This involves the way these firms perceive their marketing effort.
In particular, a strategy towards differentiation of the market is strongly underway.
Specialist sectors are identified and firms either decide to concentrate on one or two of these or arrange their activities so that they cover the whole range of sectors.
In the latter case a set of different brochures would be issued by any single firm.
Table 11.8 gives a breakdown of the main sectors that can be identified and also the leading firms or ‘names’ in each sector.
These ‘leading operators’ need not be the ones holding the largest share of any particular market sector.
That may still accrue to one of the main operators already mentioned.
For instance, in the ski-ing category, Thomson is yet again the    leader with the highest share of this sub-market (around 20 per cent ).
But this is followed by the rather more specialist firms listed in Table 11.8, Hotel Plan (under the Inghams and Swan Plan labels), and Blue Sky which also specialised in this area.
The first specialist sector mentioned in the table is direct sell.
This cuts out the travel agent and was pioneered in the United Kingdom by the Danish firm Tjaebourg (which also has its own airline, Stirling Airways).
The idea is to reduce costs by cutting out the 10 per cent travel agents' commission (Table 11.7).
The market here is probably around 500,000 holidays a year (5 per cent of the total volume of holidays).
Although Portland (a Thomson subsidiary) and Tjaebourg itself seemed to be doing well, in 1985 the British Airways subsidiary Martin Rook was rumoured to be up for disposal, with an uncertain future.
This sector of the market has not expanded as rapidly as expected.
In the age-group sector, the independent firm Saga is the market leader in the over-fifties category, followed by Intasun's Golden Days.
Global's Golden Circle concentrates on the United Kingdom over-fifties market (now a part of Intasun).
This sub-sector is an increasingly competitive one which all of the major firms have identified as a growth area.
Saga pioneered this market and became a very large company on the basis of it.
However, the firm made a mistake in buying up the Laker Holidays label and trying to revive it in an effort to diversify its operating base.
The failure of this initiative set the firm back somewhat and it may find it difficult to recover.
At the other end of the age-group market is the ‘youth’ category, led by Intasun's Club 18–30.
This sold 90,000 holidays in 1984 and claimed 45 per cent of the market.
It was  followed by Buddies (a Bass subsidiary).
Thomson launched their slightly up-market version, Freestyle, in 1984.
This subsector is recognized as another growing one and it has been further differentiated in recent years by the recognition of a specifically educational, volume travel market.
Schools Abroad (95,200 authorized holidays in 1984) and School Plan (Intasun) lead in this market.
There is even a recognition of a specifically religious holiday clientele.
Thomas Cook, for instance, sent over 5,500 pilgrims on holiday in 1985 through its Inter-Church travel firm subsidiary.
The other main sector of interest given in Table 11.8 is the long-haul category.
True long-haul serves holidays to Australia, New Zealand, South America, Southern and Central Africa, and the fast expanding Far Eastern market.
The recognized market leader here is the Swiss firm Kuoni, claiming 24 per cent of the market (40,000 holidays in 1984).
This is followed by a number of others including Thomas Cook, Thomson's ‘World Wide’ label, and the more recent tobacco brand Silk Cut/Meon Travel's ‘Far Away’entry.
This is generally recognized as still an upmarket sector but is growing by about 5 per cent per year.
Its long-term prospects as far as mass marketing is concerned are still uncertain and will depend upon the ability of airlines to keep their prices down and upon relative exchange rate movements, both of which disproportionately affect this sector.
In 1984 the total holidays in this market sector were in the region of 170,000.
Thus, whilst important, numbers here are still small relative to other areas.
Table 11.9 shows Kuoni's top long-haul destinations in 1983–4.
This probably represents the situation in the sub-market as a whole given Kuoni's position as market leader (except for the Gambia which is beginning to appear strongly in short-haul brochures).
The long-haul market is important however for another reason.
It embraces the development of quite new holiday areas and is thus in the forefront of pushing the ‘tourist experience’ onto previously unaffected or relatively little affected people and cultures.
It represents the spear-head of a possible ‘tourist imperialism’, with all the unsatisfactory consequences that this might engender.
OTHER COMPONENTS OF THE TOURIST INDUSTRY
Table 11.7 pointed out that 10 per cent of air tour operators' costs represented travel agents' commission.
Travel agents are an important component in the organizational structure of United Kingdom overseas travel.
Increasingly they are grouping themselves into multiple retail chains, as can be seen from Table 11.10.
This sector of the industry has been characterized by an extraordinarily rapid series of takeovers and mergers in recent years to create the multiples shown.
Thomas Cook is a wholly owned subsidiary of Midland Bank, Pickfords is owned by the National Freight Consortium (previously the National Freight Corporation until its de-nationalization in 1983 and ‘buy-out’ by management) and Lunn Poly is owned by Thomson   Holidays.
Thus the main multiples in the table are also themselves smaller components of parent organizations.
There were approximately 12,000 travel agent outlets in 1986, 6,000 of which belong to the trade association ABTA (of these, the total of separate travel agent firms was 2,500).
ABTA, set up in 1950, exists as a cartel.
Since 1966 it has operated a set of rules known as the ‘stabilizer’ which has regulated the behaviour of tour operators and travel agents in the inclusive tour industry.
This involves exclusive dealing and retail price maintenance in return for which consumers are guaranteed a degree of protection and recompense in the case of financial failure of a tour operator.
Five hundred tour operators also belong to ABTA, effectively covering 90 per cent of holiday journeys.
The stabilizer scheme creates a common fund to which members contribute according to their turnover.
If an operator goes out of business the fund is used to rescue stranded holiday-makers or to provide alternative holidays.
In addition to this fund there is a bonding operation supervised by the CAA against airline failure.
The basic ABTA fund is financed by a 10 per cent levy on ABTA licensed members and 15 per cent on non-ABTA operators.
The level of funding has proved inadequate on several occasions (Eros and Americana failures in 1983 and Budget Travel in 1984, for instance).
A major issue in 1985 was the possibility of increasing the cover.
The idea of the bond is both to demonstrate the financial security of the firm and to provide funds to rescue its clients if it goes out of business.
But it can place a large burden on operators and travel agents and any increases in the size of the bond are seen as likely to further the pressures for rationalization in the industry.
The problem in this area arises because of the advanced booking process in which customers commit their money or some part of it well in advance of actually taking their holiday and without ‘seeing’ the service offered.
In 1986 the fund paid out £1.3 million to customers of fifteen failed holiday firms.
A typical travel agent's income is made up of two-thirds from holiday traffic and one-third from business traffic.
Approximate sales turnover in 1984 is shown in Table 11.11.
The standard commissions on which the agents have relied for their income are shown in Table 11.12.
Two main problems face the travel agent sector of the market.
In the first place, the march of the multiples and   diversification by travel operators themselves is likely to undermine the traditional relationships established between travel agents and operators.
Lunn Poly and Thomas Cook are already part of larger groups.
The multiples in particular are increasing their share of the market.
But, as yet, concentration in the sector is quite low and market share remains fragmented.
However, rapid changes are sweeping the sector and trends remain flexible.
The second and probably more serious problem for the sector arises in the context of ABTA remaining a cartel.
The Office of Fair Trading already looked into this in 1982 and offered a judgement giving a guarded acceptance of the closed shop.
But this was again investigated in 1985 and a less favourable   response emerged from the Monopolies and Merger Commission's Report issued in 1986.
The report (Foreign Package Holidays , Cmnd 9879, HMSO: London, September 1986) recommended the end of resale price maintenance agreements.
These effectively buttressed the sector against the kind of cutthroat competition raging amongst operators.
However, one complaint already made by the travel agents is the impossibility of existing on the lower commissions implied by holidays of £25 and the like that came into existence at the end of 1985.
All in all, these twin developments are likely to throw the agents into ever greater turmoil as we enter the 1990s.
DOMESTIC HOLIDAY SUPPLY FIRMS
So far overseas holidays have formed the focus of my attention.
But very large numbers of domestic holidays are also taken — about 30 million in 1986.
Clearly in looking at the travel agent sector we have already been analysing something of the domestic arm of the industry since these agents also arrange domestic holidays or parts of them.
However, the domestic holiday situation is much more fragmented than overseas tourism.
The ‘inclusive tour’ is less well developed, for instance, and most holidays are independently arranged and are for much shorter periods.
This makes for a radically differentiated supply structure, one not easily captured in a manageable set of statistics.
Perhaps the most suitable starting point is to look at the major domestically based leisure groups, the activities of which are summed up in Table 11.13.
This gives a breakdown of their main holiday-based activities and similar financial details are given for the holiday firms discussed in Table 11.1.
Points to make in the context of this table are, again, the very large turnover involved and the fact that profit margins are healthier and more stable than in the tour operator case.
Two of the organizations mentioned in the table are also prominently involved as parents in the tour operator case, namely Bass and, until recently, Rank.
Most of the organizations involved are themselves again parts of large conglomerate groups with diversified interests, not necessarily just in the leisure services area.
Grand Metropolitan and Rank, for instance, have wide ranging manufacturing and property interests, though the    others tend to be associated with at least the provision of leisure-based products in their diversified activities.
Trust House Forte is probably the group most closely centred upon leisure and holiday based activities, being mainly a hotel and catering operation.
One other point to note from Table 11.13 is the ownership of ‘holiday camps’ by the companies listed.
In fact holiday camps is a misnomer as these have recently been renamed ‘holiday centres’ or ‘villages’in an effort to up-grade their market image.
Large investments in this area also have been made in recent years, as indicated in Table 11.14.
They have capitalized on the move towards self-catering by heavily introducing this element into their operations and have also benefited from the 1983 and 1984 slight trend back towards domestic holiday taking.
In addition, these holiday centres are increasingly catering for second holidays — a few nights or a week or so spent off-season — taken in addition to the main holiday abroad.
Thus the image of a Billy Butlin, Fred Pontin or Harry Warner (or Joe Maplin even!) coaxing their ‘campers’ into early morning collective exercises is long gone and unlikely to return, except on television.
As mentioned, domestic short-break holidays of three or four nights away from home are the fastest growing segment of the market.
The Mecca Leisure Group has already set up its own travel company to cater for and organize this kind of holiday, and others are likely to follow suit.
The ‘holiday village’ idea is being heavily marketed in the United Kingdom.
A major development here was the Dutch company's Sporthuis Centrum Recreatie investment in a complete holiday village in Sherwood Forest, opened in 1987.
This attracted the English Tourist Board's largest ever single development grant of £1.5 million.
Blackpool's Pleasure Beach still boasts the single most popular tourist attraction in the United Kingdom with an estimated 6.5 million visits in 1986.
This was followed by the main London museums, headed by the British Museum at 3.6 million visits (The Economist , 1 August 1987).
Of those attractions for which an entrance fee is charged, Madam Tussauds in London headed the list with 2.4 million visitors, closely followed by Alton Towers in Staffordshire with 2.2 million.
The fastest growing attraction in recent years has been the ‘Jorvik Viking Centre’ in     York (0.9 million visits in 1986) owned by Heritage Projects Limited (for full details, see pp. 4 and 5 above).
This company is planning more such ventures, notably ‘The Pilgrim's Way’ in a Canterbury church and ‘The Oxford Story’in Oxford.
It is the recognized market leader in this field.
Finally, we can look a little more closely at the main hotel groups operating in the United Kingdom.
These are listed in Table 11.15 according to the number of rooms they operate.
In the case of United Kingdom hotels it is again the large diversified conglomerates that are heavily involved plus brewery groups (Scottish and Newcastle, Vaux, Greenhall Whitley, Allied Lyons, Bass).
Surprisingly, perhaps, North American hotel chains are not strongly represented in Britain, Holiday Inns being the only one to appear in the table.
But groups like Hilton and Sheraton were just hovering outside of the list, both with over 1,000 rooms in the United Kingdom.
All this was poised to change rather rapidly by the late 1980s as these groups, plus the third largest American hotel chain Ramada, made a determined effort to increase their stake in London in particular, on the backs of the upsurge in American tourists coming to the United Kingdom largely because of exchange rate changes.
It has already been pointed out above how Intasun had joined with Ramada to manage its new London hotel interests.
In fact the world-wide Hilton chain was taken over by the Ladbroke Group in a £645 million deal completed in September 1987 (Ladbroke also owns the Texas Homecare d-i-y store chain).
In addition, Intasun has pulled back from its initial moves into the hotel market.
The company was returned to private ownership in mid-1987 in what was seen as a retrenchment and change in direction of its development.
Things are thus still very unsettled in this area.
CONCLUSION
The United Kingdom holiday industry was in a period of rapid change and flux in late 1985 and this is likely to continue for some years to come.
Indeed it could be argued that ever since the 1960s when inclusive charter holidays began to ‘take-off’ the United Kingdom industry has been in a continued state of flux.
It is recognized to be one of the most ‘dynamic’ in the country.
Failures, mergers, acquisitions, and diversification are the day-to-day diet of firms involved with the industry.
Competitive pressures are intense and economic fluctuations are highly significant to the fortunes of companies.
Add into this vagaries of the weather and a veritable hubbub of movement and change emerges.
But this is itself dependent upon a number of rather more enduring features, perhaps the most important of which has been the continual growth in demand for overseas holidays despite the deep recession in the economy.
It is the number of first-time overseas holidaymakers, ‘new’ consumers for this particular market that has remained surprisingly stable through the late 1970s and early 1980s, increasing by about 1 per cent per year.
In effect this has meant approximately 400,000 new and inexperienced customers coming on to the overseas market each year, and it is this that has kept the traditional inclusive tour package alive.
In this context there is always room for some sharp operator to move up the industry hierarchy of market share, although this is probably becoming more difficult as large  groups become consolidated and the industry generally matures.
It has been estimated that the real cost of an average package holiday was 16 per cent less in 1987 than 1980, and this value for money is likely to keep the large groups well placed at the top of the market share listings.
However, competitive pressures can still be generated by another feature of the industry mentioned before — the relative ease of entry into and exit out of the big league.
Amongst the hundreds of small firms expertise is continually generated and a taste for the big time engendered.
It was the small firms who first spotted specialized market segments and exploited them, and they are encouraged in this by the ability to sub-contract most of the holiday provision to other operators.
In particular, aeroplane seats can be contracted relatively easily and hotel beds booked cheaply.
It is not even that difficult to set up an associated airline company given the leasing arrangements organized by financial institutions and the aircraft producers, and the developed secondhand market in airliners.
A further advantage for holiday operators is the traditional nature of consumer booking arrangements whereby many millions of pounds are deposited with them several months in advance of the holiday being taken.
This enables the operator to keep its own financial resources low and in effect secure commitments on the basis of the cash flow advanced to it by customers.
These ‘loans’(which is in effect what they amount to) can also be invested over the winter and spring period at considerable gain to the operator.
To some extent this latter advantage has been eroded in recent years by the tendency to go for late bookings, at least by the ‘experienced’ holiday-maker.
Clearly, from the operator's point of view, one of the favourable elements to emerge from the competitive price battle of late 1985 was the reversal of this tendency, at least temporarily.
One of the reasons that ‘loss leaders’ of £25 holidays could be easily tolerated, and even a more general price reduction installed, was the advanced booking this drew in.
Thomson, for instance, was reported to have sold 400,000 1986 holidays in two weeks in November 1985 at the height of the price war, and other main operators probably did equally well.
This was likely to produce an income of £16 million on the deposits advanced by customers.
The price war of autumn 1985 then was little more than an advertising exercise, though it did reduce the general price of holidays for 1986.
However, tendencies in the economy and in the internal organization of firms were likely to have allowed this without too great an increase in risk to longer term financial viability for the larger operators.
Inflation had slowed down in the United Kingdom to 5 per cent per year which produced a greater sense of economic security in terms of planning expenditures ahead.
Added to this was the increase in real incomes of those still in work partly as a consequence of reduced inflation but also because of private sector wage rises running well ahead of inflation levels.
Another contributory factor was the expected favourable exchange rate payments and downward pressures on hotel bed prices, particularly in Spain.
As far as internal operations were concerned costs had been reduced by the extensive installation of computer technology, particularly with respect to booking and internal control procedures.
Thus, all in all, a fall in the price of holidays would probably have emerged in 1986 largely because of these changes in underlying economic conditions, and need not have been accompanied by the razzmatazz of a full-blooded price war.
However, this did serve to advertise the industry, create excitement, and generate a lot of early bookings that might not otherwise have come forward.
A similar situation is very likely to be repeated in years to come.
* I would like to acknowledge the support of the Open University Faculty of Social Science Research Fund for financial assistance, and to Leon Martin for research assistance, in completing the analysis for this chapter.
Holidays for all
Popular movements, collective leisure, and the pleasure industry
ALAN TOMLINSON AND HELEN WALKER
In early 1986 Butlins celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the opening of its first holiday camp in Britain.
The Butlin version of the holiday camp prospered in a climate of campaigning for holidays with pay and in a period before packaging had been fully developed as the major way of selling holidays and travel.
Butlins offered a comfortable exoticism, prioritizing pleasure for all.
‘Hi di Hi’, the collective address of ‘Goodnight Campers’— these greetings welcomed millions to packaged mass pleasure and at the same time contributed to the growing marginalization of other practices in leisure.
The inter-war period offered increasingly cheaper possibilities in leisure.
Between 1920 and 1938 the average real price of entertainment and recreation fell.
Regularly employed working people had no problem finding the cost of a cinema, theatre or music hall seat, a dance hall or excursion ticket.
Hire purchase was also available for new commodities such as bicycles.
Generally speaking, and in spite of the Great Depression, for the employed inter-war working class, ‘increased purchasing power led to an increase in total consumer expenditure on commercial leisure forms’.
Some trade unions argued that free time was as important as perhaps even more important than — money in the struggle for workers' rights.
There was a lot of sense to this, with little point in earning more real income if there was no time available in which to spend it.
Post Office unionists in the 1920s perceived a ‘share out of leisure and a betterment of life’ as ‘more vital than money’.
Printers expressed similar views, and painters argued for a package of extended pre-work education, a shorter  working week, and holidays with pay.
This is not, of course, to say that workers would have been prepared to face long-term falls in real earnings.
But it is a reminder that the labour movement has always addressed issues of the quality of life as well as of material pragmatics.
And the period after the First World War was a watershed in the battle against oppressive hours of working.
By 1920, 7 million workers had gained an average six and a half hour reduction in the working week — the equivalent, almost, of what we now see as a full day's work.
The working week now averaged forty-eight hours, the model for the following two decades.
The Holidays With Pay legislation of 1938 combined with the rise in living standards and the shortened working week to produce a climate ripe for the leisure and consumer markets.
The principle of holidays with pay had been extended to an estimated million and a half manual workers in Britain by the beginning of the 1920s, but the economic recession of that decade meant that this figure remained relatively static until the late 1930s.
Some employers reneged on agreements once the slump set in; a few new agreements were made.
Organized labour did not drop the issue though and some more enlightened firms continued to introduce private agreements.
By 1937 a tripartite departmental committee of inquiry on the issue of holidays with pay was set up, reporting in favour of paid holidays in 1938.
In the Committee's terms, the annual holiday could contribute to workers' ‘happiness, health and efficiency’, and be of ‘benefit to the community’.
The 1938 Act covering statutory wage-regulating bodies was not a strong and wide-reaching one, ostensibly applicable to only 2 million workers.
With its proposal for the granting of a maximum of three days consecutive holiday, it actually worsened some workers' conditions.
But it was symbolically vital, as a recognition of the principle of the paid holiday.
In 1937, 15 million people (one-third of the population) were holidaying away from home for a week or more.
By 1939 4 million manual workers and another 4 million or so non-manual workers were receiving annual holiday pay, going on for half of the total occupied population.
The Holidays With Pay Committee stressed happiness and health.
Some voices within the labour movement stressed a blend of self-improvement, pleasure and  health.
Billy Butlin stressed fun, pure unadulterated, non-uplifting collective fun.
The victory on paid holidays was achieved out of a mixture of motives, an amalgam of control and progressive reform.
Its longer-term outcomes though were less ambiguous.
It made the annual holiday more easily available to millions.
These millions were ready for new forms of fun, or at least new combinations of familiar and proven elements.
Seaside entrepreneurs had been feeding this appetite, building this market, for several generations already.
The seaside landlady figures prominently in the popular perception of the traditional British seaside holiday, but things were far from static in the inter-war period.
In Blackpool — still stating its claims to be the biggest and the best in the 1980s, and countering the continental drift with slogans like ‘Costa Notta Lotta’— there was a seven-fold rise in the number of private hotels between 1924 and 1938.
Clearly the holiday-maker was ready for more privacy, more comfort, more facilities and new arrangements in his/her main spell away from home.
Blackpool guidebooks/brochures still feature photos of private toilet facilities very prominently.
Blackpool led the way with its aggressive conception of consumption, pleasure, and fun.
The American inspired hi-tech thrills and spills of the pleasure beach became legend among holiday-makers.
Yet traditional eccentricities on the seafront, the Golden Mile, could still draw millions.
When the notorious Rector of Stiffkey — Reverend Mr Davidson — found that his encounters in London with ‘at least a thousand’ girls filled his Norfolk pews with scandalized but absorbed and voyeuristic worshippers in 1932, he soon found a less spiritual vocation.
Convicted of several charges of indecency, this was the man for Blackpool.
He found work on the promenade there, sitting in a barrel.
Thousands of people rolled up to see this infamous figure in the summer of 1932.
This was a peripatetic Diogenes of the masses though, and fined for obstruction he had to constantly seek new pitches: ‘His barrel was sandwiched between a fasting girl and a flea circus.
He sat in it for fourteen hours a day, hoping to get about £2,000 for all the appeals which lay before him.’
Via corpse-like appearances in glass cages the crazy parson ended up announcing a lecture-series for the 1937 summer season in a lion's cage at Skegness.
The spectators got  more than their money's worth on his first appearance, though little of his lecture.
The Rector walked in on Freddie the lion and his sleeping mate.
Freddie found this a bit intrusive or insensitive and killed him in front of the seaside spectators.
Through the 1930s such quirky turns were more and more discouraged in holiday venues.
Local resorts wanted the respectable if unrestrained reveller.
Guides of the time constructed an apparently more active leisure consumer, concerned with fashion, health, individual sports and style.
Such ideals did not match all tastes though.
The master tactician in the whole area was Billy Butlin, who a year before the Rector of Stiffkey's aborted lecture had opened up his first holiday camp, in Skegness.
Maybe Billy himself set up Freddie the Lion to clear out the opposition in his own chosen patch.
Blending the bizarre with the familiar, Butlin took the established model of the British Holiday Camp by the scruff of the neck.
In the late 1930s there were around 200 holiday camps, capable of taking 30,000 campers a week and often providing ‘earnest all-in facilities’ in the mould of the Holiday Fellowship.
Early holiday camps had been influenced by welfare considerations, educational ideals, political dreams of the collective subject, and the Social Darwinist spirit applied to the outdoor life.
Camps had been founded by a range of organizations — the Co-op, the trade union, philanthropic or religious bodies.
Male youths experienced the idea of the camp in the Scouts too, but the boom in the commercial holiday camp in the quarter of a century after the end of World War Two was to dwarf the scale of these earlier models.
Billy Butlin became the most successful entrepreneur in this explosive growth.
Billy Butlin's eye for the hedonistic package outstripped all competitors.
The Butlins Empire has now had to market itself anew for the experienced package tourist; a move from wooden chalets to brick-built country suites, from the Minehead Camp to Summerwest World.
But in its pioneering way, and for several decades in the formative stage in the development of consumer culture, Butlins both represented and redefined core elements in working-class and mass leisure.
Roy Hudd, the comic and broadcaster, recalls being with 2,000 campers in the South Seas Coffee-bar in one of the camps, coping with flooding.
One old boy, Hudd recalled, loved all this: ‘It's marvellous — just like the war.’
With this sense of collective  experience and shared pleasure the camps offered a commonality characteristic of working-class community.
But they also offered a sense of the new.
Butlin had previously provided large-scale seaside amusements throughout the thirties.
Noting that landladies still hoofed boarders out for most of the day, Butlin saw how the holiday-makers would shelter in his amusement parks when it rained.
What he spotted and exploited was a huge gap in the market — the provision of all-in accommodation and entertainment, the all-round holiday package.
When in 1936 the first Butlins camp opened up at Skegness the £500 spent on a half-page Daily Express advert in the early spring looked like money well spent.
The immediate response to the advertisement for ‘Butlins Luxury Holiday Camp’ was virtually a full season's advance booking.
The first campers, these pioneers of the British holiday industry, sat around the pool, ate the food, wandered around but looked bored, to Billy at least.
On the third evening of the first week he sent one of his assistants into the dining hall and told him to get on the mike and chat to the campers/diners.
This seemed to enliven them.
Billy ordered his troops to get hold of brightly coloured blazers.
Red was in the shops.
It is in such accidental and unplanned ways that key historical decisions are made.
The Redcoats ruled the roost in the world of the British holiday for many years, providing an apprenticeship for Roy Hudd, and a host of other showbiz dreamers.
Butlin of course wanted to keep campers in the camps.
A range of regular routinized but riotous activities accomplished this, from the Glamorous Grannie to the Mr Knobbly Knees competition.
The Butlin initiatives gave mid-twentieth century Britain some of its most enduring popular cultural events: dodgems, beauty queens, glamorous grannies, spaghetti-eating, knobbly knees, marathon walks, cross-channel swims.
In and out of the camp Billy made sure that his camp and his model of the people's pleasures were always in the public eye.
And he was ready to exploit the idea of celebrity.
Listen to his biographer on this:
When Len Hutton scored his historic 364 runs against the Australians at the Oval in 1938, Bill phoned him a come-to-Skegness offer within twenty-four hours.
Len, the man whose aristocratic bat could practically score  runs without him holding it, was paid £100 for a couple of hours work, playing on stage at the camp theatre with a bat made of Skegness rock.
Naturally, as it had to be the biggest show the town had ever seen, or nothing, so Bill hired the two brightest theatrical stars of the day to bowl to Len.
His choice: Florence Desmond and Gracie Fields.
Five thousand people paid a shilling each to see this show.
These takings of a mere £250 more than covered the expenses but, more importantly, gave Billy Butlin the reputation of one of the country's leading showmen.
With his new blend, and showbiz entrepreneurial flair Butlin redefined the conventions of the British holiday industry.
The Skegness Festival in 1938 had a Carnival Procession which took five or six hours to get through the town, the Rector of Stiffkey now forgotten.
In 1937 Butlin had opened his Clacton camp with the brilliantly sharp slogan: ‘Holidays with pay — Holidays with play.
A week's holiday for a week's wage.’
His finger on the pulse of the ‘holidays with pay’ movement, he reaped rich dividends with his new strategies for the packaging of popular pleasure.
The holiday pendulum swung unambiguously towards entertainment rather than worthiness, the just about respectably raucous rather than the recreationally rational.
As millions flocked to Butlins, to other imitators and to other holiday resorts offering the packaged experience, older alternative forms of holidaying began to look more and more peripheral within the popular cultural practices of the British people.
The principal organizations promoting holidays for the working class in the early inter-war period were fired by motives very different from those of Billy Butlin.
Postwar holiday consumption patterns in Britain indicate the rapid growth of package holidays in the 1950s, but the roots of this boom are located in an earlier period before the Second World War.
The early development of the annual holiday away from home in general, and the phenomenal growth of the inter-war outdoor movement in particular were influenced by popular movements and were important examples of class consciousness and class dynamics.
‘Cyclists and hikers…day excursionists, refugees from cursed towns’ were prominent enough to provide  fuel for the poetic pen of C. Day Lewis.
Holiday resorts, both inland and coastal, were expanding for new markets.
During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the elite had maintained the view that sea water was an indispensable adjunct of health.
With the development of the railway network the exclusivity of the cure had waned and many resorts were reshaped and redeveloped by commercializing forces, for the accumulation of profit.
Changes in medical fashion and research led to the promotion of fresh air and sunlight as beneficial to health and the Victorian female's obsession with the maintenance of a pale complexion as a mark of class distinction gradually gave way in the early years of this century, to the pursuit of the sun, in search of a healthy tan.
Through the period leading up to the Second World War rural England too was subjected, according to C.E.M.
Joad, to an ‘invasion of the untutored townsman’.’
This mass discovery of the countryside was to some extent a car-borne movement, a consequence of a rapid rise in car ownership as prices fell with the application of mass production techniques to the manufacturing process.
The unprecedented boom in the construction of private housing also seriously encroached upon the rural landscape.
But there was another invasion of the countryside, noticeably quieter than that of the motorist but equal in terms of its impact.
It was spearheaded by the rambling and cycling organizations and the movement as a whole included many thousands drawn from the older industrial areas or from the south of England with its new and expanding service and supply trades.
From the beginning of the century the young were attracted to these activities, and membership became increasingly dominated by individuals in their late teens and early twenties who, released from Victorian preoccupation with moral standards and propriety, rejected the values and fashions of the previous generation.
For young workers such as H.G. Wells' Miss Milton and the draper, Hoopdriver, who had money in their pockets and were without as yet the cares and responsibilities of family life, unchaperoned excursions in the countryside provided opportunities for encounters with the opposite sex.
In the emergence of this ‘young generation’ of independent means lies the early identification of the sector of the population which was  to be so effectively targeted by the market in the postwar era.
By the 1950s and 1960s market researchers were chasing the ‘teenager’ as a major new figure in the world of consumerism.
In the late nineteenth century, the pastime of rambling through open countryside had been restricted to those who not only had time at their disposal but also the financial capability to travel into rural areas.
Individual ramblers were drawn principally from the upper echelons of Victorian society, mainly aesthetes, academics and members of the legal profession.
The largely southern based and predominantly male rambling clubs were bastions of class exclusivity.
The Polytechnic Rambling Club was formed in 1885, the London Federation of Rambling Clubs in 1901.
The Federation scored an early triumph in the negotiation of concessionary fares (for the sole use of member clubs) with the Great Northern Railway Company, a forerunner in its early recognition of the commercial significance of the outdoor movement.
In the north of England there were fewer clubs but their class basis was as pronounced.
One was the Sheffield Pennine Club, whose members were leading industrialists.
Another, the Yorkshire Ramblers, was founded in Leeds in 1899.
In Manchester one of the earliest clubs was the Manchester YMCA Rambling Club, dating from 1880.
The club gained a reputation for undertaking  strenuous walks frequently covering seventy miles between Saturday afternoon and Sunday evening.
What went on on Saturday nights is less definitively documented!
The Rucksack Club was founded in 1902, originally Manchester based but expanding into branches throughout the country.
Its membership was exclusively middle class, and included an ‘uncanny proportion of lawyers’, together with large numbers of academics drawn from Manchester University.
It was formed by members of the alma mater of climbers, the Alpine Club, founded in 1858.
At the turn of the century a uniquely all female climbing club, The Pinnacle, came into existence.
The activities of the club, whose members were the wives and sisters of male enthusiasts, centred on North Wales and the Snowdonia region.
These outdoor pursuits, with roots in academia, included a self-improving dimension, emphasizing an interest in the botany, geology, archaeology and history of the districts visited.
In the early 1900s, although there was a continued expansion of the traditional and more exclusive type of club, increasingly (and especially in the north of England), there were groups emerging whose members would not only challenge the middle-class monopoly of the countryside but who also expressed a commitment to the principles of socialism.
For such groups leisure was an assertion of collective rights, not just a badge of exclusive status.
The obtaining of access and maintenance of rights of way over Pennine moorlands, particularly in the Peak District, was fundamental to their activities.
The denial, to the general public, of open access to the countryside led to an intensification of the fifty-year struggle for legislative changes culminating in the mass trespasses of the early 1930s.
One of the most remarkable of these early groups was the Sheffield Clarion Ramblers, established in 1900 and described by its founder as the ‘first workers’ Sunday rambling club in the north of England'.
The membership was drawn from the industrial conurbations of Yorkshire, and placed an emphasis on self-improvement and knowledge and understanding of the countryside.
Some individuals saw opportunities for social reform in leisure provision.
One such was T.A.
Leonard, born in 1864, educated in Germany in the 1880s, and committed to ideals of international friendship and socialism.
On his return to Britain he entered the congregational ministry in the bleak Lancashire mill town of Colne where he was deeply affected by the social and economic conditions which industrial society imposed upon his flock.
Appalled at the annual wakes week, with its general exodus to Morecambe and Blackpool, and what he saw as the mindless spending of hard-earned wages on inane amusements, Leonard proposed an alternative form of holiday.
Within the ambit of the social guild work of his church, he planned a modest two-day holiday in Ambleside in June 1981 during which thirty men from his pastorate scaled the fells.
From these beginnings Leonard founded the Co-operative Holidays Association which was non-profit making and became popular enough for advertisements to be placed in Christian World in 1893, offering CHA run rambling holidays in the Lake District.
For thirty shillings all found, accommodation was to be provided at Ambleside and Keswick, parties would climb Helvellyn and  the Langdale Pikes, and visit ‘the haunts of Wordsworth, Ruskin and the Lake Poets’.
The appointment of a chaperone enabled four women teachers to accompany this early party which spent eight strenuous days completing walking climbs of twenty miles or so and evenings listening to lectures on Ruskin and places of interest.
This element of self-improvement recurs throughout the accounts of working-class leisure organizations founded on principles of social concern and there is a clear overlap of membership with, for example, the Fabian Society and later in the century, the Workers' Educational Association.
A retrospective account written in 1937 gives the occupational composition of these pioneering groups: they were in the main teachers and shopkeepers, representing both high and low church — essentially the lower-middle classes.
Although during the early years of the century the CHA attracted an increasing membership, Leonard was concerned at its failure to fulfil its founding aims.
The main criticisms focused on the lack of progress in the provision of international holidays but principally on the fact that despite its founding objectives, to improve the lot of the exploited labouring classes, the Fellowship was becoming ‘rather middle class in spirit, and conservative in ideas….
We want [Leonard stressed], to bring holidays within the reach of poorer folks.’
The Holiday Fellowship was set up in 1913.
It represented a novel venture, owned, controlled, and administered by its members.
Membership implied the taking up of one or more £1 shares and shareholders were paid interest fixed until 1932 at 5 per cent.
Use of the Fellowship's centres was not dependent on membership but there were certain benefits including a reduction of 2/6d on the weekly charge, priority booking facilities, eligibility for office, but more significantly, in the event of personal hardship, a subsidized holiday at off-season times of the year.
Success was rapid with 2,196 organized weeks of holiday taken in the first year of operation.
Four centres were opened in Great Britain and, fulfilling the international element so desired by Leonard, one in Germany.
Membership of the Holiday Fellowship continued to rise even through the war years, and by 1919 the total numbered 5,241 guest weeks.
By 1926 eleven British and four continental centres had opened; in 1938, with assets totalling £100,000, 45,169 guest weeks were taken at the  thirty British and twenty-two overseas centres which spread from Brittany to Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Basic shelter and kitchen facilities were necessary for the many thousands using rural areas each weekend, and the role of the Cyclists' Touring Club (CTC) was significant in pioneering the provision of cheap overnight accommodation and other services for its members.
Founded in 1878, the CTC flourished with the cycling boom of the 1890s, a time when bicycling captured the imagination of a wide spectrum of society.
H.G. Wells describes how ‘Spectators would fall a-talking of the fashionableness of bicycling — how judges and stock-brokers and actresses, and, in fact all the best people rode — and how that it was often the fancy of such great folk to shun the big hotels…and seek, incognito, the cosy quaintness of village life.’
From an original figure of 142 to 3,356 in 1880, and 6,705 in 1882, club membership rose to a record 60,449 at the turn of the century.
Workers employed in the mills and factories of industrial areas took to the bicycle as a principal means of travel to work.
In 1932, a new Raleigh bicycle could be bought for under £5, or on the instalment system for 9/7d per month without deposit.
The Raleigh was regarded as the aristocrat; a Hercules cost less, approximately £4, and there were cheaper makes and predictably, a thriving secondhand market.
So by the 1930s there were thought to be at least 10 million cyclists — ten times the number of private motorists.
Clubs were affiliated to organizations ranging from church to political party.
This cycling boom was a youth-based phenomenon too, spawning its own networks of cafes and modest bed and breakfast ‘digs’.
The CTC and the National Cyclists' Union held their own conventions and cycling was not immune from fashions and crazes.
For those within ‘the Movement’, a week's cycling holiday using CTC accommodation was possible for £3 10/ all in; organized excursions took in the Scottish Isles, the West of Ireland, and the Black Forest in Germany.
Party fares, low hostel charges, and the availability of cheap, simple meals made a three-week continental cycling holiday in 1930 possible for approximately £15.
The Holiday Fellowship also promoted the provision of cheap overnight accommodation.
In its quarterly magazine (Over the Hills , spring 1929) Lakeland Tours were advertised, centred  around three camps equipped with bedding and cooking facilities for eight individuals who, it was hoped, would cater collectively.
Although an immediate success the Fellowship was concerned at its inability to keep costs below 32/6d for members and 35/ for non-members, figures which were not far short of standard charges at that time.
T.A.
Leonard argued the case through the columns of Over the Hills for Spring 1930, in reforming ignorance of the emerging Nazi appropriation of the Germanic pastoral dream:
If only we had something of the social sense they had in Germany, we might manage to give our young people the experiences they ought to have…[in Germany]the rambling movement…[has]reached enormous proportions — 2,500 hostels provide shelter for 6d per night….
We do not value our country sufficiently, we let any rich man enclose hundreds of square miles of gorgeous mountain, heath or forest and do not care what devastation arises from the growth of commercialisation….
The simplest accommodation is all that is looked for, just good clean sleeping rooms with blankets, somewhere to eat and a place to shelter from inclement weather.
The inspiration for the experiment was the German Jugendherbergen accommodation which had long been popular with English trampers and cyclists.
The Verband fur Deutsche Jugendherbergen (DJH) had, by the end of 1929, some 700 British members including a block membership by the School Journey Association, an organization founded at the turn of the century to assist teachers responsible for taking parties of schoolchildren abroad.
The German scheme of cheap overnight accommodation dated from the years prior to the First World War and had its origin in the central European tradition of ‘wanderlust’.
In 1930 a British Youth Council Committee with representatives from the major outdoor, youth, and holiday organizations investigated the viability of establishing hostels in north Wales.
It was planned that the new accommodation would be furnished very basically and would offer at minimum charge, a camp bed or mattress, blankets, and basic cooking facilities on production of the membership card of a central organization.
The choice of a name caused some division of opinion but it was agreed that  the word ‘youth’ should be used, and as the Merseyside group had publicized ‘youth hostels’, this stuck.
By the end of 1930, £2,750 had been donated by the public, £10,000 promised by the Carnegie Trust and 170 individuals as a gesture of good faith had become members of the Youth Hostels Association (YHA).
By Easter 1931, 4 hostels had opened with a total of 130 bed-spaces; a further 3 hostels opened that summer and an impressive total of 9,926 overnight stays were made that year.
British membership now stood at 1,639 but the overnight total had been augmented by many European trampers, a trend which was widely welcomed as a sign of real internationalism: ‘This summer our hostels housed a miniature League of Nations’, claimed the Manchester and District Ramblers' Federation Handbook in 1932.
By the outbreak of war, there were 297 hostels with 10,689 beds, a membership of 83,417 and some 58,000 ‘overnights’.
Although the accommodation remained spartan with bunk beds arranged in segregated dormitories, nevertheless, at a cost fixed at 1/ per night plus a shilling for breakfast, extended holidays in the countryside became for the first time a practical possibility for thousands previously denied them.
The press reported a hiking boom in 1931.
If rambling was a leisurely walk in the countryside on a Sunday afternoon, hiking was altogether a more ambitious enterprise, frequently involving a trip further afield for a week or a fortnight's hard walking using map and compass, regarded as an indispensable accomplishment as the threat of war increased.
According to Graves and Hodge, the term ‘hiker’ had entered vernacular use from the United States in about 1927 when in an article in the Daily Express , an official of the Camping Club stated: ‘We have 3,000 members.
Most of these are solitary ‘hikers’ who carry all their kit with them.’
A distinctive form of dress, essentially egalitarian, was adopted by both cyclist and hiker, consisting of an open-necked khaki shirt:, a jacket finished with the newly invented zip fastener, short trousers and a Basque beret.
This style was adopted by both men and women.
The enormous popularity of hiking can be seen not only as a consequence of the formation of the YHA, but also of the emergence of many new organizations and clubs which undertook  to arrange hikes and negotiate concessionary rates for travel, accommodation, and refreshment for their members, and others engaged in agitation for reform of the access laws.
The opportunities for commercial exploitation of the hiking boom were grasped readily by the railway companies who offered cheap day returns to hikers.
Bank holiday specials ran from all the major towns not just to the big seaside resorts but also into rural areas.
The Whit Monday trains offering a concessionary service into the Derbyshire Peak District from both Manchester and Sheffield offered the advantage of returning from a list of alternative stations and were resoundingly popular.
On the morning of Good Friday in 1932, the GWR ran a ‘Hikers’ Mystery Express' from Paddington to an unpublished destination and back.
So many people wanted to be transported to this surprise Arcadian spot that an extra train had to be put on.
During summer months there were many such trips; ‘Ramblers’ Harvest Moon Specials' were run along the Thames Valley, and in July 1932 an unexpected 1,400 stalwarts expressed a desire ‘to witness the sunrise from Chanctonbury Ring’as part of a Southern Railway Moonlight Walk.
The Southern Railway made guided rambling a regular service as had most of the railway companies by the outbreak of war.
Popular movements did not of course remain outside the influence of market forces.
The movement inspired popular songs, but also the commercial ditty, ‘I'm Happy When I'm Hiking’.
Publishers were not slow to realize the potential of the new market, releasing a spate of books and magazines which were the successors to the elitist Victorian guide book and the predecessors of the glossy coffee-table number for contemporary leisure motorists.
Newer volumes such as the Shell Guides and the Batsford series, illustrated with photographs by the newly developed cheap photogravure process, presented an idealised romantic image of rurality as well as extolling in their unpolluted wholesomeness the benefits of a holiday in the open air.
Commercial interests were quick to recognize the scale of popular interest in the outdoors, but whilst the outdoors had become integral to everyday life in Britain by the Second World War, it continued to represent in some of its expressions a relatively uncommercialized leisure culture.
Overlapping the provision of the Holiday Fellowship and the  CTC, sharing the mood of internationalism current through the period and blurring the boundaries between quasi-philanthropism and commercial enterprise such as Thomas Cook and Billy Butlin, was the Workers' Travel Association (WTA).
This was a major provider of not only walking holidays but also package holidays and holiday camps.
The WTA was founded in 1921 at Toynbee Hall, moving later to Transport House (at that time the headquarters of Britain's largest trade union, the Transport Workers, and also of the Labour Party).
In its inception and philosophy the WTA embodied national anxieties over the future stability of Europe, stating in its objectives a commitment to the promotion of a lasting international peace through the ideals of the newly formed League of Nations.
Initially concerned with the advancement of these aims through the provision of low cost holidays abroad, rapid early success led to the extension of operations to the home market with publicity material stressing the proletarian nature of the enterprise: ‘Trips for the workers; Holidays to suit all pockets’; ‘What Cooks have done in the way of facilitating travel for the upper-middle and middling-middle classes, the WTA are arranging to do for the masses.’
The promotional literature continues with an explanation of the deliberately spartan-sounding and self-denying WTA philosophy:
But there are differences, the WTA is not going to work on ‘de luxe’ lines.
It has behind it an ideal; it aims primarily at getting working men and women of this country abroad in order that the scales shall fall from their eyes through real comradeship with those who do the hard work in other countries.
It aims more at political and peaceful penetration than at profit.
From an initial 700 in the first season, bookings rose rapidly to 26,000 by 1931.
The economic crisis and in particular the slump produced lower totals for the next two years, but by 1939, the number of holidays booked had risen to a substantial 62,500, comprising 29,500 holiday-makers travelling overseas, and 33,000 taking home bookings.
The WTA offered hiking, rambling or climbing holidays at home and abroad, centre-based holidays by the sea, mountains or in the tourist centres of Europe.
In planning its programme  the Association emphasized its international objectives advertising, for example, from as early as 1924, annual holidays at two centres in the USSR: a ‘unique opportunity to experience the USSR's great natural beauty, priceless and world famous works of art, gigantic collective farms and the thrill of seeing in progress the greatest social experiment in the world's history.’
The WTA matched the provision of its main competitors while undercutting their prices: holidays ranged from winter sports, world cruises (three months, 165 guineas by freighter from Marseilles), tours of Lapland and biblical sites in Egypt, to courses on political theory at the international college in Elsinore and the Second Workers' Olympiad held in Vienna in 1931.
For the latter, the Association arranged the travel and accommodation for the fifty strong British contingent which included a National Workers' Sports Association team, a group of Clarion cyclists, and spectators.
In 1934, the centenary of the arrest of the Tolpuddle Martyrs, the WTA organized a commemorative event.
The commemoration (now annual) involved the setting up of over fifty camp sites in the Dorset countryside, complete with tents and catering services.
Extremely responsive to demand, a characteristic which was to be lost in the postwar period, it was inevitable that the WTA would become involved in the mid-1930s in the development of holiday camps.
Careful to avoid the regimentation and overcrowding that characterized the camps of its competitors and anxious to compete in terms of cost, the Association opened the 500 capacity Rogerson Hall camp near Lowestoft in 1938.
A joint enterprise with the Co-operative Wholesale Society, such was the prestige of the WTA's reputation and the skill of the promotional machine that 5,000 bookings were taken in the first year, at prices two-thirds those of Billy Butlin, who had opened his second camp at Clacton the previous year.
Yet despite his prices Butlin could take 5,200 in his Skegness camp by 1939.
The tremendous extent of the WTA's organization was reflected in the nature of its advertising campaign.
In 1933 more than 400 advertisements were placed in 90 publications ranging from provincial newspapers to trade union journals.
There were posters on 700 railway stations, 300,000 booklets and programmes were printed, 100,000 leaflets and 12,000  posters distributed nationally.
By 1938 the WTA's annual turnover was in excess of £595,000.
An early opportunities employer, it offered union rates to all its employees at a time when pay and conditions in the travel industry were notoriously poor.
Postwar, the WTA declined in relative importance, opting to focus on tried and tested coach tours and specialist holidays, and losing its market share to the newer and more competitive tour operators who were promoting the package trade.
The trade union rates so jealously guarded in the inter-war period by the Association became little more than the minimum wage of the 1950s, producing salaries insufficient to attract the ambitious tour operator and dynamic advertising manager and leading in turn to a failure to compete effectively.
The WTA like the Holiday Fellowship was rooted in a commitment to the work ethic and the progressive movement.
Along with internationalism, these values were to have a steadily devaluing currency in a postwar Britain inclined more and more towards individualism and consumer sovereignty.
Cooperative ventures dating from the turn of the century became anachronistic.
Conspicuous consumption became, for more groups, an important element in leisure culture.
When combined with a newly emerging and financially significant youth culture sharing a common childhood memory of war-time austerity, and specifically targeted by aggressively competitive marketing, the package boom of the fifties was irresistible.
Not all the demobilized troops had seen service in the immediate European war zone.
For some the Second World War was a time of extensive travel with tours of duty in, for example, North America or India presenting novel opportunities and providing the determination and individual confidence to repeat the experience in peace-time.
The inter-war working-class holiday organizations had occupied a significant place, gradually introducing a previously untravelled sector of the population to the educative and recreative value of foreign travel while yet accommodating a more traditional pattern of holiday-making.
Determined to break down chauvinism and confront the prejudice and suspicion of the unknown, the organizations also diminished the economic barrier to foreign travel by establishing the novel concept of the now standard, fixed price ‘all-in’ holiday which presented a defined objective to be budgeted for over a year.
Postwar, the field lay open for entrepreneurial capitalism to woo this sector of the population and to create new markets to service its holiday needs.
Consumption in leisure and holidaying became increasingly linked to the capacity of the individual consumer to make choices within the market.
The new organizations catering for this were to be economically more efficient and culturally more bland than the popular movements of the first half of the century.
The leisure and recreational movements generated from the grassroots or from the concerned philanthropist looking down from on high were to give way to a cultural and economic popularism which was to be progressively constructed by the new generation of market-orientated professionals.
Even ‘getting away from it all’ was to become absorbed into the logic of the third stage in the development of Braverman's universal market, in which: ‘a product cycle’invents new products and services, some of which become indispensable as the conditions of modern life change to destroy alternatives’.
Butlin himself was to be overtaken by further developments in the postwar holiday industry.
His own excursion into foreign fields was an unmitigated disaster when his Grand Bahamas Island Vacation Village collapsed into a financial mess before it had really got started, in 1950.
Butlin's blend maybe didn't look too modern for very long once chartered air travel offered a world of new possibilities to the British holiday-maker, and at the same time patterns of leisure were developing more privatized forms.
But Butlin, in bridging the pre-affluent and the affluent phases of modern Britain, was truly formative in his contribution to popular culture and mass modes of consumption.
As a 23-year-old, Stan Whittaker was one of Butlin's first clients in 1936, having met Butlin himself as a customer in the early thirties at Skegness Amusement Park.
Stan liked Bill a lot, his savings from the Sheffield steelworks were ploughed, a little at a time, into Butlins Ordinary shares.
In early 1962 his 50,000 one shilling shares were worth almost £50,000.
Stan holds nothing back in his admiration for Billy: ‘if the history of my generation is ever written, Butlin's name is going to rank along with Sir Winston Churchill's, Marconi's and Sir Alexander Fleming's’.
War, communications, medicine and fun.
Maybe  Stan's got it right.
Winning for Britain, the wireless, penicillin, and the packaged holiday.
In Stan Whittaker's eyes it is perhaps good health and good fun that make the sacrifices of a fight against Fascism at all worthwhile.
As millions flocked to the seaside resorts and holiday camps of postwar Britain they cemented a growth of the holiday market and confirmed the conception of the organized pleasure-seeker, the packaged punter.
This hedonistic surge to the seaside and the camp hailed a new phase of consumer capitalism far removed from both the collective initiatives of traditional working-class culture and the improving motives of the pioneering holiday organizations of the pre-affluent period.