

BOOK 3
15
MONDAY, 19 JULY 1965
From her office window, in the west corner of the chateau, Buzz could see what was happening anywhere on the two main terraces.
Now, she stared out only at empty space shadowed by the late afternoon sun.
Soon, thank God, things would return to normal.
Elinor would be sitting out there again, and they'd be having their usual glass of champagne before lunch.
The days of anxiety and concern were almost over; Elinor's recovery would, of course, be slow, but that didn't matter.
Buzz had warned Clare that there were to be no more arguments, and now all Elinor had to do was get well.
Buzz's office was briskly efficient; she did not care to spend one second more than necessary in it, and nothing was superfluous in the sparsely furnished room.
It held filing cabinets, bookshelves, and a desk upon which an unused IBM typewriter crouched like a grey electronic cat.
Behind the desk stood a sturdy swivel chair.
In front of it were two nineteenth-century metal conservatory chairs for visitors; they were not very comfortable: Buzz didn't like people to stay too long.
Buzz looked at her watch.
If Adam didn't arrive soon, he'd be late for the telephone calls he had booked.
She opened the door and gazed down a splendid vista of reception rooms that opened out one into the next, which Buzz had learned was typical of grand French houses.
Adam appeared in the distance; he hurried through the bar, the summer salon, and the television room before he finally reached the privacy of Buzz's office, which contained the  only telephone that did not have extensions all over the chateau.
Buzz left the room.
An aggressive French operator informed Adam that his first call had been delayed; as he waited impatiently, he glanced at the bookcases, which held first editions of all Elinor's books.
Adam swiftly read the titles, most of which contained romantic words like ‘love’, ‘heart’, ‘arrow’, ‘passionate’, ‘fire’, ‘dream’, ‘kiss’, and ‘enchanted’.
Dream of the Heart ,Passionate Fire , and Fire of the Heart in particular caught his eye.
Unlike many men, Adam did not regard Elinor's books as a subject for jokes.
He remembered a conversation he'd once had with his brother, who had teased him about his interest in the works of Elinor Dove.
With an earnestness that had surprised Mike, Adam had responded forcefully.
‘You're wrong, Mike.
Leave it to the intellectuals to deride romance novels.
Men like you and I can learn from them.
They are our guidebooks to what women want.
Often a woman reads them because they supply what's lacking in her relationship; she doesn't yearn just for sex, or even for love — she also needs romance.
And so does a man, or at least he does when he first falls in love, when he's too caught up to pay any attention to what other fellows think.
Then gradually, when reality starts to intrude again, he gets embarrassed about the sensitivity he's shown, and so he gradually pushes it away, to deny it's even part of his nature.
It's a trap we all fall into, something I don't see changing soon.
And until it does, Mike, until men and women are equal partners in romance, men who understand how women — particularly married women-feel about romance will always be able to twist them around their little fingers.’
Adam could truthfully tell Elinor that he read every word she wrote and found her books absorbing.
This was because he used them as guidebooks.
He coldly worked  out what each of his women wanted, and then coldly gave it to her.
And it worked.
Given this level of knowledge, almost any man could become successful at seduction.
Adam answered the telephone on the first ring.
‘Mike?
Great to hear from you.
How's the new bike?…
How do I know?
Because you always have a new bike.’
In London, Mike laughed.
‘It's a rather nifty Ducati.
Three fifty with single overhead cam.
Handles very well, but a bit unreliable.
I've had trouble twice and she's only three weeks old.’
His voice became serious.
‘How's Elinor?’
‘Much better.
No more talk about scattering her ashes over the Mediterranean by moonlight.
She'll soon be well enough to make her will.’
‘Does that matter now?’
‘Not now, but it will someday, and I'm not risking this scene again.’
‘I'm so glad she's better,’ Mike said.
‘D'you remember how great she was to us when we were kids?
She lent me the money to get my second bike — that Triumph Speed Twin: it had a lot of poke for the size.
When I went to repay Elinor, she wouldn't accept the money.’
‘Is that why you wanted to speak to me urgently?
To discuss Elinor's health?’
‘Unfortunately not,’ Mike said.
‘I called to tell you that you have to pay Toby Sutch, and fast.’
After a pause, Adam said, ‘I'll talk to Giles.’
‘He can't lend you money.
As of last Wednesday, Giles Milroy -Browne is doing seven years in an open prison, for embezzlement.’
‘Toby's waited longer than this before.’
‘Exactly.
He's running short of patience.
I can't fix it, Adam.
Remember, Toby has already paid your French gambling debts.’
Mike wished to God that when Adam went to the south of France, he would stay on the beach like everyone else.
‘I don't know what I'd do without you, Mike,’ Adam said winningly.
‘Just keep Toby off my back for a few more days.
Let him think that Elinor may go at any minute.
imply that I might soon have funds.’
‘I can't do that…
I don't know how you're going to get it, but you know how deep the shit will be if you don't produce at least a hundred thousand pounds…’
After replacing the receiver, Adam stared through the French windows to the terrace, drumming his fingers on the desk.
He tugged his hair over his left eye, then jerked his head to flip it back: a gesture that revealed his anxiety.
He smoked a cigarette, sucking hard at it.
Finally he called Johnny Briar, a member of his insurance syndicate at Lloyd's.
‘What's the news?
It can't get much worse, old boy,’ Johnny said.
‘We've had unbelievable bad luck.
We seem to be the only syndicate that's involved in all three natural disasters.
American Insurance Services have just released final estimates on the Chile earthquake.
Of course, we reinsured for a cut of the premiums, but we'll still stand to lose well over sixteen million dollars.
No final figures yet on the American tornado.’
‘And the tidal wave in Pakistan?’
‘They reckon it killed sixteen thousand people.’
Eventually Adam asked, ‘How soon will we know our final losses?’
‘It looks like an open year.
No money will be paid to members for three years,’ Johnny said, ‘and probably a further call after that.
Frankly, this'll clean me out.
I'll have to sell the house.’
Adam cursed.
The famous Lloyd's unlimited liability probably meant that Adam would also be declared bankrupt.
‘How long will they wait for payment?’
‘You know Lloyd's don't wait, old boy.
It's cash on the nail as soon as the arbitrators reach a settlement — the  Lloyd's reputation stands on that.’
Johnny added, ‘It's not worth messing with Lloyd's, Adam, you know it isn't: no one would ever touch you again — Lloyd's would see to that.’
Adam's next call was to Ned Sinclair, financial director of SUPPLYKITS.
With an effort, Adam steadied his voice.
‘Ned?
I want you to take another look at that new Carefree proposal — the duty-free airport shops.
I know they're asking more than we want to pay, but if we can assemble a package of cash, stock options, and newly issued shares as a good inducement, I think we'll convince the key manager and he'll persuade the others to sell.
So talk to him, see what he wants, then stitch something together for next week.’
‘I'm already working on it,’ Sinclair said cheerfully.
Adam sighed as he replaced the telephone receiver.
Again he ran his left hand through his hair, but this time he felt a tingle of anticipation.
There was always something around the corner if you didn't lose your head.
He had a definite feeling of success about the Carefree deal.
And there were plenty more deals.
And perhaps it was time to play the trump card up his sleeve.
He'd never be in a better position to do it.
Perhaps it was time for a little more reinsurance.
Annabel's call from Scott came through to Saracen just as dinner was announced.
She raced upstairs to her apartment and threw herself on the bedcover, a Welsh patchwork quilt in a soft pattern of cream and pink.
Waiting for Scott to pick up the telephone, Annabel could visualize the scene at the TV station.
She could clearly remember the first day that Scott had shown her around, could remember being impressed by the overwhelming glamour of it all.
From that day, Annabel had worshipped him.
She sometimes felt that were Scott not sitting  at the studio news desk, face made up and hair sprayed, ready to roll and clearly in control — why, then the news might never happen.
Eventually Scott's voice came through faintly on the line.
‘Angel, you aren't going to like this one bit, but you asked the agency to call me as soon as Avanti decided.
They don't want to renew your contract.’
Annabel suddenly felt that her mind was spiralling out of control.
Her forehead felt clammy and her hands began to shake.
She found it difficult to swallow.
Her heart was thumping so loudly that she wondered for a fleeting second whether Scott could hear it.
Her ribcage seemed too small and she panted for air.
She also felt a sudden, massive drop in the pit of her stomach, the place where her self-confidence dwelled.
‘Annabel?
Are you still there?’
Thousands of miles away, Scott heard a gulp.
He said reassuringly, ‘Angel, it isn't the end of the world.’
‘It is for me,’ Annabel said.
Exhausted by anxiety and emotion, Clare had decided to go to bed early.
In the thirty-foot-long, dark-panelled bedroom, she lay upon the Jacobean four-poster bed and gazed up at the crimson brocade canopy.
Stripped down to her petticoat, she felt too tired to undress further.
She wished that someone would invent a button that you pressed, and shazam !— you were tucked in bed, washed and with your teeth brushed.
Languidly she turned her head to the west-facing windows, staring out at the neighbouring mountain high above the hill upon which Saracen was built.
Again Clare wondered if she had gone a bit too far, speaking so negatively about Gran's novels, and being so emphatically against the trust.
Hearing a knock, she called, ‘Come in.’
Slowly the door opened.
In the doorway was the craggy outline of her husband.
Sam looked sheepish and apologetic.
For one glad moment, Clare wanted to rush to him, put her head against his big chest, feel his strong hands stroking her back, and let Sam do all the worrying for her.
But she remembered the sight of him in bed with that would-be starlet and fought the impulse, staring angrily at him instead.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘I came as soon as I heard that Elinor was…ill.
It was in the Tribune a couple of days ago.
I came to see if you needed me.
And if Elinor is going, I want to say goodbye.’
‘Very touching, but Gran is getting better.
You needn't have come.’
‘I know.
Adam already told me.
He was about as welcoming as you are.
Why's he here if she's recovering?’
‘Adam has every right to be here,’ Clare said pointedly.
‘He's been our family lawyer for years.’
‘I'm not the only one who doesn't trust the devious bastard.
Buzz doesn't like him,’ Sam said, ‘and she is a lady with a very reliable built-in shit detector.’
‘Adam isn't Gran's only lawyer,’ Clare retorted.
‘There's another chap, Paul Littlejohn.’
‘From the same firm?
Then he's probably under Adam's thumb.’
Suddenly Clare realized why Sam had come, and cried scornfully, ‘You can't criticize Adam for being devious!
I suppose you are straightforward?
You've just hurtled halfway round the world only to say goodbye to your estranged wife's grandmother!
How touching!’
Sam nodded.
‘Of course, I'd also like to see Josh.’
‘Not now.
He's asleep!’
‘I know.
I was told by a French sourpuss nurse in the hall; she's clearly had charisma bypass surgery.’
‘You should see the day nurses!’
Then Clare was vexed  that he'd almost made her laugh.
She stiffened as Sam shut the door and took two steps towards her.
Hopefully Sam said, ‘I also want to see you .’
He advanced, a dark, disturbing masculine presence.
Each time Sam took a step forward, Clare took a step backwards, towards the windows.
‘You're seeing me now!’ she said.
‘I haven't changed much in four weeks.’
‘I have.’
Sam took another step.
‘That contrite line won't work any more, Sam.’
Clare's voice was cold.
Retreating until she bumped into a Spanish walnut table that stood before a window, she put her arms back to lean on the table, then decided that her position might look inviting, folded her arms, and scowled at Sam.
‘I have enough to worry about,’ she said crossly.
‘Please leave , Sam!
You can come back and see Josh in the morning — but don't think you can march in here and wheedle your way back into my heart in half an hour — not this time!’
‘Of course I know I can't change things in half an hour.
I've had four weeks to realize what a stupid bastard I've been,’ Sam said.
Clare cried, ‘You don't want a real relationship, you only want ego-boosting, pseudo-relationships!’
‘I admit that's what it has been like in the past.’
‘I've had enough !’
Clare stormed.
‘You think that if I don't know about your affairs, it can't disturb our relationship.
That it doesn't matter if you cheat on your wife, so long as she doesn't find out.
But it does matter because our relationship becomes dishonest.
Even if I don't know it,you do, and that changes your attitude to me.’
‘What the hell do you mean by that?’
Sam seemed genuinely perplexed.
‘You invent, or goad me into, some failing to give you cause for complaint, so that you can then screw around with a clear conscience.
Well, I've had enough of being the  wife who doesn't understand you!
Now I do understand you.
And I can't stand your treachery and deceit!
I can't stand that parody of a happy life in that parody of a place.’
‘No more affairs, I promise.’
‘It's no use , Sam.
We both know that history will only repeat itself.
You want to nibble every biscuit in the tin, and nothing will ever change you!
I'm never going to forget what I saw — or stop wondering whether it's happening again.’
Sam's mind quickly returned to the last time he had seen Clare, when she had returned early from the beach to find Sam in their bed, and not alone.
Clare had recognized the girl — the would-be actress daughter of a neighbour who had been kind to Clare when the Shapiros first moved in.
Under Clare's glare, the frightened girl had shrunk against the headboard, her knees drawn up to hide her slim, naked body.
Clare continued to stare until the girl scuttled from the bedroom to the patio; there, she hesitated, remembering her nakedness.
Desperate, she cast one backward glance at Clare, then fled.
Hairy and naked, Sam had crouched on the bed feeling exposed and helpless.
Then Sam had thrown her a pleading look, like a naughty little boy caught with his finger in the jam pot.
Finally Clare had screamed, ‘I've had enough of these scenes.’
Without being told, Sam knew at that moment that Clare would leave him.
This time she would fling no bitter accusations or black lingerie at him.
As he stared at the torment, fury, and despair in her face, he knew that Clare would not forgive him.
He also knew that this disastrous episode was entirely his own fault and could easily have been avoided.
After all, he could have taken the girl someplace else.
Now Sam looked at his wife as she stood at the end of the long, dark-panelled bedroom, her back to the window, beyond which olive trees rustled in a hot breeze.
Leaning against the walnut table, Clare felt her face tighten as she, too, relived that painful scene.
Slowly she said, ‘I hate to admit this, but what hurt as much as the treachery was the humiliation.
My self-esteem disappeared and I felt worthless, although I told myself that I was still an attractive woman, that there was no need to feel sexually inadequate.’
‘So it's the sex thing again!’
Sam said with exasperation.
‘I thought we'd settled that!’
‘It's not sex that's the problem, it's what you demonstrate during sex!’
Clare's cry was from the heart.
‘A sexual relationship isn't separated from the rest of reality, Sam.
It never once occurred to you that you might be an ignorant, selfish, lousy lover.
It was arrogant of you to assume that I was inadequate!
Deep down, you still don't think I'm a normal woman!
You're still afraid of any attack on your divine male right to know everything there is to know about sex.’
Sam realized that, for the first time, Clare was yelling at him instead of building up a silent volcano of resentment.
He wasn't sure what to do: he didn't want to go over all that again.
On the other hand, Clare was finally able to express her anger clearly to the person who had caused it.
Sam knew better than to interrupt her flow.
‘…
And while we're talking about the man's divine right to know, little babies are born knowing all they need to know about love: they're unselfconscious, they can communicate, and their first experience — sucking — is a sensual one!
But by the time a baby boy grows up, his head has been stuffed with myths and taboos, and the idea that in sexual matters,the man always knows best !’
Sam looked suitably unsure.
Clare paused, then shook her head wearily.
‘There's no point in this, Sam.
You've never listened to the things I say, and even when something is an obvious fact, you never quite seem to believe me, or to trust me.
You're too trapped in your own ego to be able to hear or to understand.’
‘They should teach a guy these things at school,’ Sam said lamely, as he was clearly expected to make some response.
‘Please believe me, Clare, I'll do anything to get you back.’
‘Exactly what do you want to get back?’
Clare asked.
‘My wife and my son,’ Sam said firmly.
‘And, of course, your career?’
‘Yes.’
Sam's last movie,Mainsail , had performed unimpressively.
‘So at last we have the truth!’
Clare shouted.
‘You turned up here because you thought I was about to inherit enough money to stage your movie comeback!’
‘That isn't fair, Clare.
Sure, I could use any investment that's floating around.
Who can't?
I've got an option on a terrific screenplay.
It's called ‘Voyage to the Moon’.
It's about —‘
‘Get out!’
Sam did not retreat.
‘You say that you want total honesty from me, and then you throw me out when you get it!
You know movies always came first in my life until I met you.
Now they come second, but I'll admit it's a close second.’
Clare wondered why she felt so hurt, when she'd always known the truth.
Sam was a movie creature, first and foremost.
He might say now that he put his wife and child first; he might even think it.
But the fact was that ninety-nine per cent of his energy, his concentration, his time, and his money was devoted to his business.
His family got what was left.
Sam looked again at the dark smudges of exhaustion  under Clare's eyes.
He saw how thin she'd become in only four weeks.
He longed to take her in his arms, but she swiftly dodged around the table to the window so that the Spanish table was a barrier between them.
‘Get out,’ Clare said again.
The next morning, Buzz sat on a pale blue chair before the window in Elinor's bedroom.
‘Only one visitor at a time, the doctor said,’ Buzz reminded her firmly.
‘And keep it short.
Remember, you didn't feel too good yesterday.
Ten minutes each girl and not a second more!
You'll see Miranda first, then Annabel.’
‘And Clare?’
Elinor asked.
‘Clare's seeing Sam and Josh off for a day on the speedboat.
She'll be along later.’
The day nurse pulled down the cream window blinds against the morning sun as Miranda entered.
Elinor smiled as she said, ‘Hello, darling.’
She had trouble pronouncing the words.
She asked anxiously, ‘Can you hear me properly, Miranda?’
‘Of course she can,’ Buzz said.
‘You sound as if you've got a bit of a toothache, that's all.’
After ten minutes of understandably strained, cheerful chat, Buzz jerked her head towards the door and Miranda quietly disappeared.
She was replaced by Annabel, who had clearly been crying.
As she talked, Annabel picked up a little box from the bedside table; it was an antique ebony snuffbox, the lid inlaid with a geometric pattern of tortoiseshell and ivory.
‘That was the first antique I ever bought,’ Elinor said.
‘Cost tuppence from a junk barrow in Earls Court Road.
Take it now, dear child, as a gift.’
Buzz said sharply, ‘Annabel!
Put that back!
You ain't dying, Nell, and I won't have you behaving as if you was.’
Annabel jumped and replaced the little box.
‘Sorry.
I  was only fiddling with it.’
She had wanted to disguise her trembling hands: she was not about to explain to her sick grandmother the reason for her fright, for the panic that rose within her chest.
After Annabel left, Elinor whispered to Buzz, ‘I want to see Clare alone .’
‘Not on your life,’ said Buzz.
‘I'm sticking to you, close as a limpet.
You ain't going to overdo it today, my girl.
Nobody is going to see you alone.’
‘Please, Buzz,’ Elinor pleaded.
‘I want to ask her to go back to Sam.’
Buzz hesitated, knowing that Clare would never discuss this in her presence.
Reluctantly she nodded.
‘Don't forget, I'll be sitting next door in the library with my stopwatch.’
She marched past Elinor's bed into the library; in front of the large window that overlooked the sea was the wooden kitchen table upon which Elinor had written Deadly Fortune and her every book since.
From the window, Buzz could see Clare sunning herself on the terrace below.
‘Okay, Clare, you can come up now,’ she yelled.
Two minutes later, Clare stood at her grandmother's bedside; after a sleepless night, she looked almost as pale and exhausted as Elinor.
Elinor said, ‘I saw Sam for a few minutes, darling.
He told me you'd had a serious tiff, but he hopes to persuade you to return to LA.’
Clare looked carefully at Elinor.
‘Sam only tells people what suits him, Gran.’
‘He's apparently just flown halfway round the world to tell you he loves you.’
‘Sam can certainly act the devoted husband,’ Clare said sourly.
‘But if he's flown halfway round the world to tell me he loves me, then why didn't he tell me he loves me?’
‘Any Don Juan can say he loves you.’
Elinor attempted  a smile as she quoted what Buzz had so often told the girls in years past.
‘You have to watch what Sam does, not what he says.
If he gets up in the middle of the night to fetch you a glass of water, then he loves you.’
‘A Busby Berkeley lineup in front of his bed couldn't wake Sam in the middle of the night,’ Clare said.
‘Gran, I didn't want to tell you, especially now, but you must understand.
He…was with somebody else.
That's why I left.’
‘She probably threw herself at him.
A little tart.
Dearest girl, I've told you before, you mustn't let a little bit of fluff spoil your marriage.’
‘You know, she was only one of them,’ Clare said, vexed.
 It was typical of Sam's chutzpah to get his story in first, to gain sympathy and support, to get Gran on his team.
Reluctantly Elinor said, ‘I had the same problem with Daddy Billy, but in my day wives had to put up with that sort of thing.
Please be patient, darling, for Josh's sake as well as your own.
Don't throw away your marriage because Sam is giving you trouble.
All men give trouble.’
Clare said indignantly, ‘I really don't want to discuss it, Gran, but I don't see why I should put up with my husband's adulteries just because you did — so please don't try to force me!’
‘After six years of marriage, Clare, you can't expect the same relationship as on your wedding day.’
‘Of course I don't expect the same relationship!’
Clare exclaimed.
What she had expected was a loving and trusting relationship based on a realistic assessment of each other 's virtues and faults.
‘Being in love…’
Elinor dreamily remembered what it was like to feel that your lover possessed all the wonderful qualities you wanted, before you realized that he didn't possess them, and that perhaps you had forced those qualities on him in the first place.
She shook her head sadly.
‘Being in love isn't being married.’
‘Is that why you never write about marriage?’
Clare inquired bitterly.
‘Only being in love?’
‘There's no need for that tone of voice,’ Elinor said, clearly hurt.
‘Being in love isn't a solution to every female problem !’
Clare cried.
‘I've never seen that spelled out in a women's magazine story, or a film, or…a novel.’
Clare was prepared to do without the ups of being in love in return for never experiencing the downs.
She never again wanted to experience the feeling of being out of control and dependent on someone else's approval, at someone else's mercy.
She never again wanted to feel that someone else could send her to heaven or to hell.
She never again wanted to experience that feeling which led women to do too much for, and demand too much from, a partner.
‘Understandably, you're feeling cynical because of Sam's naughtiness…’
‘Gran, he's not some mischievous schoolboy.’
Last night, Sam had tried to manipulate Clare, and now her grandmother was trying to do the same thing on his behalf.
For the second time in twenty-four hours, Clare's indignation overcame her caution.
Having come to terms with the failure of her marriage, she was trying to pick up the broken bits of her pride, glue them together, and get on with her life.
She wished that people would not interfere, would leave her alone, especially people who didn't know all the facts.
‘Why not try to look upon whatever happened as a little misdemeanour,’ Elinor persisted.
‘Sam loves you.
You know he does.
And love is important because you can't live without it, dear child: without love, you only exist.’
‘I'm not sure that I love Sam.
And I can live without love!
Lots of people do — nuns and lighthousemen, for a start,’ Clare raged.
‘You taught me that without a man a  woman's life is bleak, empty, and dangerous;you taught me that a woman isn't complete without a man.
But I wonder if that's so.
I felt inadequate because I was living with a man.’
Elinor whispered, ‘Don't throw away your marriage, Clare.
No woman wants to live without love and romance — that's what makes a woman feel transformed…excited…attractive…alive.
That's what I've always tried to convey in my writing.’
‘Romance has a bad influence on reality,’ Clare said.
‘You encourage your readers to believe that one day their prince will come.’
‘What's wrong with that?’
‘What's wrong is that he won't !
He will only ever be a paper prince on a paper page!
You should have shown your readers that there isn't a Prince Charming, so they won't feel disappointed and cheated if their prince turns into a frog, like mine did.
The story Sam tells about the frog is sad because it's true …’
‘The story about the frog?’
‘It's not as silly as it sounds.
A frog asked a princess to take him to bed with her so that he could turn into a fairy prince.
But when she woke up in the morning, the frog was still a frog.
He croaked, ‘Sorry to disappoint you, but princesses always fall for that line.’’
Elinor was silent as she allowed herself to see, for once, the soft and gentle cobweb of romance she had carefully woven around her life with Billy.
Quietly she asked, ‘Is it so terrible to let an unhappy or humiliated woman forget, for a few hours, the problems that she will probably have to put up with for her whole life?’
Elinor believed that her novels provided her readers with excitement, helped them to escape from insecurity and anxiety, frustration and drudgery, misery and sorrow, and of course, the boring daily routine of a life in which nothing was likely to change.
Clare sighed.
‘You shouldn't encourage your readers to think that their lives might turn out like your novels.
You encourage them to turn to romance rather than face reality.
And then they're at a disadvantage when they have to deal with real life problems.’
Her voice rose.
‘Clare, you're getting overexcited.’
Elinor's own voice had weakened to a whisper.
Clare suddenly noticed that Elinor's hands were gripping the bedclothes, betraying the emotion hidden by her quiet words.
In trying to articulate what she felt so strongly, Clare had forgotten that she was talking to a very sick woman.
‘I'm sorry, Gran.
I hadn't planned to talk about this today.
But you know it's what I've always thought.
And it doesn't meant that I don't love you.’
Elinor was not mollified.
She said sharply, ‘My romantic novels enabled you girls to have a carefree life, the sort of life I wish I'd been able to give your father.’
Elinor waited for the apology she felt was due from Clare.
After a few moments of uncomfortable silence, she said stubbornly, ‘If you denigrate my life's work, you shall not profit by it unless you apologize to me, Clare.’
With an effort, Clare spoke softly.
‘Gran, I don't want to denigrate your life's work.
And I don't want to talk about money.
That's not important, Gran —‘
‘Are you going to apologize to me or not?’
Elinor demanded in a shaking voice.
She thought that Clare was being contemptuous of all she had done for her.
In fact, Clare had been going to say that Elinor's health was what was important at the moment.
Buzz strode in from the library.
‘Your ten minutes was up half an hour ago, Clare.
And if I'd known there would be raised voices, I wouldn't have let you in here.’
Clare's visit with Elinor was abruptly terminated.
Furious at the angry words, Clare telephoned Thomas Cook in Nice for tickets to London.
She wasn't going back  to LA and she wasn't staying here .
She would take Josh and Kathy, go to cosy, comfortable London, where she knew so many people, and there she would sort out her life.
Miranda, wearing a green bikini, sunned herself on the south terrace.
As she listened to the faint smack of the sea on the rocks below, she thought again, regretfully, of Angus.
She had to face the fact that she still missed him.
Although she'd seen a couple of nice men recently, when it came to the heavy breathing Miranda found that she didn't want to be touched intimately by anyone she didn't know well.
She didn't feel comfortable and safe with anybody but Angus:he hadn't tried to push her into bed at the first opportunity.
Three weeks earlier, her secretary had unexpectedly announced Mr Angus Maclayne on line three.
Miranda's heart had looped the loop as she happily accepted an invitation to lunch at Rules, his favourite restaurant.
She hoped Angus wanted to rekindle their love affair, as she did.
Rules was decorated like a Victorian library; it smelled of superior malt whiskies and very old leather.
Miranda and Angus sat in a velvet-lined, crimson booth that reminded her of an old-fashioned railway carriage.
The Dickensian waiter flapped his napkin and advised with more truth than tact, ‘Shouldn't have turbot today, sir, although the salmon's passable.’
They ordered vichyssoise, followed by sea bass with fresh peas, and iced apricot soufflé afterwards.
There had been no expression of undying love on the angular face she had come to love.
Instead, Angus treated Miranda with distant respect, twitching his sandy eyebrows and speaking of inconsequential things — just as though she were his aunt…or maybe his stockbroker.
Once during lunch, she thought for a moment her hopes  would be realized.
Over the sea bass, Angus leaned across the white linen tablecloth, his lips close to her ear.
‘Miranda, I've been thinking a lot about you.’
Miranda smiled encouragingly.
She longed to hear him say, ‘God, how I've missed you!
Let's get out of here, darling!
I want to be alone with you!’
Angus said, ‘I'm worried that you're expanding too fast.
You seem to be financing yourself by borrowing against your leases — leveraging in an expanding property market while interest rates are low.’
Miranda felt her heart crash to the bottom of her ribcage.
‘What's wrong with that?’ she muttered.
Angus carefully dissected his fish.
‘If this property boom suddenly collapses, or if the government decides to jack up the bank rate to curb consumer spending, then you might find your loans withdrawn, in which case you'd have a serious cash-flow problem on your hands.’
‘I appreciate your concern,’ Miranda said crossly.
‘Higher bank interest may also mean a property slump,’ Angus added.
‘And then you'd have another big problem: the leases that act as your collateral would sink in value, so the banks would run scared and ask for fast repayment.’
Angus sipped his hock reflectively.
‘That sort of situation has been known to end in…bankruptcy.’
‘Thanks for warning me, but I have no intention of going bankrupt,’ Miranda replied coldly; she was too disappointed to enjoy the apricot soufflé.
For the remainder of the meal, they chatted politely about business and exchanged city gossip.
Afterwards, they parted awkwardly on the pavement, each refusing the other's offer of a lift.
Neither suggested a further meeting.
Angus, who admired guts and gumption, had missed the adventurous and spirited Miranda even more than he expected.
He asked her out to lunch because he hoped that she had missed him.
He had kept a discreet close watch on  Miranda, who, he knew, had not been seriously involved with any other man since she broke off their engagement.
Angus reckoned that fast business expansion was absorbing all her time and energy, which was why he had decided to take things one step at a time and discuss only business over luncheon; a business chat would avoid putting either of them in a rejecting position.
Sadly, Miranda, too, had clearly wished to discuss only business.
However, Angus did not intend to give up his pursuit of her; she fascinated him as no other woman had.
Sometimes she was fiery, or she could be ice cool: qualities that intrigued the male in Angus, although they disturbed the businessman.
16
TUESDAY, 20 JULY 1965
Miranda lay half asleep on a sofa in front of her sitting-room window, which looked down on the Place de la République; from there, the road led to the distant perfume factory which Miranda wanted to buy.
It had been built in the depression of 1870 — when most villagers were out of work — by the Countess of Saracen, whose birthday was still celebrated, and a mass said for her soul in the local Church of St Peter.
Miranda was startled by a knock on the door.
She called, ‘Entrez ,’ and then said, ‘Oh, it's you, Adam.’
‘May I come in?’
‘Sure.
I've finished my siesta.’
Miranda yawned, stretched, and wriggled her bare, brown toes.
She was wearing an emerald silk shirt and bikini.
‘I see an old friend.’
Adam pointed to a framed cartoon, which he had given her the previous Christmas: a startled businessman gazed at a ghost; rising from his desk drawer, it said, ‘I am the spirit of old notes to yourself.’
‘You hit home with that one.’
Miranda yawned again.
‘What do you want?’
She rubbed her stiff neck.
‘Big mistake to go to sleep on the couch.’
‘I can fix a stiff neck in no time,’ Adam offered.
‘I learned massage at the gym.
Lie flat on the floor.’
‘Okay.’
Another yawn.
‘Shirt on or off?’
‘Oh, keep it on.’
Miranda lay on her stomach on the kilim rug; it was patterned in ochre and the same faded blue as Adam's flared jeans and shirt.
Adam knelt behind her head and started to massage her shoulders.
After ten minutes, Miranda's neckache had vanished: she lay on the rug, her eyes shut; she felt boneless and sleepy.
Adam's voice was quiet and firm.
‘Your body is getting lighter and lighter…
You feel light enough to float on a cloud…
When I count to ten, you will relax…’
Miranda thought, Why, he's hypnotizing me, and then floated to sleep.
She woke to see Adam lying with his legs up, on the sofa, reading Paris Match .
Miranda looked at her watch.
‘I've been asleep almost an hour.
You did a great job.
I feel as boneless as a squid.’
‘You were very tired,’ Adam said, ‘and we've all been worried about Elinor.’
‘Yes.’
Miranda's face crumpled and she started to weep.
She rubbed both eyes, then winced as, too late, she remembered her contact lenses.
She edged them out and scrambled to her feet.
‘I can't think why I'm crying.’
‘A natural reaction, after this strain and anxiety,’ Adam said reassuringly.
He watched her, his head to one side, as if undecided.
He stood up.
He moved towards her.
‘Don't worry.
I'm in control of everything.
You can relax now.’
Miranda sniffled.
She felt the flimsy cotton of Adam's shirt against her as muscular arms wrapped around her.
Her body relaxed and she leaned her head against his strong chest.
She felt his hand beneath her shirt; his thumb pressed along her naked backbone all the way to the nape of her neck.
Each time Adam gently pressed against a vertebra, Miranda was pushed against his body.
She could feel his flat, muscular strength: she could also feel his arousal as Adam kissed her firmly on the mouth.
Long ago, Miranda had realized that sexual involvement with Adam could only complicate her life, but she had been only half awake and off guard when he made his  move.
Rebelliously she thought, What the hell.
Why shouldn't I forget business — just for once?
And why shouldn't I do as I please with my own body?
In silence, Adam lifted her into his arms and carried her (five feet nine and no lightweight) on to the bed.
Miranda's hair flamed against the pillow as she lay back with her eyes closed, thinking, Too late to stop him now.
And I don't want to.
Almost motionless, she lay in a trance of sensuality, Adam's mouth against the soft skin of her breasts.
He whispered, ‘Keep your eyes closed.
You're not to move .
Here, I'm in charge.’
‘But don't you want me to —‘
‘I want you to lie still and let me…love you.’
Miranda felt a melting and tickling inside her stomach as if someone was stroking it with a feather.
Her body relaxed in Adam's strong and clearly skilled hands as he stroked her bare, smooth belly, and a warm glow spread from her navel over her entire body.
His mouth warmed her as his lips travelled slowly downward from her breasts.
Sometime later, Miranda said, ‘But you haven't.’
‘There's plenty of time,’ Adam said.
‘I like to do things to a woman.
I get my pleasure from seeing you climax.’
She had thrashed around like a freshly caught trout on a grassy bank.
‘I told you, you're not to move .’
Adam firmly replaced her arm on the pillow.
‘And what if I do?’
‘I'll tie you to the bed.’
Miranda opened her eyes.
‘Bondage?
How sleazy.’
‘Not if it's playful,’ Adam promised.
‘I'd blindfold you with a silken scarf and tie your wrists and ankles to the bedpost with silken ribbons.’
‘I'd bite them off!’
‘I was only joking,’ Adam murmured, feeling again for her breasts.
An hour later, Miranda, lying on top of Adam's suntanned, naked body, said sleepily, ‘That was a big surprise.’
‘I've been wanting to do it for years.’
‘Why did you wait so long?’
‘The same reason as you.
Prudence.
But nobody could feel platonic about you, Miranda.’
Miranda remembered howling as a twelve-year-old because Adam treated her as a child.
Briefly she wished that child could have looked into this future.
She said, ‘1 think…
I think I've always wanted…this.’
I know I have.’
Adam again bent his lips to her breast.
Miranda said sleepily, ‘I've never had an orgasm during sex like that.
Sometimes I've been on the verge, but then the reeling vanished.’
‘I have to confess, you're not the first woman I've made love to.’
Miranda inhaled the earthy smell of the bed, propped herself on one elbow, and started gently to scratch Adam's arm with her fingernails, stroking the sensitive inner flesh, from wrist to elbow.
He shivered with pleasure.
‘No woman has ever aroused me as you have.’
‘You too?’
‘I've never felt like this before, Miranda.
I feel that we're equals, that you'll never allow me to dominate you.
I suspect you'll always keep me guessing, keep me on my toes.’
Roughly he pulled her to him.
His kiss was deep and passionate.
Miranda fleetingly wondered how she could ever have thought that Adam had a withholding, guarded nature.
And then she was drawn again into his spell and she stopped thinking altogether.
Later, Adam lazily stared past Miranda to the windows — twin rectangles of blue sky, between which hung an old  mirror in an elaborately carved mahogany frame.
The silvered glass was faintly green in places and speckled black where the silver had flaked off the back.
Beneath this mirror stood Miranda's surprisingly feminine dressing table, skirted in spotted white muslin frills.
Adam said, ‘I'm surprised to find your dressing table looks like Scarlett O'Hara's underdrawers.’
‘Sometimes a frill is just a frill.’
Miranda shrugged.
‘My clever darling,’ Adam murmured.
Miranda stretched voluptuously.
‘Annabel and Clare are going to get the surprise of their lives when we tell them about us !’
‘I'd prefer to keep our secret to ourselves for a bit,’ Adam said firmly.
‘I have to settle Elinor's affairs.
I don't want anyone to suspect that I favour you over your sisters, which is something they already fear because of our business connection.’
He did not mention his other reason for secrecy, although they both knew it.
Everyone close to her knew that Elinor's unspoken dream was that Miranda — her only remaining unmarried granddaughter — should marry into the British aristocracy.
While Elinor lived, Adam dared not risk flinging a monkey wrench into that dream.
At eleven o'clock the following morning, Buzz sat down on the blue chair by Elinor's bedroom window, pulled the kitchen timer from the pocket of her navy cotton dress, and set it to twenty minutes: the mechanism began to tick in an irritating way.
Elinor, in a cream silk bedjacket, was propped up by a stack of frilly pillows; she looked old and frail.
Elinor's cat, Fudge, now allowed back into the bedroom, padded to the grey sofa in front of the fireplace, where Adam sat, and rubbed against his jeans.
‘Cats always like me.’
Adam leaned down and stroked  the pale ginger fur; the cat curled up against his feet and went to sleep.
From the briefcase that lay open at his side, Adam extracted a document.
He spoke briskly.
‘Before I return to London, I'd like to propose a strategy, should Elinor ever again be ill, to prevent the problems that Buzz has experienced during the past few weeks.’
Because nobody had been empowered to sign cheques on Elinor's behalf, no household bills or salaries could be paid: for three weeks, the servants' wages had been paid by Buzz from her own bank account.
‘If, for any reason, Elinor can't sign cheques, then I suggest I sign them for her,’ Adam said.
Buzz looked up sharply.
Adam continued, ‘But I would be empowered to draw only on Elinor's housekeeping account in Nice.
The power of attorney would specifically state that no cheques could be made out to me or the firm.
We would wait for any payment until Elinor was well again.’
‘Why not have two signatures required?’
Buzz suggested.
‘One of the other STG partners, perhaps?’
‘Certainly.’
Adam nodded, then turned to Elinor.
‘And the STG professional insurance would automatically cover malpractice.’
Elinor looked at Buzz.
‘That okay with you?
Yes.
Then please do it, Adam dear.’
Her voice was feeble.
After Elinor signed and the document was witnessed, Adam produced a second sheet of paper.
He said, ‘In order to prevent literary contracts being held up, I also suggest that a general power of attorney be given to me again only in a limited area and only to be used if Elinor be indisposed.’
Buzz asked, ‘Is that also covered by the malpractice insurance?’
‘Yes,’ Adam said.
‘Incidentally, if I deliberately breached a power of attorney and exploited it for my own benefit — although I can't think how that would be possible — I would be struck off the Roll of Solicitors by the Law Society.’
‘That all right with you, Buzz?’
Elinor asked faintly.
‘Do you have any specific objections, Buzz?’
Adam inquired politely.
After a moment, Buzz shook her head.
These powers of attorney were only for day-to-day transactions.
If Buzz protested without cause, it might even sound fishy — as if she wanted to control Nell's money.
‘Then I also agree to that,’ Elinor said.
WEDNESDAY, 21 JULY 1965
At five p.m., Scott finished his coverage of the anti-Vietnam War demonstrators.
In the newsroom, reporters hung around drinking coffee as they read or talked.
Desks were littered with yards of wire stories, celebrity bulletins, picture handouts, telephone messages, and empty coffee cups.
In the background, teletype machines clacked and a bank of television monitors showed different pictures, some of which were material being fed through to the station.
Somebody wailed, ‘You mean after two lawyers passed this, I still can't run it?’
In the news editor's office, an assistant was reading the list of stories from her scratch pad, ‘Report from Washington on the senator bribe story.
The mayor of New York and the anti-war demonstrations.
We have the mayor bugging out on this, Scott.’
A head poked around the door.
‘Call to Europe in your office, Scott.’
‘Sorry, you guys.’
Scott hurried to his office and carefully closed the door.
‘Annabel?
What's happened, darling?’
‘Scott…
I miss you !’
‘I miss you too, angel.’
‘I need you here .‘
Scott was sensitive to the pressure his wife had been under for the past month.
First she'd learned that her grandmother, whom she adored, was dangerously ill, and had been at her bedside ever since.
Then her contract had not been renewed.
This was a double-barrel blow for both of them in terms of loss of money and prestige.
The humiliation was worse because it was so public, and it was a good thing that Annabel had not been in New York when the news broke, when gloating gossip writers had jammed Scott and Annabel's home phones with their venomous questions.
Scott knew that Annabel was now facing the worst moment any model can face: she was officially over the hill, gaining weight, losing her looks and on the downward path to wrinkles and sag.
No reassurances from Scott had been able to lull his twenty-five-year-old wife's anxiety about her fading beauty.
It was ludicrous to be so young and yet a has-been.
Scott tried to handle her diplomatically.
‘Angel, I wish I could be with you, but we both know I can't.
We've talked about this so often: you know I want to be supportive, but I also have to do my job properly.
We're short-staffed here — the summer holiday period's started and everyone's stretched.
I can't just walk out.
If I'd come when you first asked me, I might have been in Saracen for an entire month: I'd probably have no job to come back to.’
Gently he added, ‘And what use would I have been, angel?’
Once again Scott felt that she was asking for something unreasonable, something a child might ask of a parent.
He wished Annabel were not so insecure and dependent upon him; for the past few months, as she waited for Avanti to make up its mind, she had needed constant emotional support and reassurance from Scott, who had felt her clinging to him, almost like a physical weight on his back.
‘I wanted you with me,’ Annabel wept.
She had forgotten that she telephoned to tell Scott the news of the trust.
‘My job means having to give up a lot of things that everyone else takes for granted in their life, and you've always known that, Annabel,’ Scott again reminded her.
‘Your job seems to suck up your entire life,’ Annabel sobbed reproachfully.
‘Yes, that's why I married you.
Because I love you, and I want what little private life I have to be steady and permanent,’ Scott said.
‘You're so involved with your precious career that you put it before your private life,’ Annabel retorted.
‘You put us on the back burner-you'll deal with it next week, next month — you'll do that until you retire !’
‘My career is precious to me — and you knew that when you married me.
It's not as if I worked for a large network news show.
You know that everyone here does the job of at least two people.
How would it look if I suddenly disappeared for weeks — leaving a gap that other people would have to fill — because my wife's grandmother is ill on the other side of the world?’
‘Please come, Scott.’
‘It's not necessary.
I can't walk out on everyone here.
Please try to understand that, angel.’
‘Scott, I want to hold you…
It's been months since we were in bed together.
Don't you remember how good it used to be?’
‘Nobody gets the honeymoon treatment for ever, angel.
That sort of twenty-four-hours-in-bed passion changes into a different sort of comfortable, caring love.’
Annabel wailed, ‘You mean I don't attract you any more?
You don't love me?’
Exasperated, Scott said, ‘You've become spoiled, neurotic, overanxious, and self-absorbed.
What's so lovable about that, Annabel?’
Scott's office door burst open.
‘You're wanted in the cutting room.’
‘Thanks, I'll be right along!’
To Annabel, Scott said carefully, ‘You just have to tough it out, angel.
These situations sometimes happen in life.’
‘That's not all.’
Annabel gulped, then managed to say, ‘I think I'm having a heart attack.’
‘What !‘
After he calmed down, Scott reasoned that if Annabel were having a heart attack, she wouldn't be able to talk on the telephone.
Cautiously he said, ‘Why do you think that, angel?’
‘My heart is thumping!
I can't breathe properly-I'm gasping for air!’
‘it might be another anxiety attack,’ Scott suggested gently.
Annabel said in an agitated voice, ‘I feel as if my mind is whirling madly, like a hurricane.
I can't control it.
I feel taut and tense.
I'm literally shaking !’
‘Are you sweating?
Are you hands clammy?
Is your stomach knotted?’
‘Yes ,’ Annabel wept.
It was another panic attack.
Scott said, ‘Is Adam still around?
Get him to the phone, darling.’
Another head appeared around Scott's door.
‘They can't cut until you're on the spot.
Scott.’
Scott nearly said, ‘My wife is ill,’ but he had cried wolf too often: other people's wives didn't telephone the station as relentlessly as Annabel.
Eventually Scott heard Adam's faint but reassuringly calm voice.
‘Anything I can do to help, Scott?
Annabel seems upset.
We thought she'd gone to bed.
It's nearly midnight here.’
‘Annabel thinks she's having a heart attack,’ Scott told him.
‘I don't think so,’ Adam said firmly.
‘I'll take her to Elinor's night nurse immediately — I expect she'll give Annabel something to calm her down.
The situation here has been very tense.
It's understandable that Annabel is a little…overwrought.’
Scott thought, He's telling me that she's hysterical.
He said, ‘Tell me straight, Adam.
Just answer yes or no.
Does Annabel look ill to you?’
‘No.’
‘I'm between a rock and a hard place.
Of course I'll fly over straight away if Elinor…’
‘There is no necessity to do so.’
Adam spoke firmly again.
‘Elinor is progressing well, and I have everything under control here.’
‘I'm sure you have,’ Scott said with great relief.
WEDNESDAY, 28 JULY 1965
A week later, just before her luncheon was served, Adam took the trust documentation to Elinor's bedroom to be signed.
As he laid the twenty-four-page Declaration of Trust before her, Adam said, ‘There are no changes, but one alteration.
As Paul is to be the protector, the STG partners think it best to have trustees outside the firm, so we'll arrange that through the group of accountants we deal with in Bermuda.’
‘Did you ask Clare once more?’
Elinor, looking frail, was not interested in the fine points of the trust.
‘Yes.
I'm afraid she's still adamant.’
Elinor thought for a minute.
With an effort, she lifted her head.
‘Remember that I don't want Clare to know she's included in the trust until she apologizes !
She is not to think she can get away with behaving hurtfully.
Now, where do I sign this thing?
You'd better call Buzz and that sour-looking nurse to witness it.’
At seven-twenty that same morning, Scott had been at the site of an unusual hit-and-run story: two older men had been killed and another injured by a police patrol car.
At midday, Scott returned to the studio with twenty minutes of film footage, which would be edited to two minutes plus.
It looked as if it would end up their lead story.
The news editor suggested, ‘Let's team it with this other hit-and-run story that's just come in: two black kids, in a car out of control, ran over four children, who were hurt but not badly.
The black kids have been paraded in handcuffs to the press.’
Scott was interested.
‘The cops suspected of killing the two old guys have been suspended but not arrested, even though I'm told there's a suspicion that murder is involved.
But the DA's office says they can't pin it on them yet.
So let's run the story ‘Why the delay at the DA's office?’’
The door opened.
‘Call from Europe for you, Scott.’
Scott said nothing.
What could he say?
The entire station knew about his spoiled child bride.
He hurried to his office.
Once again he listened calmly to her tearful pleas, and once again Scott refused to walk out on the station and join Annabel.
That evening, Scott took his place at the news desk and ran an eye over his script.
Just before airtime, a story had come in on a drug bust: space was hastily made for this.
At one minute to air, Scott grinned across to the other newscaster, looked up at the control room, and nodded.
The stress level in the newsroom was high.
There was no noise whatsoever.
Control said, ‘Roll feed one…’
The floor manager pointed at camera two and counted down: ‘Four, three, two, one.
Cue Scott.’
A red light flicked on camera two as the floor manager silently pointed to it.
‘Good evening.
I'm Scott Svenson with tonight's news.’
Even while the show was going out, work continued in the newsroom.
Reporters handed their just completed text  to the news editor, who edited the stories and telephoned any alterations in the programme to the newscaster: ‘Scott, kill story four from Moscow — something better's come in, so we aren't going to run it’…
‘Scott, hold item seven, medical malpractice, for later in the show.
The guy's just died, so we must update it.’
As the camera pulled back on the last shot and credits were shown on the screen, the tension in the studio relaxed, replaced by an exultant mood.
The interrupter-feedback button in Scott's ear said, ‘Nice work, Scott.
Now beat it to your office.
Long-distance call from Europe.’
Scott tore off his mike thinking, It must be five in the morning in France.
He ran to his office and lifted the phone.
‘Annabel?
What's happened?’
Annabel could hardly speak through her tears.
‘Gran had a relapse four hours ago.
Adam is here to speak with you if you don't believe me.
They say there's no point in moving her to a hospital.
Now you've got to come, Scott.’
17
MONDAY, 1 OCTOBER 1965
Ten weeks later, the ambulance team that had driven Elinor from the Nice hospital carried her into the château and up to her bedroom.
Elinor, her arms draped around the necks of two paramedics, said, ‘You can take that thing right away!’
She meant the wheelchair waiting in her bedroom.
‘Please,’ Buzz pleaded.
‘You gotta be careful for a bit, Elinor.
You gave us such a fright.
We thought you was a goner.’
‘Well, I feel fine now,’ Elinor said.
‘Where's that bottle of champagne you promised me?’
The specialists had said that if she was careful, she could live a long time.
Her doctor had told her that she had completely recovered.
He saw no reason to add that from now on, her body would break down: she would gradually become slower in her movements, she would tire more easily and lack stamina, and she would probably have another stroke in seven years' time — at the latest.
TUESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 1965
In the grey morning light, Clare, still in her nightgown, stooped to pick up the little bottle of sleeping pills from the floor.
She shook it.
Empty.
Better get another prescription.
Careful not to wake Josh in the back room, Clare pulled on her dressing gown.
Josh was still bewildered by the sudden change in living standard from California sun and the constant care of  cheerful Kathy (now working for another family in nearby Markham Square) to the stuffy flat in Pimlico where his babysitter, Mrs Gooden, a retired cook, watched over Josh and her other six little charges, one of whom always seemed to be bare-bottomed and on the potty.
Clare hurried to the kitchenette to make Josh's breakfast.
Their basement apartment cost more than she could afford, but at least she felt at home in Chelsea.
Once again she wished she understood what had happened to her in the last three months.
She had such a strong sense of being in the right, of having behaved in a morally correct manner.
Why then had she ended up in such a mess?
After Clare's sudden departure from Saracen, Miranda had immediately located her through friends, then telephoned and urged her sister to be sensible and apologize to Elinor, ‘because we all know you really love Gran’.
‘Of course I do, Miranda,’ Clare had said.
‘But that's beside the point.’
She was determined to allow nobody to treat her as a child in future — not Sam, not Adam, not Elinor, not Buzz, and certainly not Miranda.
‘This tiff is escalating to a ridiculous degree!’
Miranda exploded.
‘Adam says the trust is going to be irrevocable , so for heaven's sake, think ahead, for when Joshua goes to Eton —‘
‘I don't think I'm being ridiculous.
I hope Josh never goes to Eton, or any other privileged school where he's kept away from reality,’ Clare said stiffly.
Correctly feeling that Miranda thought she was being tiresome, she added, ‘What counts in this tiff — as you call it — is the principle of the thing.’
Miranda said, ‘People only say that when they can't think of any other reason for doing something damned stupid.’
Clare was impatient to hang up.
Enraged, Miranda said, ‘Okay, I can take a hint.’
She promised herself she wouldn't approach Clare again.
At first Clare kept in touch with Annabel after her sister returned to New York, but as her own life became increasingly difficult, she found herself unable to write the sort of letter that would prop up Annabel's crumbling self-esteem.
Via his lawyer, Sam refused to give Clare money because he didn't want a divorce.
He wanted his wife and child back, and he reckoned he could tough it out longer than she could.
Clare's solicitor explained to her that men often forced their wives to return by refusing to grant a divorce and making it difficult for them to obtain money — even when it was awarded by a court.
He said that returning to Sam might be best for her and her child.
Clare wondered whose side her lawyer was on.
She was clearly and legally in the right; she wasn't going to be manipulated and brought to heel by lack of funds.
‘I'm damned if I'm going to let him bully me with money!’
Clare cried.
‘I'll earn my own money!’
She soon found out how difficult this was.
Clare fell into the poverty trap experienced in the sixties by many single mothers.
Because she had no man, she had no income beyond what she could earn.
And because she had no training, she had no saleable skills.
She could only get a poorly paid job as a sales assistant in a King's Road shoe boutique.
Because she had no man, Clare also suddenly found she had no public identity and was not likely to get asked to dinner parties, for society seemed to move only in couples.
A full-time job, a small child, and no home help left her little energy for dinner parties anyway.
And she was too proud to accept hospitality when she couldn't afford to return it.
She, who had always helped lame dogs, now  refused the many helping hands that were held out to her, because they only hauled her back, temporarily, into a life of comfort from which she would later have to return to reality.
She became abrupt and ill at ease with her friends, who sensed this.
Eventually they stopped trying.
Clare was surprised to find how much money it cost to lead what she considered a normal life.
She earned eighteen pounds a week after tax.
Her rent was ten pounds a week, and the babysitter cost a pound a day, which left three pounds to live on — just enough to pay her grocery bill.
She didn't know how to budget or how to keep track of her expenditures, and she cried every time she opened her bank statement.
Apart from basic necessities, any other purchase was clearly now an extravagance for Clare.
Her wages only just paid for her expenses: now a taxi was a memory.
Bewildered, Clare did not understand why she couldn't manage.
What was she doing wrong?
The other assistants in the shoe shop seemed to manage on their wages.
Of course, none of them was supporting a child, and the male assistant got sixty per cent more than the women.
And she was living in an area of London that was relatively expensive, while her new peers lived in Battersea and Wandsworth.
But Clare was not yet accustomed to a life in which ice cream, sherry, and a telephone were luxuries.
So she economized by drinking cheap cooking sherry.
She felt humiliated by her poverty, especially when the telephone was cut off for non-payment and she had to confess this to Gilda, the senior assistant in the shoe shop.
‘Poor?
You ain't poor, Clare,’ scoffed Gilda during their tea break.
She lit up a Woodbine and puffed on it serenely.
‘Poor people don't have bank accounts and refrigerators and money for the launderette.’
‘I'm starting to realize that,’ Clare said humbly.
‘But I still need more money than I'm earning, to look after Josh.’
Clare had not wanted to leave Josh (who would be three in December) with a babysitter, but she found that none of the local nursery schools, public or private, had an available slot.
When she tried to get Josh into a free day nursery, she discovered that the local authority did not regard her situation as difficult.
‘Difficult’ seemed to mean that your pimp had beaten you up and thrown you out, and you had no money for a fix and couldn't stand up until you'd had one.
In the Chelsea library, Clare read the 1944 Education Act, Section 8(2) (6).
It said that a local education authority ‘shall, in particular, have regard to the need for securing that provision is made for pupils who have not attained the age of five years by the provision of nursery school.’
So — where were the nursery schools?
Clare felt protest rise within her.
She was determined not to be bludgeoned into submission by lack of money and a system that seemed not to care for mothers and children.
The following weekend, Clare sold all her jewellery except her engagement and wedding rings.
She accepted the first price offered by the first jeweller, not realizing that she could probably have raised fifty per cent more money by bargaining or trying other shops.
That night, as often when she put Josh to bed, Clare held the most precious thing in her world close to her heart and felt guilty and ashamed that she wasn't providing him with the things she thought she should.
She lived with guilt even as she fiercely told herself that it wasn't fair that her life now should be so miserable and exhausting.
Josh had to be squeezed into Clare's tight weekday schedule: after taking him to the babysitter in Pimlico, she caught another bus to the shoe shop where she worked.
Lunch hour meant a hurried visit to a launderette or one of the new supermarkets.
At six o'clock, Clare again caught the  bus to Pimlico, took Josh back to her basement, cooked his supper, cooked her supper (increasingly, the same nursery food sufficed for both), put Josh to bed, had a drink, looked over any paperwork required by her solicitor, crawled into bed with a book, fell asleep after reading a page, and woke two hours later, unable to get back to sleep.
Insomnia plagued her and sapped her strength.
Exhausted and without much hope for the future, she gradually slipped into a permanent state of depression, which made life even more difficult for Josh, although neither of them realized this.
Thankfully, at weekends, Clare felt almost normal again.
On Saturdays, she stayed in bed late — although as Josh bounced up and down beside her, it wasn't a very restful experience.
But she didn't mind as she cuddled his warm little body next to hers, played hide-and-seek under the bedclothes, or read aloud to him.
Later, soaping her son's slippery body in the bath as he wriggled from her grasp and splashed water up at his mother, Clare would again feel happy.
On Saturday afternoons, Clare pushed Josh's collapsible canvas pram up Sloane Street towards Kensington Gardens, where she mixed happily with other children and working mothers.
They were all sniffed at by the uniformed nannies, who wheeled old-fashioned perambulators rather than the canvas collapsibles.
On Sunday mornings, Clare and Josh went to Mrs Gooden's.
Here Clare (who could cook a hamburger but not much else) learned to prepare a traditional British lunch of roast meat and vegetables, followed by a fruit pie or tart.
‘You've got light fingers,’ Mrs Gooden said approvingly one Sunday as she watched Clare, with the tips of her fingers, mix flour and lard in the big yellow mixing bowl.
‘We'll make a baker of you yet.’
Shortly after this, Clare started to swap babysitting evenings with Stephanie, a mother who also took her small son to Mrs Gooden.
This arrangement ensured that, once a week, both women had an evening and a night off, followed by a leisurely rise the next morning.
On Clare's first such evening off, she went to a dinner party given by an old schoolfriend who persisted in keeping in touch.
Clare's partner was a just-divorced man who talked endlessly about ‘that bitch who needn't think she has a free meal ticket for life’, then took Clare to dance at Annabel's, London's most expensive new nightclub.
He tore her dress on the taxi journey back to her flat, and after a tussle, finally, standing on the pavement at three a.m. he realized that she really wouldn't allow him in.
The following morning, Clare arrived late for work.
When Gilda heard what happened, she said, ‘A man who's just staggered out of a nasty relationship wants a bloody nursemaid at first, and then he wants to play the field for a bit.
But what he really wants is another relationship.’
Clare said, ‘I don't want another relationship until I've struggled free of this one.’
‘Maybe you ought to play the field a bit,’ Gilda suggested.
‘That's what my solicitor's afraid of,’ Clare said.
‘He says it would ruin my case.
He'd like to shut me up in a box for the next two years.
But Sam can apparently do what the hell he likes, with as many women as he pleases!’
On her next evening out, Clare remembered Gilda's advice.
Feeling self-conscious at entering a pub by herself, she slunk into the Markham Arms, a glamorous tavern in the King's Road where men-about-Chelsea relaxed in the evening.
Sitting on the next barstool was an antiques dealer called James; he discussed his feelings with Clare for the next two  hours and then took her to dinner at the Ox on the Roof, where she chose the most filling dishes.
Eating spaghetti, Clare began to suspect that James would rather talk about a relationship than have one; wolfing boeuf bourguignon, she wondered whether James was flaunting his insecurities in order to attract the maternal feelings he clearly believed nestled within every woman's breast- and from which Clare was trying to escape for the evening.
By the time the crème brulée was served, she realized that James wasn't the gentle, sensitive, vulnerable charmer that she had first imagined but a crashing bore.
Nevertheless, having had far too much to drink, Clare woke up the next morning in James's bed, saw that it was nearly nine o'clock, fled to work in her crumpled clothes but arrived late again.
Gilda winked.
The following week, Clare avoided the Markham Arms and went instead to the Bunch of Grapes in Knightsbridge.
There she met Ian, a fruit exporter.
Ian was boyish, athletic, charming, and, Clare suspected, terrified of his fortieth birthday: there had been a bit of the Peter Pan in Sam, and Clare recognized the symptoms.
During dinner at the Pheasantry, Ian clearly expected Clare to be frivolously entertaining.
He belittled any attempt at serious conversation with phrases such as, ‘Well, you're quite a bluestocking,’ or, ‘Actually, I didn't come out to discuss politics.’
The next morning, Ian woke her up with a cup of tea, said he was sorry about last night, he'd had a bit too much to drink.
Again Clare was late to work.
‘Of course they both seemed nice guys,’ Gilda commiserated.
‘But they was fake nice guys,pretending to be nice guys.
If you're going to get picked up in bars and hand it out free on the first date, you'd better check in regular at St Stephen's.’
‘Is that a church?’
‘No, the local clap clinic.’
Always, when Clare's hangover subsided, she wondered why she did it.
She found no sexual pleasure in going to bed with strangers, but, in contrast with the rest of her week, she was comforted by the feeling of being thought desirable, of having someone's arms around her, of warm cuddling beneath the quilt.
One morning, Clare found herself in a rumpled bed in a strange bedroom with only sixpence in her purse — not enough to get to work.
If she was late for work one more time, she knew, she would be fired.
Clare panicked and telephoned Miranda.
Wondering whether the prim Miss Goody-Goody of a few months ago had really metamorphosed into this forlorn and wanton creature, Miranda said, ‘I'll send a car for you.
straight away.’
She hesitated.
‘Couldn't we meet, Clare?…
Won't you let me give you some money -just to tide you over?’
‘No, Clare lied.
‘I have plenty of money at home.’
Gran's worried about you.
We all are.’
‘How is she?’
Clare asked wistfully.
In the past, when she felt depressed, she knew that she could always rely on her grandmother to lift her spirits.
‘Gran would feel a lot happier if you paid her a visit.
Couldn't you fly to the south of France, just for a week?’
‘No,’ Clare said, feeling rage rise ‘I can't take time off.’
‘How about a better job?’
Miranda suggested.
‘You've had experience as a shop assistant, so you could work in one of our shops.
You'll probably be better paid, and have a better time of it.’
‘No.
I want to learn to manage by myself.
Don't worry.
I'll survive.’
‘But what about Josh?’
‘Josh will have to put up with the life that his mother can afford to lead.’
Clare was fired for turning up late after she had to wait for a doctor because Josh had a temperature.
As the shop manager pointed out, it was the third time that month she'd been late for work, and if they hadn't needed her to turn up on time, they wouldn't have hired her in the first place.
Having decided to start her own nursery playgroup, Clare sold her engagement ring, a flashy marquise diamond, in order to buy the lease of the first floor of a big Edwardian house in Pimlico: it contained a ballroom, a small rear room, and a bathroom.
Clare's assistants were two other single mothers whose children were also cared for by Mrs Gooden.
Mrs Gooden lost three kiddies and three pounds a day but, instead, found herself cooking lunch for thirty-four, a far more lucrative occupation.
At midday, Mr Gooden cycled round to the playgroup with lunch hauled behind on a trailer.
He also did Clare's bookkeeping.
Clare doubled her income overnight, and felt that she was doing a useful job.
In contrast to Clare, her sister Miranda was leading the fast and frivolous life of the exciting sixties as Britain launched into the first real business boom since Hitler's war.
A rush of stock exchange takeover bids coined money for shareholders, and Britain imported more French champagne than any other country, although one in three families still couldn't afford a TV.
The former aristocratic standards of who and what was acceptable were now dumped; everyone wanted to belong to the new meritocracy, based not on birth but on talent, achievement, and the resultant financial reward — the with-it people, as opposed to the dull, unwith-its.
Annabel was painted by David Hockney, and Miranda's portrait — a gloomy study in greys by Brian Kneale — was  exhibited In the National Portrait Gallery.
They both wished that Gran would hide her triple portrait: Annigoni was definitely not with it.
Fashion was madly exciting: grannies happily wore miniskirts and platform thigh boots, while young girls wore button-up granny boots and Victorian-style, flower-printed dresses.
Females under thirty tried to look like thumbsucking little girls; with turned-in toes, they skipped around in buttock-skimming shifts over pale tights.
All females in their thirties dressed like chic astronauts; all women over forty wore jaunty, flared trouser suits.
Make-up manufacturers made a fortune.
TUESDAY, 11 JANUARY 1966
Snow lay on the park outside as Miranda showed her new house in Cumberland Terrace to fashion editor Annie Trehearne.
Since the heating wasn't yet working, the two young women stamped around in winter coats and boots, and dodged whistling workmen, who no longer wore baggy dungarees but tight jeans as they carried planks from one room to another.
Annie looked down from the first-floor drawing-room windows to the gaunt trees of Regent's Park and said, ‘It's simply super.
Fab.
Smashing.
Let's face it, Miranda, not many people of your age can afford to buy a house like this.
KITS must be doing frightfully well.’
Miranda nodded.
‘But KITS has expanded so fast we're permanently short of capital.
The money for this place came from a family trust.’
‘Everyone should have a grandmother like yours.
How is she?’
‘The doctors say she's responding very well to the new treatment, and she expects to live for another hundred years.’
‘Glad to hear it.’
‘Now, I want to know what you think of my new skin-care range,’ Miranda said.
It's targeted at the young twenties and I'm calling it Image.
What do you think of launching it with pictures of Deneuve?’
‘Pix by Bailey then.
Expensive,’ Annie said.
Photographer David Bailey had recently married French film star Catherine Deneuve, with Mick Jagger as best man.
‘Of course.’
Miranda nodded again.
‘By the way, how's Annabel enjoying her retirement?’
‘Off the record?
Relieved, I think,’ Miranda reported.
‘She's neatly switched to the life of a successful New York hostess — she's on every charity committee in town.’
Miranda was not going to let anyone know that Annabel's self-confidence had been shattered.
It had been painful to watch her struggle for her self-respect, but she had managed to ward off the threatened nervous breakdown.
Endless reassurance had been necessary — not of her beauty, for nothing could persuade Annabel that it had not vanished, but of her value to them all, and of her family's affection.
Airily Miranda continued, ‘Annabel's just bought a new apartment.
You really ought to hop over for a weekend and see it, Anne.
It s a penthouse in a high rise on the Upper East Side, with a spectacular three-sided view over the city and across the river.
It's simply stunning.
Someone else had practically bought the place, so Annabel was lucky to get it.
‘How did she manage It?’
‘Simply offered more money.
Adam fixed it.’
‘That family trust again?
What lucky girls you are!
What news of Clare?’
‘I don't see much of Clare these days, Miranda said.
‘She's very busy, now that she's running a nursery playgroup.’
She looked out over the smudged white landscape  of Regent's Park, then peered at the road below.
‘Hell, I've just got another parking fine.
Those stupid new meters!
It's getting really difficult to drive in London.’
‘Or out of it,’ said Annie.
‘Yes.
I was pinched for dangerous driving last month, in a radar trap.
Luckily, Adam fixed it.’
WEDNESDAY, 12 JANUARY 1966
Clare still swapped one night a week off with Stephanie and reported subsequent events to Gilda, who now managed the shoe shop: occasionally she visited Clare for an evening meal.
As Clare poured sherry, Gilda asked, ‘So how was the BOAC pilot?’
‘Tony was the worst yet.’
Clare never felt embarrassed discussing sex with Gilda, who could talk about little else.
‘He'd read all the sex manuals ever printed.
Whipped a porn magazine out of his flight case after the first gin and tonic.
He was coldly determined to be a good lover.
For me, that was a total turn-off.’
‘Porn pictures are a turn-off to most women.
Women like words, not pictures,’ Gilda said as she sipped her drink.
‘But I'm starting to think that everything's a turn-off for you, doll.
You clearly can't have sex with fellas you ain't fond of.
I expect you need a chap you know well, someone you feel comfortable with, not these one-nighters.’
She swallowed half the glass.
‘Now me, I'm the reverse.
If I don't give a damn about ‘em, I ain't anxious, and if I ain't anxious, then I come easy.’
She drained her glass.
‘When Tony couldn't get me to climax, he wanted to ask another girl over,’ Clare said.
‘He automatically assumed that I was a lesbian.’
‘That's not what he meant,’ Gilda said.
‘Lots of guys find it a turn-on to watch two women making love.’
‘How very odd.
Can you imagine a woman trying to get two men into bed so she could watch them?’
‘Forget this guy,’ said Gilda.
‘I know what you need, Clare: someone you know and trust, someone who won't make you feel anxious.
Then you'll relax and it'll happen — then you'll stop being one of them miserable nymphos who hop from man to man, hoping for Mr Right, the man who can satisfy her.’
As Gilda held out her glass to be refilled, she added reflectively, ‘Although you seem more lonely than horny.
Are you looking for sex, or just someone to talk to?
You ain't likely to pick up Prince Charming in a bar.’
Clare said, ‘I'm not looking for Prince Charming.
I don't want the disorder, the pain, the mess, or the misery of being in love.
I just want a short-term relationship, without responsibility.’
Gilda laughed.
‘So do these fellas you pick up.
But I'm not convinced that's right for you.
You need a secure situation with someone you can trust, who you know will stick around because he loves you.
I'll tell you who you ought to fall in love with, Clare.’
‘Who?’
‘Yourself.
You clearly think that you're a piece of worthless rubbish, and if I pick up those vibes, then so do the blokes.
Why not give sex a rest for a bit, and pay a bit of attention to yourself?
You never want to make a man the centre of your existence.
That place is for you, Clare.’
‘I am the centre of my existence,’ Clare sang, as if chanting a psalm, pitching her voice an octave lower, as she pushed Josh to her playgroup the next morning.
A man stood on the porch, his hands in the pocket of his beige mackintosh.
‘Good morning.
Are you a prospective parent?’
Clare asked.
She felt in her pocket for the key.
‘No.’ said the man.
I'm an inspector for the local education authority.’
After examining the bathroom, the inspector pointed out that legally one toilet was required for every seven kiddies.
Clare said, ‘But if each child goes there every two and a half hours, one lavatory is adequate.
There is a potty for emergencies.
We have never had a problem.’
The inspector was not listening.
He was making notes on other violations.
Half an hour after the inspector left, as if to prove his point, the lavatory refused to flush.
The following morning, Clare's playgroup was ordered to close.
Two days later, Clare's mind was unexpectedly diverted from her personal problems — no job, no man — when the CND office telephoned to ask her for voluntary evening help: they were organizing another protest after a nuclear accident.
Over Spain, an American B-52 bomber carrying an H-bomb had collided in mid-air with another aircraft.
The H-bomb, with an explosive capacity of more than a million tons of TNT, had fallen into the Atlantic Ocean off southern Spain.
Clare felt cheered to be back among like-minded people, doing something worth while.
MONDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 1966
Valentine's Day brought two happy events.
The radio reported that the missing H-bomb had been located on the Atlantic seabed.
And to Clare's delight, she sold the lease of the apartment in which she ran her playgroup — for a profit of twenty-three per cent.
Clare felt as if she had won a sweepstake.
On the following morning, she bought a portable TV, a warm winter  coat for herself, and new clothes for Josh.
She didn't buy any toys for Josh because she had decided to open a toy shop.
Two weeks later, Clare bought the short lease of a small shop in the Pimlico Road, close to Mrs Gooden's home.
Though there was a lot to do, Clare, busy redecorating the shop and visiting wholesalers to buy stock, still managed to work one evening a week for the Movement.
In mid-April, just before her toy shop opened, Clare's weary, amiable, National Health doctor looked up from his desk and said, ‘About your vaginal symptoms, Mrs Shapiro.
You'd better go to St Stephen's for tests: they're properly equipped to handle this sort of thing.’
He seemed uneasy.
‘What sort of thing?…
Not…cancer?’
‘No, gonorrhoea,’ the doctor said apologetically.
Clare almost fainted from surprise and anxiety, horror and shame.
Then she wept.
The doctor refused to give her more sleeping tablets but scribbled a prescription for tranquillizers, which were increasingly prescribed for women like Clare, with symptoms of anxiety in stressful situations such as poverty, divorce, or bereavement; women with marital problems and women who were out of work also found them helpful, although the pills did nothing to resolve the problem responsible for the initial anxiety.
Clare, who blushed with shame whenever she thought about it, waited anxiously for the result of her tests at St Stephen's Hospital.
The tests were negative.
But within a month, she couldn't get through the day without tranquillizers; she felt less anxious, calmer.
Clare managed to open the Red Rocking Horse by mid-May.
At the opening party, an excited three-and-a-half-year-old Josh rode the pretty antique red rocking horse in the shop window.
MONDAY, 15 AUGUST 1966
Standing by the swimming pool at Saracen, Miranda beckoned to Adam, who was floating on the water in a transparent blow-up plastic armchair.
In a voice of soft persuasion, she said, ‘Will you do something for me, Adam?
I'm going to learn to fly.
I want you to break the news gently to Gran.’
‘But you promised your grandmother not to learn to fly,’ Adam objected.
‘It was a condition of her gift to you the ten thousand pounds’ capital to start KITS.’
I didn't say for ever.
I'll pay the money back to her.’
Miranda was defiant.
‘I've always wanted to fly.
I won't be held by a promise that was unfairly extracted from me before I legally became an adult.
And I get bored with nothing to do on holiday but lie in the sun.’
‘When are you starting?’
Adam asked, resigned.
‘This morning, at the Cannes flying school.
They have English instructors.
Four hours of instruction a day for two weeks.
And of course, this time of year, it's perfect flying weather!’
Miranda was triumphant now.
‘I've already passed the two written exams.
Did law and meteorology last Easter, and now I've finished navigation, radiotelephony, and technical — that was the toughest.’
So that's why you're so pale.’
Three hours later, two thousand feet above the Mediterranean, Miranda, alert and exultant, sat next to her instructor at the controls of a trainer plane, an ugly little single-engine Rallye which her instructor described as efficient and forgiving: you could do something wrong m a Rallye without getting immediately punished for it.
Flying was even better than she had hoped: better than skiing, better than driving a sports car.
As the Rallye droned towards the lighthouse on the tip of Cap Camerat, Miranda felt as if she were breathing the air of the gods.
Gently they swooped, turned, and climbed in the azure sky.
After they reached two thousand feet, the instructor showed her how to fly level; he then encouraged her to experiment with the stick, manoeuvring the plane m every direction.
Miranda felt that the aircraft was an extension of her arms and her fingertips, outspread in flight.
Heading west on the return flight path, the instructor said, ‘This is the first time I've flown with a pupil and haven't once needed to touch the controls.’
Miranda pushed home this advantage.
‘Then can I land?’
The instructor hesitated, then said, ‘Why not?’
The girl was clearly a natural flyer.
After being given clearance to land, Miranda, following her instructor's directions, started her approach; she throttled back to reduce speed and control her descent as she flew towards the threshold — the point just before she intended to touch down.
The plane was now moving at not much above stalling speed.
As the Rallye dropped to about thirty feet above the runway, Miranda throttled back completely and held the stick back.
The plane seemed to glide forward and land itself.
The undemonstrative Miranda flung her arms around the instructor.
‘Oh, thank you!
Thank you!
‘Quite a smooth landing,’ the instructor said approvingly He hesitated, then warned, ‘Next time be careful not to land too fast or you'll run out of runway.’
This woman was adventurous and ambitious: such pilots did not live long.
He added, ‘Careful pilots are the ones that survive.
A good pilot never takes a risk.’
‘The opposite of a good businessman,’ Miranda said, still on a high.
‘A businessman has to take risks constantly — and win sixty per cent of the time.’
‘In the air, that risk factor would kill you.’
Nine hundred years earlier, the great hall had been the hub of castle life: wolfhounds ate on floors strewn with rushes; servants slept on straw pallets thrown on the floor.
Then, the winter salon did not smell of lilies and expensive leather but of stale, fat, stinking human bodies and animal ordure.
Elinor sometimes thought of all the love and the hatred, the treachery and the killing that this hall had undoubtedly seen, when strong men fought hand-to-hand to the death, to protect their women and children.
Now the winter salon at Saracen, where Elinor waited for Adam, was not only the coolest but the most impressive room in the château.
High arched walls of pale, honey-coloured stone were hung with bluish-green tapestries; around the big stone fireplace, where logs burned in winter, stood sofas covered in the blues and greens of the tapestries; here and there were lamps, flowers, books, and piles of parlour games.
‘What's keeping Adam?’
Elinor asked Buzz, who was adding up the Scrabble score.
‘You said three o'clock.
It's only two-thirty,’ Buzz said.
‘Ninety-three for you, two hundred and sixty-four for me.
That's not a bad score for you, Nell.’
Buzz never cheated to let Elinor win: she knew that Elinor would immediately sense this and feel humiliated.
After an intensive rehabilitation programme of physiotherapy and speech therapy, Elinor appeared to have completely recovered from her stroke, although she could no longer think of three things at once, which Buzz said was a mercy for the people who had to live with her.
Elinor was sometimes at a loss for the right word, or name, and then became impatient with herself; she was often frustrated because she couldn't move as swiftly as she did before.
At times, she was downhearted and wondered whether she would ever write another book.
‘When you want to write, you'll write,’ Buzz would tell her then.
Now Buzz grunted, ‘Look what I tore out of the Daily Mail .’
She dug into her pocket, unfolded a bit of newspaper, and read, Sportsman Jim Clark today opened a splendidly equipped physical training college at Larkwood in Wiltshire, formerly the family home of the O'Dare family.
Lady O'Dare commented, ‘I wish them well.’’
‘I doubt that.’
Elinor peered at the photograph of the new owner, a motor-racing hero, standing with her sister-in-law, Marjorie.
The doorbell sounded.
‘I'll go,’ Buzz said.
‘It's either Adam or the postman.’
Buzz returned reading a postcard.
‘It's for you, from Sonia Rushleigh…
Whoops, I mean Bromley.
Who'd have thought them two would marry?
She says the Colonel's taken up petit point, and Miss Hawkins is teaching him.
Remember her, the schoolmistress?’
‘I do indeed,’ said Elinor.
‘Frumpy sourpuss!
Who's the letter from?’
‘Clare.’
Buzz held the envelope out to Elinor.
Elinor shook her head.
‘You open it.’
‘It's marked personal.’
‘I don't want to read it, unless she apologizes.’
Buzz opened the letter and read it.
She shook her head.
‘It's just a friendly letter, asking how you are.
But reading between the lines, I think Clare needs money.’
‘If she took her poor child back to his father and gave her husband a second chance, she wouldn't need money.’
‘How about a bit of generosity?’
Buzz said.
‘You're a silly, stubborn old woman.
And Clare's just as stubborn and just as silly.
It wouldn't have hurt her to say she was sorry.’
Elinor looked anxious.
‘Do you really think she's short of money, Buzz?
I wouldn't want her to have a rough time.’
This remark was overheard by Adam as, in pale blue  shirt and jeans, he sauntered through the door.
He said, ‘Elinor, you allowed ample provision in the trust for helping Clare — if the trustees consider that help is needed.
I'll check on Clare when I get back to London.’
He put a pile of papers on a side table.
‘There's rather a lot of paperwork here, things that you should be aware of.’
‘We've had more paperwork, not less, since the trust took over,’ Buzz said tartly.
‘And I tell you frankly that I can't follow it, Adam.
I thought the trustees were going to manage the business.
Elinor shouldn't be made to wade though pages of paragraphs with no commas in ‘em.’
‘Of course the trustees manage the business, and they do it very well,’ Adam said.
‘And there's no reason for Elinor to see any of this if it tires her.
In fact, I'm about to suggest something that would simplify matters.’
‘What's that?’
Buzz asked.
‘I'd like to substitute Paul Littlejohn for myself in the power of attorney that I hold on your behalf, Elinor.
I'm trying to reduce the number of business administrators: the fewer there are, the simpler the system and the cheaper it will be.’
‘Does that mean that Paul will be legally responsible for Elinor's affairs instead of you, Adam?’
‘Yes, but that's only a technicality.
Paul will do as I say.
And I'd also like you to sign this document, Adam added, ‘which absolves me and STG from any further responsibility once Paul Littlejohn has been substituted.’
Buzz said, ‘But surely…’
Smoothly Adam explained, ‘The responsibility must clearly rest m only one area.
It's in your interests to clarify the situation.
It's customary.’
‘If you think that's best, Adam dear.’
Elinor frowned slightly at Buzz.
Adam decided to hold back Miranda's bombshell until later, after Elinor drank her evening glass of champagne.
Just before five o'clock, when the business session had ended and the afternoon was still hot, quiet, and heavy with languor, Buzz left to get some tea.
Adam escorted Elinor to the elevator; after taking her to her bedroom, he intended to go to the beach for a swim.
In the high-ceilinged kitchen, surrounded by the smells of mint and basil, Buzz whistled ‘Roses of Picardy’ with much dramatic warbling as she prepared Elinor's tea.
Leaves and yellow blossoms obscured the top of the window, while the bottom was covered by aggressive pink hollyhocks, seemingly determined to fight their way inside.
Sylvie, the cook, sat at the big kitchen table by the window, writing a list and shooing pigeons away.
The bane of Sylvie's life was the pigeon droppings that littered the windowsill and had to be cleaned up daily.
With a shudder, Sylvie refused a cup of tea.
Still whistling, Buzz laid the tray.
The soporific calm of the drowsy afternoon was shattered by the bell indicator above the kitchen door.
Someone was jabbing the bell — non-stop — in Elinor's bedroom.
Knowing that Adam was probably in the elevator on his way to the beach, Buzz hurled herself out of the kitchen and ran upstairs.
Frantically she tore open the door to Elinor's apartment.
In the passage, she stumbled and almost fell, then flung back the door to the bedroom.
To her relief, Elinor was not slumped on the floor; deathly white, she clung for support to the silver brocade hangings of her bed.
Wordlessly, she pointed above the fireplace.
Buzz turned her head to the left, where the portrait of the three sisters hung.
At first Buzz saw nothing, but then she gasped in horror.
Each of the three long, creamy necks had been cut horizontally: a small triangle of canvas hung downward from each slashed throat.
18
WEDNESDAY, 17 AUGUST 1966
In the foyer of the Clanrickard Club, Mike Grant leaned against the wall at the bottom of a double-sided curving staircase.
With his hands in the pockets of his dinner jacket, he surveyed the room.
It was going to be a good night, in spite of the fact that it was August and a Wednesday.
Making sure to appear casual, he carefully watched the men in dinner jackets and the women in full-length décolleté dresses move slowly over the red carpet towards the restaurant at the rear, or climb the staircase to the gaming rooms.
Mike noticed a group of heavy gamblers, most of them Greek, move towards the baccarat room, where the Sultan of Rupolei had been losing for the last hour.
His attention was also caught by a woman dressed in midnight-blue satin and diamonds; the sister of a Middle-Eastern ruler, she was known as an audacious gambler.
He stiffened as he recognized a man move upstairs with a distinctive, boneless saunter: he had better send someone up to check the backgammon room.
The club owners, the casinos, and the multinational bookmakers knew which professional gamblers successfully played games that contained an element of skill — such as backgammon and poker- and they preferred to have nothing to do with them; ideally, the house welcomed inexperienced, rich idiots.
‘This is certainly a good night to play the odds.’
Mike heard a sarcastic voice from behind him.
He turned and smiled at Adam.
‘Come into my office for a drink.
What's up?’
In Mike's office, furnished with heavily varnished Victorian club furniture.
Adam shook his head curtly at the offer of a chair.
‘I'm not staying,’ he said.
‘I merely wanted to tell you that you've scared the hell out of everyone at Saracen — except me.
So kindly curb your theatrical, James Bond streak.
I knew immediately what your message meant: ‘If you don't pay up, one slash is all it takes.’’
He glared at his brother.
‘I thought you were fond of Elinor.
I seem to recall that Elinor helped you to buy your first good bike.
Why drag her into my problems?
You might have given her another stroke.’
‘I don't know what the hell you're talking about, and I can't comment until I do.’
Mike, his face alert and wary, lit a cigarette.
Adam briefly described how the triple portrait had been slashed and added, ‘D'you really expect me to believe that you had nothing to do with it?
Someone told some cat burglar where to find that picture!’
Mike stared at his brother, then slowly said, ‘Not me.
I agree, it's clearly a warning to pay, but I swear I know nothing about it.
It couldn't have been the brothers — they'd be even less subtle…’
He inhaled deeply.
‘Who else do you owe money, Adam, you stupid bastard?’
‘No one who'd do anything so bloody childish!
How do I stop this bloody nonsense?’
‘How many times must I tell you that if you let things go too far, nobody can stop what will undoubtedly happen?
Adam,’ Mike went on quietly, ‘you've always taken full advantage of anyone who's fond of you.
You think you can push me around because you've been doing that since we were in the nursery.
You also grew up watching Grandfather's clients literally get away with murder.’
He sucked on his cigarette, furiously threw it into the fireplace, shoved his hands in his pockets, and glared at Adam.
‘Do you want to be found washed up on the seashore with a few  vital bits missing?
Are you so anxious to know what it feels like to have both eyeballs gouged out, one at a time?
Do you want to be slowly battered to death, before dying in agony?’
‘Of course not, you bastard,’ Adam said.
‘I only want to know who slashed that picture if you didn't.’
‘Whoever they are — and only you know that — these people are serious.
Punters often try to avoid paying.
Examples often have to be made.
You know that.’
Mike started to stride up and down the room.
‘Take that fucking urbane look off your face and face reality, Adam.
If you lose money, that's tough.
But if you don't pay up, that's insanity.’
‘I've had enough of your melodrama,’ Adam snarled.
Mike glared at his brother again.
‘I'm not exaggerating.
Remember that incident when the Sultan's sister had her Rolls stopped, at two in the morning on the Grande Corniche, after leaving the casino?
They blew away the chauffeur's head with a machine gun.
She wasn't touched.
She paid all her gambling debts the very next day.
And when the story was carefully leaked to the newspapers, quite a lot of other debts were suddenly settled in full.’
‘I'm not some goddamned sultan's sister.’
‘No, but you also like playing with fire.
You never believe that the gods will really let it burn you .
You think you're omnipotent — but you aren't.’
‘Keep your voice down,’ Adam growled.
‘I'll do what I bloody well like in my own office,’ Mike said.
‘Don't you understand?
I'm on your side, Adam.
You're the only brother I have.’
His voice deepened.
‘I'm probably more worried about this than you are.
If anything happened to you…
I'd be left without you.
So for God's sake, pay up, you stupid shit!
Don't think you can get away with it just because you've always got away with everything, since you set that nursemaid's apron alight.’
‘I thought you were too young to remember that,’ Adam said uneasily.
He added, ‘She shouldn't have left the matches within reach of a child.’
‘She was in hospital for six weeks, and I was the only one who knew it wasn't an accident.
I knew you wanted to see how far you could go .’
‘Let's not argue about something that happened over thirty years ago,’ Adam said finally.
‘Can you raise money to help me fend them off?
I promise you.
within six months I know I'll have no more money problems.
Never again.’
‘You'll have money problems as long as you gamble, Adam.
Annabel was determined to get a grip on herself and do as Scott advised: remember 1965 as the year she stopped having to go to auditions and 1966 as the year in which she blossomed into a successful young New York hostess as she met Andy Warhol, Lenny Bernstein, Baby Jane Holzer, and all the other gossip-columnist fodder.
By July, Annabel was a Junior Friend of the Metropolitan Museum, a Friend of the Museum of Modern Art, and a patron of the Bronx Zoo.
She also allayed her insecurity with a massive spending spree; each charity dinner required a new ballgown, and each new glittering friend — contacts for Scott — required a glittering party.
So the year thus far was a busy one.
FRIDAY, 19 AUGUST 1966
On the hottest morning of the year, Scott's news editor asked him to step into his office.
From behind the untidy piles on his desk.
the news editor said.
‘Shut the door and prepare to listen to some good advice, Scott.
I know you went after an anchor job last year and didn't get it.
I know you're now up for  another anchor job.
I know you're going to be interviewed and I know which network it is, so don't deny a thing.’
He shoved a paper cup of lukewarm coffee across the desk to Scott.
‘I'd rather you went after it with my support than behind my back.
At least if a guy from a local station gets a prominent network job, it reflects well on that station.’
He picked up his cup, took a whiff of it, and put it down again.
‘In order to get that Job, Scott, you have to clarify one thing in your mind — a picture of what they're looking for as an anchorman.’
Scott said nothing.
‘Forget the crusading-journalist approach, Scott.
Or the hard-nosed, insistent, tough approach.
That's what everyone applying for that job will pitch.
The network is looking for something extra.
They want someone who looks as if he's been shot at, wounded, and spent the day crawling through minefields to deliver the dispatches.
So don't go looking too neat.
On the other hand, don't go looking too battered: they aren't looking for Walter Huston, they're looking for a younger, well-scrubbed, cheerfully confident Robert Mitchum.’
‘I don't think they're looking for a battered glamour boy,’ Scott said.
‘They're looking for a first-class professional journalist.’
The news editor looked cynical.
Viewers don't switch channels for a good professional journalist; what prompts that switch is something less tangible.’
‘And they also want something else,’ Scott went on quietly.
A quality that you and I share.’
‘What's that?’
‘Devotion.
We love this business.
You'd rather be doing your job than anything else in the world.
You feel guilty about enjoying it so much.
The real reason you often put in fourteen hours seven days a week is because you think it's important that people know what's happening in their world.’
Jake laughed.
‘You can buy me a drink after you land the job.’
One week after Scott's interview with the network, Jake arrived at his office to find a bottle of pure malt Highland whisky standing on top of the papers on his desk.
FRIDAY, 26 AUGUST 1966
The feather — an ordinary pale grey pigeon's feather — softly traced Miranda's thighs.
She sighed sleepily.
They'd had a wonderful afternoon.
The secret of Adam's sexual success with women was simple: he took plenty of time to stroke or massage, to make sure that his partner was completely relaxed before they made love.
Then he always made sure that she climaxed before he entered her.
Gradually Adam would discover where and how each woman liked to be touched, and he would change his techniques to suit her, then move on to something that she wasn't expecting or had never experienced.
Adam blew the feather into the air and let it drift to the floor.
He stretched.
‘Looks as if we're in for a storm.’
Miranda slipped from her bed and wandered to a window; leaning out, she smelled rosemary and eucalyptus as she watched the summer storm approach from the distant cobalt-blue mountains.
The bright light of Provence changed theatrically as the sky darkened to grey, then turned slate purple.
After an ominous moment of silence, when not a leaf fluttered, two incandescent white worms of lightning flashed across the sky.
A mighty clash of thunder followed, after which heavy rain fell.
Below Miranda, the dusty terracotta tiles of the medieval roofs were slicked and sharpened to glistening ochre, tangerine, and brown.
Then it was  as if a grey curtain fell in front of the window.
blotting out all colour.
Miranda frowned at the rain; her visitors would shortly be arriving at the village hotels, for she had decided to hold the KITS annual sales conference weekend at Saracen.
The sales conference, held just before the all-important Christmas run-up began, was meant to psych up the sales force for the new line.
Miranda loved everything about the sales conference except making her speech.
She really ought to rehearse that presentation again, she thought.
She drew in her head, shut the windows, pulled the heavy cream linen curtains, and switched on the lamps; they glowed cheerfully over the primrose chair covers and the yellow silk bed quilt, upon which Adam lay naked.
I'd better creep off,’ Adam said.
‘It's nearly five o'clock.
This place will be humming with staff in a few minutes.’
Miranda, sounding slightly mutinous, said, ‘I don't see why we can't sleep together openly.‘
‘Because we're not married,’ Adam said, because I'm not an earl.’
‘I don't intend to marry to please my grandmother.’
‘Soon,’ Adam said firmly, ‘but not yet.
I'm too busy with SUPPLYKITS.
But there's something else I must discuss with you before I leave.’
Miranda, not wishing to quarrel with Adam, did not pursue her argument.
SUPPLYKITS was negotiating for three businesses, and Adam was handling all three deals: a direct-mail business, a premium-gift business, and a public-relations business.
Should all the deals be successful, SUPPLYKITS would then own five subsidiary businesses, including KITS.
A director from each of the new companies would acquire shares and sit on the SUPPLYKITS board: as  Miranda owned the entire company, these inducement shares would reduce her holding, but Adam had convinced a reluctant Miranda that by relinquishing fifteen per cent of her shares, she was exchanging a hundred per cent of a small orange for eighty-five per cent of a crateful.
Adam turned on to his back, his hands behind his head, and looked at the ceiling.
‘It's about time we considered going public.’
Astonished, Miranda sat down on the edge of the bed.
‘So soon?
Why?’
‘We can't do it until next March, when we'll have five years’ trading figures to show,’Adam said.
‘But such a move would provide more cash for acquisitions.
We can't go on leveraging for ever.’
‘No,’ said Miranda, remembering that Angus had warned her about this.
‘But won't it be expensive to go public?’
‘Very expensive,’ Adam said.
‘But you want more outlets for KITS and you want them in the best and most expensive locations.’
‘So the reason to go public is to finance expansion?’
‘Not only that.
We'll also be more respectable and creditworthy.’
‘What about control?’
Miranda worried.
‘I don't want to lose control of my business.’
‘You won't lose control so long as you retain over fifty per cent of the shares,’ Adam reassured her.
‘But nobody should have all their capital invested in one sector of the market, as you have.
You should sell some shares for cash and invest that money in other areas.
Arrange a nice, well-spread portfolio for yourself.
It's about time you saw some financial reward for your work and responsibility.’
‘How many SUPPLYKITS shares would I have to sell?’
‘Legally, twenty-five per cent of the shares have to be made available to the public.
The new directors will  probably be pleased to sell their incentive shares for such a quick profit, so you should only lose ten per cent of your present holding.
If we issue new shares, you'll end up with seventy-five per cent of the business and a large sum of cash.’
‘I'd like the staff to be able to have shares,’ Miranda said, ‘to benefit from the success of the business.’
‘We can certainly arrange that, should SUPPLYKITS go public.’
‘I'll think about it.’
Adam said, ‘It will take at least six months to organize, so think fast.’
FRIDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 1966
Four months after Clare opened her toy shop, her bank manager advised her to close it as quickly as possible, because she was losing money at a steady and frightening pace.
He advised her to sell the shop and deposit the money in the bank.
She had better not invest it in the stock market, because she couldn't afford to lose a penny and there was no such thing as a safe share.
Over supper at the basement flat, Clare discussed her woes with Kathy, her former nanny.
‘It was apparently doomed from the start,’ Clare explained sadly, over the baked beans.
‘The sort of people who can afford handcrafted learning toys don't shop at the wrong end of the Pimlico Road.’
She scraped out the dish.
‘I concentrated on toys for pre-school children because I thought I knew about them.
But those children didn't want well-made, tasteful, pale wood Swedish toys.
What they wanted was cheap, bright, plastic toys from Hong Kong, and I didn't stock those.’
‘Couldn't you sell Lego and stuff like that?’
‘I had plenty of Lego, but what they really wanted were the expensive toys they saw advertised on children's TV.’
‘Well, couldn't you have sold a few of those?’
‘By the time I realized that, I had no spare cash,’ Clare explained.
And that wasn't my only problem.
The importers weren't reliable, and neither were the craftsmen, especially those who persuaded me to pay them in advance Then I got in a financial muddle because I didn't keep my bookkeeping up to date.’
‘It sounds like a nightmare,’ Kathy said.
Clare shuddered.
‘The worst problem was theft.’
Her entire gross profit for the first four months had been negated by shoplifting tots.
The first time Clare caught a little girl hiding a rag doll up her knickers, she angrily threatened to call a policeman.
The child burst into tears.
Clare, contrite, gave her the doll as a gift.
At the beginning of October, Kathy, who had again been invited for supper, arrived at Clare's apartment to find that nothing had been cooked.
Clare.
wearing a dirty dressing gown, was sitting on her unmade bed, staring into space.
‘Where's Josh?’
Kathy asked
‘I put him to bed early.
It's good for him.’
Kathy made two cups of tea and said firmly, ‘You aren't yourself, Clare, and you haven't been for months.’
‘I'm still depressed about the Red Rocking Horse,’ Clare replied vaguely.
‘This started before that toy shop closed,’ Kathy said.
I think it's those pills you take.
Why not stop them?’
‘Don't be silly — my doctor prescribed those tranquillizers,’ Clare said.
‘He's a qualified doctor and you aren't, Kathy ‘
‘But I know you better than he does!
You aren't the same person since you started taking those things, Clare.
You don't listen to what I'm saying.
You don't play with Josh like you used to — you just sit!
You've even stopped working for CND.’
‘I could easily do without the pills,’ Clare said crossly.
‘But not just yet.’
She started to weep drearily.
‘I don't seem to be successful at anything .
I used to be such a smug little prig.
I was so sure I knew what was right, so critical of other people.
Now I've found out how hopeless I am on my own…’
‘You'd be a lot less hopeless if you were thinking straight,’ Kathy advised.
‘Why don't you get away from Chelsea, move to the country?
You're always saying you wished you still lived in the country.
And you could live in the country on what you're wasting in rent for this dump!’
She looked around the room with distaste.
‘Go to that place where you grew up and tell a local estate agent you want the cheapest thing he's got.
Try to get it before Christmas, because I've got a bit of time off then, and I'll help you settle in.’
Mrs Gooden agreed to let Josh stay with her until Clare sorted out her problems and found somewhere to live.
The day he left, Kathy said to Clare, ‘I'll come round every evening and you can phone me any time — I've asked my boss.’
To Clare's horror, Kathy then flushed the pills down the sink drain.
‘Now you know you'll have to manage without ‘em,’ she said firmly.
During the first day without her pills, Clare grew increasingly depressed and agitated.
By the evening, her mouth was dry, her hands had started to shake, and she felt dizzy.
She didn't sleep at all that night.
Her hands trembled too badly to cook and she sweated as if in the tropics.
Frightened by these bodily reactions, she collapsed on the sofa and cried.
The following evening, when Kathy came to check on her, it was obvious that Clare blamed her for the shape she was in.
‘If you go back to the doctor for another prescription,’ Kathy told her, ‘we'll only have to go through this again later.
Now eat this stew I've brought.’
By the fifth morning, Clare's hands no longer trembled.
On the eighth day, she felt her normal, clear-headed self again.
Deeply grateful to Kathy, she said, ‘Tomorrow I'm going to pick up Josh, take the train to Warminster, and look for a place where we can start all over again.’
Applebank Cottage, made of local soft Bath stone, was damp and cold, but as the agent pointed out, what did Clare expect for two pounds per week?
All it needed was some heat.
From the garden gate to the front door, a herringbone brick path divided a neglected vegetable garden.
Apple trees grew on either side of the double-sided small house, and behind it the land rose smoothly to a small wood that followed the ridge of a hill.
Clare moved in just before Christmas, with a minimum of furniture bought second-hand at an auction in Warminster.
She hoped that Kathy was right, and that once away from the city, with enough money for her simple everyday needs, she would gradually find herself able to cope again.
SUNDAY, 25 DECEMBER 1966
Neither Annabel (the hostess at a big charity children's skating party at Rockefeller Center) nor Clare (not invited) was present at Elinor's 1966 Christmas Day luncheon at Saracen, but Miranda and Adam were there, both arriving with bulging briefcases of work papers.
After the traditional turkey and Christmas pudding (made by Buzz, for Sylvie thought the recipe ludicrous), everyone left the table for a siesta.
A few minutes later, Miranda sneaked to Adam's bedroom.
After they made love, Adam lay naked on the bed, staring  contentedly at the ceiling.
Beside him, Miranda felt too tired to think, too tired to move.
She wondered how long she would be able to continue at her present pace.
Adam picked up a yellow legal pad and scribbled on it.
He murmured, ‘Can you manage that dinner at the Mansion House next Thursday?’
‘if you insist.’
Miranda yawned.
Miranda was the prominently displayed figurehead of the SUPPLYKITS flotation.
planned for three months ahead: she had become the living corporate identity of the company: her face, clothes, and style had become the visual embodiment of her business.
Miranda was publicly perceived as an intelligent, modern woman on the move — the new sixties woman.
not content to sit at home and wait for things to happen to her.
Because of this, Miranda.
who hated being photographed or interviewed, had been obliged to entertain important people: pension-fund managers, stockbrokers, bankers, and financial journalists.
These business obligations made her feel impatient and frustrated: she would have preferred to spend her time working m her cosmetics business.
KITS needed much more of her attention than it had been getting recently, and was now in a disturbing financial position: it didn't look as if the company would make a profit in 1966.
Although Adam pointed out that a profit was projected for the whole group, and that the group expansion had been phenomenal, Miranda felt a wistful longing for the old, less comfortable days — not so very long ago — when KITS had been her brilliant baby
Now Adam interrupted Miranda's reverie by saying, ‘By the way, Paul Littlejohn says that the trustees regretfully must turn down your request for funds to redecorate your house.
Apparently there have been big extra bills for Saracen this year: this place costs a fortune to run.’
‘Blast,’ Miranda mumbled into her pillow.
‘The trustees are only doing their job,’ Adam soothed.
‘After all, you can't expect them to go on saying yes for ever.’
He turned away from her as the telephone rang.
‘Hello?
Mike?
Had a good Christmas?
So it arrived on time…
A Harley-Davidson Sportster was exactly what you wanted…
Of course I can afford it…
No, the panic's over…
Happy New Year, little brother…
I know you're thirty-four years old…
Then I won't in future…
We're coming back tomorrow, in Miranda's plane…
Ciao .’
The day after Christmas, at six a.m., when it was still dark outside, Elinor stood in the entrance hall waiting to say goodbye to Miranda and Adam.
Buzz, only half awake, wore an old Jaeger dressing gown that now looked like something from a dog basket.
‘Buzz, please go and hurry Miranda!’
Elinor said, smiling apologetically at Adam.
‘It's been a wonderful Christmas,’ Adam said to Elinor as soon as Buzz disappeared.
‘I've used this peaceful break to consider something very important to me, and last night I reached my decision.
I am going to leave STG and start my own practice.’
Elinor stared, astonished.
‘But why , Adam?
It's your family firm…’
‘Quite frankly, Elinor- and in confidence — STG has been handling too many criminal cases for my liking.
I don't think a respectable firm should take such a direction, however lucrative.
I'm certain my father would never have allowed it.
I'm not letting down STG — there are now seventeen senior partners and I'm only one of them.
And since my speciality is international tax law, I feel…somewhat regretfully…’
‘How will your decision affect my business?’
Elinor asked sharply.
‘It's up to you, Elinor.
You will have to choose between STG and me…
I shall carry the same professional insurance as STG, by the way.’
‘I wish you could have talked about this when we had more time, Adam.’
Elinor was vexed.
‘Until last night, I was undecided.
You are the first person I have told, Elinor.
I only wish that my father could know that I'm at last setting up on my own…
If you want to stay with STG, I'll be happy to arrange to have your work handled by one of the other partners although it may take him a little time to be able to handle your affairs completely on his own without asking you a lot of questions.’
Elinor said, ‘I don't want to deal with some new lawyer.
I'm far too old to change.
I want my affairs handled properly without a lot of questions.
And if you're setting up your own firm, I'm sure your dear father would want me to help you start.
So please arrange it.’
‘The simplest thing would be for you to write to STG and say you no longer wish them to represent you.
Ask them to submit their bill to date — I'll check it, of course and hand all your papers to me.
No need to type the letter — in fact, a handwritten note would perhaps be best.’
Adam's brown eyes looked sincere.
‘I can't tell you how much I appreciate this, Elinor.
I only wish that Dad could know of your loyalty.’
19
MONDAY, 26 DECEMBER 1966
On the morning after Christmas, peaceful demonstrations organized by the CND took place all over Britain.
In Bath, the march started from the courtyard of Bath Abbey, which demonstrators had been forbidden to enter; the beautifully carved golden stone entrance to the abbey was protected by police horses.
They stamped impatiently, legs shifting and snorting breath visible on the crisp, thin air.
Clare, wearing an old red ski suit, stood in a crowd of about three hundred people.
She had left Josh with Kathy, who was spending Christmas at Applebank Cottage.
Clare's banner, made from an old sheet kept taut by two broom handles, was painted with the red words BAN THE BOMB.
At eleven o'clock, the demonstrators formed a line in front of the abbey and prepared to parade slowly through the streets of the historic Georgian city.
They were watched by a straggle of housewives and schoolchildren, and a photographer from the local paper.
Clare took up her position on the abbey side of the line.
Just as the column began to move, a schoolgirl, pushing a baby in a pram, accidentally backed into a police horse.
The horse, trained to keep calm, hardly moved, but the schoolgirl shrieked in terror and let go of her pram, which ran into the column of marchers; it hit the man standing next to Clare, who stumbled heavily against her, knocking her sideways.
As Clare staggered, her arms dropped and her banner  wrapped around her head: she could not see where she was going.
She tottered to her right, bumped into a police horse's hindquarters, stumbled against the horse, then screamed as she was pulled violently backwards by strong arms.
Someone helped her to struggle free from her banner.
Clare looked up and saw the tallest man she had ever seen; he had curly black hair and black-lashed, dark brown eyes, now filled with worry.
The man half carried, half pulled her into a nearby pub, where he propped her in a Windsor chair and went to fetch water from the bar.
Clare, who felt dizzy and tearful, wondered whether she would ever again be able to move her jaw, which had received a painful blow, probably from the broomstick of her own banner.
She looked across the bar to the back view of her rescuer: he wore jeans and an old maroon suede jacket buckled around lean hips; his boots were muddy.
As the man returned with a glass of water, Clare stared at his short, straight nose, above a mouth to write poems about: it was full-lipped, finely chiselled, subtly curved.
Michelangelo's David come to life, Clare thought.
She wished she had worn some make-up, then chastised herself for such a feeble thought.
Her rescuer said impatiently, ‘Sorry I took so long.
It's almost impossible to get water in a bar since they don't make any money out of it.’
He poured water on his handkerchief, then gently dabbed at Clare's chin.
‘You'll have a huge bruise…
Is there anyone with you?’
Clare shook her head.
‘You shouldn't drive, or ride a bicycle, after a wallop like that.
I'll take you home.’
Clare mumbled with difficulty, ‘No, I'm okay.
I'll get a lift home after the demo.
I've just moved into a cottage on the edge of Warminster.’
He drove her back in a battered silver sports car.
To Clare, his milky warm smell was like that of a newborn baby.
She sternly reminded herself that she wasn't going to fall in love with the wrong man again just because she was sexually attracted to him, and she was never going to get married again.
Having decided not to marry him, Clare directed her rescuer, David Arrowsmith, to Applebank Cottage.
In the kitchen, Kathy's look of incredulous congratulation was followed by concern when she noticed Clare's battered chin.
Abruptly Clare said to David, ‘Thank you for bringing me back.
I'll be perfectly fine now.
Kathy will look after me.’
Clare knew that women often made up their minds very quickly, and without enough information, about other people, particularly those who were physically attractive: she had just seen Kathy do so.
She also knew that, generally speaking, good, worthy men did not look flashy and glamorous, let alone theatrical; on the other hand, many rats were as good-looking as they were confident.
Clare wouldn't put it past Sam to use a rat to lay a trap for her.
Like many divorcées, she now viewed the man she had married as a monster of depravity, as capable as Richard III of any dirty deed.
Clare's divorce petition would not be heard until July; she had been warned by her solicitor not to be seen alone with a man right now, or it might affect her petition and the custody of her son.
She couldn't afford to run any risks, and there was certainly something mysterious about David Arrowsmith, something she couldn't identify for the moment: so she didn't trust him.
The following morning, after breakfast, a bruised Clare cut a photograph of herself from the local newspaper; luckily, her face was totally obscured by the banner, which had wrapped itself around her like a winding sheet.
She looked  like an Egyptian mummy in boots, but it was a good picture of her rescuer.
She slipped the newspaper cutting into the top drawer of her bedside chest, then took the opportunity to go for a walk by herself, without Josh.
Once past her garden, Clare turned off the narrow lane on to a path hedged high with hawthorn, which led up the gently rising hill behind the cottage to the wood.
The wood was disturbingly still and silent; the twisted trunks and naked branches of the trees looked lonely and forlorn.
Not a leaf moved, except for the dead leaves that Clare trod on.
When she stepped on a stick and snapped it, the sudden noise caused a rook to rise from its nest with a startled beating of wings.
She looked up at the rook's nest and the grey sky beyond, then bent to pick a clump of white winter aconites to take home to Josh.
As she did so, a rusty trap sprang shut, clamping her left foot.
Clare yelled in pain as she fell on scratchy, frosted bracken.
Luckily, she was wearing tough boots, so the trap had not torn her leg.
She felt little pain unless she moved, which she tried not to do as she struggled to pull apart the serrated jaws of the trap.
It was attached to a rusty chain hidden in the bracken.
Clare could see more rusty chain around the slender, peeling, silver trunk of a nearby birch tree.
She would only be able to move within the circumference of that tree.
She was truly trapped.
The air didn't feel sharply cold enough for snow, and Clare hoped it wouldn't rain; she peered upward at the dull, grey sky.
She wondered how long it would be before Kathy grew alarmed If Clare wasn't home and hadn't telephoned by two o'clock — or three at the latest — she reckoned that Kathy might phone the police, who would surely find her before long.
Unfortunately, Clare lay off the path in a place where  the ground dipped, so she could not be seen.
With difficulty, she rolled her body into a more comfortable position, pulled up the collar of her cherry wool coat, twisted her scarf around her head, and heaped bracken to form a pillow; with her head upon it, she stared crossly at the now leaden sky overhead.
She pushed her hands deeper in her pockets and wished she had worn heavier gloves.
She wondered if fate had just punished her for picking wild flowers.
Just before midday, Clare heard a noise behind her.
Abruptly she sat up, winced at the pain this produced, then listened as the sound grew nearer: somebody was whistling ‘Lillibullero’ with warbles and elaborate trills, off-key, but with clear enjoyment.
Clare yelled, ‘Help!’ several times, then stopped.
She could hear nothing.
Again she yelled.
This time a man's voice shouted, ‘Keep calling.’
Eventually Clare heard a distant crackle.
As it grew louder, she twisted around to face the sound.
‘Oh!’ she said.
‘It's you!’
‘And vice versa,’ said David Arrowsmith as he scrambled towards her.
He towered above Clare, his hands tucked in the front pockets of the suede jacket.
‘I called to see how you were.
Your nanny told me you'd gone for a walk.
She saw you come up here.’
He squatted beside her.
‘Hey, not much of a country girl, are you?’
He examined the trap.
‘As a matter of fact, I am,’ Clare said.
‘We used to live near here.
But as this is hunting country, I didn't expect a trap in the woods.
And Kathy isn't my nanny.
I can't afford a nanny.
She's been staying with us over the Christmas holiday.’
David tried without success to release Clare.
Eventually he said, ‘This is a very old, heavy trap, and I don't think I can force the thing apart.
I'd better phone the police they'll know who owns this wood, and get him to free you.
Take my gloves, and try not to get into any more trouble while I'm gone.’
He added ruefully, ‘I know I should tear that trap apart with my bare hands, but I'm not as tough as I look.’
An hour later, the trap was  prised apart by two mechanics from the local garage using steel bars.
Teeth chattering, Clare limped back to Applebank Cottage with David, telling herself not to make a fuss.
After she had a hot rum toddy in a steaming, warm tub and showed Josh the trap marks on her leg, they all sat around the wooden kitchen table to eat vegetable soup, local Stilton cheese, and a salad of walnuts and chicory, followed by gingerbread that Clare had made with Mrs Gooden's special recipe.
Then Josh had his nap and Kathy took Clare's bicycle to explore the country.
‘You must be an Escoffier when you're in full possession of your faculties,’ David said.
‘May I have another slice of that delicious gingerbread?’
‘It's a bit overdone.
I've only just started to cook in a convection oven,’ Clare said apologetically.
‘And it's a bit difficult to manage with no fridge — just that metal meat safe hanging outside the back door.
When I get a job, I'll get a fridge.’
David, who had been briefly told about the flight from Sam, joked, ‘You might try selling gingerbread.
I'd be your first customer.’
Clare laughed.
‘What do you do for a living?’
‘I'm an architect.
I work in Bath.
Mainly house renovations.
I add an extension, convert a barn, chop off a couple of wings to make a house a manageable size — that sort of work.
It's always a headache, but you have to take anything you can get when you're newly qualified.’
‘I thought of converting the attic,’ Clare said.
‘Making a room for Josh to sleep and play in, with bunks for visiting  children.
This house has only two bedrooms, which isn't ideal.’
‘I'll have a look at the attic, if you like.’
‘Well…
I can't afford anything yet
‘But you might like to know what's possible, and how much it would cost?’
‘Very much.’
In the attic, David said thoughtfully, As there's a window, you only need to lead the electrical supply upstairs, lay a soundproof floor covering — cork — and insulate the roof.’
‘It'll have to wait until I have some money ‘
After Josh had gone to bed, the three adults spent the evening roasting chestnuts before the living-room fire.
At ten o'clock.
David said.
‘I must go.
But I'll be back.’
At the front door, he kissed Clare on the tip of her nose, then left.
SATURDAY 31 DECEMBER 1966
Just after Kathy left for London, David arrived with a bottle of champagne to spend the day and celebrate New Year's Eve.
Clare wondered suspiciously why this sensationally good-looking man seemed not to have any New Year's plans.
At lunch, Josh misbehaved.
He pushed his food off the table and refused to eat even the cheesecake.
Clare was mortified.
She had so hoped that Josh would like David ‘Hes tired,’ she apologized, and took Josh off for his afternoon nap He kicked and screamed, furious that his mother's attention was being distracted from himself.
Darkness fell early, and it started to snow.
After tea, Clare pulled the sitting-room curtains together but didn't switch on the light; she preferred to watch the firelight flick  shadows over the walls.
In the embers of the fire, David again roasted chestnuts for the now sunny-tempered Josh, until his bedtime.
When Clare returned from putting Josh to bed, David wordlessly took her in his arms; they sat on the floor, leaning against the broken-backed armchair, and necked like teenagers.
As David's nose nuzzled the back of her neck, Clare had an overwhelming need to be even closer to him.
She felt as if she were lying naked on a hot rock, stretching languorously towards the sun.
As the light of the friendly flames played over their faces, Clare felt she was in a dream world where time was suspended.
She felt a physical longing too strong to resist, she breathed fast and grew a bit light-headed: she could smell the soft, milky smell of David's body and the warm wool odour of his sweater; she felt a frenzied yearning.
At midnight, David kissed her gently and left shortly afterwards, saying he hoped that snow hadn't blocked the roads.
Disappointed, Clare wondered what had gone wrong.
After all, he needn't have visited her.
Why hadn't he wanted to stay?
Of course, she wouldn't have let him.
WEDNESDAY, 11 JANUARY 1967
‘What's so urgent and private that you couldn't discuss it over the telephone?’
In his study, Adam, wearing a dinner jacket, poured whisky into a cut-glass tumbler and confronted his brother.
Mike wore black leather biking trousers and a heavy seaman's turtleneck sweater.
He said, ‘I've now been waiting two bloody years for my commission on the Framwell deal.’
Mike's agreed commission was two per cent of the purchase price of any property that Miranda acquired, either directly or indirectly, through him.
The commission had been correctly paid on all the relevant purchases except that of Framwells — the chain of tobacconist shops — which was easily the biggest deal Mike had handled.
‘You'll get your money,’ Adam said.
‘But Framwells was a self-financing deal.
Frankly, the interest we've had to pay on the loan is very high.’
‘Fuck that.
It isn't my problem.’
‘With the greatest respect’— Mike knew this phrase meant Adam was annoyed —‘it is your problem, Mike, because no date of payment for commission was written into your contract.
Legally, I could keep you waiting a hundred years for the money.’
‘We didn't have a contract.
You wrote the arrangement on a sheet of paper over dinner, and we both signed it.
Here it is!’
Mike pulled a paper from his pocket and looked at it.
No period of payment was mentioned.
‘If you're going to be difficult,’ Adam said, ‘I suggest that either you wait for a hundred years or agree to reduce the amount payable, by half.’
Mike looked at Adam in astonishment.
‘You're my brother , you bastard!
Brothers aren't supposed to fuck each other over!
You use me when it suits you, you get me to fix your dirty work —‘
‘If you didn't do it, there are plenty of others who would.’
‘You ruthless, evil bastard.’
Mike, furious, could see that Adam clearly felt he had nothing to fear from his little brother.
Adam stopped now to light a cigarette, contemptuously confident of his ability to manoeuvre and control.
‘Kindly remember that I provide the legal know-how to protect you and your — friends,’ Adam said calmly.
‘I'll  speak to Miranda about your payment.
I'll see if I can hurry it.’
‘I'll damn well speak to Miranda myself,’ Mike growled.
Adam looked up sharply from his cigarette.
‘No.
Don't do that.
It isn't necessary!’
Mike suddenly realized what had happened.
‘Miranda thinks she settled this bill months ago, doesn't she?’ he yelled.
‘What did you do ?
Forge my name on the back of the cheque and endorse it to yourself?’
Mike saw a fleeting guilty look in Adam's eyes before his lids were lowered and his attention seemingly focused again on his gold lighter.
‘No doubt you told yourself that you were only borrowing my money to pay your bloody gambling debts, but I call that theft !’
Mike thundered.
Coolly Adam ground out his cigarette on the hearth.
Adam's apparent lack of concern enraged Mike, as hurt by his brother's treachery as he was by the theft.
He wanted to hurt Adam.
He wanted to feel his fist bruise flesh, smash bone, draw blood.
His fist shot out.
Adam stumbled backward, tripped over the steel fireplace screen, then lost his balance and crashed to the floor.
As Adam fell, Mike heard the sound of his head hitting the elaborate steel fender.
It happened so fast that Mike was left with his arm still outstretched, towards the dinner-jacketed body of his brother.
Immediately contrite, Mike crouched by Adam and lifted his head: it lolled sideways.
Mike's face was very pale.
Christ, thought Mike.
I can't have killed him, not just with one lousy punch…could I ?
He knew that only a very good fighter — a much better fighter than he was could knock a man unconscious with one punch to the jaw.
Hastily Mike pulled at Adam, until he lay full length on  the rug.
He tore Adam's tie loose, undid his shirt and collar, and stuck his finger in Adam's mouth to check that his tongue was free.
He grabbed the telephone and dialled 999.
He knew that the housekeeper wasn't in, because Adam had opened the front door.
After the fourth ring, the emergency operator answered: ‘Police, fire, or ambulance?’
‘Ambulance!
Fast!’
After giving full address details, Mike ran to the kitchen for water and a towel.
How could he have hit his brother, the only person in the world with whom he felt fully relaxed, happy, and at home?
As he swabbed his brother's temples with cold water, Mike muttered, ‘I'm sorry .
I can't tell you how sorry I am, Adam.
My bloody temper again!
Look, forget the money.
Just, for God's sake, open your eyes.
Please .’
Adam's eyelids moved slightly.
Mike carefully wiped his face.
Adam looked up and said weakly, ‘God, my head's splitting.
What happened?’
He tried to lift his head, but the room tilted.
Giddy, he fell back on the rug.
With eyelids still closed, he murmured anxiously, ‘Where's my watch?’
‘It's still on your wrist, old boy,’ said Mike, dabbing with the towel at his brother's face.
‘An ambulance is on its way — should be here any minute.’
Adam slowly lifted his left wrist and looked at it.
Puzzled, Mike wondered what was so special about that ordinary-looking Omega watch.
Adam said weakly, ‘I don't need an ambulance…
You hit me, that's all.
You're not Superman…
I'll be okay in the morning.’
FRIDAY, 20 JANUARY 1967
Just after six o'clock, Clare heard the squeak of the garden gate hinge.
Her heart jumped.
She caught her breath, dropped her oven gloves to the floor, and leapt to the window.
David was walking up the garden path, half an hour earlier than expected.
As he came through the kitchen door, he said, ‘I'll oil that gate for you tomorrow when we clear the garden…
Mmm, what's that delicious smell?’
He took her in his arms.
‘Leek-and-potato stew.’
Clare's newfound, short-term leisure meant that she now enjoyed cooking instead of seeing it as an added, rushed, three-times-a-day chore to fit in around earning her living.
She mumbled against David's tweed jacket, ‘We're having chicory-and-orange salad with vinaigrette sauce, followed by mushroom croustade with a hazelnut topping, then Stilton and homemade oatmeal biscuits.’
‘Sounds delicious.’
He kissed the top of her head.
‘By the way, are you a vegetarian?’
‘Only since last week.
I decided I don't like eating dead bodies — not after being caught in a trap.
I know most people think it's cranky.’
Clare served supper early so that four-year-old Josh could stay up late and eat with them.
She would have preferred a romantic candlelit dinner for two, but even more, she wanted Josh to see David as one of life's pluses and not as an interloper.
After Josh had gone to bed, they again sat on a rug before the fire with their backs to the broken-backed armchair, holding hands as they listened to a radio concert.
Clare murmured, ‘There's something I have to tell you.’
She had carefully thought out what she was going to say, but when, in the firelight, she looked into his dark-fringed eyes, she forgot her rehearsed words.
She sighed and said regretfully, ‘You're so good-looking.’
‘I know what you mean.
I hate it.
It's embarrassing.
And believe me, it's a drawback.
Women are distracted  and men don't trust me because of my looks,’ David said.
‘But there's nothing I can do about it.
I wear my hair long and I comb it forward to hide as much as possible of my face.
I used to wear clear glass spectacles, although I didn't need them.’
He added.
‘But there is one great advantage: nobody wants to fight me.
Sometimes if I'm sitting in a bar, I'm teased by strangers, who think I'm a homosexual.
Then I slowly stand up, and they see the length of me and back away.
They're not to know I'd never fight.’
He laughed apologetically.
‘I also have some cranky principles.’
Clare didn't laugh.
Instead, she said what she had to say, knowing that this was the time to get it out.
‘David, I find you almost unbearably attractive.
I love feeling close to you.
But I don't want to go to bed with you .
I want to make that clear!’
‘Why not?’
David settled his arm more comfortably around her.
Clare lost her nerve.
She had intended to say, ‘Because I went through a promiscuous period after I left Sam, and it was a hateful, shameful, humiliating time, and I'll never let it happen again.’
She also feared that early sexual disaster in this relationship would doom it.
But Clare forgot her lines; instead.
she burst into tears.
‘Because my love life has been such a mess!’
‘Well, that's in the past,’ David murmured as he cuddled her.
‘But what happened?’
Clare snuffled a bit.
Sex isn't what I was led to expect.’
David said, ‘Sex without a close emotional relationship doesn't work for me either.
I can't separate sex from old-fashioned feelings like love and affection.’
‘But that's what women usually say!’
‘You know, Clare, what I like about you is your innocence.
Maybe what I'm saying is the only sure-fire, tried and tested way to get a girl's knickers off in thirty seconds — which, by the way, it is.
But what I said is the way I feel.’
‘I know why you're so easy to talk to,’ Clare said.
‘You don't bother to try and prove yourself.
You really listen to what I say — and you respond to it.
My husband didn't take me seriously.’
‘And you haven't had another relationship since?’
Clare hesitated, then took the plunge.
‘I had a ghastly series of one-nighters.
Usually they hopped on and pumped away and suddenly it was over.
I never climaxed and I was too shy and too timid to ask for what I wanted, so afterwards I'd be resentful…’
‘But if you never told them what turned you on, how could you expect —‘
‘I agree, it seems crazy.
I wasn't too shy to leap into bed with them, but I was too shy to tell them what I needed.’
‘How you feel is how you feel and how you climax is how you climax, and so long as you let a man know those things, there shouldn't be a problem,’ David said.
They settled down to some serious kissing.
FRIDAY, 27 JANUARY 1967
The following Friday evening, after spinach soufflé, baked potatoes with sour cream, and rather a lot of excellent claret, Clare found herself sitting naked to the waist in the firelight.
‘Let's go to bed,’ she whispered.
‘Promise you won't anticipate?’
‘What?’
‘No anxious thoughts.’
‘Such as?’
‘I hope I'm going to come…
I hope my body's as good as his other girls’…
I hope I don't take much longer…’
Shyly Clare added, ‘I hope he isn't bored or tired…he'll be disappointed if I don't come…’
‘Hell, it's all too much trouble.
I'm not going to come.
I'll fake it.’
Clare nodded.
David stood up and pulled her to her feet.
Hand in hand, they moved upstairs to bed.
20
MONDAY, 19 MARCH 1967
Oh my God, darling, I'd forgotten I ever signed that!’
Miranda looked with dismay at the document that Adam had just placed on her white horseshoe-shaped desk.
She suddenly felt as cold as the raw wind of March that swept the streets of London outside her office window.
Adam stared thoughtfully at Miranda; he leaned across her desk.
‘I've spent a long, long time thinking about this.
Of course, I know you won't like giving up fifteen per cent of the total equity of SUPPLYKITS — nobody would.
On the other hand, it was on this condition that I joined your company: you agreed that should your business ever go public, I would have fifteen per cent of the equity for the nominal sum of fifteen thousand pounds.
I would like to hold you to your bargain, Miranda.’
‘But I thought that only referred to KITS!’
Miranda said, dismayed.
The wording of the document clearly states, ‘and/or any other businesses that arise from this company.’
That means fifteen per cent of SUPPLYKITS, Miranda.
Surely you read the document before signing it?’
‘But, darling…’
Miranda looked pleading.
Regretfully Adam shook his head.
This is not a personal matter, it's a matter that concerns your business integrity.
What made me finally decide to insist on this was when I realized that had you been a man, Miranda, or had I not been personally involved with you, I wouldn't have hesitated to ask for these shares.’
From opposite sides Or the desk, they stared at  each other impersonally.
It was as if a glass wall had gone up between them.
Miranda said quietly, ‘In that case, Adam, I'd like to get a second legal opinion.’
‘Of course.
But you'd better inform Freddy Swanson immediately that there is a problem.
After all, it's only two days to the flotation.’
‘Why the hell didn't you bring this up before now?’
Miranda fumed.
‘I've only just reached my decision,’ Adam said softly.
He hadn't intended to give her time to try a countermove.
Miranda telephoned her lawyer.
Having ascertained that she would, indeed, be forced to sell fifteen per cent of SUPPLYKITS to Adam for a token amount, she added, ‘In that case, please rewrite my will and delete all reference to Adam Grant.
Instead, reapportion those shares to my staff…
No, I've had a better idea!
Add Adam Grant's bequest to that of Buzz — I mean, Miss Doris Mann.’
Miranda replaced the receiver and called for her secretary.
‘June, please cancel all today's appointments.
Ask Mr Swanson if he would be kind enough to see me here, as soon as possible.
I mean within the hour.’
Miranda's ten-man board of directors had recently been expanded to include a new chairman, the Earl of Brighton, and Frederick Swanson of Seligman Swanson, the merchant bank chosen to handle the SUPPLYKITS flotation.
The bank had organized everything concerning the various consultants, the share price, and the prospectus — a forty-page, glossy volume about the company's structure, trading situation, and future plans.
As was customary in Britain, existing contractual obligations had been included; as was also customary, two weeks before the flotation, the essential details of this prospectus had been published in national newspapers.
Mr Swanson arrived at the reception area and was shown to the private lift that went straight to Miranda's office on the top floor.
When he stepped out, he was astonished by his first view of the place.
The entire sixty-foot room was white, including the marble floor.
The furniture was white and chrome, and even the many vases of spring flowers were white.
The space looked clean, glamorous, and exciting.
At the far end of the room, spotlights shone on white tables, upon which cosmetics, in various stages of testing, were spread.
Overriding the scent of flowers was the faint suggestion of a peculiar smell, slightly reminiscent of a school science lab, but fruitier.
Miranda walked forward to welcome her visitor.
‘Good morning, Freddy.’
‘What's happened?’
Freddy Swanson asked.
He was pleased by the progress of the flotation: SUPPLYKITS was thriving; KITS had sacrificed its 1966 profit only to facilitate the other company's expansion.
Swiftly Miranda outlined her problem, grateful for once that her personal involvement with Adam was a secret.
‘Why did Adam wait until so late ?’
Freddy thundered.
‘An undisclosed stock option worth three hundred thousand pounds throws out all your figures!
That means our brochure and advertisements are inaccurate.’
‘Originally he decided not to take up the option because he thought it would upset me,’ Miranda said lamely.
‘But Adam eventually decided that he couldn't afford such sentimental generosity.’
‘Which, of course,did upset you.’
‘To be frank, Freddy, he's earned it.
I doubt SUPPLYKITS would be going public without him.’
‘Nevertheless, Adam's a qualified lawyer,’ Freddy said, ‘yet he put his name to a prospectus which says that all material information has been disclosed — but does not mention a fifteen per cent stock option that I wasn't told  about.’
He sat down on a white, tulip-shaped chair.
‘I'll calculate the exact figures,’ he murmured.
‘Adam has acquired one hundred and ninety-two thousand thirty-shilling shares worth two hundred and eighty-eight thousand pounds for fifteen thousand pounds, which leaves you, Miranda, holding sixty per cent of the shares.’
Slowly he looked up from his calculations.
‘I suppose we can't do anything about it at this stage.
All the expensive consultants’ work has been done, all the donkey work is over, everyone is exhausted, and some of the public have already applied for the shares, so very reluctantly I will take no action.
Those shares mustn't be sold to Adam until after the flotation.’
Everyone in the office noticed the new, impeccably polite coldness between Miranda and Adam.
Nobody guessed the reason.
But Miranda felt exposed and lonely.
Early on the following Thursday morning, she grabbed the pale pink copy of the Financial Times from her breakfast tray.
SUPPLYKITS was now on the London Stock Exchange: the share price had risen to thirty-three shillings.
As Miranda poured her coffee, she realized that checking the share price would now be her first priority every morning.
She was no longer the proprietor of SUPPLYKITS but the managing director and major shareholder of a public company.
For a moment, Miranda's eyes sparkled: the little sister — number three in the nursery — to whom no one had paid much attention, was now, at the age of twenty-six, clearly a number one in the business world!
She was one of the few self-made women in Britain.
In the world !
She remembered her early unsuccessful struggles for equal treatment and wondered what her sisters would think of this news.
To hell with equality now.
She wished she could share her glee with Adam.
Miranda hated the coldness between them.
Perhaps she should not have been so aggressive.
After all, she had agreed to the  option when she wanted Adam to join the company: he was only taking what he was entitled to.
Hearing a knock, Miranda turned her head to the door as the housekeeper entered; she carried a Victorian brass birdcage, in which was a dove.
Attached to the ring at the top of the cage was an olive branch with silvery-grey leaves.
She tore open the card.
Adam's angular black handwriting read: ‘Can I tell you tonight how sorry I am?’
Miranda threw back her sheets and took the cage to the window.
She laughed as she watched the dove soar above the chestnut trees, which were already showing the first flecks of green.
That evening Miranda ran down the stairs to her drawing room; her heart was beating hard and she was short of breath.
Adam, in white dinner jacket, turned from the window and stared.
‘Darling, art thou dressed or undressed?
One never knows these days.
Miranda wore a sheer cream chiffon Grecian gown with thonged gold sandals that crisscrossed to her knees.
‘Definitely dressed.
It's Zandra Rhodes.’
‘That dress was designed to be taken off.’
Adam held her by the shoulders; through the gauze, he could feel her warm flesh.
As he pulled her against his body, she breathed in his body scent and felt his excitement.
‘How I've missed you,’ he murmured as his hands slowly moved down her back and then traced the swell of her buttocks.
Hungrily Miranda groped for his body; her knees shook and, together, they fell upon the thick cream carpet, where, wordlessly, they came together again.
Towards dawn, Miranda no longer knew whether or not she was dreaming, as she felt Adam's flesh against hers and inhaled the pungent almond smell of love; by the dying embers of the drawing-room fire, she could just see his face.
Sleepily Adam whispered, ‘I find it an extraordinarily erotic idea.’
‘What?’
‘To be in bed with a self-made millionairess.’
‘But we aren't in bed, darling.’
‘Let's get there quickly.
There are things I must do to you.’
SATURDAY, 19 AUGUST 1967
Outside, the sun beat down on the red baked earth of Provence, but the summer salon was cool.
A Scrabble board lay on the floor, a reminder that so far this year Buzz was beating Elinor by 147 to 17.
Miranda, in black linen shorts and halter top, lay with her feet up on the terracotta-coloured sofa, enjoying her idleness.
She yawned and stretched; she wished her siesta could have lasted until the following morning — no, the following week.
The SUPPLYKITS interim dividend had been seven per cent— an excellent figure — but in spite of this satisfying result, Miranda still fretted about her neglect of KITS.
After the SUPPLYKITS flotation, the analysts, investors, and competitors had taken a much closer look at the company.
An exhausted Miranda found that instead of having more time, she had almost a full-time job keeping present and future shareholders informed and happy: she prepared official reports, gave institutional and pension-fund presentations, attended city lunches, and made time in her overfilled schedule for the financial press.
Overworked and depressed, she felt as if she were being turned into a glamorous business machine.
Miranda sniffed the heavy scent of the lilies; in the flower room beyond the bar, she could hear Elinor and Buzz talking as they made their way slowly into the summer salon.
A maid arrived with the tea tray as soon as they sat down.
‘Cucumber sandwiches.’
Buzz nodded approvingly.
‘And chocolate éclairs.’
Miranda yawned again.
‘Buzz, I can't understand how you can eat anything after these huge, delicious French lunches.
The others are still working it off on the tennis court.’
‘Not me.’
Adam sauntered into the room.
The maid put down the tea tray and fished in the pocket of her dress.
‘Une lettre par courier pour Mademoiselle Mann .‘
‘For me ?’
Buzz was puzzled.
‘Nobody sends me letters by courier.
An American stamp…’
As she turned the letter over, her face became eager and younger.
‘It's Bertha Higby!’
Since the death of her fiancé nearly fifty years ago, Buzz had continued to correspond with his mother.
Every year, Ginger's parents travelled to France to visit his grave, sometimes accompanied by Buzz.
Now eighty-seven years old and recently widowed, Mrs Higby remained in Cleveland.
Buzz read the short letter.
‘Oh !…
Oh…
But I couldn't…’
‘What is it?’
Elinor asked, teapot suspended.
‘Eric left a bigger windfall than Bertha expected.
She says at her age, she might not have long to enjoy it.
She says she's spent her life living modestly, as Eric wanted, but now she wants to blow a bit of it on some fun…
Strewth!
She wants to take a luxury winter cruise…next January…
Six weeks on the Stella Polaris .
Round the Caribbean islands and South America, until the end of February…and she wants me to be her guest !’
‘Why did she send it by courier?’
Miranda asked.
‘She wants a quick reply, to book our passages.’
‘Then why didn't she telephone?’
‘Such extravagance!
Eric would turn in his urn.
Anyway, it's out of the question.
I couldn't leave Elinor on her own.’
‘I don't need a chaperon, you old fool.’
Elinor handed Buzz a cup of strong Indian tea.
‘I can do without you for six weeks, Buzz.
Perhaps I'll get a bit of peace, for a change.’
‘No.
Six weeks is too long to be away,’ Buzz said, blowing on her tea to cool it.
Adam said, ‘Elinor has five servants here, three secretaries, and a doctor almost within shouting distance.
Perhaps it's time you had a real rest, Buzz.’
‘I agree,’ said Miranda.
‘I don't need a rest.’
Buzz was affronted.
‘Of course you don't,’ Adam soothed.
‘But I expect Elinor feels that as your friend is eighty-seven, she probably shouldn't be travelling alone.’
‘That's for sure,’ Elinor said seriously.
‘And I do think you need a rest from me, Buzz.
It's two years since my…er…incident and you've hardly had a day off ever since — you've fussed around me like a mother hen.
How long is it since you've seen Bertha?’
‘Four years,’ Buzz said.
‘They came for a weekend just before we left Starlings.’
‘We could easily arrange for a nurse to be here during your absence,’ Adam suggested.
‘Fiddlesticks!
I don't need a nurse!’
Elinor said.
‘You need somebody ,’ Buzz said firmly.
‘And she'll have to sleep in my bedroom because it's nearest to yours.’
Elinor smiled at Adam.
‘Tell the trustees that Buzz must have a bonus, Adam.
She'll need to keep her end up on a luxury cruise.’
Adam pulled a notebook from his trouser pocket.
As he scribbled, he said, ‘By the way, Elinor, Paul Littlejohn has decided to leave STG, Bermuda.
He's setting up his own firm there.’
‘What a nuisance!’
Elinor said.
‘Why does he want to do that?’
‘For much the same reason as I did.
I'm afraid that STG is no longer as reliable as it was in my grandfather's day.
I've never regretted leaving.
In fact, it was a great relief.’
‘But who will superintend my work in future?’
Elinor asked.
‘That is a problem,’ Adam admitted, ‘although, of course, we could transfer our affairs to Paul's new firm.
We know that he can handle everything.’
Buzz looked disapproving.
‘Why not?’
Adam said casually.
‘He could avoid mistakes and the need to brief someone else.
But there's no need to make a decision yet.
Paul has to give six months’ notice to STG, so he won't be leaving until well after Christmas probably in February.’
‘Plenty of time to think about it carefully,’ Elinor said.
‘Another cup of tea, Buzz?
Tell us more about this cruise.’
SATURDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 1968
A week after the affairs of the Dove Trust had been transferred to Littlejohn and Partners (Bermuda), Adam surprised Elinor with a trip to Saracen for the weekend.
Every time his plane touched down at Nice airport and he saw palm trees and tanned porters in white, short-sleeved shirts, Adam enjoyed afresh the glamour of a life where one stepped on to a plane in bleak winter weather and shortly afterwards stepped off in warm sunshine.
That evening, he and Elinor drank aperitifs in the summer salon.
Adam pointed to a pair of elaborately carved chairs in cinnamon-coloured wood, inset with ivory.
‘Are those new?’
‘Yes.
Found them at my pet antiques dealer in Cannes.
Eighteenth century, from Goa, made for some rich Portuguese trader.
I also snapped up those two new chairs in the hall — the ones with angels’ faces carved on the back: really too good for family use, but I couldn't resist them.’
‘What did they cost?’
‘Too much to tell you, dear boy,’ said Elinor gaily.
As Adam refilled his glass, Elinor said, ‘I never realized how much I'd miss Buzz.
How she'll crow when I tell her!
She's obviously having a wonderful time.
Every day, I get a postcard from some tropical place called Brown Sugar Island or Crab Cove.
She says there are no men on board— the ship is full of hopeful widows — but the crew are wonderful and she's friendly with the purser, who dances a mean Charleston.’
Adam sipped his drink.
‘As well as a winter break, there's another reason for my visit, Elinor, but I didn't want to alarm you unnecessarily by discussing it over the telephone.‘
Elinor sensed trouble.
‘It's the new book contract,’ Adam went on.
‘The publishers would feel…happier…if they had a medical all-clear before signing.
They know it's been over two years since your illness, but they'd appreciate reassurance.
They're all overjoyed about it, but before they make their plans and get the sales force excited, they want to be…quite sure…that you are…completely fit.’
‘It's not as though I were writing a new book,’ Elinor said crossly.
‘The boxed set is a reissue.’
‘Yes, but you've agreed to promote it,’ Adam said patiently.
‘And before they spend vast sums on the publicity launch, they'd like to know that it won't be too much for you.’
‘I feel fit as a fiddle,’ Elinor protested.
‘Elinor, this is a reasonable business precaution to take,’ Adam persisted.
‘Film stars, sports stars — everyone in businesses where heavy investment depends on the health of one person — know that a regular medical check is considered a reasonable — and professional — precaution.’
Adam knew that Elinor would go to great lengths to avoid being called unprofessional.
‘Oh, well, if it's only a medical check, I can go to that American nursing home at Cannes.’
‘They'd prefer British medical reports.’
Oh dear.
How long will it take?’
‘Perhaps four days.’
‘A pity Buzz isn't here.
Although she'd only fuss if she were.
She doesn't like the London Clinic.
Noisy place, she thinks.’
‘You can be there and back before Buzz returns,’ Adam said.
‘And you needn't go to the London Clinic.
I'll arrange for the best possible care.
As you say, you aren't ill — so your friends will be able to visit you.
Life will be one long party, with a matron to shoo people away, should you get tired or bored.
And the night you leave, I'll take you to the theatre.’
‘You make it sound quite fun, dear boy.
Could you see that there are a few crates of champagne — those half-bottles, so convenient for visitors.’
‘I'll arrange everything,’ Adam promised.
SATURDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 1968
One week later, as the plane took off from Nice for London airport, Adam outlined his arrangements to Elinor.
‘Eastbourne !’ she exclaimed.
‘Why Eastbourne ?’
‘Elinor, you sound like Dame Edith Evans saying, ‘A handbag ?’ in The Importance of Being Earnest .
Eastbourne isn't the Gorbals,’ Adam said easily.
‘Eastbourne has the highest sunshine rate in Britain.’
‘I can get plenty of sunshine at Saracen.
And I'm not on my last legs yet,thank you very much!
Eastbourne is filled with nursing homes in Victorian mansions with names like ‘The Gables’.’
‘And that is why the best specialists for this sort of medical check-up are in Eastbourne,’ Adam said persuasively.
‘It's only for a few days, Elinor, and it's just an hour and a half away from London.
There will be plenty of flowers and books, delicious food, TV and a telephone…’
Elinor pursed her lips.
‘You should not have made these arrangements without my approval, Adam!’
Adam looked contrite.
He said, ‘I can, of course, cancel them should you wish, but Sir George is undoubtedly the best-qualified heart specialist in the country.
And he himself told me that the Lord Willington Nursing Home is the most professional of the local nursing homes.
Dr Craig-Dunlop, who owns it, prides himself on having all the latest equipment.’
‘Oh well, I suppose it won't hurt me for a couple of days.
Stop fretting, dear boy.’
With the South Downs behind it and the turbulent grey English Channel in front, the Lord Willington Nursing Home looked like a country mansion.
As she stepped from her Rolls, Elinor shivered in the unaccustomed raw air of February.
Inside, a faint whiff of disinfectant was almost overpowered by the heavy scent emanating from bowls of blue hyacinths.
A smiling receptionist apologized for the matron's absence.
After Elinor had signed her voluntary consent form, she and Adam were taken to her suite of rooms.
But for the mechanical hospital bed, she might have been in a first-class hotel: the sitting room was agreeably furnished in eau-de-Nil, the bedroom in old rose; the interconnecting rooms faced the sea over lawns and flower beds, though they were bleak at this time of the year.
Elinor read the cards from two identical large vases of lilies which took up all the space on the dressing table.
She laughed.
‘One is from Miranda, one from Annabel.
They both know I love lilies.’
Adam smiled.
‘Miranda wanted to be with you today, but Dr Craig-Dunlop wants you to settle in quickly, with no excitement.
Your tests start tomorrow.
Miranda wants to know as soon as you're allowed visitors.
Annabel has already telephoned three times, but I've asked her not to call again, in case she disturbs a treatment.
It's best if you call her.’
Coffee was served in the sitting room right after their arrival.
Then a smiling procession of medical staff presented themselves, each of whom told Elinor that if there was anything she wanted, she had only to ask.
Finally she was given an enormous burgundy leatherbound folder that looked like some medieval city charter: it was the menu.
‘Don't worry, dear boy,’ Elinor said over a glass of champagne poured from one of the little bottles.
‘I can see they're going to look after me really well.’
‘I'm sure of it.’
Adam smiled as he lifted his glass in a toast.
On the following day, Elinor's door was thrown open by a nurse who then stood to attention as, smiling benignly, Matron Ivy Braddock appeared in the doorway.
Elinor's first astonished impression was that Matron Braddock looked like a female impersonator — a sergeant-major in drag: she couldn't wait to describe her to Buzz.
The matron was one of the biggest women Elinor had ever seen; her neck seemed sunk between strong shoulders, and her red hands hung from beefy arms.
Her face looked rough-hewn, as if carved from a cliff.
Her yellow hair was cut very short, and on it, like a cake frill, perched a nurse's cap, tied beneath the square jaw.
The matron moved towards Elinor's bed on legs that seemed to be joined to her feet without ankles: she did not walk so much as stomp.
‘We're going to do everything we can , Mrs O'Dare, to  make you comfortable.’
Matron Braddock's voice was surprisingly light and pleasant.
First, blood and urine samples were taken; then Elinor was X-rayed, after which she spent the rest of the day being wired up to various machines for tests.
That evening, Dr Cyril Craig-Dunlop stopped in just to visit.
He was a small, mild-mannered man with surprisingly beautiful, black-fringed grey eyes.
The next morning, the heart specialist, Sir George, was ushered into Elinor's bedroom by Matron Braddock.
Elinor hated to be interrupted: she was reading Truman Capote's In Cold Blood .
Other specialists followed.
On the third morning, Dr Craig-Dunlop again visited Elinor.
‘I've had the results of nearly all the tests,’ he said, ‘which are more or less what we expected.
However, as you know, you must be very, very careful with the few years that remain to you.’
In Cold Blood fell to the floor.
Elinor sat upright.
‘What do you mean?
I have recovered completely!
That's what I was told!’
Dr Craig-Dunlop stammered, clearly confused, ‘I — I'm so sorry, Mrs O'Dare.
I assumed you were the type of patient who would have been told…’
‘Told what ?’
‘The truth about your condition,’ Dr Craig-Dunlop said apologetically.
‘The few years that remain to me ?
Are you sure?’
Elinor blanched, her pallor more obvious against her peach chiffon robe.
‘I'd like a second opinion.’
Dr Craig-Dunlop coughed.
‘Your three specialists are all of the same opinion.’
Elinor stared bleakly out of the window, beyond the sloping lawn to where the sludge-coloured sea met with the grey sky.
There was no sound in the room.
Eventually she said, ‘I don't want my granddaughters to know.
They would worry, you see.’
Shortly after the doctor left, a smiling nurse, smart in a lavender-and-white-striped uniform, entered; she carried two pills in a small vial.
‘This will make you feel better.’
She watched to make sure that Elinor swallowed the medication.
The nurses were well trained in dealing with rich patients who were used to doing as they pleased and often disliked accepting the discipline of routine; they knew that the very old, the alcoholics, and the more than slightly batty patients (called ‘eccentric’) had to be carefully supervised.
This old dear, who was to be kept under heavy sedation, clearly didn't know that she was a long-term patient, being treated for depression.
During the next two days, Elinor slept a lot, which Dr Craig-Dunlop said might be because she wished to evade reality.
But the reason was simply that Elinor was very sensitive to medicine; for her, a normal dose of sedative was an overdose.
In a moment of clarity, just before her eleven a.m. medication on Friday, a bewildered Elinor threatened to leave and was told by a nurse that this was not possible without the prior permission of the matron.
Elinor, used to prompt obedience to her wishes, flew into a rage, of which the nurse took not the slightest notice.
An injection was swiftly administered, and Sister correctly reported that the patient had become uncontrollable and needed sedation.
‘Paranoia,’ Dr Craig-Dunlop said quietly to Matron upon reading this report.
Matron Braddock nodded.
She knew that a classic symptom of paranoia was the suspicion that those who were caring for you were trying to harm you.
SATURDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 1968
After Elinor had spent a week in the nursing home, Annabel and Miranda were allowed to visit.
On the way, sitting in the back of the Bentley that drove them from London, the two worried sisters spoke little.
Finally, Miranda inquired after Scott.
Annabel snapped, ‘Don't ask me how Scott is!
I hardly ever see him — I don't even suppose he's noticed that I'm not there this week!’
‘What do you mean?’
Miranda was surprised.
Oh, he's too wrapped up in his work to bother about his wife.
He even forgot our tenth anniversary!’
That doesn't sound like Scott.’
‘Well, he would have forgotten,’ Annabel amended, ‘but I reminded him.’
Annabel and Miranda were shocked by their grandmother's appearance: her golden hair was lifeless, her eyes were dull, her speech was thick and slurred, she seemed inert and limp.
Forewarned by the matron to treat her normally and to ignore anything eccentric that she did or said, the two sisters immediately wrapped Elinor in an invisible cloud of affection.
Afterwards, in the matron's office, where Adam and Dr Craig-Dunlop were waiting for them, Annabel burst into tears.
‘I can't understand why I couldn't see that she was ill.’
Miranda put her arms around her sister.
‘Don't cry, Frog.
I had no idea either.
It's lucky she's being properly looked after.’
Oh, what bad luck that Buzz was away!’
Annabel sobbed.
She could have been here with Gran.’
What exactly is paranoia?’
Miranda impatiently asked the doctor.
‘We prefer to describe it as a personality disorder,’ he  said.
‘A chronic, slowly progressive mental disorder.
In this case, I fear that there will be delusions of persecution.’
‘What treatment is she having?’
Miranda asked while Annabel wept.
‘She is being given a drug called Mellaril.
And sedatives as necessary.’
‘How long will she be ill?’
There was a short, ominous silence.
‘How long?’
Miranda repeated shrilly.
‘I cannot say.
Not yet.
We'll have to see how she responds to treatment, but it may take quite a long time.’
‘How many weeks?’
‘Perhaps you should think in terms of months,’ Dr Craig-Dunlop said gently.
He added, ‘But I must emphasize that at this stage we simply cannot tell.
She is an elderly lady, she has had one stroke, and she has a personality disorder.
We simply cannot say what will happen.’
‘How can she have deteriorated so seriously in such a short time, when she only came here for a check-up?’
Miranda persisted.
‘It was extremely fortunate that she came here when she did,’ said the doctor gravely, ‘or her situation might have been much more serious.’
Over a depressing hotel lunch of beige roast beef and sour cabbage, Miranda asked, ‘Why didn't you tell us, Adam?’
‘I didn't want to cause you unnecessary anxiety until Dr Craig-Dunlop and the specialist consultants had reached a definite conclusion.’
In front of Annabel, Adam was careful to speak to Miranda formally and without endearment.
Although many people suspected them to be lovers, Adam still insisted on secrecy.
‘But we can't leave Gran in that place,’ Miranda said.
‘She must come to London — where we can get the best medical advice, and I can look after her.’
‘She seems to be getting very good care where she is.
The sea air is bracing, and you won't find a London nursing home in acres of garden, like this one,’ Adam said.
‘But if you want further opinions, we can go to any London consultant you choose.’
‘Why can't Gran go back to Saracen when Buzz returns and be nursed there?’
Annabel pushed aside her untouched plate.
‘She loves Saracen.’
‘That might be a bit too heavy a load for Buzz,’ Adam suggested.
‘Remember how she knocked herself out after Elinor had her stroke?
Round-the-clock nursing, such as Elinor is getting here, would mean overseeing four nurses, organizing their schedules, plus providing meals, transport and the rest of it.’
‘We don't want Buzz ill as well,’ Miranda agreed.
‘I've telephoned Dr Montand at Saracen,’ Adam continued.
‘He agrees that the best place for Elinor is an English nursing home where she can get round-the-clock medical care if necessary.
In any case, Dr Craig-Dunlop is adamant that, for the moment, she must be under proper medical supervision for twenty-four hours a day, in case her condition deteriorates rapidly.’
Both sisters looked alarmed at the thought of possible further deterioration.
Both were glad of Adam's presence.
He was always so comforting in times of trouble.
‘If you're sure this is the best place…’
Annabel said hesitantly.
Miranda said, ‘Firstly, I'd like to be sure that a nursing home is the best place for her, rather than a hospital.
Secondly, if she's likely to…be like this for some time, that the Lord Whatsit is the best nursing home available.’
Annabel nodded in agreement.
From his briefcase, Adam produced a sheaf of coloured brochures for nursing homes.
Silently he handed them to the two sisters.
Miranda looked at the imposing exteriors and the bleak interiors of the nursing and residential homes.
‘These reception rooms look like pub lounges.
Gran wouldn't put a maid in one of these bedrooms!
I'm sure they're comfortable — but they look so deeply unattractive.’
Annabel read aloud, Each bedroom has a fitted hand-basin.’
Big deal .
No private bathrooms.’
‘Elinor has her own bathroom at the Lord Willington,’ Adam pointed out.
‘But these other places have a certain number of amenities — physiotherapist, chiropodist, hairdresser.’
‘Singsongs and sideshows’!’
Annabel read.
‘Bingo ’!’
‘I brought only the most attractive brochures,’ Adam said.
‘I hate to think what the others are like,’ Annabel said.
‘But look at the prices they charge!’
‘Gran could practically live at the Ritz for what the Lord Whatsit is costing,’ Miranda pointed out.
Adam said in a stiff voice, ‘I went to considerable trouble to choose the best place, so naturally it isn't cheap.
But you're welcome to move her if you wish.’
The sisters looked at each other and shook their heads.
‘It's not the nursing home we hate,’ Annabel acknowledged.
‘It's what's happened to Gran that we can't bear.’
‘We must find Clare and tell her straight away.’
Miranda did not look forward to this.
Adam coughed.
‘I must warn you that any mention of Clare agitates your grandmother.
I really feel that her wishes must be respected.
Elinor clearly doesn't wish to see Clare.’
SUNDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1968
Standing barefoot in her pink-sprigged Laura Ashley nightgown, Clare looked from her bedroom window at the quietly falling snow.
The moon dimly lit the woods, faintly etched against the hill behind Applebank Cottage.
She shivered, jumped back into bed, and snuggled lower under the patchwork quilt.
In half an hour it would be time to take her loaves out of the oven: the only drawback to her new business was that it meant getting up early every single morning of the year.
Because her business had long outgrown the kitchen, David had drawn plans to convert the outhouse into a proper bakery.
Clare had accidentally metamorphosed into a baker ten months before, when David took some of her homebaked bread to friends who lived nearby: they asked if they could buy bread regularly from her.
Why not? she thought, and packed a sample treacle cake and some shortbread with her first order.
One month later, Clare had tacked a plastic-covered price list to her back door and another to the garden gate.
She now baked rye bread, whole-grain bread, soda bread, and date bread; pasties, rich chocolate cake, rum-flavoured fruitcake, brandy snaps, and shortbread.
She cooked fruit flans when fruit was in season.
Clare baked nothing that could be found at the local baker and charged what she considered exorbitant prices, which people seemed happy to pay in cash.
The main reason Clare did not allow credit was because it complicated her bookkeeping.
Having experienced that particular chaos, she was careful to keep her books up to date, a simple matter of filling in two columns each day, ‘Purchases made’ and ‘Total cash takings’.
Under the patchwork quilt, David turned over and sleepily pulled Clare towards him.
Her nightgown had ridden up around her waist, and she enjoyed feeling his hard, muscular legs entwined around hers.
Still half asleep, he kissed her cheek and fumbled beneath her gown, seeking her breasts.
With a loud crash, the door burst open, and Josh, in yellow Donald Duck pyjamas, leapt upon the bed.
‘Ith thnowing!
Ith thnowing!
David, can I have a thledge?
I'm old enough now.
Oh, pleathe .’
David sat up, turned on the light, yawned, and scratched his hairy chest.
‘You can take a tea tray up to the wood and slide down to the back garden.
But not now.
It's the middle of the night.
After breakfast.’
He turned and smiled at Clare.
‘You are going to have breakfast in bed…
No, not a word!
Josh and I planned it yesterday evening, didn't we, Josh?
After you've taken your loaves out, you're coming back to bed.
Isn't she, Josh?’
Josh nodded happily.
‘There must be a catch,’ Clare said.
‘You're too perfect!’
‘Yes, there's a catch,’ David said quietly as he made room for Josh in the bed.
Later, David pulled on Clare's towelling bathrobe and led Josh down to the kitchen.
After twenty minutes, her breakfast tray arrived; upon it was boiling red soup, chocolate ice cream, and a fizzy orange drink.
David winked over Josh's head.
‘Josh chose the menu.’
‘Delicious,’ Clare said feebly as she looked into the smiling face and aquamarine eyes of her son.
She looked down at the tray on her lap.
‘That's too much tomato soup just for me.
Perhaps you could help me eat it, Josh?’
Suddenly Clare's baby was wearing jeans and a navy nylon anorak, and howling for tough boots like the village boys'.
Now five years old, he went to school in Warminster and was trying hard to adopt a Dorset accent, having been teased about the snob way he talked.
Josh liked reading comics, watching TV (especially Dr Who ), and peeing in his bath when his mother was looking the other way.
He loved soccer and couldn't remember baseball; neither could he remember California, except for a vague recollection of sunshine and a white house and what seemed an enormous  swimming pool, although Clare laughed and told him it had really been quite small — for LA.
When Josh had scraped the plates and gone to ‘tea-tray’ down the hill, David produced another tray with coffee, Clare's own homemade croissants, and strawberry jam.
After that, huddled under the patchwork quilt, they made love in a lazy, unhurried way.
This morning Clare felt tender and loving; she wanted to be close to him.
But sometimes after they made love, she felt wide awake and energetic, beautiful and happy, strong enough to lift the stove.
‘It's a pity more men aren't like you,’ Clare murmured.
‘You're so sensual.
You enjoy physical intimacy and affectionate contact as much as women do.
I wish all men enjoyed their whole bodies, rather than just a little, wobbly bit of it.’
‘I've always thought the most important sex organ is between the ears,’ David said, kissing hers.
21
THURSDAY, 29 FEBRUARY 1968
On the last day of February, a suntanned Buzz flew into London airport, wearing Bertha's farewell gift — a snappy white Capri pants suit.
She felt energetic, almost girlish as she left the plane.
To her surprise, a ground hostess met her and took her to a VIP lounge, where Adam was waiting.
‘Something's happened to Elinor ?’
Buzz turned white.
Gently Adam told her what had happened.
Buzz was out of the car almost before it rolled to a halt on the gravel forecourt.
It was an unusually sunny day for the end of February, and cheerful nurses in scarlet cloaks wheeled or walked their patients slowly around the garden.
One nurse moved a wheelchair towards her, and Buzz suddenly realized with a shock that the cocooned creature within it was Elinor.
She looked small, frail, and feeble; her face was dazed and vacant, as if she'd just been woken up and couldn't quite remember where she was.
Buzz said, ‘Hello, Nell.’
Elinor did not look up.
In silence, Buzz listened to the nurse's non-stop starling twitter.
‘We've had a good morning,haven't we, Mrs O'Dare?…
We watched the birds at the birdbath and we fed crumbs to them,didn't we?…
Lean forward a bit, dear — you've pushed your cushion down again.
There, that's better, isn't it?…
Then we had a choccy biccy and the usual little argument about our nap.
Then we listened to a nice concert on the radio, didn't we?’
Slowly Elinor looked up and glared.
Buzz felt tremulous hope.
She said, ‘You seem a bit under the weather, Nell.
Don't worry, I'll have you out of here in no time.’
In Elinor's overwarm bedroom, Buzz peered at the temperature chart and medical instructions clipped to the foot of the metal bed.
She frowned when she saw five different tranquillizers and sedatives listed: no wonder Nell looked bewildered and depressed.
Buzz recalled Elinor's swift rage and felt another glimmer of hope, but a thought occurred to her: If they insisted on treating Nell like a crazy person, she might actually end up like one.
Peering again at the list of medications, she started to say something to Elinor, then stopped short, remembering that Adam was in the room.
Buzz turned to him.
‘I've a present for Elinor in my hand luggage.
It's in a red box.
Would you mind getting it from the car?’
She turned back to Elinor and said in the rather loud, slow, and contrived voice that people use for the deaf, ‘I've brought you a surprise , Nell.’
As soon as the door closed behind Adam, she whispered, ‘What have they done to you, my girl?’
Lying back on her pillows, Elinor slowly shook her head from side to side but said nothing.
‘I'll be back tomorrow,’ Buzz told her.
‘I'll just turn up, without warning.
Until then — don't swallow them pills.
Do you hear me, Nell?’
She leaned forward and shook Elinor's shoulders.
‘Don't swallow them dratted pills !
Hold 'em under your tongue and play possum.
Then spit 'em into a handkerchief and hide it under the pillow.’
The door opened and Adam came in.
‘Just straightening Nell's pillows,’ Buzz said airily.
As she and Adam left, Buzz turned back to see Elinor silently looking at the ceiling.
Buzz's gift, a nacre box, lay ignored upon the bedside  table; but even in the dull afternoon light, the shell surface gleamed.
As their hired limousine purred back to Heathrow airport, Buzz asked, ‘Why didn't you let me know she was ill?
They had a radiotelephone thing on the Stella Polaris .’
‘Had you been present, Buzz, there was nothing you could have done, so it was thought best not to disrupt your holiday,’ Adam explained.
Buzz noticed he didn't say who had ‘thought it best’.
He added sadly, ‘It's not yet certain that Elinor will ever again be well enough to live without nursing support.’
‘Just as well I know a lot more about nursing than some of these young Australian madams,’ Buzz sniffed.
Then Adam quietly explained that she no longer had a job.
Tight-lipped and pale, Buzz listened in silence and near disbelief.
Nobody had ever sacked her !
Even after she had been caught in that ruined church with Ginger Higby, that old bitch of a commandant in the women's ambulance service hadn't wanted to lose her.
Eventually she asked, ‘Does Elinor know about this?’
‘Of course not,’ Adam said.
‘As you saw, she's in no condition to discuss anything.
But the trustees have considered the matter most carefully.’
‘Them trustees are sitting miles away in their offices in Bermuda!’
Buzz snorted.
‘I know Nell better than they do!
And better than you do, you young whippersnapper!’
‘Of course you do,’ Adam said soothingly.
‘But in fact, it is Elinor's doctors and consultants who feel that she will no longer need you.
I thought I had made that plain.’
Shocked and incredulous, Buzz could say nothing more, but as the limousine glided on, she remembered a great deal: the teashop outings in Earls Court when Edward was little, comforting Nell, time after time, when Billy had had  a few and behaved badly.
She remembered the difficulties they'd had repairing Starlings after the war, when you couldn't get a brick or a plank of wood, not even if you was royalty; and she remembered comforting Nell as each granddaughter left home.
Now they were kicking her out!
And the worst part was that she couldn't talk to Elinor about it.
Finally, Buzz stifled her feelings enough to ask calmly, ‘Do the girls know about this?’
‘They asked me to tell you,’ Adam lied.
‘We all have to face the fact that Elinor's life has suddenly changed and she will probably continue to deteriorate.’
‘And they didn't mind me going?’
Buzz asked painfully.
‘Of course they mind — they're very,very fond of you,’ Adam said.
As soon as he'd seen Buzz safely on the plane to Nice, he planned to drive back to London, where he would telephone Annabel in New York before seeing Miranda.
The sisters would be told that Buzz had agreed it was best for her to leave.
‘Of course them girls are fond of me!’
Buzz bit back further words.
She'd wiped their tears, she'd wiped their botties, and she'd loved them as if they were her own.
Adam shrugged his shoulders and said nothing.
Buzz growled, ‘Where am I supposed to go?’
She refused to accept this mortifying disgrace.
Who did this little twerp think he was?
Too big for his boots, as she'd always said.
Slowly her face reddened as she fought to control her anger and her tears.
Eventually her voice grated, ‘You can't kick me out like this.
Not after all these years.’
‘Of course we're not kicking you out.’
Adam spoke soothingly, but Buzz sensed a hint of contempt — or was it triumph?
‘Then what exactly are you doing?’
‘I am not doing anything.
I have been asked to see that you are properly looked after in your retirement.’
‘Retirement?’
‘You are eight years over the legal age of retirement,’ Adam reminded Buzz.
‘The trust has approved a generous pension; it will be paid to you monthly wherever you wish — anywhere in the world.’
He waved his hand expansively.
‘You make it sound as if I've won a sweepstake!’ she said bitterly, still fighting to control her feelings.
What was that favourite saying of Elinor's?
Buzz could almost hear her voice: ‘Stupidity is the operation of intelligence hampered by emotion.’
Buzz sensed that she had to be careful, she had to box clever, she had to let Adam think she had accepted what he said and would go quietly.
Seething with indignation and fury, she told herself that this was the best way to catch Adam off guard and discover what was going on.
Thoughtfully Adam said, ‘It was, perhaps, a pity that you were unable to stay on with your friend Mrs Higby.’
Once again Buzz noticed that Adam didn't speak like other people: he always gave himself an out.
Adam couldn't say, ‘The cat is black.’
He would say, ‘To the best of my knowledge, the cat appears to be black.’
You've got to have the sense to hold your tongue, my girl, Buzz told herself.
Play along with him.
Let him think that he's able to plant these ideas in your head.
Let him think that he's getting away with it.
She said, ‘I suppose I could always go and live with Bertha, if Nell really doesn't need me.’
‘Living with Mrs Higby might be an excellent idea,’ Adam approved, ‘particularly as — eventually — it might be necessary to sell Saracen.’
‘Sell Saracen !
Elinor would never allow it.’
‘Saracen now belongs to the trust,’ Adam said firmly.
‘If Elinor is unable to live in Saracen, the trustees might consider it an unjustifiable expense: apart from the income that might be generated by the capital that's tied up in the  place, keeping five full-time domestic staff members and three secretaries would no longer be viable.
Have you any idea of the cost of running that place, compared to the cost of a couple of rooms in a nursing home?’
‘No idea,’ Buzz said, ‘but I'm sure you know what's best for Nell.’
Buzz waited in the departure lounge.
When the flight to Nice was called, she informed a brisk blue-uniformed redhead that she was feeling ill and thought she'd better cancel her ticket.
He took her to the airport nurse, who could find nothing wrong with her but agreed that she might be suffering from jet lag and needed only to rest.
An hour later, Buzz hailed a taxi and returned to Eastbourne, where she booked into a modest residential hotel recommended by the taxi driver.
Buzz did not feel like sitting in the small lounge at the Eastbourne hotel, which contained a great many genteel, inquisitive, elderly ladies, all of whom seemed to be knitting.
She would have liked to go for a long walk past the charming wedding-cake buildings that lined the promenade, but although it was only teatime, it was already too dark to see anything.
Instead, she wandered into town, where she bought a bag of chips, well soused in vinegar and wrapped in newspaper; she took the bag to her room, where she sat on the edge of the single bed, slowly eating chips in the dark and thinking.
Buzz decided that her first priority was to see Elinor again.
She would then telephone Miranda, the most decisive of the three sisters.
She did not blame herself for going on the cruise, although she sensed that Adam, always an opportunist, had taken advantage of her absence.
Buzz had read newspaper accounts of old people who had been forcibly removed from their homes and admitted to nursing homes; such  people had been robbed by the very guardians who were legally supposed to care for them.
She had also read about old people's homes that ruthlessly exploited their pensioners: unscrupulous proprietors grabbed all they could squeeze from the social services but gave little back to the residents; they cut corners on staff, food, laundry, and amenities and added to their profits by pocketing the difference between their sparse expenditures and the sums they actually received.
If such money-grubbing goings-on could happen in cheap nursing homes that were checked by the authorities, Buzz wondered what might occur in expensive ones, where there was a greater possibility for profit?
The Lord Willington looked the sort of place into which dishonest rascals might put their inconvenient relations in order to get them out of the way: uncles with the DTs, incontinent aunts, senile grandads, and cousins who'd been odd since they were born.
Buzz remembered Nurse Evans, who'd been with Nell in Ward C at La Chapelle; after the war, Evans had worked in one of those rich bins before she'd married a Lutheran minister and gone to live in Scotland.
Evans had relayed some hair-raising stories about the exploitation of her rich patients.
Because for what reason, other than profit, would a nursing home prescribe so many drugs for Nell?
Did Adam know what was going on?
Buzz didn't know what was going on, but she certainly smelled dishonesty: it probably involved fraud, and it probably involved Adam.
Having finished her bag of chips, Buzz licked her fingers, switched the light on, and prepared for bed.
She had not felt this alone and lonely since she first set out for the French battlefields over fifty years ago.
On the following morning, Elinor lay with her eyes closed, apparently sleeping.
For the past twenty-four hours, she had swallowed none of her medication, although she had  been unable to refuse an injection.
She trusted Buzz.
She knew instinctively that Buzz would reappear to get her out of this place and help her to recover.
While she lay waiting, Elinor fought back the fears underscored by the hospital bed and the smell of antiseptic.
Her foremost fear was that she might lose her mind, for trying to think made her feel as if her head were filled with cotton wool.
She felt muddled…couldn't keep track of one thought for long.
She wasn't ill when she came in here…yes, she was sure of that…but she was ill now.
How could that have happened…unless they were making her ill?…
How could they do that?…
Easy…with medication.
She feared that decisions were being made behind her back, and that she was not being told the truth by that apologetic mouse of a doctor.
Was she really more ill than she'd been led to suppose?
If so, why hadn't she felt ill?
Or was she not ill at all?
And if not, then why was she imprisoned here?
It was too difficult.
She would wait for Buzz.
But as she lay there, demons slid possible visions of the future into her mind.
Suppose she lost the use of her body?
She dreaded being immobile and physically dependent, and she certainly felt as if heavy weights were attached to her feet and her legs; she felt as helpless as if she were buried to her neck in quicksand.
Another vision slid before her, of a halfwit locked in a cell.
Perhaps she would never again be able to function normally.
She saw herself wheeled along white corridors, wired up to huge machines that clicked, whirred, and flashed lights: this was her greatest fear, that she might be kept alive artificially by machinery, a mumbling vegetable, after her natural time to die had arrived.
She felt isolated in this comfortable place, but paradoxically, she also wished that these young women, with their bright faces and inane chatter, would go away and leave her in peace.
The next day, the taxi arrived at the nursing home as the clock above the entrance portico struck ten.
Buzz carefully counted out coins for the taxi driver, who said, ‘That ain't much of a tip, lady.’
‘It's exactly ten per cent,’ Buzz retorted.
‘And what have you done to deserve a tip?
You didn't help me out of the cab.’
‘Well, it's snowing.’
‘Exactly.’
Before entering the nursing home, Buzz stood under the imposing portico and carefully stamped the snow from her shoes.
She settled the squirrel evening cape that had belonged to her mother on top of her light summer coat, then walked in and asked to see Mrs O'Dare.
The smiling receptionist disappeared.
Smiling Matron Braddock appeared in her place.
The stocky woman looked intently at Buzz with raised eyebrows.
‘Is Mr Grant with you?’
Her voice was light and charming, but her eyes were hard.
‘He usually accompanies visitors.
We don't want Mrs O'Dare disturbed by people she would rather not see.’
‘I came with Mr Grant yesterday,’ Buzz reminded the matron.
‘And I'm going back to the south of France tomorrow.
I wanted to see Mrs O'Dare once more before I go.’
As Buzz entered her room, Elinor's eyelids slowly opened.
‘Hello, Buzz,’ she whispered, feeling warm relief flood her body.
Now she could stop worrying.
Buzz would take care of everything.
Buzz settled herself on the upright chair by Elinor's bed, firmly clasping her old-fashioned handbag on her lap.
The nurse left the room.
‘Can you walk, Nell?’
Buzz whispered back.
‘Do you go to the lav by yourself?’
‘Yes,’ Elinor said weakly.
‘They're not going to lay me out yet, you know.’
Buzz said, ‘Soon as my back's turned, look what happens!
That stuff they're giving you would kill a dozen cats.
But once you're out of here, I'll have you well in no time.
And I ain't never going away again.’
‘Dear, dear Buzz.
But they'll never let me leave.
Not without a fuss.
I signed something.’
‘I expect you signed in as a voluntary patient; then they're covered, Evans said.
Course they don't want you to leave.
They won't get paid if you leave — I bet this costs a pretty penny.’
Buzz looked around the room.
‘But I ain't scared of that great ox of a matron, even if she does remind me of my old commandant.
and I ain't scared of Adam.’
Elinor's eyes filled with tears.
‘Do you really think that Adam…’
‘Adam brought you here in the first place, my lamb.’
‘Why did the girls allow it?’
Elinor asked sadly.
She could vaguely remember Annabel and Miranda's visit, but Clare hadn't come.
On the plane to London, Adam had said that Clare still refused to see her; he had hinted that she expected an apology.
What sad stupidity.
How silly they had both been.
Of course she would apologize to Clare.
Buzz said, ‘The girls trust Adam, but he's getting too big for his boots — ordering everyone around.
Adam even says Saracen costs too much to run.
He says them trustees are going to sell it and keep you here because it'll be cheaper.’
‘Sell Saracen!
Never !
Why should Adam bother to do that?
He doesn't benefit from the trust…’
‘Adam's up to no good,’ Buzz said firmly.
‘But we won't worry about that now.
What's important is to get you out of here.
And this is how we'll do it!’
Elinor listened carefully as Buzz leaned close to her ear and outlined her plan.
‘I'll go straight back to Eastbourne.
I'll buy two identical  coats and hats in some bright colour.
Tomorrow I'll turn up here again at ten and tell the taxi to wait.
I'll ask him to move along a bit, so he ain't blocking the entrance.
I want him waiting by this corner.
Then I come in with my suitcase, and Matron thinks I'm on my way to the airport.
She's not to know I was supposed to catch yesterday's plane.’
‘Thank God you didn't.’
‘In that suitcase, Nell, will be a coat and hat — same as mine — for you to wear.
I get you dressed.
I open them glass doors to the garden.
You walk out slowly , with your head turned away from the house, to my taxi.
You get in the taxi.
I wait for you to do that; then I simply walk through the main hall, my empty suitcase in my hand.
Then we drive hell for leather to the airport and catch the next plane to Nice.’
‘Buzz, darling Buzz, that's a brilliant escape plan.’
Elinor's face crumpled and she started to cry.
The door of the bedroom flew open to reveal the huge, forbidding presence of the matron.
Firmly she said, ‘We don't want to overtire Mrs O'Dare.’
Buzz stood up.
‘I was about to go.
I'll pop in tomorrow to say goodbye on my way to the airport.’
She wagged a finger at Elinor.
‘Now be a good girl and do as you're told.’
In the cab on the way back to her Eastbourne hotel, Buzz checked her plan; she was determined to look upon this as a lark, as she and Nell had regarded some of their dangerous escapades in the Great War.
Buzz spent the cab ride reminiscing about those times, some grim and some sad, but all of which made her smile.
In the darkening afternoon, the taxi pulled up to her hotel.
She paid the driver, and as she turned to enter, she felt a snap.
Buzz found herself lying face up in the snow, in  great pain, unable to move: as helpless as a black beetle flipped on to its back.
Immediately Buzz knew she'd broken her hip.
It irritated her to think that she hadn't been doing anything reckless like running to catch a bus; but she had a private theory that an old person didn't break a hip because she fell, but fell because her hip snapped, after gradual erosion.
The taxi driver jumped from his cab and hurried to her side.
‘Lucky thing I saw you in the rear mirror just as I was driving off!’
As he ran to the hotel for help, Buzz realized that Elinor's escape would have to be postponed.
She must let Elinor know this.
She would telephone Miranda.
The following day, Elinor again hid her medication under her tongue, slipped it into her handkerchief, and later flushed it down the lavatory.
With carefully suppressed excitement, she waited for Buzz to arrive.
But Buzz did not come.
After a few days, having received no telephone call, letter, or message of any kind from Buzz, Elinor started to lose hope.
The medical staff had realized that she wasn't swallowing her medication, and it was now dissolved before being administered.
In her occasional lucid moments, Elinor again wondered if she was losing her sanity.
22
MONDAY, 4 MARCH 1968
‘Mr Grant?
Tell him to come straight in.’
As she replaced the telephone, Miranda, prim in a high-necked grey flannel suit, checked the Cartier travelling clock on her white desk.
She had to finish reading the pile of reports in front of her — and make the necessary decisions — before tomorrow's management meeting.
Adam sauntered in, his hands in the pockets of his dark city suit.
He looked at Miranda's white, exhausted face and said, ‘I thought you might like to knock off early and go to Hair ’.
Hair , the psychedelic tribal-love-rock American musical that celebrated hippie values, free love, hash, and hatred of the Vietnam War, had opened the day after stage censorship by the lord chamberlain had been abolished.
‘I'd love to, but…’
Miranda pointed to the piles of papers.
‘And I have to find time tomorrow to visit Buzz.’
Buzz was still in an Eastbourne hospital.
‘Forget everything else, just for one evening.
We've got something to celebrate.
In our first year as a public company, our pre-tax profits have increased by twenty per cent.’
‘But KITS showed a loss of thirteen thousand pounds,’ Miranda reminded Adam.
He shrugged his shoulders.
‘That's understandable.
KITS paid the expenses of SUPPLYKITS during its first year of trading — including those huge consultants’ fees and all bank interest.
It's not really a loss if you look at the overall company situation.’
‘It's not only the loss that's worrying me,’ Miranda said.
‘KITS now has weak middle management and poor internal communication; that's causing us big problems.
And we need better distribution, but can't afford it.’
‘So long as you know what's wrong, you can fix it.’
‘Sure — if I had the time.’
Wearily Miranda put down her pen.
‘I wish I could turn the clock back two years, when my time was spent running KITS.
It depresses me to waste time being photographed and hyped.’
‘Your real problem is that you've become very successful, very quickly, Miranda.
Some people would like your problem.’
‘Every morning when I wake up, I ask myself, If I'm so damned successful, why do I feel tired and miserable?’
‘You just need a couple of days off,’ Adam soothed.
‘Why not fly to St-Moritz for a long, lazy weekend?
Get a little snow and sunshine.’
Hands in pockets, he moved into the horseshoe of her desk.
Miranda swivelled her white leather chair around to face him.
She laughed.
‘That's unlike you, Adam.
What do you want?’
He leaned forward and quickly unbuttoned the top of Miranda's prim suit.
‘I want you,’ he said firmly, and slid his hand beneath the grey flannel.
Adam had never touched her in the office, and she was not expecting it.
Miranda felt the immediate and powerful reaction of her body to this forbidden sensuality.
Trembling, she reached backward for the telephone.
‘June?
No more calls please.’
Her voice was slightly overcontrolled.
Adam pulled her from her chair, undid two more buttons, quickly unzipped her skirt: Miranda was left standing in a daffodil-yellow camisole and black high-heeled boots.
Adam gently slid the daffodil straps from her shoulders.
Miranda gasped, ‘We always said…never in the office…’
‘I don't remember.’
Adam picked her up in his arms and laid her on her desk: reports slithered off it and the Cartier clock crashed to the floor.
‘We'll leave the boots on,’ Adam said.
‘Adam, I simply can't risk it.
If June came in, this would be round the entire company within seconds.
And I can't lock the door.
Let's go back to my place and —‘
What Adam said then was the last thing that Miranda expected.
He looked down at her flaming hair and beige, naked body and whispered, ‘I love you.’
That left Miranda speechless.
Adam started to stroke her body.
He murmured, ‘I love your boobs, and I love your ass.
And I love you because you're so exciting.
And I love the way you love it.’
‘Only with you,’ Miranda whispered.
Adam reached to a shelf behind Miranda's desk and picked up a case of cosmetic samples.
He flicked it open, picked a magenta lipstick, and scrawled across her breasts, GREAT BOOBS.
Gently he turned her body over.
He picked up a pot of turquoise eyeshadow, dipped his forefinger in it, and scrawled across her buttocks, GREAT ASS.
Then he turned her once more, gently, and  prised her thighs apart; in violet eyebrow pencil, he drew an arrow up each white thigh.
At the head of each arrow, he scrawled further appreciation.
With a lipstick pencil, he drew bracelets of crimson hearts around her wrists; with green eyeliner, he encircled her ankles with bracelets of kisses.
He covered her body with colourful graffiti.
Adam then selected a very expensive make-up brush, intended to apply blusher, and started carefully to brush Miranda's tuft in a circular motion.
Later, on their way to the theatre, Miranda snuggled  happily against Adam in the back of the chauffeur-driven Mercedes.
‘By the way,’ he said, as if he had almost forgotten to mention it.
‘Remember you said you wanted a better distribution system for KITS?’
Miranda nodded.
‘And you'd like to expand into other countries, where the KITS system is already being copied?…’
Miranda nodded again.
‘It so happens that SUPPLYKITS also needs more cash.
It looks as if we'll be able to buy the Stiebel-Stein mail-order business, so I've been working on ways to raise the money.
As a matter of fact, that's what I came into your office to discuss, you gorgeous mantrap.’
‘Explain,’ Miranda said sleepily, wondering if she'd be able to stay awake until the end of the show.
‘We'll have a rights issue.’
Miranda sat up abruptly.
She knew that if a company issued extra shares to raise more money, the value of the existing shares was diluted.
‘I don't like the idea of further diluting my shareholding,’ she said.
Adam ignored her objection.
‘To raise sufficient capital, we'll probably need a one-for-three issue.’
‘That'll mean issuing one extra share for every three existing shares.
You're telling me that instead of owning all of three oranges, I'll own three quarters of four oranges.’
‘Exactly.
You'll still be worth exactly the same amount, but the company will have more working capital.’
In a worried voice, Miranda asked, ‘Won't a rights issue make SUPPLYKITS more vulnerable to a takeover?’
‘Theoretically, yes, but that's unlikely to happen so long as the company is successful and the shareholders approve of the way it's run.’
Adam patted her knee.
Miranda instinctively pulled away from him.
‘You should remember that very few chief executives of  public companies own a controlling interest in them,’ Adam said patiently.
‘There's no need for you to worry.
Your shareholders have complete confidence in you.
And let's not forget, you're all-important to the company in other ways: you're the chief shareholder and the public image of the firm.’
Miranda sighed.
‘Adam, I do wish you wouldn't spring these things on me when I'm not expecting them.’
‘I'm sorry, darling.
I thought you'd be as excited as I am by the idea.’
He should have stuck to his usual tactics.
When Adam had a document for Miranda to sign that he thought she might argue about, he always included it in a sheaf of other papers he handed to her at the end of the day, when she was exhausted.
He always said that these documents needed immediate decisions.
While she examined the papers, he would distract her attention by asking questions about other matters.
If she queried anything, he blasted her with expertise.
Because she trusted Adam, Miranda allowed herself to be convinced.
On the following afternoon, Miranda went to Eastbourne.
As always, she was depressed by the sight of her grandmother: Elinor lay inert, neatly tucked into her bed, white, frail, and exhausted.
And as always, although she clearly recognized Miranda, Elinor seemed almost too tired to speak.
‘How's Buzz?’
‘She's fine, absolutely fine,’ Miranda said.
She hadn't told her grandmother about Buzz's accident; she did not want to further distress Elinor.
‘Then why doesn't she visit me?’
Elinor asked.
‘She's…back at Saracen,’ Miranda lied.
‘I wish they'd let me have my telephone,’ Elinor whispered.
‘No, darling, not while you're on medication,’ Miranda said sadly.
She then drove to Eastbourne General Hospital.
Buzz lay on a high, black-barred hospital bed, in a pale green room as small as a shoe box.
Pale green pipes writhed around the top and bottom of the walls and in a complicated pattern over the ceiling.
Buzz took off her radio earphones.
‘You're a good girl, coming to visit your old Buzz.
I been looking forward to this all day.
A pink azalea!
Wicked extravagance, you naughty girl!’
‘And I've brought this bedjacket from Annabel.’
‘Pink marabou!
I'll feel like a blooming film star!’
‘Can't they give you a prettier room?’
Miranda asked as she contrasted Elinor's luxury to this austere little cubicle, the best that Eastbourne General could offer.
‘Now don't you make a fuss, Miranda,’ Buzz admonished.
She added carefully, ‘Have you visited your gran?
Why can't I phone her?’
‘They still want her to rest.
They took away the telephone after Gran tried to telephone Buckingham Palace to complain to the Queen.’
‘They're pumping so much rubbish into her!
Half the time, Nell don't know what she's doing!
You should take her away from that place, my girl!
Get her to the London Clinic and see what another doctor says.’
Miranda looked away.
If she mentioned paranoia, Buzz would insist that Elinor was the victim of a lot of quacks.
Buzz's views on psychiatry were well known: psychiatrists were ‘trick-cyclists’, not to be taken seriously, people who said that grown men were in love with their mothers: disgusting.
Gently Miranda said, ‘I'm sure Gran's in the best place, for the time being.
We mustn't interfere with her treatment.’
‘Treatment!’
Buzz snorted.
She wondered why strong-willed Miranda was going along with what Adam wanted.
Because she was, Buzz couldn't confide in her.
So she  couldn't rescue Elinor until she left Eastbourne General.
She couldn't even write to her, lest her letters be opened by that two-faced ugly bitch of a matron.
In the thirties-style luxury of the Savoy Grill, Adam chose expensive wines to accompany the meal — Colchester oysters, foie gras, and porterhouse steak — chosen by his guest, Alistair Stacey-Cripps, a former schoolfriend, now a stockbroker.
When the wine steward left, Adam's guest continued, ‘At midday, the share price was forty-six shillings, which makes the value of SUPPLYKITS three million pounds.’
Adam nodded.
We're offering the new one-for-threes to existing shareholders at a discount of eight per cent.’
‘You're sure that Miranda won't want to take up her rights issue?’
‘Positive.’
Recently the trust had refused Miranda's request for a new plane and an extension to her house.
Thinking of that, Adam added, ‘In fact, she'll be delighted to sell them.’
‘And you're sure that this Bermuda company controlled by you will lend me the half-million pounds in cash to buy these shares, at no interest?’
‘Absolutely certain.
Later, you'll sell them to me — at sixpence profit to yourself.’
‘After you've notified,’ Alistair reminded Adam.
Although not a legal obligation, the director of a public company was supposed to notify the chairman before he dealt in company shares.
‘I must get this absolutely clear,’ he went on.
‘Miranda currently holds sixty per cent of the shares, you hold fifteen per cent, and twenty-five per cent are held by the public.
But if we go ahead as planned, then Miranda will own forty-five per cent— a minority holding — and after acquiring her shares, and taking up your rights issue,you will own thirty per cent .’
Adam tasted the wine and nodded.
The waiter carefully poured the ‘45 Chateau Margaux.
Alistair said, ‘And then you want me quickly to buy as many publicly held shares as possible.’
Adam nodded again.
‘Funds will be made available as you require them.’
‘By this same Bermuda company?’
Alistair asked.
Adam nodded a third time.
‘You realize, Adam, that I'm legally obliged to inform SUPPLYKITS of my acquired shareholding?’
‘If anyone asks at some later date, you can claim some oversight in your office administration.
If you produce a copy letter from your files, then it will look as if you did inform the company.
Letters are often lost in the post.’
‘A wonderful claret,’ Alistair said.
He lifted his glass.
‘Here's to your controlling interest.’
TUESDAY, 7 MAY 1968
In the library of his apartment, Adam sipped a pure Highland malt whisky as he waited.
Eventually Alistair telephoned.
‘I've bought a further sixteen per cent of SUPPLYKITS.
So you now control forty-six per cent, which is one per cent more than Miranda holds.
I couldn't buy more because the price is shooting up — too much buying.
Closing price was sixty shillings, which values the company at five point one million pounds.’
‘Good.
How much did the shares cost?’
‘One million four hundred and sixty-one thousand one hundred and fifty pounds.’
‘Then you made a decent profit, Alistair,’ Adam reminded him.
Alistair couldn't resist asking, ‘Didn't Miranda smell a rat?’
‘Alistair, Miranda is extremely happy: her shares have  shot up in value and are now worth well over two million pounds.’
In fact, that afternoon, Miranda had been worried by the swift rise in share price; she had asked Adam whether he thought anyone might be buying with a view to a takeover bid.
Adam had laughed and told her not to be dramatic.
They could expect takeover bids when the company was more firmly established, but not when it was still learning to walk.
As Adam replaced the telephone, his guest was announced — a small, mild-looking, bald man who looked at least fifteen years older than his actual age of thirty-five.
‘Hello, Paul,’ Adam said.
‘Have a good trip?’
‘Not bad.
Weak whisky, please.’
Paul Littlejohn settled himself carefully on the sofa.
‘How is Mrs O'Dare?’
‘I'm sorry to say she's still alive,’ Adam said.
‘But not for much longer.
I've made it clear to Craig-Dunlop that the family doesn't want her life prolonged, for religious reasons.
He got the message: an enormous bonus when she dies, removal to some other nursing home if she doesn't.’
‘Her death no longer matters.
I'm virtually in control of the trust now.
You're legally responsible for nothing, Adam.’
Littlejohn shrugged his shoulders.
‘And our actions can't be legally queried under Bermuda law, British law, or any other law.’
Adam smiled.
‘What's the income situation?’
‘All book royalties have been received; two per cent has been deducted by my firm — the agreed management fee.
The remainder was immediately sent on to the appropriate numbered Swiss account.’
‘And the transfer of the capital — how's that proceeding?’
The capital was the bulk of the fortune.
‘Ah, that has to be done more slowly.
and cautiously.’
Paul Littlejohn sipped his whisky.
‘The shares have all  been sold and cash lodged in various banks, according to your instructions.
However, I can't just ship it all — in one huge transfer-to Switzerland.
If I did that, there would be nasty questions from the Bermuda authorities when the sisters discover that the money's gone.’
‘Leave the authorities to me.’
Littlejohn lifted a hand of caution.
‘As I'm going to be blamed, I must be cautious.’
‘You're being paid a bloody fortune for being blamed.
Is everything else going according to plan?’
Littlejohn nodded.
‘The funds are currently being invested in our bogus companies; their value will fall dramatically over the next six months.’
‘Good!’
‘But I'm warning you, Adam, I'll have to leave something in the Dove Trust — a bit over fifteen per cent— or I can't justify what I've done.’
‘I don't see why you can't empty the account.’
‘There's nothing wrong with choosing the wrong investments,’ said Paul Littlejohn carefully.
‘Nobody can see into the future, and all stock exchange investment is a gamble.
But if we don't leave something in the till, it will be spotted as a cheeky scam, and bribery or not, I won't get away with it.’
Adam thought briefly.
‘If they're going to keep fifteen per cent, then I'm going to stop showering money on those bitches — in fact, I've already started to cut back.
And I'll sell that bloody great château as fast as possible.’
‘Don't be too greedy,’ Littlejohn cautioned.
‘We can't afford an official inquiry during the next year.
It's the only thing that worries me.
During that time, we just can't risk having our moves queried.
You will have to keep the sisters quiet — I don't care how you do it.’
‘Leave them to me too,’ Adam said confidently.
‘I'll keep them quiet.
You move the money into those Swiss accounts — the faster, the better!’
Paul Littlejohn nodded.
Without being told, he knew that as fast as the payments were made into five Swiss bank accounts, the money was transferred into five different accounts — the numbers of which were known only to Adam.
THURSDAY, 23 MAY 1968
Adam sat at his usual lunchtime table in the Savoy Grill the one discreetly opposite the main entrance, so that without seeming to do so, he saw everyone who entered the restaurant.
Eating quail's eggs, he frowned as he reread the letter from Lloyd's: it warned him of the amount that he would shortly be expected to produce in settlement.
He looked up as the lean figure of his guest approached.
Then he shoved the letter in his jacket pocket and stood.
‘Good to see you, Scott.’
Scott Svenson wore blue jeans and jacket over a navy T-shirt and a wide, striped kipper tie, which looked ridiculous.
The tie had been loaned by the headwaiter; unless male guests wore a tie, they were not allowed in the Grill.
Scott sat down.
‘Hi, Adam!’
He noticed that Adam's appearance was unchanged.
While all around him, men wore their hair at shoulder length and sported gold chain necklaces, frilled pink shirts, flared-leg hipster trousers, and coloured boots with platform soles, Adam had remained carefully traditional.
Scott would bet that he had never worn the snakeskin overcoat Annabel had given him the Christmas before.
Spurning the menu, Scott said, ‘I'll eat whatever you're eating, Adam, plus a glass of milk.
I've a heavy afternoon ahead, and I'm off to Paris tomorrow — by parachute if they can't get me in by any other method.
I'm covering the riots.’
‘You lead a more exciting life than I, I'm glad to say.’
‘It isn't so easy.’
Scott's network job was taking up more time and concentration than he'd expected.
‘Nothing ever is.’
‘I really wanted to see you on behalf of Annabel,’ Scott said.
‘Has something come up?’
I saw her briefly only two weeks ago.
She was on her way to visit Buzz.’
Just before Buzz was due to leave the hospital, the pin in her hip had worked loose, and a total hip replacement had been necessary.
Scott's speckled green and gold eyes looked speculatively at Adam.
He said, ‘Annabel doesn't understand why the trustees originally allowed her large sums of money but are now refusing relatively small sums.’
Adam sipped his wine.
‘Initially the money on deposit was distributed between Annabel and Miranda.
Having emptied the honey-pot, I understand that the trustees are now allowing the income to build up again before further distributions.’
As steak-and-kidney pie was placed before them, Adam added, ‘In addition, the trust has to pay Elinor's very heavy medical expenses.’
He sniffed the dish of peas.
‘Good, cooked in fresh mint.
As you know, Scott, I don't control the Dove Trust, but if Annabel needs extra funds, then I would be happy to suggest further payments.’
‘Annabel would prefer a modest regular income to occasional lump sums,’ Scott said.
‘And if you don't control the trust, Adam, then it's time we knew who does.
We want to know everything about the Dove Trust and its officers.
We want to understand the structure, the aims, the obligations.
We want to know precisely what funds the trust handles, where those funds are, and what regular income might be expected from the capital sum.’
Adam helped himself to peas.
‘I thought Annabel already had that information — although, of course, there's no legal reason why she should.
The trust is run like any other  business, with annual accounts prepared by qualified accountants — although, again, that isn't legally necessary.
I understand the final accounts for 1967 were signed last week.
I'll see that a copy is sent to Annabel.’
‘Are accounts produced only once a year?’
‘That's the usual procedure.’
Adam decided to stall for time.
He didn't want this newsman poking his nose into the trust.
‘If you like, Scott, I could suggest quarterly accounts, although that's an expensive business.’
‘That's what I intended to ask you.’
‘Then I shall arrange it,’ said Adam, who had no intention of producing quarterly accounts for this inquisitive journalist.
He decided to arrange that a large monthly income be paid to Annabel until next May: that should shut her up.
Similar sums would also have to be paid to Miranda, blast it, for very quickly she would learn of Annabel's new income.
Still, lose a lure to catch a mackerel — or, in this case, a whale.
But Scott could stir up a lot of trouble before next May.
Something would have to be done about Scott.
That evening, having explained that the best place to enjoy a peach was in the bath, Adam fed one slowly to Miranda.
The mirrored walls and ceiling of her large bathroom reflected the room to infinity.
In spite of a complicated lighting system, only one candle flickered in an antique silver candlestick.
In the warm water of the square, sunken marble tub, Adam lay beside Miranda; he soaped her body as though she were a royal baby.
Dreamy and passive, she lay in the scented water and gave in to Adam's sensual massage.
They listened to the Beatles on Miranda's new stereo; the magical mystery of ‘Strawberry Fields Forever’ reminded her of her grandmother, so lonely, isolated, and unreachable in the prison of her own head.
Sharply Miranda diverted her thoughts: she did not want to plunge again into pointless depression.
‘Where did Scott take you to dinner?’
Adam asked.
‘That new Italian place in the King's Road,’ Miranda murmured.
‘Why is it that pansies seem to run the best restaurants?’
‘The queers are all coming out of the closet after last year's legislation,’ Adam said.
Homosexual acts between adult men were now legal in Britain.
‘What was the restaurant like?’
‘The usual Italian thing.
Vaulted ceilings, everything white, one perfect flower spotlit in the centre of each table, impeccable fettuccine primavera.’
‘Did Scott have anything interesting to say?’
‘He was a bit too earnest to be amusing.’
Miranda gently splashed scented water at Adam.
‘As a matter of fact, Scott spent most of the first course warning me against you.
He wants me to visit STG and find out more about the trust.’
‘The trust no longer has anything to do with STG,’ Adam said, hiding his annoyance as he soaped Miranda's sort right underarm.
‘And you saw the trust accounts for last year, remember?’
Adam turned his attention to Miranda's other tender places and casually added, ‘Perhaps you'd better give Annabel a call, to reassure her that you're keeping a watchful eye on the accounts.
Explain again that trustees are very careful with somebody else's money…
That reminds me, did I tell you that the trustees have turned down a request from Annabel?’
‘No,’ Miranda said.
‘What for?’
‘She wanted a large sum of money to fund some project at the Bronx Zoo.
Unfortunately, this request didn't come within the trust beneficiary limits.
I expect that's what's behind Scott's concern.’
‘The trust was absolutely correct to say no,’ Miranda agreed.
Then she added, carefully casual: ‘What I'd really  like to talk to Annabel about is us.
I'm sure everyone in the office guesses.’
‘Our relationship isn't your secret, it's our secret, and I want it kept secret,’ Adam murmured, his voice smooth but determined.
‘I've never understood why you want to keep it a secret — I wish I did,’ Miranda said, returning to their perennial source of disagreement.
A year ago — and again at Christmas — she had proposed, playfully.
On both occasions, he had laughed the idea of as a charming joke.
Miranda was puzzled and humiliated by Adam's rejection.
He had now been her lover for nearly three years: the physical side of their relationship seemed to be perfect.
Miranda, while not vain, did not suffer from false modesty.
She knew that she was beautiful, although her looks were not as sensational as Annabel's.
She was a perfect size ten at five nine, perhaps a little too tall, but Adam was well over six feet.
Rich and famous, Miranda knew she was also an interesting companion.
Besides, Adam said that he loved her.
At the back of her mind, Miranda heard the ghostly voice of Buzz say, ‘Any Latin lover can say ‘I love you’, but she pushed the thought away, just as she had pushed away other silly possibilities.
Perhaps Adam sought a bride with better status.
If so, Miranda thought sarcastically, Princess Anne would soon be old enough for him.
The only other reason Miranda could think of for her failure to get Adam to the altar was her success; she knew that while many women were attracted to a man by his status, many men saw a successful businesswoman as a direct competitor.
An insecure man, she knew, might not want to be married to someone more powerful than himself.
But Adam was extremely successful in his own right.
So why wouldn't he marry her ?
Knowing that Adam always liked to keep his options open, Miranda was forced to the lonely conclusion that he didn't love her enough to commit himself to her for life.
As is always the case when a person wants something and can't have it, her frustration merely increased her desire.
As he soaped Miranda's back, Adam knew perfectly well that she was about to propose to him again.
But if he tied himself to Miranda, he would have less influence over Annabel, who would then have legitimate reasons to doubt his objectivity.
However, Miranda, who couldn't stand indecision, wasn't the sort of woman to be fobbed off for much longer.
Until he controlled all the money, Adam couldn't risk either sister querying his moves: he needed to placate and control both of them.
So Adam intended, when Miranda asked him, to reassure her by promising to marry her one day .
In fact, if she got too insistent, he might agree to an engagement on…say, February seventh, Miranda's twenty-eighth birthday.
With any luck, the trust funds should be in his hands shortly after that date, at which point he would say goodbye to Britain for ever.
Adam's wet arm lazily reached for another peach.
He said, ‘I can tell you're thinking about something.’
‘You know what I'm thinking about,’ Miranda replied sadly.
‘Well, stop it, or I'll tie you to the bedposts with silk ribbons and do wicked things to you, so you won't be able to think of anything else.’
He slid his hands beneath Miranda's soapy body.
As he caressed the two pale curves of flesh that rose above the water, he decided what to do about Scott.