

PART TWO
Chapter six
August, bloody August, the Sunday afternoon of the year; the suicide hour that lasts a month.
There I was at my bedroom window giddy from David Rosen's ‘sad’ rather than‘bad’news.
Francis, dead?
Drowned in his own pool?
Outside my living day stretched on to poach the night while I cried.
Dead after all this time?
My love, no longer inhibited by his existence, presented itself with all the understanding required to bring us together again — the gentleness, the words, the small gestures that make it possible for one person to reveal himself to another and two people to share life.
We would have come together when his hullabaloo was over.
We were old enough to know what we wanted at last.
That night, the night before I went to David Rosen's office to hear Francis's will, I was woken by a dream.
In this dream I was the invisible observer of the terrace outside Francis's house in the Abacos.
A party was taking place inside.
The feel of its sound decanted through glass doors into the humid Bahamian night.
A white-coated servant placed candles on tables among the bougainvillaea-covered arches.
Two figures were seated in the shadows, unseeable but known, as things are in dreams.
The party emerged from the house on a silent swell of hilarity.
Sleek people accustomed to dealing with idler's sunshine, some of them dancing only to explore a little vulgar love.
Francis was one of those.
He clutched a supple-bodied girl against him to soak her fragility into his ageing frame, and licked her neck, palmed her short bright dress, his fingertips easing into the fold between buttock and thigh.
He fumbled for her zip; a strap fell.
The girl  mouthed entreaty to the other guests who smiled and looked away.
The dress slipped to her narrow hips where it remained supported by his hands, until he raised them and it fell to the floor and her body gleamed naked.
She ran back to the glass doors but Francis barred her way; she ran across the terrace to the balustrade, climbed on to it, poised to dive.
Now he was naked too beside her and making pantomime bows to his guests before launching himself into the night.
The girl stepped back on to the terrace, laughing.
They were all laughing and peering over and down, their heads black against sheet lightning.
Suddenly the terrace was empty and the two came, those from the shadows still unseeable, still known.
Their tangible presence passing over glazed tiles to where Francis had made his dive and they looked over, as the others had done, only they weren't laughing.
Far below, but impossibly detailed, was his crumpled body; his limbs in ghastly akimbo, head tipped back on itself, a stealth of blood staining the white marble of an empty pool.
Even the light of my bedside lamp didn't extinguish that last image so I turned it off, testing the validity of the dawn, and yes, there it was, tomorrow already.
Too late for any more useful sleep, I'd be leaving for London at six to avoid the rush.
just how lonely had he been when it wasn't late and he wasn't drunk?
How lonely?
Don't go, Delia.
Don't leave me this time .
I never did.
I was always there, waiting to be rediscovered.
I'd have joined him in the Abacos if he'd asked me, little holidays from time to time.
He'd have come back, was beginning to; so many years bound us.
He had from me that gift with subtle ties, freedom without complaint; subtle ties and guaranteed disillusion.
He was going to come back.
And now? poor, poor Francis, dead.
David Rosen was short and in his mid-forties, a study in pale human colours with hair and lashes the shade of weak orange squash and fine skin dusted with light freckles which, in certain lights, appeared to oscillate.
When Delia Sutherland arrived punctually the morning after he had telephoned her, Rosen was standing by the door to his office  talking to a junior partner.
She was still a way from him when he stretched out his left hand to grasp hers from a distance.
She would be seated in front of his desk before he allowed himself to be near her; then he would lean against the same side of the desk as she.
All this was strategy he had developed to detract from their discrepancy in height.
They would not exchange a word until they were settled this way.
Over thirteen years, since he had taken over from the retiring senior partner to whom Francis Sutherland originally brought the affairs of Sleet, David Rosen and Delia Sutherland had come to know each other well enough to do without greetings; they liked it that way.
The daylight did not penetrate far into the room where only his desk lamp was lit.
He watched her place handbag and gloves on his desk, help herself to a cigarette.
She had not done that for a long time.
He held a marble lighter towards her and said as she lowered her head to the flame, ‘Filthy, isn't it?’ nodding towards the rain at the window.
She let him scan her face for whatever it was he sought there and said, ‘Yes, but beautiful evenings at home, you know.
The sun's brilliant from six on.
Too late to dry the corn, of course, and get the combines out.
A sort of meteorological ‘up yours’ She grinned at him with deadpan eyes.
‘Still, the last few days've been all right.’
He expelled his laugh in a single breath and was serious again, wanting to study her more, like a doctor, she thought, looking for symptoms, and she allowed him, remembering that this was part of sorrow.
You let people do this sort of thing for their sake.
There she was, hair swept up as usual, mannishness accentuated by a tailored suit, her presence haloed by the only perfume she ever wore, if she wore any at all .
Rosen knew the name of it because it was the same one his mother had used, Arpège.
Of course, Delia Sutherland had personalised it the way women do, in her case with a trace of dog.
She looked powdery, worn out.
‘I'm so sorry, Delia,’ Rosen said, and immediately thought: Blast, remembering her cold reception of his sympathy on the telephone the night before.
He should not have to pretend with her.
‘Well, one is,’ frowning away from him, to return with her expression adjusted.
‘Forecast is brightening up.
With any luck we'll get into pope's Bottom later on today’
‘Good.’
‘Well, it is good.’
Still leaning against her side of his desk he watched her, waiting for something.
‘Do you want any details?’ he asked.
‘Some have filtered through.’
‘He drowned, you say?’
‘Yes.
There were others about.
He dived from a terrace.
Apparently the pool was situated…’
‘I know where the pool was.’
‘Photographs?’
‘No.’
‘You've been there?’
‘Honeymoon.’
‘You never said.’
When he spoke next he was monitoring his voice away from irritation.
‘So you'll know all about it, his dives, the party trick and all?’
‘Yes.’
She did not, but she wanted to be the kind of wife who would have known all the things it would hurt to know, like the circumstances of his pleasure.
‘Well, it seems he dived from the terrace and no one took much notice but he hit his head on the way down.
Unconscious when he reached the water.
It was too late by the time they wondered about him coming up again.’
‘Funny,’ she said.
‘What did you say?’
‘I don't want to know any more.’
‘But, Delia…’
‘Does this have to take very long?’
He faced away from her.
He had been frightened of her, when he first acted for Sleet.
Gradually, during his visits there, he began to tell her how much he had been looking forward to it, and confided how he would remember their ‘walking the policies,(which is what Delia Sutherland called a businesslike like across  her property) and sitting up late at night drinking brandy, discussing plans.
He was the one who had first asked her with rushed ineptitude, despite his having planned the question for months, ‘Are you ever lonely?’
‘Lonely?’
She had repeated it as though the word were a new one.
It was the same question Francis would ask some years later.
‘For a companion?’
Rosen had said.
‘I've got the dogs.’
‘I think I meant a man, Delia.’
Her eyes had prised accuracy from him.
‘Sex, David?
Are we talking stuffingtons?’
He had gulped his brandy.
Rosen went to the window of his office and stood with his back to her, twisting the ring on his little finger.
‘I last drafted Francis's will twelve years ago as per his instructions and he returned it signed, everything in order.’
‘I know.’
This time she did.
‘Do you remember, the three of us discussed it once?
That I felt you should know your position if just such an event as this occurred?’
‘Yes, I do.
And Francis and I have discussed it since then.
We had our talks, David.
We had our times.
There were understandings between us that people didn't guess at.’
It was a childlike boast and made Rosen finally turn while she went on.
‘I was only thinking this morning in bed, that others never really knew what we shared.
No, it wasn't a conventional marriage but we gave each other what a lot of married people don't: freedom.
We were coming back together, you know.
Well, you wouldn't, but we were.
It was only a matter of time.’
‘Really?’
‘Oh yes.’
She tapped and drew on her cigarette.
‘Now then, Delia,’ brisk, all at once, ‘when dealing with Wills the law provides a floor on what's left to a wife.
It's judged in somewhat the same way as a divorce settlement, the same sort of amount.
If the wife is left any amount lower than that floor she can contest and will almost certainly win.’
Delia Sutherland was impatient; he was always this pedantic and  it wasted time.
She dropped her watch lower on her wrist, viewing it discretely, but he saw.
‘Are you listening?’
‘Yes, yes.’
‘Francis has left you well over double what would be regarded as the floor in this case.’
‘I know, David.
I know the Will.’
And now she spoke kindly, in an effort to stop him from trying so hard.
It was just not necessary, all this.
‘Not quite.
Now, Delia, the fact is Francis has a natural son called Leon Kennedy.’
Delia Sutherland stood up, walked to the other side of the room, wiping something from the palm of one hand.
‘I know.’
‘You do?
I see.
Only you've never mentioned him.’
‘No, I've not mentioned visiting the Abacos, I've not mentioned the boy.
What's the matter with you today, David?
What makes you think I should want, or need, to discuss these sorts of things?
So I haven't mentioned him.
Why should I?
He doesn't exist as far as I'm concerned.’
Rosen shut his eyes saying, ‘You take patience, Delia, you do take patience,’ and opened them again.
‘Francis has remembered him in a codicil to his Will drawn up in Nassau.
I've had it a while now, couple of years.
There was an instruction not to open it unless he died.
So I did, at eight-thirty this morning.’
Delia Sutherland moved her scrutiny to the other palm.
‘So he's been remembered.
His mother too, I should hope.
What of it?
I don't begrudge them anything.’
Rosen did not speak right away so Delia Sutherland added, ‘Well, has he?
Has he remembered the mother too?’
‘No.
There's no mention of anything for her.’
‘That's too bad 'cause he should have.
He should have.’
At last Rosen sat down in his desk chair and scratched his forehead.
‘Delia, Francis has left Sleet to this young man.’
With no pause, almost before he had finished, Delia Sutherland was saying, while glancing openly now at her watch as though determining whether or not she had enough time to put him straight, ‘No, no, no.
Give it to me, the codicil.’
She shot out a hand.
He passed her the document and she read it, fast the first time, slowly the second.
Pushing it back on to the desk without taking her eyes from it, she said, ‘I don't quite see.
Clearly it's…what is it?
What does it mean?
Come on, David.’
‘It means Sleet, the house, the farms, the whole estate goes to Leon Kennedy.’
Her gaze drifted past his shoulder to the window.
She moved towards it and stood, staring out.
Pigeons.
Pigeons there on the parapet opposite, squabbling, jostling for position.
One is ousted.
It lifts its wings, flies, circles, returns, and another goes.
The rain had ceased.
‘I think it's going to be a lovely day,’ she said.
‘Combines'll get into pope's Bottom.’
‘Good old pope's Bottom.’
The laugh he tried failed.
‘Quite.’
She came back to her chair, sat down, leant forward.
‘So how do we begin the fight?’
‘We don't.
You can make expensive legal waves, look for caveats, but in the end it'll be the same.
You have shopping malls in Richmond and Clapham.
A development site on the Isle of Dogs, the 1974 Offshore Trust, the 1983 Offshore Trust.’
‘It's not legal for him to inherit.
He's illegitimate and he's not
‘It's perfectly legal.
Francis acknowledged Leon Kennedy as his son, besides which he can leave his property to whom he likes.
Young Mr Kennedy is as British as his father, if he chooses to be, because Francis, as you know, always kept his British citizenship.
There'd be no problem with immigration, particularly since there's little likelihood of him being a drain on the State.’
‘Stop it, I don't want to hear all of this,’ she said, and he rested his head in his hands, only too glad to stop.
‘The point is, Sleet's mine.
It's my home.
My family's home for a hundred and sixty years.
I've never lived anywhere else.
Now come on.
What are we going to do?’
He did not answer and she said, ‘David?’ so softly she might have been waking him.
He pushed on quickly with words in order to forget that tone he had never heard from her before.
‘Francis has allowed for joint occupancy.’
‘What does that mean?’
‘That you can stay on at Sleet as long as you like, but with the new owner, should he wish to take residence there.
Of course it's absurd.
‘Preposterous.
What'll we do?’
His hands performed a meaningless mime masking his face.
‘I'm afraid it can't be a question of ‘we’ any longer.’
‘What do you mean?
You're my lawyer.’
His hands became purposeful, spreading possessively over two of the three thick files in front of him.
‘I'm Sleet's lawyer.’
‘And Sleet's mine.’
‘I'm Francis's trustee and executor.’
‘And Francis is dead.’
‘Precisely.’
From the dark hole of his sleeve he brought forth his cuff, fiddled with the plain gold links, moved the files to the left, the right.
‘There is a conflict here.
I could relinquish my trustee and executorship on the grounds that I think the Will is unfair to you…and I do, Delia, I think it's very unfair.’
‘Fine, do that.’
‘I can't.
I've always believed one must respect the wishes of the dead.
It's a principle.
Francis bought Sleet from your father and now he wants his only child to have it.
If he were alive I'd tell him I think it's unfair.
I've spoken to him in the past about making the place over to you.
I don't know whether he listened to me or not.
I'd suggest to him that at least the place should be yours for life; let the young man have it on your death.
But Francis can't speak for himself any more…’
‘Seems to be doing all right.’
Her voice came out of the dingy light in the far end of the room to where she had retreated again and Rosen had not dared look while delivering this speech.
‘And I am obliged to defend his wishes.’
She did not say anything more so he added in a real voice and proper words, ‘Delia, I have to.’
Far-away sounds revealed themselves, a vacuum cleaner somewhere, a typewriter, water pipes.
‘Have you met him?’ she whispered, close now and watching his face.
‘Kennedy?
No.’
‘He's black, you know.’
She rubbed at a chalk mark on her skirt, brushed her fingers, picked a thread from her sleeve, held it up
Rosen laughed, too much because he was so relieved to have something to laugh at, ‘Oh Delia, you are wonderful…’
‘He's black, I tell you.
His mother was an Exuma girl.
They're the loveliest.
She was a whore in Nassau when Francis found her.
He liked them slender, dark and vulnerable.
And she, well, she was the slenderest, the darkest, the most vulnerable.’
Rosen took a deep breath and, forgetting the rhythm of breathing, held it.
When it did finally rush out, the words, ‘No odds, no odds,’ came too.
Delia Sutherland said vaguely, ‘Not mine?’
Tears filled her eyes as the truth danced before her, but they ebbed without spilling as it danced away again.
‘I did try to be a little of what he wanted, you know, at the beginning.’
She addressed her fingers splayed on the desktop.
‘But it's not in my nature to allow myself to be altered by another.
It's not a safe thing to let happen to you, David.’
‘No.
No, it's not.
You're right.’
She squeezed her temples to dam the source of memory.
‘There were such a lot of women in his life.
When he wasn't flirting with them they flirted with him in front of me.
He didn't resist.’
She finished with surprise in her voice.
‘It hurt, actually.’
David Rosen walked around the desk to where she sat.
He drew her to him, so that her head was near his waist, in a stiff sort of way because she did not give in to the embrace.
He had not expected she would.
He had never seen her like this before and, despite himself, was glad of the moment.
‘About the funeral, Delia.
Would you like me to ask Francis's lawyer out there, Freeman Tucker, to see to it, or would you rather…?’
‘No.
Him.’
‘That'll be all right, I'm sure.
I believe Francis and he were rather good friends.
Shall I tell them you'll be there for it?’
‘Tell them I won't be.’
Without warning she towered to her feet and he found himself  facing into her breasts before stepping back to give her room to pick up gloves and handbag.
She moved so fast to the door he had no time for even one step.
From the door she called, ‘Don't move, David,’ in her usual voice.
He could not see her because the grey London light was all his end with a dab of amber from his desk lamp.
‘I'm so sorry, Delia,’ and, Blast, blast, he thought.
‘Well, of course you are, so sort something out, then, David.
I'll call you later in the week.’
Outside Rosen's office the rain had expired leaving a sheen on the streets.
The sun dazzled in the tarmac, the windshields of cars, shop windows.
It was hard to see and Delia Sutherland walked, sheltering her eyes with the large brown envelope Rosen had given her.
Three times she stopped before reaching Charing Cross, abruptly breaking the current of pedestrians so people stepped around her, glancing, while she said, ‘No…’ and turned back from where she had come, only to turn again, move on.
At the end of a narrow lane leading to the Embankment was a tilting building with ‘Wines from the Wood’ in flaking gold letters arced across its glass.
She was prevented from entering by people surfacing from the cellar bar.
Why so many coming this way when she wanted to go the other?
Was this the end of the lunch hour or the beginning of rush hour?
The day had lost its form.
Not only could she not translate the hour, but the light, the leaves on the trees, the noise of trains and traffic were meaningless.
There was nothing so simple any more as a line of days leading to this one, or another leading away from it.
The attendant of a fuming barrow with a torn awning was snapping his fingers, jerking his head to music in his earphones.
He raised his eyebrows at her and, assuming her stare was an order, flipped open the lid to plunge in tongs.
She watched him draw out a hot dog, place it on a bun.
She did not speak when he raised his eyebrows the second time, so in went onions, mustard and ketchup.
He handed over the oozing affair, wiping his fingers on his sweatshirt with ‘Happiness is a warm pussy’ printed across it, before holding out his palm and facing away, bored.
In the small park near by was an open-air theatre, closed, the deck chairs lined up, each bucketing its share of rain.
Gulls stood one-legged on the umbrella-topped street lamps.
Delia Sutherland sat on a bench, the river view blocked by a public lavatory.
She placed her handbag on the ground between her feet, the hot dog on her lap.
David didn't believe me when I said he was black.
He thought I was lashing about for excuses.
But I saw him.
He was playing around his mother's feet outside the gate of the house in the Abacos.
I was driven through the gate when I first arrived and she was shut out; she and her baby.
I turned round and watched her hoist him on to her hip and harangue with her fist in the air, until the sight of her was dissolved by the dust thrown up behind the car.
She stood with the quality of a wanton twelve year old and must have been, what, seventeen, eighteen?
Sometimes when I've been up early at home walking in the woods and come upon a roe deer close to, motionless, its alarm and scenting has reminded me of her.
A creature all sense and intuition.
Graceful; she was so graceful.
We went there, Francis and I, as part of our protracted honeymoon taken in fits and starts and which, Francis told me, in those days, would go on and on.
We only used the road to the back of the house once, on arrival, otherwise we came and went by boat from the dock.
The second time I saw her was the day after I arrived.
I'd walked into the garden, over tough grass that wasn't grass at all but rough, close-growing weed.
I'd skirted the beds of leathery things bright with bloom and walked the sandy, oleander-lined drive.
We saw each other at the same moment, she on her side of the gate, me on mine.
I probably said good morning.
I would have said that.
She didn't answer.
I never heard her speak to me.
The following day I went again, not to see her but just the way one does in a house with a garden at a given point in the day when there's not much else to do.
I went every day at the same time, in fact, over the period of my short stay.
She was always there and  each time I tried to speak to her.
‘Nice day’ I'd say, ask the baby's name, that sort of thing.
She always had the same reaction: she'd gather her baby close and back away, her hand firmly encircling the little head, pulling it against her breast so he couldn't face me.
I hated the way it made me feel, someone the sight of whom could contaminate, endanger a baby.
When I asked Francis who the girl at the gate was he was easy about it.
‘It's only Jeanne Kennedy, she's all right.’
‘Is she mad?’
I asked.
He laughed and told me she lived in the cabana.
I called her baby the Dust Baby and bought him clothes from a shop in Nassau before I left.
It was early afternoon and she was asleep under a seagrape tree.
Her baby was wide awake, watchful, sitting by the road with that insolently erect posture little ones have.
He was playing with his fist inside a glass jar, banging it on the ground then licking it.
Struck me as a dangerous thing for him to be doing.
He stopped when I approached, stared at me implacably with his yellow eyes.
I could see his flesh was of that dense-celled compactness black people have, quite a different material from ours.
Burrs of hair were scattered on his scalp; they were the same muted colour as his skin, as though he were compounded of the dust he played in.
Only his eyes were different, his brilliant tiger eyes.
His mother remained asleep, with one long arm across her Androsia print dress, a knee drawn up and fallen away, languid.
The column of her neck was weighted to the left by the perfect sphere of her cropped head.
And, coming closer, I could see her features properly.
Her cat's nose was long, flat, progressing to form a finely moulded triangle on her upper lip.
Her cheekbones were like plums under the fabric of her face and her closed eyes had a crescent of natural shade where lid met lid.
The cushion of her mouth stood proud from her face, an inspired afterthought.
She was no muted colour.
Her skin, dry-glistening, was mulberry-black.
Her baby's motionless observance of me observing his mother must have woken her.
She opened her eyes with a remarkable slowness, assimilated my presence.
I put the packet of little clothes beside her like an offering and stood back.
Did I stumble?
Was I  gauche?
Need I wonder?
How I must have looked, the bloody great English lady, agawk.
Her mouth pouted further, if that were possible.
Her cheeks made minute undulations until, without so much as a quiver throughout the rest of her body, she fired a perfectly formed spitball which smacked my lip, swelled, slid down to my mouth.
Before I realised what had hit me, my tongue was out, feeling and retrieving that warm, aerated slime.
I ran away.
I only wanted to be kind to the Dust Baby.
And now?
Good God, and now?
Delia Sutherland blinked out of the heat and white light of the Bahamas into the face of a man with bad weather in his eyes.
His massive head was framed by red hair that met beard spreading to his chest.
He sat down beside her looking hard into her face then her lap.
His fingers with corrugated nails pressed hard, moving north; she felt them separating her thighs through the tweed of her skirt, the rayon of the lining, the nylon of her slip.
‘Can I? he whispered.
‘Can I?’
She frowned her confusion.
‘So I'll just go on, then,’ he said.
‘That's all right, is it?’
She saw the hot dog being borne tenderly from her.
Holding it with both hands the man took a bite, slowly chewing, scrutinising what was left, relishing the decision of where to bite next.
Without raising his eyes from it, he wandered off, guiding with his belly a three-wheeled pram piled high with old newspapers and cardboard.
Delia Sutherland looked down at her skirt stained yellow and red.
Your subconscious knows when it's encountered another who's impinging on your life, your love.
It stands to attention, striking the air with a knowing finger.
Ah, it says, let's see…and it waits while you go on living, telling yourself this peculiar state of suspension is the common sensation of being.
The memory of my encounter with Jeanne Kennedy and how I'd run away remained and I thought it stayed with me from shame.
It was a friend of Francis's who told me the facts, one woman whom I do remember, though not her face.
She was a Gaby Muir, just as Patricia had come to be a Patricia.
It could have been any one of many faces opposite me in a fashionable Italian restaurant, a woman heavily scented, expensively ajingle.
That's all I remember of her, the smell, the sound, the trace-element of spite.
It was the point in our marriage when Francis's absences from England were increasing.
Between zabaglione and coffee she said, ‘Did you ever know about Jeanne Kennedy?’
And I said, ‘Yes,’ because right away I knew what the question was telling me.
‘Oh, so you do, then?
Of course it was over some years back.
I only mention it now because Francis is taking quite an interest in her little boy.
It seems she let him run wild while she got on with her business — hate to think what that was — and he got nabbed by the police.
Set light to a car with a gang of others.
He's only seven.
Francis pulled strings to get him out of trouble and into his old school, St something's…’
‘St Andrew's.’
‘Oh.
You knew?’
‘That he went there.’
‘I see.
So, well, his little boy's going there too.
He'll be one of the first coloureds.
Caused quite a stir, it has, the talk of the Lyford Cay Club.
It won't be easy for him, poor little brute.
I hope you don't mind my telling you, it's only that I thought you ought to know.’
Conscious saluted subconscious.
I asked Francis questions and I'm not sure my nonchalance was feigned.
‘That girl in the Abacos, the one I thought was mad.
Whatever became of her?’
‘She's fine.
Set her up with her own bar in Nassau.
Clever girl.’
‘Her baby, the Dust Baby, is he fine too?’
‘You bet.
He's a bright little person.’
The way he said it.
‘So, he's yours, then?’
But, you see, I asked that question, the final one, the only one that mattered, a long time after.
Because we'd worked over that seam of conversation at infrequent intervals, in exactly the same order.
It was nothing to add a question  one year, and another two years later.
‘He's yours, then?’
‘Oh yes,’ he said, not even bothering to look up from the menu.
We were in Brown's Hotel.
‘The roast's always good here.’
I wanted a baby.
I'd wanted one, too.
So, after all, Francis had been right in his assumption: the problem was mine.
Chapter seven
A green pickup swerved across a field to follow a combine with a tractor and trailer travelling alongside.
Without stopping, the combine disgorged a stream of grain into the trailer.
Delia Sutherland reached to the stack of cans on the seat beside her: it was Tom in the combine and Alec in the tractor; Tom was Heineken, Alec was Lilt or anything soft.
She pulled up and ran after the still-moving combine, grasped the rail with one finger and sprang on to the vertical steps.
The driver opened the door letting out a blast of Bob Marley, ‘No woman, no cry…’, and a fume of the mothballs scattered to prevent mice from chewing the wiring.
‘Thanks,’ he shouted, taking the beer.
She rolled her shirt-sleeves and crouched on the platform shouting back, above the noise of the engine and Marley, ‘I've just been checking the records.
The yield's the highest for three years.’
‘Thought so.
Long time since I've seen such a heavy crop.’
‘Another hour, you reckon, before you're through?’
‘At least.’
‘The forecast said the weather should hold until Tuesday, then more rain.
So when you're finished here take the combine on down to Pope's Bottom ready for the morning.
OK?’
‘All right,’ he grudged, contemplating the hour it would take to drive it there.
She slapped him on the back.
He nodded without taking his eyes from the spiked reel rolling below him.
When she had gone he looked at his watch, and hissed.
Reflected in his side mirror was Delia Sutherland waving two cans above her head; a hand appeared from the cabin of the tractor and she threw them.
Inside her pickup she was oblivious to the harvest dust caking the dashboard, sticking the panel windows open, masking the windscreen except for two fans of clear glass where the wipers reached.
Moving into first gear the knob came off in her hand again.
‘Bloody, bloody foreign cars.’
She threw it aside, grabbed the shaft and forced it in gear.
When a fox bolted towards the hedgerow, the dogs barked furiously.
‘Shut up, dogs,’ she yelled over her shoulder.
It was a gun blast that silenced them.
She stopped beside a man wearing T-shirt, plus fours, cartridge belt, and baseball cap back to front.
He lowered his gun.
‘Did you get it?’
‘Naa.
Got two before dinnertime, though.’
He pushed a can of beer into each pocket.
‘Thanks, I'll have those later.’
‘By the way, I found this on piper's Drive yesterday evening,’ slamming open the back doors of the pickup.
‘Some maniac driver must have hit it.’
She stood back for him to see the roe deer.
‘Looks like.
OK, Mrs S. I'll get rid of it.
Boil it up for the dogs.
Too damaged for the dealer.’
He walked to a battered Land Rover with the carcass slung over his shoulder, its tongue lolling from the tenderly parted mouth.
Delia Sutherland curled her hands deep into her trouser pockets; her keeper loosely cradled his gun.
They remained in convivial silence surveying the field, harsh textured, sore, as far as the lapping wheat, from which, at any moment, a hare might rush, or another fox.
Beyond the hedge untidy maize was bordered on two sides by ploughed soil, speckled white with chalk.
In a further field black-and-white cows grazed in unison.
The terrain went on dipping and rising, a body breathing, spinneys, spires, housing estates and glossy-roofed industry trickling from its folds.
In the distance detail was lost in a scrim of rain.
‘Seen any broods?’ she asked.
‘Plenty of pheasant.
No partridge.
Though I seen partridge up on Cocky Down.’
‘Wonderful.’
‘The birds in Crendal Wood release pen are nice strong ones.
just have to keep the foxes off them now.’
‘I'll get over there later.
Keep your eyes open, then.
They'll be finished here in an hour.’
He did not look at his watch.
He did not have one.
Frank Grimwood did not worry about time.
Ducking her head to left and right Delia Sutherland studied the woodland as she drove through Sleet: softwood plantations bordered by a line of beech.
It was looking clean; the lower branches had been brashed.
She left the pickup door hanging open to examine the first line of trees.
The bark had been stripped away leaving a bright damp patch.
She smacked the wound.
Countless others had the same damage.
Despite the coat of white lead paint at the base, despite the baited traps, still the squirrels ravaged the saplings, doing far more harm than the deer.
She decided on a new campaign, Warfarin this time.
‘Muriel, it's me.’
‘Delia, I didn't recognise your voice.
How are you, my dear?’
‘What are you doing?’
‘I was in the garden.
What else on an evening like this?
It rewards my years of hard work a hundredfold.
Do you remember the dump it was when we first moved in?’
‘Yes.’
‘Would you like me to come over, or would you rather be alone a bit longer?’
‘Do come over, would you?’
Muriel arrived with earth still clinging to her fingers.
They sat in the last of the sun on the morning-room steps.
Since Delia said nothing Muriel began, ‘How was David?
Did it go all right yesterday?’
She was watching Delia's profile.
Her mouth had contracted in a manner Muriel had not seen for years.
Not since the days when Francis used to come to Sleet with his bright flock of friends.
‘He's left Sleet to Leon Kennedy, Muriel.
You know who I mean, don't you?
Of course you do.’
‘Delia?’
Muriel said on several notes, implying it was the wrong type of joke and the wrong time.
‘It's true.’
Muriel's incredulous gasp began with a ‘B’ and went nowhere.
‘It'll be all right, though.’
Delia was squinting across two fields to where a group of deer grazed.
‘Well, it's got to be.
It's your home, for heaven's sake.’
Delia Sutherland smiled.
It was reassuring to hear the protest she herself had made.
‘I know what I've got to do.
What Francis meant me to do.
I've got to buy it back from him, you see.
God knows, he's made me rich enough.
I'll make it all right, you'll see.’
The deer raised their heads, scented, and sped into the woods, the white flashes on their rumps bobbing against the green of the field.
‘He wasn't a straightforward man, Francis.’
‘That he wasn't.’
David Rosen heard nothing from Delia Sutherland.
Even when he failed to ring her later in the week, as she had commanded him to do, once he had sorted life to meet her expectations, she did not ring him.
He knew what she would be doing and why she had not called him.
She would be at home continuing as before.
After all, she was not a realist, not a worldly woman.
She had not accepted it yet.
He contacted Freeman Tucker of Tucker, Higgs and Kelly, the Nassau lawyers.
They confirmed Leon Kennedy had been informed of the Will.
Beyond that there was nothing to say.
There was one hope which Rosen kept to himself and which would only come to light when Kennedy responded.
When Delia Sutherland did at last ring it was three weeks after their meeting and he was proved right.
Her talk was all about the recent fine weather, the record yield, the completion of harvest —all but the linseed.
She even said, ‘The worry is, how'll we better it next year?’ and laughed.
Rosen did not laugh.
He did not want to enter into that precarious optimism.
So when it seemed the conversation was nearly over and, for the first time since he had known her, she appeared to have called for no reason, he was almost relieved to hear her ask, ‘Now then, David, have you heard from him?’
‘Not yet, but he knows the will.’
‘Good.
So it won't be long now.’
Her airy finality bothered him.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, of course it was frightful, the shock, at first.
Driving home, though, I couldn't think why it wasn't worse.
Do you see what I mean?
Why I kept almost forgetting.
Then I understood.
You see, the boy won't want Sleet, David.
It's quite obvious.
I wouldn't in his place.
He'll be a simple island boy.
These, well, these natural children, for want of a better expression, are not at all uncommon over there.
Francis once told me that his father, Scott, had two or three that he knew about.
As for old Wallace Sutherland, well, dozens, by all accounts.
What would a boy like that want with land in England?
No, I assure you, he'll want me to buy him out, which I can easily do.
Then he can be a big noise over there.
Francis understood all of this, of course, or he'd never have done it.
He only did it to, well, I don't really know.
A joke, maybe.
That's what it was.
A little joke to give me a shock.
That's why he made things so I could buy the boy out.
And that's what I'll do.
Simple.’
‘I'll confess to a similar hope, Delia.
But I've made a few enquiries about him, discreetly, of course, from Mr Tucker in Nassau.
‘Simple island boy’ wouldn't seem to cover it.
Did you know he's a graduate from Columbia University?
Sociology?
Well, you wouldn't, but he is.
He finished last year.
He's twenty-five now, Tucker told me, and he's been living with his mother in Nassau.’
‘That's all as may be.
I just don't want it to take too long.
It's an upsetting thing to have hanging about.
I'm sure you understand.
You'll put it to him as soon as possible, won't you?
By the way, you must come down again soon, you know, for a little visit.
I always enjoy your little visits.’
You'll see then, she thought; you'll be reminded of the rightness of me, here.
The unalterable nature of the place, and my presence in it, is obvious to anyone who lives, works or visits.
She had had visions too, during the three weeks since the news.
Visions which confirmed that, of course, she was not only at Sleet, she was Sleet.
Checking the progress of harvest in Dog Trap — seventy-six acres of rich soil thrown among plantations of Norway spruce and  Douglas fir — she strolled to the centre of the field where there was a natural hollow ringed with arabesquing Scots pine.
Down in the sun-filtered green of it were mossy, flat-surfaced rocks, bracken, and a dew pond.
Three people were picnicking by the pond: a young man, a woman and a little girl.
The girl had hair like a charred bush, and was wrestling with a tolerant Labrador, while the other two lounged laughing.
The woman rolled over on to her stomach, reached for a bottle of wine, handed it to the man.
He stroked her fair hair before taking it.
Then he stood, lifted a bright golden saxophone against his body and started to play.
The woman leaned her head, and her hair draped to one side.
The little girl stopped her game with the dog to sit cross legged, attentive.
Delia Sutherland thought: An ugly little thing, that child, peripheral to those lovers, and: Damn, it's me.
The moaning combine in the field, the tractor and trailer with grain trickling from the back of it as it rumbled off to the corn drier, the waving haze of barley still to be cut, these things all fell into shade as the sun clouded over.
But down in the hollow the sunshine remained and so did Delia Sutherland watching her father, her mother, herself.
In New Hope Copse she saw at a distance a man holding the hand of a small child, inclining to her the way adults do when walking with little ones, while his free arm swept the air to possess the oaks, the beeches, the ash.
Delia Sutherland did not need to go nearer to know who they were — apparitions of herself, her father.
No doubt other Caldwells, too, inhabited every shade, every trunk, rabbit hole and rut of Sleet.
She always visited the dairy during afternoon milking.
When she saw Mike in the pit — Mike who had helped her dam the slurry lagoon four years before — attaching a cluster to one of a line of cows, when she slapped the flank of that cow, and shut her eyes to inhale the air loaded with the smell of blood-warm milk, udderwash and cow breath, she was utterly content in the conviction of her seamless permanence.
That was something to have, she told herself, to know precisely where you belong, and to be as essential to that place as it is to you.
Nevertheless, having called Rosen, knowing that Kennedy was  aware of the Will and having had no word from him, was annoying.
There were details to be arranged.
She rang again.
‘David, have you told the man yet, to tell the boy I'll make an offer?’
‘To Mr Kennedy?’
‘Who else?’
‘Yes, I have.
We're still waiting.
Tucker wants to know what's happening about Francis's personal effects.
Do you want to see to those, or what?’
‘I'll think about it.’
Another week passed.
It was purely silly that the whole business could not be arranged more quickly.
‘Well, David?
Has he heard?
Does he know?’
‘Two weeks ago, Delia, I faxed Tucker right after we spoke and rang him again yesterday.
He's passed it on.
Mr Kennedy knows what you'd like to do.’
‘And?’
‘They're ringing me tomorrow afternoon.
I'll call you.’
At five the next day when Delia Sutherland telephoned she was informed that David Rosen was on the other line.
She replaced the receiver but left her hand on it until Rosen rang back.
‘Yes?
Well?’
There was amusement in Rosen's voice which faded immediately after he had said, ‘Good afternoon, Delia.’
‘Exactly.
So?’
‘Tucker's told me that Mr Kennedy doesn't want you to make an offer.
He's not interested in selling Sleet.’
‘That's ridiculous.
He doesn't even know how much yet.
I can pay for it.
Does he know that?’
‘He's adamant.
No offers.’
‘Oh, David, really, that's only because he knows perfectly well he'll sell when we say how much.
We're talking about a great deal of money, after all.’
‘That's not how Tucker made it sound.’
‘That's how it is.
Really.
I know.
I'll speak to the boy myself, then.’
‘He's not a boy, Delia.
He's twenty-five and Tucker said that  he's specifically declined any offers at all, and that he doesn't want contact with you.’
Chuckling as one familiar with her own unalterable flaws she said, ‘No, I don't expect he does.’
After that she sat on the morning-room steps watching the day slide off the face of Old Carrots field.
For the first time that year she sniffed autumn.
Alone in the dining room, having eaten the half-grapefruit set in her place by Curtis, she helped herself from the sideboard to fish pie cooked by Mrs Files.
Later, she watched the Nine o'clock News , shut the dogs in the kennels.
She wound the bracket clock on the letter table in the hall, the marble mantel clock in the serious chill of the ballroom, catching the pendulum, releasing it, listening for the rhythm of ticks stuttering into the vastness.
In the morning room she wound the French clock, the one with love birds entwined on the top of it.
She tried and failed, as always, to synchronise its chimes with the hour.
In the upstairs passage she opened the long case clock, knowing very well it was broken, that the weights had not descended for years and the hands remained at twenty to one.
But this was Thursday evening and that's what she did on Thursday evenings, wound the clocks.
She sat on the edge of her bed for a few minutes, digging dirt from under her nails.
Shortly after ten-thirty she switched off her light.
Nine and a half hours later she rang David Rosen at his home.
‘I'm going over there, David.
I'll sort out Francis's stuff in the Abacos.
And after that I'm going to see the boy myself, make him understand.
We can't go on waiting about like this.’
I must leave all of this awhile.
I must postpone reliving the stages of failure because it's too much, too much for me at once.
You never failed.
Let me tell you now, you didn't.
You had perfect pitch, my love.
Instead I'll describe my hotel room here in Marseille which, although large, is really quite featureless.
The impersonal style suits me.
It'll be easy to leave when the time comes.
When you come.
They call it a suite, that's because there's room for a sofa, I  expect, not a very nice one.
No effort has been made to enhance the room, unless you count three small prints randomly hung on separate walls,Une Baigneuse by Seurat, a Degas of a woman drying her hair and a Bonnard of another woman in a bath.
Someone has specific taste, haven't they?
But this is my dwelling place and has been for nearly four months now.
My goodness, how long it takes to write all this, this life of mine.
Is it all right, I wonder; am I clear?
Will you understand?
I make a point each day of leaving the New York before lunch to walk along the Rue de la République where, fifth on the right, is a fine flower shop.
I always bring something back from there —today it was iris together with something white and richly scented; I asked the girl twice what it was called but couldn't catch what she said — I arrange the flowers in the vase I bought soon after I arrived.
My hotel is a first-floor one on the Vieux Port with narrow stairs leading up to its reception.
There are two windows in my room, three-quarter-length casements with elaborate iron balustrades.
I lean there.
My eyes skip the busy road that sweeps around the head of the port and is divided by a great oval flowerbed, garishly planted.
What I'm watching is the fishmarket on the far side.
I watch it from my seat in the New York as well, which is down below to the right; I can see the top of its maroon awning.
The fishwives pack up at lunchtime.
The trestles supporting shallow wooden trays painted blue, red or yellow, and which have the vendor's name and telephone number roughly inscribed on the front, these are all folded away at about twelve-thirty, until the next day.
By two o'clock there's no sign the market was ever there, except for a residual odour on stiller days.
So, you see, I've entered, as completely as I can, the scene on my postcard; I'm part of it.
I'm here.
I'm not going.
Chapter eight
Delia Sutherland stood in the immigration queue at Nassau Airport.
She wore a safari suit and khaki hat perched on her slipping load of hair.
The unkind brilliance of the tropics depressed her.
She had not liked it before, did not like it now, and the throng of tourists who had also disembarked, wearing baggy floral shorts, trussed with the straps of cameras and rucksacks, was irritating.
So was the welcoming goombay beat pounded out by two drummers and a guitarist at the back of the hall.
Seeing her name on none of the placards paraded outside the customs hall, she retreated to the shade of a wall opposite the terminal.
At last a car drew up.
A fat man alighted and, with the unexpected delicacy of the very fat, nimbled across the road, his belt buckle riding high on his belly.
He entered the terminal building, then returned to stand with one hand on his haunch, the other sheltering his eyes to the right, then the left, where Delia Sutherland was sitting on her suitcase, unaccountably invisible to him.
‘Mr Tucker?
Are you?’ she called, and he swung round, his hand hovering over his oiled, blond hair.
‘Mrs Sutherland.
Mrs Sutherland.’
He spread short arms in greeting, relief then wonder as she rose to her feet.
‘My, my’ he murmured to himself and, bowing, he announced, ‘Freeman Tucker.
Tucker, Higgs and Kelly.
Welcome to The Islands.’
Twenty minutes later the Tucker, Higgs and Kelly Cessna glided off the runway at Grand Bahama Island and tip-tilted one hundred and six miles north to the Abacos, cays where Sutherlands  had dwelt since 1789.
After years of persecution as loyalists in independent America, they had fled their lush Carolina plantation with their slaves, believing the Bahamas to be British, rich and fertile.
All it was was British.
Within years their cotton plants were decimated by a tiny bug and the Sutherlands resigned themselves to a meagre living from farming.
They acquired the skill of boatbuilding; first dinghies and smacks, then sloops, eventually large cargo schooners.
During the Civil War, when the Yankees surrounded the southern ports, the Sutherlands made a fortune running the blockades with war supplies from the British and French, as well as helping the cotton export to flow from the ports of Wilmington, Charleston and Savannah.
They invested their money abroad, avoiding the poverty suffered by most Bahamians when the Civil War ended.
‘So, no more Sutherlands in the Abacos now,’ Tucker shouted above the noise of the plane he was piloting himself.
‘Not now Francis is gone.
Seems a pity, don't you think?’
He was not looking at her, did not see how unaffected she was.
‘It happens with families.
They die out, you know,’ she said without raising her voice or removing her attention from the crowding clouds.
‘You say something, Mrs Sutherland?’
Tucker shoved his earphone aside, creasing up his face to hear better.
She did not turn and he shook his head, presumably on her behalf.
The thirty-minute flight was followed by twenty minutes in a truck to a dilapidated harbour where a black-skinned man hauled himself from a motor boat on to the patched wooden dock.
Tucker called, ‘Hey there.
How are you today?’
‘Hah, Mr Tucker.
I's fine.’
‘Good, good.
Now, this is Mrs Sutherland.’
Shy-eyed, smiling, the boatman passed a hand before his face to remove a veil of sleep.
‘Hah, Mrs Sutherland.
I's fwinky,’ tossing up a grin, sharing a joke about his identity with the sky.
‘How do you do, Fwinky?’
His handshake rippled to her shoulder.
Tucker said, ‘You've worked for Mr Sutherland some years now, haven't you?
Must be five, could be seven, even more.’
The hum of agreement was no confirmation of time.
Tucker confided, ‘Good man, that.
Haitian, you know.
Hard-working, reliable.’
Later, in the boat and shouting again because of the whoosh of water behind them as well as the noise of the engine, Tucker told her, ‘We could've gone round by road but this way you get a better feel.
I've got a small place near by on another cay.
Beautiful, eh?’ levelling stubby fingers with pride at oyster pink sand and casuarina pines shimmying at the sea chambered turquoise and petrol-blue.
She shut her eyes against it all; shut her eyes to open them again on to the harmless horizon.
Tucker saw her do that and decided what kind of a woman he was dealing with.
The coastline crept low, green with intermittent houses, each a different interpretation of the same dream: sea life in the sun.
They all had their own finger of dock with a greater or lesser craft.
Francis Sutherland's dock stretched further and was better kept than the rest.
Tied to it were two speed boats, a smack and a power boat equipped for deep-sea fishing.
Having handed her suitcase up to Tucker, she clambered ashore and retrieved it from him.
She hurried forward with her head down so as not to see the diesel-and-hemp-smelling boathouse where she and Francis had once kissed and kissed; or the two canvas shoes pushed on dock posts to dry and which she was certain had belonged to Francis.
How long had they been drying there now?
He had been dead five weeks.
Still she had not reached the end of the dock.
There was the holding tank to pass yet.
Inside were grouper, dolphin fish, conch, and lobster on the bottom.
From Francis's last trip, were they?
His prey surviving when he hadn't?
A white plastic bag containing two loaves of bread was huddled against one of the last dock posts and she was relieved to see it, something belonging to today, to the living.
Must be Fwinky's, she thought.
Now there was no choice but to raise her eyes and let herself see the house.
The whole building was made of the island pine.
The steep, shingled roof shone in varying shades of grey, and there was the terrace in front.
The pool below was hidden behind imported  rocks.
Before she climbed the wide wooden steps, where a frenzy of bougainvillaea covered the handrails, she looked back down the jetty.
Tucker had remained beside the boat, staring after her, while Fwinky padded barefoot with a petrol can towards the boathouse.
‘Well?’ she shouted.
‘You are coming in, aren't you?’ /
‘Right there.’
He saluted and advanced.
The house was entered from the left into a sheltered deck area running its length and surrounded on three sides by louvred shutters.
There were tawny wicker chairs heaped with cushions.
Three gold-bladed fans in the ceiling stirred limp currents into the air.
When Tucker caught up, Delia Sutherland was standing with her hands up and her back to him, saying, ‘George?
Can it really be?
All this time?’
She stepped forward, brought her hands to her knees, solicitously bending.
‘Speak to me, darling.’
She was addressing a massive and gaudy macaw perched in the corner, side-facing her suspiciously.
He held out a black claw which she stroked.
‘That's right, baby.
So it is you, then.
Well, fancy that.
After all this time.
‘Fat white’, remember?
‘Fat white’, go on.’
The bird cranked out, ‘Fat white lady nobody loves.
Whydu whydu whydu.’
‘That's amazing.
Mr Tucker, this is George; we're old friends.
One forgets how they live on, poor things.’
‘Yes, that's right, we've met often.’
Tucker trilled his fingers self-consciously, embarrassed at having not previously registered that the bird was human.
‘It was Francis's father, apparently, who taught him a lot of tum-te-tum poetry.
He knows another one about Heraclitus being dead, you know.’
At last this difficult woman was animated, and to sustain her Tucker pointed enthusiastically to a cage in the opposite corner.
‘Parrots too, Mrs Sutherland.
Come over here.’
She barely glanced at the bright creatures.
‘Yes, I know, Mr Tucker.
But they're not really people, are they?
Not like George here.’
When Tucker caught himself shrugging apologetically at the  parrots he knew he was out of his depth.
He slung his jacket over his shoulder and, anointing his fingertips in the breast pocket of his shirt, ascended the two shallow steps leading into the main part of the house.
It was one great, shadowed room with bedroom suites flung, at first-floor level, to left and right.
Guests would stay in a cottage in the garden.
All the cooking, eating, living went on under this vaulted ceiling with its skylights, around this central fireplace, on this limestone floor knuckled with the imprints of fossils.
Still caressing George, Delia Sutherland heard Tucker cry, ‘Luney’
‘What?’
She stepped up into the deep cool of the room.
‘Mrs Sutherland, come and meet Luney.
Luney, Mrs Sutherland.’
Tucker was holding his hand towards a still presence and a flare of white at the back of the room near the kitchen area.
Delia Sutherland offered her hand to a young girl in an overall.
She was short, and as dark-skinned as the boatman, which was darker than most of the Bahamians.
The front of her hair was flattened by a battery of pearl clips and left to rise at the back in styrofoam peaks.
She allowed her hand to rest in Delia Sutherland's, whispering to one side, ‘Luney,’ following with a palm stroke to her lips, brushing off the word.
‘How charming.
Now, ‘Luney’.
How do you spell that?’
Swayed by the drawing of her breath, the girl took a moment to dream, then said with a far-off resonance, ‘You don’ spell dat, ma'am, you sez it.’
‘And so I shall.
Thank you, Luney; using the removing of her hat to hide her amusement.
The girl vanished, apparently without movement, to be heard clanking saucepans and chopping.
Delia Sutherland fell on to the cream leather sofa with her arms stretched across the back of it, her legs stiff in front of her, laughing uncontrollably.
‘Oh dear, oh dear, I'm so sorry, Mr Tucker.’
She curled up to tourniquet her laughter.
‘I always did that with them, said the most ludicrous things.’
‘With whom?’
‘With them.
The blacks.
‘You don't spell it, you sez it.’
Perfect.
She's so right.’
She laughed more and Tucker was smiling, intoxicated by the  sound escaping from her, which shook the sofa, reverberated in the rafters and made the parrots screech.
She had steadied herself when Tucker, who was chuckling too, nodded at her.
She heard him say, ‘And you have joy, Mrs Sutherland.’
Her hand went so quickly to cover her profile and her mouth became so taut, he thought she was going to weep with the same energy.
‘Oh no, Mr Tucker,’ she choked.
‘You're quite wrong there.
It's been very hard for years, and now, to be back here, you don't know what it is for me.
Here, where I could've done better, if only I'd understood, if only he'd helped me; if only this, if only that.
God, what am I saying?
I must be very tired.’
He touched her arm.
‘Mrs Sutherland?
I only meant that you have Joy, the gardener.
He works the plot over the road, the Yamacraw.
He's Haitian too, like the rest.
Immigrants, you know.
Life's better for them here when they're lucky enough to get in.
And they don't mind work.
May I take your bag upstairs?’
‘I'm quite all right, thank you.
I know the way.’
He called to her when she was half-way up the open stairway to the bedroom she had shared with Francis; Francis's bedroom.
‘May I say, Mrs Sutherland, that I understand it can't be easy for you?
But that I'm so glad you've come here to see to his personal effects this way?
You see, he was my client, sure, but he was my friend too and it seems right, to me, his wife should be the one to tidy away after him.’
A great bed with a dark carved headboard like an ecclesiastical panel reaching half-way up the wall, a chest of drawers supporting a mirror between brass pillars, a desk dropped open exposing drawers and pigeon holes stuffed with papers: these high-polished, sombre items, out of keeping with the rest of the house, subsided within the airtight hush of the room curtained and shuttered against the light.
Delia Sutherland put down her suitcase and closed herself in there.
It wasn't like entering a room at all.
It was like entering Francis himself, the undead essence of him.
Not the young Francis either, in whom I stood a better hope of experiencing the odd happy  memory, but Francis as I'd last experienced him with the tang of his Lucky Strikes, last night's whisky and dejection all togged up as joie de vivre .
The spirit of his meticulousness was in the pile of freshly laundered shirts and handkerchiefs at the foot of the bed.
It would have been no one 's job to put them away.
Everything in his life had its place; long-sleeved shirts to the left, short-sleeved to the right, belts hung this way, not that, this painting, this woman, this sock, each just so, and only he knew how.
Escaping from under the pillow on the bed was the hem of a caftan, the soft kind he'd slept in all the time I'd known him.
The mirror on the chest was tilted down, reflecting a dish of cuff links, a pencil stub, crushed boarding pass, loose change, the ivory brushes he never used, and the plastic hairbrush he did because it was more effective.
How could I have known that detail?
It's the sort of thing a lover would observe.
Or a loving wife.
I pulled his hair from between its spikes, not so grey as mine.
It smelt dry, of his skin, of his life.
I was rubbing the dusty ball of his hair against my cheek as I turned over papers on the desk.
In his handwriting one of them began:
Darling, darling, Here I am, with you again.
Writing to you is being with you.
The nearest I can at the moment.
That'll change.
We'll have more, much more…
I didn't read on.
That was the way it had always been, my love daring the slightest signal only to find his love was elsewhere.
And who was she these days?
Who had he been making beautiful?
He was reaching out from death to hurt me in the same old way, only this time I didn't have to know.
Later when Tucker was gone I'd be alone to burn every paper there without another glance.
There was a photograph of me — it could not have been taken more than five years before.
In it I was crossing Old Carrots, coming towards the house, a stick in one hand, the other pushed into my hair.
I was clearly alone.
My face had that closed concentration of the solitary walker but I looked happy.
No.
I looked tranquil, contained.
But isn't that the sum of it, happiness?
To think he'd stolen that secret image of me, taken, no doubt, from an  upstairs window with a fancy lens.
In recent years he had often carried cameras with any number of attachments.
Never saw the pictures he took.
Now this one.
As I held it, I knew if I looked over to the bed he'd be there, hands behind his head, stealing, this time, an image of his widow.
‘Hello, Francis,’ I said, to have the sound of my voice ground me.
It made his presence more complete.
I felt the cuffs of the cotton jackets hanging in the cupboard, smoothed the scrupulously scruffy trousers.
I opened his razor in the bathroom to rub the powered residue of his beard in my fingers, and wondered if it was still growing on his dead face.
I held his toothbrush, left-handed the way he'd have done, opened a container of cotton buds, pulled off a length of dental floss, examined a bottle of eardrops.
‘So soon, Mrs Sutherland?’ and, ‘Oh dear.
Here, here, have a drink.’
They lunched in the lilac light of the deck shuttered against the day, slips of sun crossing their faces, the table, the floor.
Delia Sutherland watched the coming and going of Luney's bare feet as she brought the food she had prepared.
Tucker would have liked to say something to amuse Mrs Sutherland.
He was sorry her laughter was gone.
But then why should she laugh, it was a sad business.
‘Sad business.’
‘What?’
‘Too bad.
Man like Francis.
Silly accident.’
‘So he was your friend?
I've often wondered lately who his men friends were.
Are there others?’
‘Not many.
He'd become reclusive.
He'd do the parties now and then as he used to.
He'd get very wild those times, like he was making up for something.
Mainly he was happy to fish.
In fact the night he died, the Saturday, we'd been fishing all day, just the two of us.
It was his birthday and I'd planned this surprise party for him.
The same old crowd, but he'd been seeing much less of them.
I took him off so the house could be got ready and everyone arrive.
We came back to this great reception and the party began.
I think he was pleased.
I like to think he was pleased.’
Was she at the party, the ‘Darling, darling’ of his letter?
Was she someone's wife?
Was writing to her the nearest he could be?
I wouldn't look.
I wouldn't read.
I didn't have to know.
And Tucker was saying, ‘He spent more time in the islands these past years than ever before.
More like his pa did.
Now Scott Sutherland was a big man here, very involved in politics.
But I don't blame Francis not going that road.
It's not so easy any more.
Things are different here since Pindling and all.’
Tucker crossed his short arms, tenderly rocking himself, his own baby.
‘We got fond of each other, Francis and I. He was a generous man, a rare thing these days.
And, like I say, I'm glad it's you sorting the stuff.
As you know, his sister inherits this place.
She lives down in Atlanta and she's way older than Francis, isn't she?
Some fifteen years?
She didn't make the funeral either.
There weren't too many there, to tell the truth.
All those that took his hospitality, where were they, I'd like to ask?
I've seen pictures with him duck-shooting on Andros surrounded by girls in bikinis and all sorts.
But, excuse me, you won't want to know such things.’
That's true, I don't want to know; don't have to know anything I don't want to.
A small fire in the garden will settle the contents of his desk.
‘Is the cemetery near by?’
‘At the top of the hill beyond the town.
He's there with all the Sutherlands.
I've had a fine tomb made, Mrs Sutherland.
You'd be pleased.
I had to pay to have them work as fast as they did, only I didn't want my friend's grave marked with just a cross in the sand for any longer than it had to be.
We could go over if you'd care to.’
‘I'm not ready, Mr Tucker, but thank you for all you've done.
I didn't come to the funeral because I was too angry.
I didn't understand at that point.’
‘Of course, of course .’
Organising a meeting of his fingertips, he peered round them to enquire, ‘Didn't understand what, exactly, Mrs Sutherland?’
‘That Francis expected me to buy Sleet from Leon.’
‘Oh no, that would be a misconception.
That's not how it is.’
‘Forgive me, Mr Tucker, but despite everything I think I understand my husband better than you.’
‘Yes, of course.
However, I'd hoped you'd come over understanding that Leon doesn't wish to sell his property called Sleet.
He's most adamant, Mrs Sutherland.’
‘He won't be when he hears my offer.’
‘It's not the money.
He's a tenacious young man.’
‘Do you know him well?’
‘Got to, over the years.
Francis had me watch over him since he was a kid and his mother couldn't cope.
He got into some trouble down in Jumby Village.’
‘I heard about it.’
‘Did you know his ma asked Francis to take him off her hands when he was seven 'cause she was too busy with the bar?’
‘No.’
‘Well, that's what happened.
I was the one that took him from her and it wasn't a good scene.
I'd never want to have to do that again.
Even though I'd found a fine lady to take care of him.
Aldina Simmonds.
She still lives in Fox Hill.
It's all Nassau.
She was then in her sixties and a fine black church-going lady with a number of boys and girls from similar circumstances.
But you see, Mrs Sutherland, he handled that and being one of the first non-whites at St Andrew's School.
Not easy.
Not easy.
All this makes a boy something.
In Leon's case, tenacious, I'd say.
Vacation time Francis arranged for him to caddy at the Lyford Cay club to keep him out of trouble.
You know it?’
‘Slightly.’
‘Leon's bright, like his ma.
He learned from those guys he caddied for, sophisticated stuff too.
Why, why you know, I've even heard him speak a little French?’
Tucker smiled to himself.
‘He was always a cute kid.
Sad.’
‘Why sad?’
‘Well, excuse me, Mrs Sutherland, but a kid with no ma, no pa but they're both alive, living near by and rich to boot, while some matron, fine though she may be, is paid to take care of him and he works vacations?
I'm not saying it's unusual but it's sad and tough too.’
‘His mother's rich, now?’
‘Big success.
Smart business woman.
Got a club called the Big Bamboo on Wulff Road.
Gambling, dancing.
Named after a famous place that burned down.’
Was it Jeanne?
Was she still the ‘Darling, darling?’
A bonfire.
A bonfire on the beach tonight when it'll be too dark for my eye to catch a few stray words of love.
‘Are you married, Mr Tucker?’
‘Nope.
I'm a solo act.
Broke up with my wife years back.
My daughter visits with her kids, summers.
Kids like it here.’
Delia Sutherland pushed a shutter wide.
The sun hit her face, her throat where her shirt was unbuttoned.
‘I saw her once —Jeanne.’
‘Jeanne?’
He frowned.
‘Oh Turpie.
He always called her Jeanne, didn't he?
I'd forgotten that.
I asked him why he did once and he said it was a more beautiful name.
But Euturpia's nice too, that's her real name.
Doesn't use Jeanne any more.
You don't get too many Exuma girls with a name like Jeanne.’
Tucker broke off some bread, wiped his plate with it, chewing with dainty relish before dabbing his napkin to pursed lips and fluting his fingers.
‘Is she still very lovely?’
Tucker massaged his knees, contemplating the conch salad left in the bowl.
He would have liked some more but it did not seem appropriate.
Not now.
‘She is.’
‘I want to talk to her, Mr Tucker.’
‘It's not a good time, Mrs Sutherland.’
She examined the palm of her hand.
‘Couldn't…’
‘Something the matter there?’ he interrupted.
‘You got some irritation?
Rash, maybe?
It's the heat.
I've a spray that's good.’
‘No.
No thank you.
Couldn't Jeanne, Euturpia, have seen to his stuff?
Why didn't you ask her?’ colouring from her effort at detachment.
‘Why?
Propriety, Mrs Sutherland.
You're the wife.
Besides, she wouldn't.
Not Turpie, not now.’
‘It was you who prepared the codicil to his will?’
Tucker's fingers travelled in search of a resting place and settled for their usual breast pocket.
He made a noise of agreement.
‘It was.’
The wine was half finished, there were mangoes, sapodillas.
He rose from the table forlornly, addressing his attention to the crease on his trouser leg.
‘Mr Tucker, I have to persuade the boy…’
‘Leon, Mrs Sutherland.
He's called Leon.’
‘Leon, to let me buy back Sleet.
Do you know the circumstances?’
‘I am familiar, yes.
Even if he'd change his mind, and he wouldn't, his mother wouldn't like it.
I've talked to her.
She wants it for him.’
‘So she influences him?
They're close?’ /
‘I don't know about close.
They've found each other.
After I took him over to Aldina Simmonds when he was just a tot, Turpie and Leon never met.
That's how she wanted it.
Only last year, when he came back from college, did he go to live with her.
Seventeen years apart, they'd had.
Now she has this fancy residence in Delaporte, big Spanish-style house, built with all her own money, and he's the college graduate.
Like I say, they've found each other.’
Delia Sutherland closed her fingers around the inside of his elbow with a pressure that could have been the overture to an embrace but he knew it was not.
‘Mr Tucker.
I must see Leon.
I have to talk to him.
I want to make him an excellent offer for Sleet, one impossible to refuse.
Where do I find him?’
‘He's not in the islands right now.’
‘He's avoiding me.’
‘Not necessarily but he won't sell, Mrs Sutherland, and like I say, he's not here.’
‘Then I'll see her.
She's a business woman.
I insist you arrange a meeting.’
His eyes trailed from her hand, the penetrating warmth of it, up to where her expression conscripted his obedience.
‘You're some piece of work, Mrs Sutherland, you know that?’
‘Is that ‘yes’?’
He pushed plates aside to lay his briefcase down, clicked it open, clicked it shut again, before descending the wooden stairs to the dock.
‘Mr Tucker?
Is that ‘yes’?’ she shouted after him.
‘That's ‘yes’, Mrs Sutherland,’ stepping away lightly, a balloon in ballet shoes.
At the last minute a sense of something unsaid made her hurry after him.
He was already in the boat.
‘Mr Tucker?
Well, I wanted to say thank you.
I mean, thank you for everything.’
The boatman was untying the guest-line.
‘Fwinky?
Now you will look after Mr Tucker, won't you, Fwinky?’
‘Yes, ma'am.’
That was better.
Yes.
She felt all right now and when Tucker came as close as he could to her, confidentially crooking his finger, she was only too pleased to lean precariously forward over the dock, ear to his lips.
He whispered, ‘The name's Franky, only he has trouble with his ‘r’ s.
The Haitians do, you see?’
In the kitchen Delia Sutherland found matches and Luney, without a word, watched her take them.
She closed the bedroom door, drew open the curtains, folded back the shutters.
The noise of the boat departing with Tucker in it grazed the afternoon silence.
A door slammed downstairs.
She seated herself at the desk.
from the window was the sight of Luney ambling across the garden below, away from the house.
Still watching the retreating figure, she let her fingers drag papers from the six pigeon holes, pull open the small drawers to find more.
Collected under her hands they made a thick pile.
Perhaps they were not all love letters?
Perhaps she was making a mistake?
Her eyes slipped across and down to glimpse any words not covered by her fingers spread over the top page: ‘hours’, ‘be with you’, ‘your name’, ‘love’, ‘last night’.
Before sleep
Darling, darling, Here I am, with you again.
Writing to you is being with you.
The nearest I can at the moment.
That'll change.
We'll have more.
Much more.
I was in Nassau on business today but couldn't keep my mind on it because I'd already decided to come up here tonight and be with you.
When I decide to talk to you this way, my hours are spiked as if we really have a date planned.
I was counting these pages  last night and gave up at forty-two.
I say your name and pretend you're here with me.
I'll ring you tomorrow.
I really will.
Good-night, my love.
Sun up, Tuesday
Been looking at your picture again.
The worn lions of your beauty, fiercer, finer than ever.
I'd like to hold you.
Touch you.
I've done it with other women.
Still do, just sometimes.
It's not a thing with me any more.
I want it to be you.
That's all.
After lunch
I go to buy the bread from Ulrich most days.
Like I did when I was a boy.
I'd take a smack along there and he'd give me a cinnamon cake.
He still does, like there's no change.
Like I'm still a boy.
He was old even then.
I tell him about you.
Why can't I pick up the phone and say, Come on, darling?
I guess because if you said no there'd be no more dreams.
I didn't used to be one to leave dreams be.
Had to make them real.
What happened to me?
Late
I'm weak.
I have to sit down now and then.
Just in the middle of doing something I have to sit down with my mind blank and filling, like a pitcher, with sadness.
I'm frightened of the dark.
I see things that aren't there.
And I'm scared of the light when it comes because I see things that are, like my face getting old.
Sunday
Went to Jeanne last night.
She gave me stuff.
It passes the time.
Makes me feel good for a while, then bad.
It's worth it.
Saw my boy.
He's sometimes in the hall when I pass on the way out.
I say hey, kid, he says hey.
I'd like to know him.
It's like seeing myself in the shadows there, all choked up.
I guess I'll do it.
Get him over.
We'll go fishing.
I have a son.
I have a son.
First thing
I was awake last night and suddenly remembered the time you made me rise early to flight the duck.
And what did we do?
We screwed in the bushes till breakfast.
When I remembered that I panicked.
If I could have forgotten that, even for a while, what else is gone and I don't know?
I pretend you're here.
When I came back from fishing yesterday you were beside me in the lean-to gutting the catch with me.
It's the kind of thing you liked doing when you were here.
The light from the hurricane lamp fell on your hair.
How long since I've seen it loose?
The first time I saw it loose.
The honour of that intimacy.
Few women have anything so remarkable in their armoury.
I remember waking with my face in it the first whole night we spent together.
I opened my eyes into a black web.
I thought: no man has ever slept in her hair before.
I have that and the privilege of her laughter all my life.
Then I fucked up.
Last thing, Friday
The privilege of your laughter.
I wrote that to you once before, in the letter you pretended not to read.
Was it because of my ‘game with fate’, Leon inheriting Sleet if I should die?
Was that what you couldn't face?
I don't think so.
Besides, why should I die, honey?
People don't, especially when they've had enough and wouldn't mind.
He's more likely to die than I am because he loves life, his mother tells me so.
Or did you pretend not to read it because of my invitation to make a real life together?
That's what I believe.
That there may be no hope.
I guess that's what stops me ringing.
But I will one day.
I will be the man I was.
I can still hear your laughter when I said, ‘Who's Patricia?’ and still don't know why it was so funny but, God, you looked fine.
Evening
Today I had four baths to fill in time and I invented you.
We sat with George looking at the sea.
We didn't turn on the lights.
Those stars.
Jesus, the nights here.
All my life and they  still amaze me.
I look up at all those stars and I think: He's one strong sucker, God is, but he sure doesn't give a shit about me.
I want you to know you're not a fantasy for me.
I know you and the value of what we could have shared.
I'm the impotent one.
What does a man do with a woman like you?
I'd send every letter I've written you since we last met if I thought you wouldn't do it to me again, humiliate me again.
Sleet's not good for you, my darling.
You don't know that and you might never know it.
I don't know the day.
I don't know what the day is any more
I rang you just now and you did what you do, not speak.
I listened to you listening till you cut me off.
You're right.
The wound I made in you has healed in an ugly way.
If I opened it up could we take care of the healing together?
Make a better scar?
I'll call again tomorrow.
I'll just pick up the phone and, how'll I begin?
It'll have to be me.
I'll say, Delia?
You'll say, Francis, what is it?
But you'll say it like an accusation.
I'll have to remember that and not be put off.
I'll say, How're things?
Like a signal to let you know I want just to talk.
Fine, you'll say.
You'll be thinking I haven't just rung to talk, that there's a motive.
There will be.
To tell you I want you to come back to me.
That I love you.
I'll wait to say all that till we've talked some more.
You'll say, So how's life?
I'll say, Wonderful, why wouldn't it be?
And then I'll have told a lie, the first, but soon after, because of it, I guess, we'd say goodbye.
Night before my birthday
Fishing with Freeman tomorrow.
That sweet guy.
Plan to go way up by Double Breasted Cay.
I know it's 'cause there's a party planned for my birthday we're going so far.
We'll come back and they'll all be here, all those ones I don't want to see any more.
But Freeman's done it all in friendship, so what would I say?
Luney told me about the party.
She knows it's not a good idea to surprise me.
Not like the old days.
What  if someone made you come?
Only no one knows what that would mean to me so they won't.
But it could happen anyway.
You might be there.
And if you were I'd be so good to you you'd stay.
And the next day I'd say, Let's go see Joy awhile, see what's growing.
You'd like that.
Every day I go to him, pretending you're with me.
And you will be.
Good-night, darling.
Chapter nine
I read throughout the night, glancing at the bed from where, earlier the same day, I had been certain Francis was watching me.
Not any more.
The room was emptied of his essence.
To reconjure it, so palpable when I first entered, I pressed my face into his clothes again and couldn't, couldn't retrieve his scent.
His hairbrush, razor, everything I'd previously touched, had relinquished his identity.
All that remained of him were the words of his confused hopes, swimming on the pages.
The qualities I had cultivated to help me through, such as diligence, such as dignity, such as keeping my peace, had been, after all, weapons which isolated me and made me loathsome.
I had wasted my life and Francis's.
Content with humiliation, satisfied with disappointment, I had been too selfish to reach out.
I heard Luney arrive, heard her talking to Franky and then the boat going away.
The hours expanded in deeper and deeper heat, until the air split and the rain was all but blinding.
I lay down with Francis's caftan in my hands.
Luney didn't disturb me.
Perhaps, accustomed to Francis, she'd become unquestioning about others' ways of life.
There were over a hundred letters covering the two years since our meeting in Brown's.
Some pages were long, illegible, others no more than a line.
Although he'd written that I was not a fantasy for him, he had dreamed me, written me, into a woman far less flawed than I am, or ever could be.
But I would have tried to be anything to have him back and be able to say, Look, I've come.
Late for the party, but I've come.
During the second night a headache forced me to stop reading.
I found a canvas bag in his wardrobe in which I laid the pages, handling them as though they were living and in pain.
As though they were Francis.
And they were.
Opening the door I found the house in darkness.
It was hard to walk, my legs were so cold, although the night was very hot.
At the top of the stairs I thought I was going to be sick and returned stiffly to the bathroom.
Kneeling, with my head bent over the lavatory, it was some time before I realised this sickness was not a thing I could throw up.
I shuffled away and at the bottom of the stairs the back of my hand accidentally knocked the rail, hard.
It was a shock.
I raised my hand to my eyes wondering how I could have hit it so hard.
I banged it again, purposely this time, and again, and again.
I stood there trying to destroy my right hand.
Using the walls for support I made a slow tour of every inch of the building, stopping frequently to squeeze the dizziness from my skull.
No Francis.
No Francis, anywhere.
I knew I was alone now.
That the dead are dead.
When I slumped on to the sofa George acrobated his way to me and I stroked my face against the armour of his feathers, nosed into the softness beneath.
His scent of desiccated sweetness was peculiarly consoling.
Outside on the terrace, at the point from where Francis used to dive, and made the dive that killed him, I looked down into the moon-flecked pool.
I had become a tenant of my own dream.
There was no wind, no movement, but for the dark shapes of the boats breasting the dock.
The vibration of my heavy steps along the jetty shuddered down the poles, swelled in the water.
Through the grimy window of the boathouse a night-light old-mastered Franky's sleeping face.
Back at the house I found a note had been folded into the handle of the screen door.
My derangement had me believing that this, too, could be from Francis.
The letters were lopsided and inaccurately formed:
PLEASE MY BOSS LADY.
AM RONT YOU LUL ME $14,000 GO TO HAITI.
PLEASE MY BOSS LADY ON  MONTE OCTOBRE.
AM RONT YOU LUL ME.
PLEASE TAKE $BY WIKS.
AM RONT SEE MY BEBE.
L.
I had planned to stay only a few days in the Bahamas.
Dealing with Francis's belongings had been a useful excuse, when all I had really wanted was to meet with Leon Kennedy, arrange a conclusive deal.
One which would have left him rich and me in possession of Sleet.
Now I understood Francis's will not to be so simple a matter, also that he had believed I knew about it.
Everything he had done had been in the light of a life he believed we would, one day, share.
I could no longer leave right away.
I wanted to live awhile among those who had been part of his childhood and his last few years.
I would stay to invent him, the way he had invented me.
Late on the afternoon of her third day Delia Sutherland left the house for the first time.
Slowly she walked the oleander-and-silk-cotton-lined drive, out to the road where the seagrape tree, twenty-four years on, had spread its branches low to the dust.
No place there any more for a Jeanne Kennedy, Euturpia, Turpie, to sleep with her baby playing near by.
She crossed over the road in search of Joy in the Yamacraw — fifty acres of fruit trees conjured from blowaway soil.
A track led her through haphazard planting into a clearing where three shacks listed companionably on limestone supports.
Their planking was patched with corrugated iron, their roofs shingled with flattened tin cans.
The window spaces were covered with greasy cheesecloth.
A fence made of tree limbs, a pogo stick, three golf clubs and some broken implements was draped with barbed wire low enough to step over.
Creeper grew out of a wheelless Cadillac raised on blocks.
A toaster, a pram and a hostess trolley, all lay wreathed in weed.
Inside the chicken run — mesh bed bases tied with baling twine — the hens nested in a fridge.
Their soft quibbling, a television muttering from one of the shacks, the buzz of a distant light-aircraft, these sounds were subdued, deferring to the dusk.
A man with skin like an old passion fruit lay asleep under a  butterwood tree, a machete in his loosed grip.
He jumped to his feet, screeching, when Delia Sutherland's shadow fell across him.
His bare, bony chest heaved.
His lower half was engulfed in army-issue shorts held up by one of Francis's old school ties.
He retrieved a cap with ‘Bahamas’ in blue letters on the front, smacked it, dropped it on his head and squinted up.
‘Would you be Joy?’
‘Yeah.
Ah's Joy.
Ah been sleepin'.’
He looked behind confirming that his body had joined him from the ground.
‘When I see you I finks you Zombie.’
‘No, I'm Mrs Sutherland.
How do you do.’
He took her hand while his toothless mouth gaped.
‘Would you show me round, please?
I'd like to see what you're growing here.’
‘Sho, Joy show you.’
He strutted ahead lashing his machete about.
‘Mister Fwancis, he do this with me.
He always like to do it, even when he was little boy.
Look, dem's sapodillas, dem's mammy supporters, limes, mangoes.
Lots a diffwent fwuits.
Ah stays round stop 'em teef de fwuits.’
‘Animals eat them?’
‘No.
Teefs teef 'em if dey don' see Joy.
But Joy always here.
Joy come here for Mr Scott when Fwancis just a little boy.’
‘Over forty years, then?’
‘Mmm.’
Another noncommittal song, as Franky's had been, and she thought: Quite, what can it matter, forty, fifty, who cares?
‘I came here years ago,’ she said.
‘But not for long and I never came over to the Yamacraw.
I didn't know you were here.’
‘But you eats my fwuits.
Lotsa people don't know they eatin' Joy's fwuits.
For a long time Mr Fwancis didn't come but he did lots before he die like that.’
Joy pulled down avocados and sugar apples, offering them in his tortoise-belly palm.
He showed how he planted the young trees in pot-holes where the soil was richer and she saw that after all there was nothing haphazard about the planting; it had the symmetry of necessity.
She bent with him to examine troubled roots, spotted leaves, patchy bark.
When they arrived back at the butterwood where he had been sleeping he showed her a white fungus around its base.
She shook her head.
‘I don't see it coming  on, Joy.
Do you, really?
I think you'll have to expect the worst.’
He shook his head too, and they stood together without speaking.
He touched her arm, beckoning her down to his glittering eyes, and asked in a rattled whisper, ‘Miz Boss Lady, you like see Joy's cock?’ and was nearly knocked over by her abrupt straightening.
‘I don't think so, thank you, Joy.
The fruit'll do nicely.’
‘Joy got fine cock.
Mr Fwancis lul me de money.
I buy 'im.’
‘Fighting cock, you mean?’
His strip of mouth opened but his eyes did the laughing.
‘Dem's good.’
The stench of chicken-dropping choked her as soon as he opened the door to one of the shacks.
Inside were two cockerels in opposite corners, sore, bald things with a vestige of feathers.
When Delia Sutherland entered, they took off, squawking, thrashing the air on a collision course, but crashed in a cloud of dust and straw on reaching the end of their short tethers.
Beneath a haze of cobwebs the walls were painted with clouds, hefty angels and Disney characters.
‘Was this a nursery, joy?’
‘One time.
Mr Scott give shack to Joy when Fwancis come big boy.’
He picked up a cockerel by its feet, stuffing it under his arm.
Outside he allowed her to examine the bird.
‘Cruel business, this cock-fighting.’
‘I jes breeds 'em,’ he told his innocent feet.
‘Oh well, that's all right, then, isn't it?’ she told hers.
‘You've children?’
Joy swiped the air in the same manner as Luney and Franky.
This time she understood it was the drawing not the lifting of a veil.
‘All gone 'way.
Got dish now.
Lotsa channels.’
‘Well, thank you for the fruit.’
‘You come on find Joy 'nother time?’
‘I'll come tomorrow, if I may.’
The following morning she walked towards town along a road tumoured by tree roots.
In half an hour only one small truck passed, a satellite dish rocking in the back.
The town began all at once, with no outskirts; neat lines of  pastel-coloured clapboard bungalows, their garden paths painted to match, each dwelling with its own dish in the yard.
The rows were separated by concrete lanes, toy-town tidy.
The only traffic-bearing road ran between the houses and the waterfront.
Figures rocked on porches, hunched on stoops.
No black faces, only white ones watching her without greeting.
Even between themselves there was no calling, no chat.
These were descendants of humble loyalists, and of the sailors who had accompanied them from America.
The two or three families who had come without money or slaves and who had kept themselves rigorously segregated from the few black people they found already on the island, were still shunning newcomers.
Their energy and physique had been sapped by interbreeding.
Their pale skins were raddled with melanosis.
There was little boat-building any more.
Money was made from fishing and selling tourist junk made in Taiwan.
Delia Sutherland stopped calling her unreturned greetings, tried to ignore the many pairs of sun-tired eyes, slow-moving behind glaucous panes, as they measured her progress past the wooden church, the school, the town hall, the fire house, the inn.
She was stalked by one small girl who was joined by a boy, until, keeping a distance, a group of silent lint-haired children followed.
When she glanced behind they vanished around corners in a bouquet of arms and legs, to peep out at her with drained blue eyes.
The end of town offered nothing but the turn-around, so she struggled over the dunes, through razor-edged grasses.
There was the sea again.
It was restless here on the windward side of this spit of island.
She took off her shoes and paddled.
There were voices in the wind, as there often are — no words, just voices.
When she sat in the dunes brushing the sand from her legs, the voices persisted although now she was sheltered:Go home, go home.
Francis is dead .
No.
Too early.
Too early in the day for this.
She stumbled down the beach.
The voices followed:Go home, go home …
They were not imagined.
The dunes were stippled with the white heads and sore-burnt faces of the children.
Go home, go home, Francis is dead .
Delia Sutherland ran towards town.
Teenagers were gathered on the steps of the one-roomed town hall — big-boned, inactive boys and blonde girls in a twilight between ethereal beauty and over-heavy womanhood.
Save for the tinnitus of a Walkman no noise came from the group, no foot-tapping or nudging, no jokes, flirts or smiles.
Standing in front of them with her hair awry Delia Sutherland panted, ‘Did any of you know my husband?
My husband, Francis Sutherland?
I'm sure you did.
Perhaps you ran errands for him, or went fishing with him?’
Lids were lowered, gazes shifted.
Down left was a boy with cotton-wool hair and eyes too small for his face.
‘Did you know him?’
He slow-motioned his head away.
She had turned and was a few steps off when she stopped.
‘What?
Did someone say something to me?’
‘Past the ‘otel hover there.’
The boy with cotton-wool hair lazily lifted his long arm towards the sea.
Francis used to imitate the Abaconian speech, dropping aitches from where they belonged, slipping them in where they did not.
‘Thank you,’ she said, although what he had said made no sense.
She walked to the harbour.
The heat was intense.
‘Hah, Miz Sutherland.
You ront go back in boat now?
You don’ look too good, Miz Sutherland.’
‘I'm not, Franky.
Not really.
How did you know where I was?’ /
‘Luney sez you's gone so ah comes and ah waits.
Couldn't be nowhere else.’
‘I couldn't really, could I?
Let's go home, Franky.’
When the boat was under way she looked back and there were the children running in the dunes, waving to her like children anywhere.
She waved back and thought: They're right, of course.
He is dead.
No harm in saying so.
And she waved harder still.
When she returned she found Luney crouched, chin in hands, her back against the cooker.
‘What are you doing there, Luney?’
‘Waitin'.’
‘Is there something cooking inside?’
‘No, ma'am.’
‘Then what are you waiting for?’
‘You, ma’ am.’
‘I see.
Come and sit next to me.’
The girl uncurled and slow-stepped towards Delia Sutherland.
She trailed a hand along an imaginary banister, sweeping the other behind where the skirts of a ball-gown would have trailed and was so tangibly created that when she sat down on the sofa Delia Sutherland moved to make room for the folds of that gown.
‘Is it about this, you're waiting?’ holding out the note from the screen door.
‘Mmm.’
‘How old is your baby?’
‘She's three.’
‘How old are you?’
‘Eighteen.’
‘Luney, now you must answer me truthfully, you've nothing to be afraid of.
Nothing will make me angry.
Who is her father, Luney?’
Luney rolled her eyes away, covering them first with lids, then a hand and another hand.
‘Come along, I think I should know.
Don't you?’
Delia Sutherland spoke softly.
‘Is Mr Francis the father of your baby?’
Luney screwed up her face and her laughter squeaked like a party whistle.
‘No, no.
Not Mr Francis, ma'am.
Ma bebe's papa's a minister.’
‘Thank God,’ she said.
‘No, it ain't thank God 'cause he took 'vantage o’ me, my aunt say.’
‘A politician?
From here or Haiti?’
‘From Kansas.
He were a minister of the church.
My aunt, she run a house for them visitin' ministers to Port au Prince.
I'd fix rooms, make 'em nice.
Turn the sheets an’ such.
My aunt show me how to fix things nice.
He were a minister along of his delegation to Haiti.
He were real nice to me till he ront go back an' I had ma bebe.
My aunt keep ma bebe while I go make money some other place.
So I works for Mr Francis.
He give me money see ma bebe.
He always do that.’
‘How often?’ /
‘Each time he go way en monte Octobre.’
‘Do you want to stay here, now Mr Francis isn't here?’
‘Yes, ma'am.
Mr Tucker says I can.
He says ah's needed here.’
‘So you are.
Did you like working for my husband; was he kind?’
‘Sure was, but times he was mighty crazy.
He get so wild, shoutin' an’ screamin' at fings which ain't there.
Luney hide when he like that.
Then I come along and finds him sleepin' on the floor here like a big bebe an' I cover him up.’
She twirled a knob of hair and crooned as though having described a trifling scene.
‘That was kind of you.
I'll make sure you have the money to see your baby.’
‘Yes, ma'am.’
‘Luney, he talked about my coming here, didn't he?’
‘Lots.’
‘What did he say?’
‘That you's beautiful.
You's fine.
And you's comin'.’
This was said with such an earnest effort for accuracy that Delia Sutherland smiled.
‘I see.
Anything else?’
‘He said Luney, when Ma'am Sutherland get here she ront take dat talkin' from you.
Ah laughs and he do too.
He say I have to learn behave myself if you come.
You ain't so bad.
You look sick, ma'am.’
‘I'm sad, Luney, that's what it is,’ and she wished Luney could cover her the way she had Francis, as though she too were like a baby.
Luney crossed the garden to the hut where she slept, nodding and gesturing to inhabitants of her air-drawn world, which was no longer a ball.
Now she was apparently surrounded by children and was patting their make-believe heads.
And why not?
What else should she do while the day expired in this fearful heat?
Then what, when evening came?
She could be with Franky but there was nowhere they could go to eat, drink or dance.
It must have been like that for Euturpia, when she was turned out to the cabana.
And for Francis too, the lonely, empty afternoon followed by similar evenings.
Wasn't Sleet the same if, for once, she was honest?
‘No, my love,’ she said aloud.
‘My love, my love,’ and  was flooded by the days she had called him that.
‘You were never committed here the way I am at Sleet.’
Every afternoon for twelve days Delia Sutherland visited Joy.
Her visit became a ritual, as did her daily walk to town.
There the children never failed to stalk her, calling different messages, some days more friendly, some days less.
Once she heard the chant ‘Lonely lady's husband's dead, Lonely lady's husband's dead…’
On listening harder she became certain the chant was ‘Bony lady's husband's dead’.
That's good, she thought, bony lady, that's me.
She spent hours sorting Francis's quantities of clothing into piles for Franky, Joy and the boys on the town hall stoop.
When she set the boxes in front of the teenagers, drawing out the bright shirts and linen trousers, the girls were the first to come forward.
Only then did the boys stir themselves, to stop the girls from grabbing everything.
They thanked her in quiet voices, told her the clothes were ‘cool’, but no one said they knew Francis.
The city suits and ivory silk dinner jackets she gave to Franky.
In the afternoons she lay on the bed with the canvas bag beside her.
Unable to sleep, night or day, she withdrew the letters at random.
Some she knew by heart.
On the morning of the day before her departure Delia Sutherland was sitting in front of the fruit and toast Luney set daily on the terrace, and which not once had she been able to eat.
Franky was leaning against the boathouse whistling while Luney, a basket in one hand, primping her stiff hair with the other, meandered towards him, chattering in an unfamiliar language.
They would be going off in the boat together because that is what they always did in the mornings, to return in half an hour.
Having accepted this as routine Delia Sutherland was suddenly curious.
Gripping the banister of the wooden steps with both hands, she called to Luney who did not hear.
Her voice was hoarse.
Luney was already stepping into the boat when Franky saw Delia Sutherland half-way down the steps.
‘Hah, Miz Sutherland.
Fine day.’
He waited while, hand over hand on the jetty rail, she made her way towards them.
Such a  different walk from the day she arrived and had carried her own bag into the house.
Nor had she pinned her hair securely; it was beginning to break loose.
When she was very close and could finally be heard, she said, ‘Where are you both going?’
‘Ah's takin' Luney to the bread man.
You wanna come along, Miz Sutherland?’
‘Is he called Ulrich?’
‘Yeah, that's him.’
During the trip the wind finished the business of her hair.
She knew what had happened but could not be bothered to deal with it.
Franky struggled to keep his attention on the way ahead, preferring to nod at her in admiration.
Ulrich Barker's house was along a still band of water broken at the edges by crowding mangroves.
His dock was strewn with beer cans, oil drums, fishing nets.
A sign slipped from its nail read ‘ATTALUS BARKER: BOATS FOR RENT.
GAS.
BREAD.
WATER’.
Stretching up to a paint-peeling house was a patch of watermelons and tomatoes.
The soil around the plants was dark from recent watering.
Two dogs rushed at Delia Sutherland, growling and scattering dust.
She knew she did not have the strength to throw her voice through the stillness so she knelt on one knee.
‘Good boys, steady now.
There's fellows.’
They stopped to feign distraction from another direction, jaws hanging.
A bow-legged fellow in a straw hat watched her approach with his dogs at her side.
His eyes and mouth were diminished by his nose, an overripe fruit in the middle of a face littered with sore patches.
He allowed her, ‘Good morning to you,’ to blister and drop.
‘Are you Ulrich Barker, by any chance?’
‘'S me.’
‘How do you do, I'm Mrs Sutherland.’
His eyes remained set on a point beyond her shoulder.
‘You the Missus of Francis done kill hisself?’
‘Absolutely.
But he didn't.’
‘Die?’
‘Kill himself.
It was an accident.’
‘That so?
You gonna live here now?’
‘I leave tomorrow, I'm afraid.’
At last he pulled his eyes towards her and she rewarded his effort.
‘I would have done, you know.
I would really have tried,’ she insisted to someone he could not see.
‘'E'd been saying ‘ow's you's coming hover.
Coming hover to live.
Guess you couldn't make it before.’
He thought awhile before concluding, ‘Too late now, I guess,’ with the dispassionate perspective of the very old.
He beckoned her into the house.
The room was divided by waist-high partitions into kitchen and two sitting areas, one for himself, one for customers.
A counter was stacked with plastic bags containing loaves.
‘It's bread you want, right?’
‘Yes please.’
‘Cinnamon cakes too, they're good.
Try one.’
He dropped a heavy thing glistening with syrup into her hand.
She bit into it.
‘Certainly is good.
Can I have some?
You knew Francis well, didn't you?’
‘Baked his bread.’
‘Well, there you are, then.
Did he come to you every day?’
‘Most days, poor man, an’ talk about the time he was a boy.
Long time ago now.
Talked about his missus too.’
‘That's me,’ she reminded him.
‘Yes,’ he responded vaguely and she felt less real.
‘Why do you say ‘poor man’?’
‘I say that 'cause he weren't a ‘appy man.
Some his some haint.
He weren't.
Such a sweet, ‘appy kid he was too.’
‘And Jeanne, did you see much of her?’
‘Dunno no Jan.’
‘Euturpia?’
‘Turpie?
Sure thing.
She'd come get the bread back when Willa Mae baked.
Made you laugh, Turpie did.
'Ad names for hall of us.
She'd watch then baptise ‘cordin' to what she saw.
Names fit so well some still ‘ave ‘em, though she haint been round for years.
Willa Mae was ‘Sunny Face’.
Heveryone called ‘er that  ‘fore she died.
Mind you, Turpie weren't halways that polite.
‘I'd give her little one a cinnamon cake.
He loved ‘em.
Hall the kids do.
Gone now, hall of them.
Francis, Turpie.
And she haint got no little boy no more.’
‘Why not?’
‘He growed up.
My boy Hattalus done that too.
He growed.’
‘Is that your son's boat business on the dock?’
‘Was.
He's gone.
Married a Chicago girl.
She couldn't settle.
Kept going off ‘ome, comin' on back.
She'd leave the little one along of Willa Mae and me.
When she was here they'd go out late and leave him then too.
He's sleep hover of us.’
‘Your grandson?’
He checked her face for sincerity before going to the other room, returning with a photograph in a fancy tin frame.
Holding it close to his face between two big hands, speaking to the picture, he said, ‘Sweet child.
We'd give him cakes.
Put him to bed.
I'd collect up the photos and put 'em hon the bed.
He'd look an’ look.
Laugh till he slept.
I'd tell him who they hall was.
They hall look different now, see.
Them as haint dead.
When Willa Mae died Sally went on to Chicago for good, took the boy.
Hattalus went hafter them.
Never came back.
I heard from them once these five years.
They sent me this picture.’
He stroked the glass, reaching through to the living face.
His breath rattled.
‘Miss ‘im, sure do miss ‘im.’
An amen silence.
‘Still, it's hall sent to try us.’
‘You're alone now?’
‘Guess so.’
‘How old are you?’
‘Ninety-four.’
Was she to be sentenced that long?
Later, after she had visited Joy for the last time and he had filled her arms with fruit, as he had on every visit, she made her way to the cemetery.
It was an isolated place exposed to every sand-carrying wind.
Elaborate memorials were sunk in it, urns and angels' faces worn away by it.
Simple graves were almost obliterated, but for the tin cans blown over, stiffly retaining plastic flowers, and the curling photographs in cellophane tacked to  wooden crosses.
Even the newest graves, their flowers still fresh, were misshapen by icing-sugar waves of sand.
Delia Sutherland did not see the children among the headstones.
She was unaware, this time, that they had followed to pick noses and scratch, contemplating her from a dozen hidden places.
The audacious ones stood in full view when she mounted the surrounding steps to a white marble sarcophagus.
She shouted things they could not understand before lying face down covering up the words:
Francis Sutherland Who Fell Asleep In Jesus 8 August 1936 — 8 August 1989 ‘Frail Children of Dust’
The children played hide-and-seek and catch until dark, when they fled past her.
Two grubby quick-bitten fingers reached out to tickle her leg.
She raised herself and saw pale-headed shadows hop-scotching the graves, disappearing through the wrought-iron gate wedged open in sand.
She arranged Joy's fruit where Francis's feet would be inside all that stone and left.
I stayed in the Abacos just over two weeks, waiting for the return of his spirit, to reassure me, give me some indication of the future.
Night after night I sat on the sofa looking out to sea, the way Francis had.
I moved, as I've described, among the people of his childhood, and those, like Luney and Franky, who had cared for him lately.
I didn't sleep at all until, one daybreak, I sank into unconsciousness for several hours.
On waking I found myself unexpectedly, profoundly, homesick.
All I could think of was Sleet without me in the autumn.
The fields would be ploughed and drilled; the cows calving, dropping their loads in secluded corners.
Francis was gone and I remained the woman I always had been.
Like a persistent current, my sorry nature would resume its course.
Franky looked fine in Francis's clothes.
To escort Delia Sutherland to the main harbour he selected a navy pinstriped suit with matching waistcoat.
The trouser hems flapped way above his ankles and bare feet.
From the helm he waved to the world skimming past, to a fisherman in a row boat with a long-legged dog sniffing the air from the prow; to a capsized windsurfer, and three children running on a strip of sand.
All the time he threw away laughter, at one with the day and his life.
‘Fine place, eh, Miz Sutherland?’ he shouted over his shoulder.
She sat on the tool-box, pressing her hat to her head, and looking not this time out to sea but at all that was passing and being left behind.
‘What?’
‘Pity you gotta go so soon.
Next time longer and Fwinky take you fishin'.
Some beautiful place, huh?’
‘Yes, Franky, it's a lovely place.’
He did not hear but saw her smile and was pleased.
When he shut the door of her taxi twenty minutes later he leant in through the window.
‘Next time Fwinky and Boss Lady catch some big fish,’ he whooped, sweeping his arms wide.
‘Thank you, Franky, I'd like that.
Take care of George, won't you, while Luney visits Haiti.’
‘You bet.
Ol' George OK with Fwinky.’
The taxi jerked away before either could speak again.
From the back window she saw him swaggering along the dock, a hand on his hip, throwing keys in the air with insouciant authority.
A perfect imitation of Francis.
Tucker sent the company plane to fly Delia Sutherland to Nassau.
He did not come in person.
There was an evening to pass before the midnight flight to London and, despite Tucker's adamancy that Miss Kennedy wouldn't see her, she taxied to the Big Bamboo on Wulff Road.
‘Are you a member?’
A huge ebony man crossed the worn glitz of the lobby.
‘No.’
‘I'm sorry, members only.’
‘May I become one?’
‘Recommendation only, I'm afraid.
There's a nice place down the road.
I'll point you the way’ He held open the door.
‘Is Miss Kennedy here?’
‘Your name, please?’
‘Mrs Sutherland.’
He bowed, not to her but reviewing their exchange.
‘I'll show you to a table, Mrs Sutherland.’
The thin, conditioned air inside carried smoke, sweat disguised in a hundred bought perfumes and an electronic beat through spangled darkness.
A bar glowed in petrol-blue neon.
Candles bloomed on faces, talking, drinking, kissing.
Dancers, waiters, wandering shapes were countlessly reflected in smoked mirror walls.
The clientele was elegant and mostly black, men in beautifully tailored white suits, well-dressed women.
Delia Sutherland ordered a whisky and waited, uncertain of recognising Miss Kennedy when she came.
An hour passed.
Could she be the one with the little skirt and thigh boots?
The one naked beneath a white chiffon blouse?
Or the languid treble clef at the bar, clasping and reclasping long fingers, who, feeling herself stared at, removed dark glasses to fire hatred?
She was none of these women.
Nor was she in the gaming room with its low lights on green baize tables, circles of hands restless with chips, cards, cigarettes, while the tension adjusted itself with each soft call of the croupiers.
Eventually Delia Sutherland returned to the lobby.
The big man was not there so she opened the only door marked ‘Private’.
Kidskin sofa, a satinwood desk strewn with papers, overturned plastic cups, the surrounding chairs askew.
A trolley was heaped with beer cans and plates of half-eaten burgers.
Lace underwear and a slipper trimmed with marabou lay among the sheets on an open divan.
‘You're wasting your time, Mrs Sutherland.’
The source of the packing-paper voice was hidden by the door.
She closed it and saw, through glass in the far wall, the interior of the club again.
There was a clear view of the table where she had sat for so long.
A woman was leaning, forehead on arm, against the glass, observing the noiseless throng.
A red silk kimono clung around her skeletal ankles.
When the woman turned her head to smoke the cigarette held near her viciously straightened hair, Delia Sutherland said, ‘So you are here.
You were watching me all the time.’
Euturpia Kennedy turned untenanted eyes in a face laid waste; even her lips, emptied of succulence, were hardly there but for the outlined ridge.
‘I watch everyone.
You have to in a place like this, every move they make.’
She crossed the room unsteadily, reached over the desk for a bottle of pills.
‘What do you want, Mrs Sutherland?’
‘You know very well that I want to make an offer to your son.
That I want to buy back Sleet.
Will you please listen to my suggestions, or at least have him meet me?’
‘Forget it.’
‘What about him?
How does he feel?
It would mean a great deal of money.’
‘He's his own man.
He does what he wants.’
‘I don't know if I believe you.
I've been in the Abacos, you know, at the house.’
‘So?’ /
‘You were still friends with Francis, weren't you?’
‘Yes,’ very quickly, to have the confirmation over with.
‘Yes.’
‘What happened to Francis by the end?
I found letters to me.
Some read as though he were losing his mind.’
‘Your husband was lonely, bored, disappointed.
He came to me for stuff to  forget all that.
He wasn't a serious user, but maybe sometimes he got a little crazy.
I wouldn't know.’
A refrigerator buzzed in the corner of the room.
Curious how you couldn't hear the music at all.
Her silk kimono rasped; bright  lacquered seedpods and gold chains around her neck chuckled with every movement.
Was she a serious user?
‘Francis didn't dream he'd die so soon, Miss Kennedy.
He thought he'd grow to be an old man.
Did he tell you he wanted us, him and me, to be together again?’
Their attention locked on each other.
‘Why would your son want Sleet when, if he sold it to me, he could have anything he wanted?
Why leave these islands for somewhere like England?’
‘Because he must get away from this.’
Euturpia Kennedy held up two pills, tossed them into her mouth.
Her hand shook as she filled a paper cup with vodka, drank it, refilled then pointed into the club.
‘And that.
Right?
He doesn't need money.
I made plenty of that.
He needs distance.
A place far off with responsibilities to hold him down.
Somewhere safe.
This isn't safe.
Francis gave that place to Leon and he's going to take it.’
‘But it's not just ‘that place’.
It's my home.’
Euturpia Kennedy's eyes pursued something in Delia Sutherland's expression until, finally, she said, ‘I remember the last time I saw you.
Never will forget.
I was shut out…’
‘Yes, I remember too.’
‘I was shut out my home.
Francis told me to stay in the cabana while you were there 'cause you were his wife.
Never knew he had a wife till then.
I'd been with Francis three years, living in his house, sleeping in his bed, caring for our child.
Even when he wasn't there he'd let me stay on.
Then he shut me out for you.
You who never came but once.
One day I uncovered myself in front of him, stroked my body, my breasts, my ass.
I had some body then.
I said to him, ‘You want that bag of bones more than this, and this and this.’
I called you the Bony Lady.
‘You want that bony lady more than me?’
She bared her shoulder, traced her breasts with her fingertips.
‘Not so good any more, is it, Mrs Sutherland?’
She cradled herself in crossed arms.
‘Francis taught me all kinds of stuff from books and talked to me.
He'd changed my name and changed my head before he tired of me.
But I'd had the taste.
After that nothing's good enough any more.
I wasn't going to be no whore in Nassau.
Yes, he bought me the bar so I'd be quiet and leave him alone like a good girl.’
She beckoned with her finger, dropped her voice.
‘Want to know what I really wanted?
I wanted to be you.
I wanted to be the Bony Lady, and have him love me like he loved you.
Right up to the end I wanted that.
And where were you, lady?
Where were you all the time he wanted you?
And me?
Me?
He gave me nothing.’
Delia Sutherland searched her lap for the offers, the arguments, the good sense.
All she found there were her hands, big blue veins on the backs of them, not pretty at all.
She understood now that any deal would be no more adequate than baby clothes thrown into the shade of a seagrape tree.
‘You have his son, Miss Kennedy.
It's more than I have.’
Euturpia Kennedy closed her eyes, allowed her head to fall far back.
‘Yes, yes.
I have Leon.’
‘But he's away at the moment, so Mr Tucker says.’
‘I think he said that so you'd leave us alone, don't you?
Leon's with me.
Not for much longer but he's with me now.
So would you go, please, and do like Mr Tucker wanted, like we all wanted, leave us alone?’
PART THREE
Chapter ten
‘Well, that's it, then, Mrs Sutherland, I'm retiring.
No more to be said.’
Mrs Files brushed the whole matter from the front of her apron, chasing it down, across and off her lap.
‘My family won't be sorry.
I'm sixty-one as it is and, truth told, I couldn't work for one of them .’
Her vowels turned in the syrup of her West Country accent.
She was seated, with Curtis, before the desk in the morning room.
Before Delia Sutherland could make up her mind about how much to say, and to whom, she was forced into an explanation less than an hour after her return.
Curtis had dropped the Echo on to the dining-room table, where she was drinking her morning coffee, and he remained beside her.
She twisted her head around, up to his face, followed the line of his arm down again, to his hand, to his finger pressed against the newspaper.
She read the headline, ‘ALL CHANGE AT SLEET PARK’, and in smaller letters, ‘Sutherland Son to Inherit’.
Underneath were outline facts about Francis Sutherland, his childless marriage to Delia, and Leon Kennedy's inheriting the estate.
‘How on earth did they get hold of this?’ she exploded.
‘They do, Miss, these paper people.
They telephoned three times while you were away.’
So she asked Curtis and Mrs Files — who had been watching Delia Sutherland's reaction from the service door — to come with her into the morning room where she explained the situation as frankly as possible.
‘It's nothing personal,’ Mrs Files said.
‘I'm sure they're as good as we are but, they're them and we're us.
And that's that.
Don't  expect they'd give a thank you to work for me neither.’
‘I quite understand, Mrs Files.
And as you say, you're past retirement anyway.’
‘All right, then.
It's settled.
But I'd like to say now, it's a shame.
What Mr Sutherland can've been thinking of, I don't know.
There was me thinking the place was yours too.
Then he puts you out like this.
Fancy.
Don't seem right.’
‘No.
Well.’
It was satisfactory that Mrs Files should come to that conclusion.
Curtis had said nothing.
‘Here.’
Mrs Files leant conspiratorially forward, her arm across her knee, glancing round the room before continuing.
‘Is he very, like, though, you know?’
‘The only time I saw him was years ago; he was just a baby with his mother.’
‘And was she, like, very?’
Concluding with a nod intended to provoke disapproving confirmation, wanting Mrs Sutherland to draw on the fund of resentment that must surely be there.
‘I went to see her, actually’ Delia Sutherland mused at the pen she was threading in and out of her fingers.
‘She's terribly ill — her looks are decimated.
It was appalling.’
Dismissing that, Mrs Files pressed on.
‘Yes, but, you know?’
‘What?
Black, Mrs Files?
Dear me.
Yes.
She's black.
Good heavens, I think your plan to retire is for the best; let me know if I can help in any way.
Curtis?
How do you feel?’
His face, paled almost to blue, was crackled with thread veins.
The tremor of his head, which had begun only lately, had grown more distinct during this conversation; starting low and shuttling up as though following a fly on a windowpane.
‘Curtis?’
‘I don't know what to say, Miss.
There are no words.’
Speaking appeared to calm the agitation.
‘I'd thought I wouldn't have to move again, that we'd be all right, you and me, Miss, a few more years yet.
I'm too old to change.
Seventy-one.
It's a bolt.’
‘I'm sure Mr Kennedy'll let you have your old cottage back.
I'll ask Mr Rosen, if you like.’
‘No, Miss.
Too much for me now with the garden and all.
And the memories of Maurice.
I wouldn't want that.’
‘We'll apply for a council flat, then.
Somewhere central.
How would that be?’
She knew he would be friendless, that, beyond the house, the few people who worked in it and herself, there was no one.
‘You'll be all right, Mr Curtis.’
Mrs Files nudged him.
‘I'll come visit, bring along our Auntie Megan.’
‘Not Auntie Megan, thank you, Mrs Files.
See enough of her in the kitchen, as it is,’ nostrils flaring, mouth dipping.
‘I'd be grateful, Miss, if you didn't mention my age to Mr Kennedy.
I'll retire, of course, but I'd like more time to lay my plans.
Besides, I might be of some help settling the young gentleman.’
‘Quite.’
Fair enough, she thought, why shouldn't he work on and ‘settle the young gentleman’?
Nevertheless.
‘All right, then.
I promise I won't mention your age or retirement.
Leave it all to you, as it were.’
‘I'm sorry, Miss Delia.
And Mrs Files has it, it doesn't seem right, the place being taken from you.
Nothing'll be the same.’
‘That's for sure.
There's not much else to tell you except that he could be arriving any time.
I intend to be gone when he does.
I'm looking for a smallholding in the north of Scotland.
Room for a flock of fifty sheep.
That'll keep me quiet.
I've missed having sheep here these last few years.’
She gazed accusingly at the sheepless landscape.
When she turned back again her expression made Mrs Files stand to reach her arm around Delia Sutherland's shoulders.
It was their first embrace in thirty-five years.
‘There, there, my dear, there, there.
It's not right.
Just not right.
Come along, Mr Curtis, I think Mrs Sutherland'd like to be alone for a bit.’
Delia Sutherland gave a short blast on her nose and stuffed the handkerchief back up her sleeve.
‘Thank you, Mrs Files.
I'll be telling the others in the morning.
No need for secrets.’
No need for secrets, so Mrs Files telephoned her daughter straight away, then told Frank Grimwood who came by with four brace of partridge from yesterday's let shoot; who stopped Alec on the tractor with a load of silage behind; who met Tom in the grainstore; who found Mary in the estate office when he went in to fill out his time sheet; who confided in the postman when he came  with the afternoon mail; who amazed Mrs May in Forester's Cottage when he delivered her Freeman's Catalogue and a postcard from her son holidaying in Pouket; who stunned her husband when he came in from the saw mill.
‘Holland, duck, you'll never guess what.’
Less than two hours after her meeting with Mrs Files and Curtis, Delia Sutherland received a call from Muriel Fuller.
‘Delia, what on earth happened out there?
Is it true?
Is it really happening?’
‘You saw the paper, then?’
‘No.
I only arrived from London a minute ago.
I stopped at the garage to fill up a can for the mower.
Steve, you know, Mrs Files's son-in-law, who works there, he told me.
What he actually said, just between you and me, was, ‘A black man's inheriting Sleet.’
I didn't say anything.
What did happen, then?
Surely he's agreed to let you buy it back?’
‘It wasn't exactly…you see, when I was there I found —’ Her stomach contracted and she retched.
‘Stay there.
I'm corning over.’
She arrived within fifteen minutes and found Delia Sutherland in the morning room, with her face pressed into the wing of an armchair.
Muriel held the broad shoulders and was surprised at the strangeness of the proximity, just as she had been surprised at the sight of Delia's loosened hair some weeks before.
‘Come on, tell me.’
‘I've been wrong all the time, Muriel.
I've wasted years and it's too late.
I mattered, you see?
Look.’
She pulled some of the letters from the thigh pocket of her combat trousers.
Muriel read slowly, tapping her mouth with her fingertips.
Twice she removed her eyes from the letter, matching what was written there with the woman in front of her.
When she had finished she stroked the letters back into their creases, muttering to herself, ‘Of course, of course .’
She closed her friend's hand around them and, without letting go, pressed her dry lips very hard against Delia's forehead.
Muriel did not know precisely what she was trying to convey — more than consolation; nothing she could have explained.
Later, to her husband, she said, ‘It's  pathetic, Tom, she's no idea how to love and considers herself unlovable.’
‘Did you speak to him at all, Delia?’
‘No.
There wouldn't have been any point anyway.
He won't sell.
The lawyer described him as ‘tenacious’ and I believe it.
I went to see his mother.
She's very sick, Muriel.
It was horrible to see.
She used to be so lovely’
‘I know, we met her, Tom and I. We went out to stay with Francis, years ago.
It was after you two were, well, less together.
Tom and Francis remained quite friendly until —’ She changed her mind about continuing, which made Delia Sutherland more interested than she had been.
‘Until what?’
‘Something happened.
So what'll you do?’
‘Go.’
‘Good.
I hoped you'd say that.
Things are never so bad when you just let go.
I promise you that, and you'll go before he comes, I hope?’
‘Long before.’
‘I can't see it, you know, him here at Sleet.
I just can't see it working.
However, let's be practical.
What'll you take with you?’
The next morning, when she returned from her early visit to the estate office, Delia Sutherland found Frank Grimwood waiting to speak to her.
‘I haven't had breakfast yet, Frank.
Will you join me?’
‘No thanks, I'll come straight out with it: rumour has it a black's taking over here.’
She eased into her seat behind the desk in the morning room.
So early, so early in the day.
‘Please sit down.’
He would not.
‘Mrs Files gave me some of her talk yesterday.
Then I was down at the Chough last night and everyone was on about it.
Dawn was dishing out the details with the beer.’
‘Dawn?’
‘She's behind the bar there.
Steve, who works at the garage, his girl.
Mrs Files's granddaughter.’
‘I see.’
‘Well?’
Having explained once more she added, ‘I'd intended to tell you all together this afternoon.’
‘It's no good, Mrs S. I'm not working for no black.
One or two of the others feel the same but they can speak for themselves.
I'm giving my notice.’
‘It'll have to be to Mr Rosen, Frank.
Strictly speaking, I've no role here any more.
Are you sure you're wise?
Have you another job?’
‘I'll have to see about that, won't I?
Young Martin's been out of work for a year now, ever since he left school.
He's made sixty-three job applications, and had fifteen interviews.
Nothing.
If those blacks weren't here things would be different.’
‘I don't want to get into that, Frank.’
‘But you are, Mrs S.’ He jabbed a finger at her.
She was startled, confused by his anger and weary too.
With an effort she said, ‘Listen, Frank, and you can pass this on if you want to: I've not given Sleet to Mr Kennedy, nor sold it to him.
It's been taken out of my hands.
There's nothing I can do.
If you feel you can't stay then so be it.
Just think before you make a move, that's all.
I'll do all I can to help.
Now if you'll excuse me.’
Frank Grimwood sat down, watched her making big business of cleaning her spectacles.
‘I'm sorry, Mrs S. Don't suppose you're none too pleased either.’
The spectacles fell from her fingers.
‘So if that's all, Frank.’
She collected papers, set them down, opened a drawer, shut it.
She would not allow him to see her face.
She had wanted to be strong to the end, give no evidence of what this overthrow was doing to her.
And here she was, with Frank Grimwood of all people, shaking so much she could not fix her spectacles on her nose.
His chump hand came down on the desk, giving her a point of focus.
‘Here,’ he said gently.
‘You know that old badger up by Crendle Wood?’
‘Yes?’
Shadow cleared from her features.
‘Yes?’
‘Well, he's pushed his set right on up through Ragge Down.
Come up in the middle of it, he has.
I swear it's the same old boy.
Twenty yards, it must be.’
‘No?
Really?’
She reached for her keys.
‘How wonderful.
Let s go and see.’
The next morning, when Delia Sutherland met the men before work, she was treated to opinion and advice.
‘Don't you settle for it, Mrs S.’‘You should see someone.
Take it to court.’
‘No, but you can see his point, Mr Sutherland's, that is.
After all, it is his son.’
‘What about our jobs?
Will we be all right, d'you think?’
‘What's he like?
Sort of Michael Jackson, is he?’
‘Is he called Sutherland, then, like his dad?’
‘Will his mum come too?
Nightclub owner, fancy.
Can't picture them here, somehow.’
‘What can he know about farming, anyway?’
‘Well, so long as he does know about it that's all that matters.
No offence, Mrs S. Oh sorry.’
She backed away, appalled such details should have been passed around so soon, and that people were confronting her with them.
The imminent change had already stolen her distance; she did not feel safe any more.
There was nothing familiar in this intimacy.
But it wouldn't be long.
Not long and she'd go.
‘Work on,’ was all she could advise them, ‘as though there were no change.
I've no information as to the future.
Nothing's discussed with me any more.
No doubt you'll be receiving letters.
Meanwhile farming won't wait, will it?
So, Alec, I expect you'll finish moving that dung today.
Warren, you and Tom can dehorn the calves.’
The weeks passed into November, December, January.
Everyone worked on ‘as though there were no change’, including Delia Sutherland.
Several times during that period Muriel implored, ‘Aren't you ready to go yet?
Just don't leave it too late, will you?’
At last Delia Sutherland said to Curtis, as he stooped into the dining room with her breakfast coffee, ‘So then, Curtis.
Here it is.
It's happening.
That was Mr Rosen on the telephone.
He's arriving with Mr Kennedy on Sunday evening.’
‘Sunday, Miss?
Sunday?’
His tremor had worsened in the past weeks, a mild oscillation had become a violent jerk of the head.
‘Surely not a Sunday?’
‘I know, I know.
I tried to explain that no one 's really in.
And  there's no need to come in, Curtis.
They can go out for a meal.
So long as their beds are made, don't you think?
Will you get the trunks out?
I'll start packing today.
Off Saturday.’
‘Oh Miss Delia,’ patting around his head and the back of his neck the oven glove he had used to hold the coffee pot.
‘Oh Miss Delia.’
‘Sit down, Curtis, here.’
She pushed a chair behind him and he dropped on to it, sitting forward, gripping the sideboard.
‘Oh Miss Delia.’
‘I won't be taking much.
There's not much I'm allowed to, actually, by the terms of the Trust, but even so…’
She did not go on to explain that to remove anything would be wrong as far as she was concerned.
The least ornament was integral to the whole; anything she took would create a space in the picture of her history, the only thing in her life left intact.
‘We have three days.
More than enough.’
Sunday night and there I was stalking the hall.
My shadow lapped the outside steps because the doors were open letting out the heat, wide open because I hadn't bothered to bolt them, and the side door was open too, creating a through-draught that made the fire smoke and the dogs restless.
They knew something was up even before my car was loaded.
They'd known for weeks and stayed by me, anxious when I was out of sight, whining in the daytime when they never used to.
Curtis had closed that side door twice but I'd found reasons to go back through, the dogs' bowls, checking the padlock on the cellar and, somehow, I didn't bother to shut it.
It didn't seem to matter.
My three trunks were upended in the corner ready for Curtis to send on the train.
‘I'll stay over, give you both dinner,’ I'd told David.
‘It's only civil, after all.’
He wasn't happy about it and extracted my promise not to try, on any account, to negotiate.
Sunday night and there I was.
Headlamps swung into the top of the drive, caught me midway across the hall.
Not here, I thought.
Not here, after all.
I want to be in  the morning room.
He'll see me by the fire, leaning against the mantelpiece, and know how things really are; how they ought to be.
But had I ever done that?
Leant by the mantelpiece?
I called the dogs and they crowded behind me into the morning room, clip-clipping to their place with the chewed blanket and the bones.
I went to mine, the fireplace, the place of possession.
Right away I had to leave it to answer the telephone.
It was the elderly widow of the village-school caretaker, whom the council had tried to evict from the flat that went with her husband's job.
When that failed they attempted an exorbitant rent so I intervened.
She was ringing to say she was settled in a new council bungalow and it was thanks to me.
This was the best of it, I thought; such actions and such responses had justified my life.
I forgot my circumstances talking to her, that I no longer had power to help, that in a few hours I'd be gone, and I said, ‘Of course I'd love to visit you, I'd be honoured.
Goodbye.’
After replacing the receiver I must have said aloud, ‘Bloody bureaucratic bullies,’ because I heard, over the racket the dogs were making, David's voice.
‘Another victory over red tape, Delia?’
Just for one moment I hope they saw, David and the young man next to him, a radiant woman, generous, strong, sure of her place in the world.
I hope they saw that because it wasn't going to last.
‘Delia, may I introduce Leon Kennedy?
Leon, this is Mrs Sutherland.’
How did I see him then?
My impression is overlaid by so many later images.
He was taller than I was.
His wiry hair, so sparse, nondescript when he was an infant, had become thick and dark-brown, russet where the light struck.
His eyes, those tiger eyes, retaining mine from the moment I turned, were the ones I remembered; steady, with no fear, without bravado.
He was not black, nor could he be mistaken for white.
His hairless skin, with a bloom of well-being, was in a territory of its own.
When he moved his head I caught sight of minute areas along his hairline where there was apparently no colour at all, as though the bistre shade of his face were a mask.
Tear it away and he'd be insupportably white.
He had his mother's beauty and strength of feature: straight-bridged nose broadening at the base, below which the line of his upper lip was a  flip of Matisse's brush.
His mouth was wide, beige, blunt-cornered.
What had really locked me over there, kept me rigid, foolish by the telephone, was the way he moved; like an athlete, a dancer, with the ease of one glad to be in the world.
I knew him.
‘How do you do, Mrs Sutherland.’
He held his hand out to me.
The point is, Francis was back.
His spirit had come with his son.
Not one feature was the same, or even similar, but the slide of his identity came and went, coalescing with the presence of this young man.
Behind the movement, within the breath, Francis was there.
‘How do you do…
Leon.’
Then he did a terrible thing.
He touched his eye with the back of his hand.
David Rosen centred himself between the two tall people with his arms raised, a referee weighing his introduction.
Delia Sutherland, having given Kennedy's hand a cursory grip, backed to the fireplace, heels on the fender, gaining two inches.
Her fingers buttoned something at her neck where there was nothing to button.
She dropped her hands, rubbed her bottom, twisted palms out to the fire, delivered him the room with her eyes and chin.
Here it is, our room, a Caldwell room and, very slightly, a Sutherland room.
Everything here has been chosen by us, cared for by us.
She watched him seeing it all, feeling it all, assimilating his surroundings with no fidget or fluster.
He was genially detached, as though brought along to Sleet for no better reason than to admire and be pleasant.
She wanted to say, Now do you understand that it's all mine and always will be?
She smelt the newness of his clothes, his tweed jacket, the soft shirt, the corduroys.
He had tried hard to dress the part, succeeding only in appearing too English.
When she noted this minor failure a peculiar sensation slid inside her, like pity, like an ache resting at a way-station to fear.
‘I suppose you'd like a drink, both of you?’
‘Don't move, Delia.
We'll help ourselves.
Leon?
Anything?’
Rosen crossed towards the drinks trolley but she was there before him.
‘I'll do it, thank you, David.
I'll do it,’ and ‘Shut up, dogs,’over her shoulder.
The dogs, who had sustained monotonous barking at Leon Kennedy since he entered, now submitted to aloof ecstasy as he kneeled to massage their ears.
‘All right, my friends, that's enough, now.’
His voice, though deep, trailed a feminine note.
There was no show in his words to the dogs, he was speaking privately to them in a way she approved of.
Bottle in one hand, glass in the other, she said, ‘So you do like dogs?’ as though the world had told her otherwise.
‘Yeah, I like them.
I have one back home, I mean there, Nassau.’
And she thought: So you're not decided yet, are you?
When he stood up, brushing his hands, the dogs came at him, barking with greater confidence than before, as if they had learnt his secret and wanted to tell.
They would not let him pass.
Delia Sutherland continued preparing a drink.
‘Funny things, aren't they?’ holding it to the light, checking the measure before giving it to Rosen.
‘Place, boys,’ she said without conviction, but they scuttled away, relieved to be let off.
She considered the trolley again.
‘Well, Leon?’
He was still standing.
‘Sit down, for goodness sake.
What do you want, then?
To drink, I mean?’
‘Bourbon would be fine.’
‘Well, I don't have that.
One doesn't much in England, you know.’
‘Scotch and water?’
‘Splendid.’
She watched Rosen feeling for a cuff in his sleeve.
‘Perhaps it would be a good idea to take our drinks upstairs?
Have a bath or change or whatever before dinner?’
Leon Kennedy had just seated himself.
‘You're in North One, Leon.
David, you're East, as usual.’
Leon Kennedy's lips restrained more than a smile.
‘I'll go fetch my bags.’
Near the door he groped in his inside pocket, brought forth a package, held it towards Delia Sutherland.
‘By the way, this is for you.’
‘Me?
Gosh.
What is it?
I say, Arpège.
The very one I wear.
How did you know?’
He gestured to Rosen.
‘Oh, I see.
Well, thank you, Leon, how nice.’
He was on his way out again when she called after him, ‘You'll find Curtis lurking about out there.
He'll show you to North One,’ and crossed her arms saying to Rosen or herself, ‘North One is where Francis slept, so that's all right, isn't it?’
‘He gave me a lighter.
Rather charming.’
‘You don't smoke.’
‘No, but I can light other people's now.
It is nice of you to have stayed to greet him, really.
Sorry if I didn't sound too keen at first.
I just thought it'd be hard for you.
But it'll be OK, won't it?
I imagine you'll be leaving early in the morning?’
While she stared at the floor Rosen continued, ‘I do hope we have time to talk alone before you go.’
There was activity in the hall and Curtis's quavering voice.
‘David?’ she said.
He put his hand on her arm.
‘I mean, Delia, we've had such a long association and a successful one, I'd like to think, well, I don't want to just lose touch.’
‘David?’
She had not removed his hand from her arm, or let her arm fall to make his hand fall too; so he moved his hand to cover hers.
She was still looking at the door.
‘David?’
‘What, Delia?’
‘He doesn't say much, does he?’
An unfamiliar sound came from the hall.
Curtis was laughing.
The dining table, long enough for twenty, was laid with makeshift formality on a damask cloth bulkily folded to cover three places.
There were silver-covered dishes on the sideboard.
Portraits of ancestors covered the walls; their faces advanced and retreated with a pulse in the electric current; a shuffling audience straining to see the play.
Leon Kennedy surveyed them, his attention returning to the one in front of where he sat, a dark, curly-haired man, wearing a red velvet coat and an arrogant smirk.
‘Ah.
There you are, Curtis,’ Delia Sutherland said as he backed through the door with a tray.
‘I take it you've met Mr Kennedy.
No need for introductions?’
‘No, Miss.
And Mr Kennedy was chilled in North One so I've taken…’
‘Seriously, Leon?
Chilled in North One?
There's a bar fire, isn't there?’
‘Curtis kindly brought me another.’
The darkness of his jacket made his eyes even yellower.
Sitting straight, self-contained, his wrists resting on the table, he dipped his head to emphasise certain words.
‘And, say, he was telling me how in your mother's day there were coal fires in every bedroom and how…’
Francis was lingering; he was there, even in Leon's voice.
Delia Sutherland stopped listening.
Her fists mounted on each other, she stared beyond the picnic-patch down the molasses shine of the table.
So here he is, then, walking about, asking for heaters, getting them; hearing the stories.
It's begun.
Please, God, I want it to be over but I don't want the ending.
The candlelight drained her life, stressing dark hollows in her cheeks and eyes; tendrils of hair strayed around her face with shadows of their own.
‘I guess it takes time to adjust.’
Leon Kennedy said it gently, almost an apology.
‘What?
Adjust?
What do you mean, adjust?
I'll never adjust.’
He was leaning imperceptibly towards her.
‘To the cold, Mrs Sutherland.
I'm talking about me and the cold.
Nothing important.’
A smile glided to his mouth.
‘And, say, Curtis was telling me about these things, these weird things.
What are they called, Curtis?’
‘Thermals, sir.’
Leon Kennedy slumped in his chair, laughing, and it came to him with the same elegance as movement.
His laughter bred laughter in Rosen, and even Curtis was unusually breathy going about his business with the plates.
‘We'll help ourselves, thank you, Curtis.’
‘Very well, Miss,’ sharing the pretence that there had actually been an intention to serve them.
While speaking Delia Sutherland had noticed that Rosen was staring at Curtis's feet.
He was wearing bedroom slippers, tartan with pompons on the front, the same as Delia's own, only his had the sides cut out to ventilate bunions.
‘It's Sunday, you see,’ she said  when Curtis had closed the door behind him.
‘Help yourself, Leon,’ indicating the sideboard.
‘Sorry?’
Rosen said.
‘You were looking at his slippers, weren't you?
They're because it's Sunday.
It's his little statement.
He doesn't normally work on Sunday evenings but if anyone does come —’ She paused.
‘As you have —’ another pause.
‘He'll come in to cook because Mrs Files is off and she won't come in.
But he wears his slippers to remind one that he doesn't really have to.’
‘Gosh.
I see.’
‘All right over there?’ she called to Leon Kennedy who was peering into a dish, tilting it towards the light of a portrait above.
‘It'll be kidneys.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Yes.
They go with the slippers on Sundays.
Don't have them if you don't want.
I'll give them to the dogs.
I usually do.’
He returned to his seat and she went on, ‘Anyway, I don't see what's so funny about thermals.
Very useful, they are.
Wear them myself.’
Leon Kennedy passed a hand across his face, drawing off expression and swallowing.
‘You do?
Well, you're going to have to tell me all about that because…because…’
His voice was spiralling up to laughter.
‘Thermals, thermals.
I'm sorry, but I just can't get over it.
It just sounds so silly.
Say, Curtis is great, David.
Just as you said.
He's cool.’
‘So you've been describing us, have you, David?
That's nice,’ adding before Rosen could answer, ‘More new clothes, Leon?’
She touched the fold of hair at the back of her head.
‘Who, me?’
Leon Kennedy turned his fork on himself.
‘Yes.
You,’ she answered to the ceiling.
‘Hey.
That's right.
It's cashmere.
Really soft.
Do you like it?
How did you know it was new?’
‘The smell.’
He dropped his arm, shook his head incompletely, taking it to one side, half decision, half dismissal.
‘By the way, David.’
She turned from Kennedy's eyes.
‘My keeper, sorry,the keeper is leaving.
I did tell him to write to you.
Didn't he?
Oh well, people don't, you know.
They won't.
And  there's Mike too, at Home Dairy.
Now he's not happy,’ mustering the bad news.
‘Delia, let's not bother with all that now, shall we?
Let's just, you know.’
Blanched by the candlelight, Rosen stirred in his seat.
‘Well, you'll have to find out for yourselves, then.’
‘That'll be fine.’
‘Will it?
And naturally Curtis is retiring.’
She had not planned to say it.
But did they know, did Rosen and Kennedy have any idea how much all this was hurting her?
‘Do you mean that Curtis?’
Leon Kennedy pointed to the door leading to the kitchen.
‘He's not going to be here any more?
He's leaving?’
His confidence was subsiding, along with his smile.
Now Delia Sutherland gave him proper attention.
‘No, Leon.
He won't be here.
He's well past retirement.
He only stayed on for me.
More wine?’ /
‘Leon's been touring England for the past ten days, Delia.
Wasn't that a good idea?
To see around the country a bit?’
Rosen  eked out a conversation with her and without Leon Kennedy, who was sewn into an isolation that made him more powerfully present.
His laughter had been natural to him, but this, this removed tranquillity, was more so.
She wanted to watch him and then say something to find out how hard it would be to retrieve him from such self-preservation.
‘Not hungry, Leon?’
‘Not really’
‘She's retiring too, Mrs Files.
My cook.’
‘Oh Delia, please.’
Rosen threw down his napkin.
Leon Kennedy did not react.
He returned his attention to the picture opposite.
‘Who is he?’
‘Not family.
He's the man who built this house then gambled it away.
All the rest are ancestors, every one of them.’
‘Ah.’
‘Mine.’
‘Yes.’
‘Look here, Leon…’
‘No, Delia, you promised,’ Rosen broke in but he did not know it was an evening of broken promises.
This she had to say.
She who had been refused any kind of hearing, now she would be heard.
And Leon Kennedy would understand.
She knew finally why she had stayed to suffer in this way, so she could explain to him and he would see.
Then he'd go.
Nothing to it.
‘You know very well how many times I've asked to see you, speak to you.
The proposals I've made.
Francis made his will in a moment of madness.
That's all.
He loved me.’
With a short triumphant nod to Rosen she insisted, ‘Yes.’
Then back to Kennedy, ‘This is my home, Leon.
There are so many reasons why it won't work, you taking over here, but…’
‘Delia, for pity's sake.’
‘Pity, David?
Pity?
Look I'm entitled…’
Leon Kennedy stood up.
At the sideboard he crashed two covers on to silver dishes.
Delia Sutherland, Rosen and the ancestors blinked.
He punched the sideboard with both hands then opened a fist, levelling his hand on the air in a private calming gesture.
With his back to them he jabbed a finger to the floor.
‘You told me, David, you told me she understood.
You said we wouldn't have to do this thing.
Talk this way.’
‘I know, Leon, and I did.
Christ, Delia, help me out here, can't you?
Have I not explained that?’
‘So.’
The sideboard knocked the wall as he swung round and the noise groaned in the room that had not known such life since the night Francis Sutherland, drunk in front of weekend guests, told his wife, self-assured and aloof on the distant coast of the table, that she was a frigid bitch who needed seeing to and he didn't care who did it.
He had clawed the cloth from the length of the table and a slow-motion avalanche of plates, food, cutlery, decanters of wine in silver coasters, candles and engraved Bohemian glass, creatures carved in silver, a bowl of roses and two Paul de Lamerie dishes all shunted beneath sixteen pairs of bewildered eyes, and no one thought to hold the cloth, prevent the steady crash of destruction at Francis Sutherland's end of the table.
It seemed to take a long time.
When it was all over and the table was bare and no one could think what to say, then they noticed that Delia Sutherland was gone.
It was past her bedtime anyway.
Leon Kennedy was next to her now, one fist gripping the back of her chair, about to pull it from under her, his other hand clenched on the table near her own which she snatched to her lap.
‘No, Mrs Sutherland, you look at me because I want to see you understanding what I'm going to say 'cause I'm never discussing this again with anyone.’
His face was very close.
Her shoulders attempted a shrug of indifference but remained defensively hunched.
‘Sleet's mine now, Mrs Sutherland.
Everything else is history.
I'm not saying that nothing belongs any more — like those pictures, this.’
He picked up a silver owl, holding it at her face.
‘Or anything else that's here.
Even you.
All of it, everything, has its place that began somewhere in the past.
Now I'm here and I have a place too and nothing's going to change that.
No suggestions.
No deals.
You can stay or go, it's the same to me.
But I stay.
Do you hear me, Mrs Sutherland?’
He did not move away from her so she slid from beneath the arc of his body, her napkin fell to the floor.
She passed around the table but slowly, and touched the back of one of the seventeen vacant chairs to steady herself.
She had reached the door, was almost through it, when she called wearily, ‘Come on, boys.’
Leon Kennedy pointed a questioning finger between himself and Rosen, who was paralysed in a protective lunge between his and Delia Sutherland's chair.
Rosen shook his head, indicating the dogs under the sideboard who were staring after their mistress, equally uncertain.
They shifted their gaze to Rosen who grimaced sympathy at them, nodding.
Still they did not move until, on hearing a more familiar tone, loud, irritable, from the hall, ‘I said, ‘COME ON, boys,’’ they scrambled.
I went out with the dogs into the volume of the night.
It felt cold and good and free.
Real night, country night, is a very complete thing with a limitless density, unlike the sham night of cities; a density that allows no belief in dawn.
And that is what I wanted then, to feel I could remain safe from a future and past, safe from time.
There was a new swathe of light among the stars.
It hadn't been there before and no doubt wouldn't be tomorrow; resting, I expect, on its journey from one universe to another.
I tried to believe there were things beyond possession, greater belonging, greater satisfaction, but I was tied by resentment, self-pity and a mad belief that the past could be resuscitated.
I could only think of that oh so English phrase ‘It's not fair’.
I've been told there's no real translation in any language for the English conception of fair, which is oblique justice redefined for every circumstance.
I leant against a chestnut, one of a bib of trees leading down to the Wild Garden.
Through its low branches I had a latticed view of the buildings that made up my home.
To the right was the outline of the dovecot where, as a child, standing in the doorway with my back to the sunlight, I fought my shadow with a wooden sword.
When I was bored and ready to win, I kicked shut the door.
Inside I would sit on the dirt floor smoking cigarettes stolen from the drawing room.
My throat would itch with the dust of doves who enquired and conversed on the same few notes, while the heavy ticking of the estate clock at the top of a rotting ladder reverberated around the eight chalk walls where game used to be hung.
After the dovecot came the wall connecting the stableyard to the house, the yard I'd crossed every night I could remember to collect the dogs' bowls and return them full.
After the yard was the house that was built for, and due, so much more life than I'd ever been able to give it.
Perhaps that was why it was being taken away from me; I couldn't do it justice.
If I could have departed then, never reentered the house, it would have been with some strength of mind.
I told myself I was waiting out there for the signals to let me know David and Leon had gone to bed, lights switched off at their bedroom windows, at least some movement of the curtains.
There was no need to see him again; I was leaving very early.
Only I had to feel, to see one more time that elusive spirit of Francis; despite repeating to myself, ‘It's not you, is it, Francis?
It's not really you?’
David Rosen came to the steps and peered into the darkness as though into a room where he had no right to be.
‘Delia?
I say, Delia, are you out there?’
She was not going to answer but he remained, so she said, ‘It's all right, David.
I'm coming in now.’
Although she made no effort to be heard, the night carried her voice just the same.
‘No kennels tonight?’
Rosen followed her to the gunroom where she pressed her head against both dogs, murmuring inaudibly to each.
She sighed, picked yellow hairs from her black dress.
‘No.
They won't like it in here, too hot; but it's quicker for the morning, otherwise I'd only have to cross the yard to get them.
And that's how I always start my day, isn't it?
Crossing the yard to get the dogs.
Mustn't do that tomorrow.
No routine tomorrow.
Nothing familiar tomorrow.’
‘I'll be down to say goodbye.’
She was at the bottom of the stairs, he was two steps up.
‘Do you mind not, actually, David?’
‘I understand.’
‘So.
Good-night, then,’ facing away.
‘Yes.
Well.
Quite.’
She frowned.
‘That's what I say, isn't it?’
And her laugh was halting and light and willing for more fun.
It was the laugh of a girl, how she might have laughed on the night of the dance where she met Francis.
It seemed to her there was something more to say.
While she was thinking what that might be David Rosen bent from the height of his two steps and kissed her cheek.
She covered the place with her fingers, preventing one of the many draughts of Sleet from carrying it away.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘Good-night.’
She bolted the front door, checked her car keys were on the hall table, turned off the lights, all this briskly.
There had to be an end.
All ready now.
Nothing to do but go upstairs and sleep; only the lights in the morning room and she could turn those off without entering, just reach around the door.
No need to see again the possessions she was leaving.
She felt inside to the glass plate on the right and swept three switches upwards, blacking out one more cuddy of the past.
The door was nearly shut when she heard, ‘Please don't do that, Mrs Sutherland.’
She flicked the bottom switch.
One table lamp by the window shone on to the Chinese figures.
Leon Kennedy was standing in front of the fire where she had chosen to stand all that time ago at the beginning of the evening.
‘Oh, I see,’ she said.
‘I'm sorry.
I thought you'd have gone to bed.’
‘No.
Because I thought you'd have said goodbye.’
‘Of course.
So, well, goodbye, then.’
‘OK.
Yes.
Goodbye.’
She remained by the door with her arms crossed.
The tangled fringe of a rug was suddenly very interesting, the back of an armchair, its cover taut from washing, the wide oak floorboards.
Anything but to raise her eyes and see him there where she ought to be.
She wanted to say in her other voice, the one she had mislaid outside, So here you are at last, on my estate, in my house, at my place in front of the fire.
She decided she would say it, noticed how her body rearranged itself for the tone that would come.
She was surprised that to be herself and speak her mind required such physical effort.
Had this always been the case?
Never mind.
Fingers tapping her upper arms, she focused on him, ‘So here you are, then…’ and stopped.
She refocused and saw a man, very young, a stranger in a room made, lived in, loved by others; a room he would possibly never make his own.
She saw a young man afraid and pretending not to be.
‘Do people say how like your father you are?’
‘Well…’
Hands in pockets, he lowered his head, taking the question as a compliment.
‘You think?’
Her fingers rested.
‘What's it like?
Not belonging?’
He tensed.
‘You mean here?
Sleet?’ /
Her gaze roamed, she half-raised a shoulder, fingertips, an eyebrow.
‘Ah.
That.
I understand,’ he said and pointed to the drinks trolley.
‘Would you like a…’ but he repocketed his hand.
‘No.
Of course, you do that yourself.’
‘A drink, you mean?
Brandy, then.
Perhaps I'm not so keen to have this day end after all.’
She let him pour it for her while she threw another log on to the fire, smashing a cathedral of embers.
There would be nothing but heatless yellow flame for a while.
Her armchair already felt unfamiliar because her spectacles were not in their place beside it; there were no files waiting for attention, no newspapers, even the armchair itself felt different.
She reached to the gap between back and seat where years ago she had stuffed a cushion that made all the difference to that small problem with her spine.
It was gone.
Gone already.
When had they done that?
Like they could not wait to abolish her conveniences and idiosyncrasies.
She scanned the room for other changes.
Yes, the chrysanthemums had been moved from there to there.
Or had they?
And there was the desk, something about that too.
But of course there was.
She had cleared it herself.
She clutched her forehead, drew up her legs.
After all these years, at bay in her own armchair.
Through the spinney of her fingers she saw Leon Kennedy standing again by the fire watching her.
‘It's a place to be,’ he said, ‘like any other.’
‘What?
What are you talking about?’
She organised her limbs, pretending ease.
‘Not belonging.
You asked.’
‘Did I?’
It was a trick and she knew it, to ask a personal question then appear to forget it so any answer would seem to be volunteered with all the humiliation of confession.
But Leon Kennedy's eyes did not hold humiliation, only the assembling of a special hatred.
The kind she had encountered from the languid woman in the Big Bamboo.
She hauled herself upright.
‘I'm sorry.
Of course I remember.
You could've told me to mind my own business.’
‘I know that.’
He came to sit on the floor near her chair with his elbows on his knees, hands linked.
He's very relaxed, she thought.
How quickly he becomes relaxed if I allow him.
My hand could touch his hair from here, he wouldn't even know.
‘So not belonging's a place to be, is it?’ /
‘That's right.’
‘Will I like it?’
‘You'll never be there.
You belong.
You always will.’
‘Is there anything you want to ask me before I go?
There must be things you need to know about Sleet.’
‘There must be.’
‘Well, then?’
‘I guess I'll catch on.’
She pictured herself getting up, going from the room.
In a minute.
‘Did you see much of your…of my…of Francis?’
‘Some.
He'd come to our house in Delaporte from time to time.
Are you familiar with Delaporte?
It's a nice part and my ma built this really beautiful place there.’
‘A highly successful woman, your mother.’
‘I guess,’ he said, viewing something in memory unhappier than success.
‘So anyway Francis would come to our house late, after Mamma was home from the club.’
He realised what he was saying and glanced at Delia Sutherland.
She stroked any possible offence from the air in a good imitation of worldliness.
‘She gave him drugs too, didn't she?’
‘Nothing serious.
He was low.
He liked a little help from time to time.
You asked if people say we looked alike.
Well, I don't know his people, the ones that knew him.
He never had anything to do with me until I graduated from college nearly two years back now.
The very first time I saw him he stopped on his way to the front door, three, maybe four in the morning.
I'd been waiting.
He kind of smiled at me and he said, ‘Hey, kid,’ then he said, but more to himself, you understand, he said, ‘Jesus, it's like looking at myself.’
So that's who said we look alike, Mrs Sutherland.
Good authority, eh?
Or maybe you don't think so?’
‘After that?’
‘I'd make sure he saw me every time before he went out the door.
He turned round often enough to let me know he was looking for me.
He'd say, ‘Hey, kid,’ and I'd say, ‘Hey.’’
Leon hit his breast.
‘I mean, I was twenty-four.
‘Hey, kid.’
But that was OK.’
‘That's all?’
‘That's all.’
You're here, Francis, aren't you, seeing all this happen to me?
You're very close.
Am I doing all right?
Will you stay near this time?
‘So here you are, then, Leon.’
Disbelief swirled inside her.
‘You keep saying that and yes, here I am.’
‘Because your mother insisted.’
‘Absolutely not.’
‘If it hadn't been for Sleet, then what?’
‘Social work.
Family therapy, difficult kids and such.
Makes me laugh when I think how things turned out.’
‘Makes you laugh, does it, like a lot of things?’
‘I guess.
Take you, for instance, only don't take it wrong.
You're a cut-out English lady.
I met thousands of them back there and they're all like anybody else except for the voice, French, Germans, Americans.
Give or take.
But you, Jesus, you're the one God made.’
‘Thank you so much.
But I'll have you know this cut-out lady is a woman in terrible pain; a woman who's leaving here because of a whim of her husband.
So this figure of fun is going to bed now.
And when you've finished laughing perhaps you'll turn off the lights.’
She was already crossing the room when she smacked her forehead.
‘What am I saying, what do I care about the lights?’
He reached a hand in her direction.
‘I'm sorry.
You misunderstood.
Not funny, Mrs Sutherland, really.
Talk to me.
Tell me about the house in the Abacos?
I've never been there, talk to me about that.’
Her eyes linked them until she went to pull together the curtains she knew very well had never met properly.
‘Well, of course you've been there.
I've seen you there.’
‘Seen?’
From within the arena of armchairs and sofa he had been mirroring her progress about the room, two steps forward to the drinks trolley where she placed her glass, four steps to her eight over to the window, three back on her way to the door again.
‘What do you mean, ‘seen’?’
She could not bring herself to say, You were shut outside the gate.
‘You were a little boy.
Playing.
Your mother was there too.’
‘Oh, she would've been.’
His voice was suddenly loud, strained.
‘Mamma was always there by me.
She, why she, throughout my life, has always stood by me to help me make big decisions…’
Delia Sutherland had stopped to face him while his voice rose still higher.
‘And when she came to school for me…’
‘St Andrew's?’
‘Sure, St Andrew's.
Why not St Andrew's?
Columbia too.
She'd visit and the guys'd say how beautiful she was.
Because she was beautiful and couldn't do enough for me, that's for sure.
I guess you could say she spoilt me and —‘
‘All right, Leon.
I heard you.
You needn't go on.’
She quickened her pace towards the door.
From the other side, leaving only her fingers around its edge, she said, ‘Good-night.
Goodbye.’
‘Mrs Sutherland?’
‘What?’ her voice doubling about the hall.
One of the dogs barked from the gunroom.
‘Don't go.’
The wind cartwheeled, slamming up against the windows, resting awhile before starting again.
Chimes from the clocktower trailed in the clefts of movement.
A log split, resettled; another cathedral in the making.
Delia Sutherland reentered, keeping the door as a shield.
‘What did you say?’
‘I said, ‘Don't go.’’
Her eyes searched among the possessions and in the folds of the curtains for familiarity but there was nothing to reassure.
In the moments she had left, the room had changed its allegiance and there was nothing safe here any more.
She felt her voice collecting inside her.
Her body flexed.
‘I'm very sorry, Leon.
It's late and I have an early start.’
‘I don't mean that, Mrs Sutherland.
I mean don't go.
I can't do it on my own.’
Chapter eleven
They've done it, they've taken the outside tables away.
You can understand; the weather's too cold now for any normal person to want to sit out.
And they look so dank, all those unoccupied chairs, not good for business.
Besides, there's a lot of rain, even I can't sit out in that.
I haven't been in yet because when I do I want to have bought the silk flowers for the old lady.
I'm not quite ready for that, for acquaintances.
I'll remain in the open where I'm easily seen, easy to find.
What I do now in the mornings is walk, the way I do at night.
I go to the quarter behind the Quai du Port, it's old there and very poor.
So I walk, I think, and return to my room where, sitting beside the window, I pin down butterflies from inside my head.
How many times had I prayed for the impossible?
To have that evening with Francis once more, not all of it, just the moment when I was through the door and heard him say, ‘Don't go, don't go,’ and I wouldn't have gone, and my story would have had a different end?
Funny how turning points can visit in plain clothing and only on looking back is the impression found, an impression made by the weight of a moment so apparently modest it's hard to recall.
I fell asleep that night saying: Thank you, God, Thank you, God, and with images of myself explaining to Leon the rhythm of the forestry and fields, teaching him love for what I loved.
That was all I'd ever wanted, I thought.
This time I'd make it right.
At seven the next morning Delia Sutherland let the dogs outside, yelling after them so her voice might slip through the window and heavy curtains of North One.
Leon Kennedy did not come down.
At seven-thirty she had started the engine of the Subaru when he came running out of the house.
‘Get in.
We're late.’
She pretended not to see David Rosen who appeared on the step as they drove off to talk to the men at the place where they gathered before work.
She was prepared for hostility towards Leon.
Very well, she'd tell them, leave if you must, but I want no abuse, is that clear?
Frank Grimwood would not be there, they would see him later.
The men were going to be surprised, of course, because she had said her last goodbye on Friday.
She wanted to study Leon beside her in the pickup without him knowing.
Did he have any idea what he was in for?
He was only half awake.
As they approached the workshop at the Piggeries — there had been no pigs there since her grandfather's day — she saw the clump of men, half turned away, appearing uninterested.
‘Yes.
Well.
Here I am,’ she said to them, suddenly shy.
‘Staying on a bit, you see, to help Mr Kennedy here.’
Their cheer did not go far in the brittle morning air but it pleased her.
She would never have expected a cheer.
She patted her pockets in the way she used to when she smoked and was in search of her lighter.
‘So, Tom Sutcliffe, Stuart Macdonald.
Alec here's on his year out from college, Donald's our mechanic, Warren…’
‘Hi there, Tom,’ Leon Kennedy said.
‘Stuart, great to meet you.
Alec, hello.
Say, Donald.
Warren, hi.’
Each man looked at anything other than Kennedy so long as his eyes were on him.
The minute his attention was removed to the next, Kennedy was appraised from head to foot.
Every gesture was judged and measured, while they concealed their interest behind beard-scratching, nose-stroking, brow-rubbing hands.
Delia Sutherland was thinking: Who'll be the first, which of you will speak up?
‘Now, then.’
She was just inside the workshop doors with the fertiliser shed behind her, stacked to the roof with one-tonne sacks.
‘We're in a quiet time at the moment, Leon.
January always is on a farm.
The best thing is for everybody to get on as usual and Mr Kennedy here can ask anything he wants to.
There's nothing to it really.’
He was standing between Delia Sutherland and the others, facing her.
Although his features were almost hidden by the collar of his goosedown parka he nodded and did something with his eyebrows that made the company smile.
‘Right, then?’
She was disconcerted.
‘Yes, Mrs Sutherland.
That's OK by me,’ Leon Kennedy said.
‘I'll ask what I don't know.
Like what's that you're standing on?’
‘This?
This is a Cambridge roller used after the fields've been sown.
Gives a sort of tidy look to it all.
That there's a seed drill, there's a fertiliser spreader, plough,’ indicating the line of machinery outside.
‘And the white sacks in there?’
‘Ah.
Urea, Leon.
Urea.’
‘Oh really.
Nice.’
Now they were laughing and Delia Sutherland did not understand.
‘Right.
Let's get on.
Tom, where are you today?’
‘Ploughing Top Field.
Spring barley.’
‘Oh, that's right.
Well, you can't.
They rang on Saturday morning to say the repair to the tractor'll be three thousand and that's the only one that'll take the big plough.
But three thousand is too much for now.
So you'll just have to hang on a bit.
There's the fencing to get back to.’
Tom made a noise like a horse blowing.
‘I know, I know,’ she said.
‘We won't have to wait long, though.
Martin, Warren, you're still on fencing, aren't you, well, Tom can lend a hand there.
Any questions, Leon?
Happy with that?’
‘Terrific.’
The men stamped their feet, restoring their circulation, as they walked away.
‘See you later, guys,’ Leon called after them.
‘And, say, we'll get that tractor fixed right away, Tom, no problem.’
They stopped to look back at him.
Tom raised his arm, mirroring Leon Kennedy.
‘Thanks.’
Someone else said, ‘See you later.’
‘That's right,’ said another ‘see you later.’
The men went away chuckling.
‘Funny mood they're in’ Delia Sutherland said as they drove towards Home Dairy.
‘They're curious about you, of course.’
‘'Course.’
He let his head roll against the window and she could have believed he was doing something with his eyes to the countryside, the way he had done with his eyebrows to the men.
Something to enlist the support, the complicity, of the fields, the plantations of spruce.
She had wanted to see him wake to the possession of all this beauty but he watched its passing impassively, stirring only to ask practical questions.
‘That's fifteen of those big ones down.
Why leave them lying about like that?
It's a shame.
An eyesore,’ he said of the oaks fallen in the park.
‘Since the hurricane.
There's no money in them and it takes the right machinery to cut them up.
That's expensive, so they stay.
We have five hundred acres of forestry here.
But you know that already, don't you?’
‘Yes.’
He refolded his arms, closer this time, pulled his chin into his collar and withdrew.
He's returning to somewhere safe when he does that, she thought.
Mike was in the pit between two lines of cows.
He showed no surprise on seeing Mrs Sutherland and called out angrily, before she could speak, ‘Mrs S, we've had the MMB cell-count.
It's far too high.
Our price'll drop even lower.
We've got to replace the tank washers.’
‘I know, Mike.
As soon as we get this month's cheque.’
‘But you said that last month.’
‘This is Mr Kennedy.’
‘Oh yes.’
Mike rubbed his hands into a cloth pulled from his green overalls.
‘That's right, I forgot for a moment.
It's your problem now, isn't it?
Well, we won't sell the milk at all if the washers aren't replaced and that's that.’
‘Jesus, money, money, money’ Leon Kennedy said, walking away from the dairy.
‘You're really strapped for it.’
‘No, actually, Leon.
You are.’
And just for a few minutes she savoured the circuitous routes of pleasure.
Frank Grimwood was having breakfast when Delia Sutherland knocked and entered his warm kitchen.
‘Morning, Frank.
Don't move and don't be surprised to see me.
I've stayed on to settle Mr Kennedy here.’
She pocketed her gloves and gripped her cold fingers around the rail on the stove.
Frank Grimwood showed no sign of moving, or even of lifting his eyes from his plate, except to flick them at Kennedy who was standing by the door.
‘So I've come to introduce him.
Leon, this is Frank Grimwood, our head keeper.’
‘Thought you were leaving,’ Grimwood said before Kennedy could speak.
‘Scotland, wasn't it?’
‘Like I said, I'm staying on a bit.
Mr Kennedy arrived last night.
He's met some of the others already.’
Shoving crockery aside with his forearm Grimwood linked his fingers in mute concentration on the table.
‘How do you do, Mr Grimwood?’
Leon Kennedy held up his hand, more of a proclamation than a greeting.
There was no response.
Delia Sutherland regloved, giving herself time to consider her unexpected anger towards Grimwood.
But wasn't he the one she knew?
The one she trusted?
Wasn't he the one with whom she'd grown up at Sleet when his father was head keeper before him?
‘Do you have anything to say to Mr Kennedy, Frank?
Even, for instance, what you told me a few weeks back?
How do you feel about that now.
You've not mentioned it again.’
‘I might have something to say when I'm ready.
Not before.’
‘OK, Mr Grimwood,’ Leon Kennedy said.
‘When you want to talk about anything you'll know where to find me.’
The door rasped on the red-tile floor as he dragged it shut behind him.
‘Really, Frank, I don't know.
That was too bad of you.’
She had intended this to be no more than a comradely rebuke.
‘I'll thank you to mind your own business, Mrs S.’
The inside of her mouth was suddenly bitter.
She wanted to swallow, only the muscles in her throat were stiff.
Driving back she scanned the fields, the forestry, the ditches at the sides of the road, anything but Leon Kennedy.
It wasn't her fault, she was thinking, he'd have to get used to this sort of thing.
He'd got off lightly with the men earlier.
There were bound to be some who felt as Frank did.
That's life.
She would have to think of something to say in a minute to break the silence.
When they reached the house, five minutes later, she had to nudge him awake.
‘No breakfast?’ she called when she saw him striding up the stairs two at a time.
‘God, no.
It's too early.
I have to sleep, Mrs Sutherland.’
‘What do you mean, sleep?’
‘I mean, seven-thirty's too early for me.
I need more sleep than that.’
‘Good heavens.
So, saw mill at eleven, then.
We'll meet Holland May there.’
David Rosen was watching Mrs Files's scrambled egg on his plate.
‘Still here, then, Delia?’
‘Slight change in plan.’
She leaned through the service door.
‘Curtis?
Morning.
Have trunk ‘1’ unpacked in my room, will you?’
She joined Rosen with a cup of coffee and an apple.
‘Don't you like your scrambled egg?’
‘I've reached an understanding with it.
What about Scotland?
The smallholding you've just signed for?
The sheep?’
‘It's a little house with vacant land.
There are no sheep yet.
It can wait.’
‘He doesn't need you, Delia.
You're making a mistake.’
‘Last night he said he couldn't do it alone.
And of course he can't.
And, David, with the best will in the world, you can't teach him.
It's something only I can do.’
He dropped one word into the shelter of his newspaper.
‘What?’ she asked over the top of hers.
‘Nothing.’
‘No, well,’ looking at her watch, ‘I must be getting on.
You here for lunch?’
‘No, but I'll wait for a word with Leon.’
By mid-morning Leon Kennedy had not arrived down so Rosen left a letter for him on the hall table and returned to London.
At eleven Delia Sutherland found Curtis teetering upstairs with a tray.
Both ignored the fact that yesterday they had said farewell to each other and a way of life.
‘Are you safe with that?
What is it, anyway?’
‘Mr Kennedy's breakfast, miss.’
He moved on when he saw her expression.
At lunchtime she found Leon Kennedy in the morning room, dressed in a tweed jacket, soft shirt, tie, different ones from the day before.
‘Oh, there you are, Mrs Sutherland.’
The pleasure in his voice disarmed her.
He did not look so much like Francis today.
He was reduced in some intangible way: maybe it was his youth; perhaps his essence had not yet unfurled to fill the room the way Francis's used to.
‘What's the matter, Mrs Sutherland?
Are you all right?’
‘Yes.
Yes.
Of course.
Why wouldn't I be?
Where were you at eleven?’ /
‘I overslept.
Isn't that terrible?’ as though speaking of another's transgression.
‘So you didn't meet Holland May, my forester.
The head forester.’
‘I'll catch up with him.’
‘Jet lag, is it?
Makes you sleep like that?’
‘Not any longer.’
‘Idleness.’
‘Boy’ he breathed quietly, distancing himself without movement.’
He ate little at lunch and she thought: Well, he wouldn't, would he?
He's only just had breakfast.
She told him about the new high-tensile fencing they were putting up, and the ten acres of daffodil bulbs they were planting as an experiment rather than consigning the field to set-aside.
‘Set-aside?
Is that some kind of fertiliser?’
‘No, it's when the government pays you not to grow crops in the fields.’
‘They pay you not to?’
It was more interesting to him than high-tensile or daffodils so she tried to explain the principle until his interest faded.
‘May I borrow your car to go down town?’
‘Leon, we don't go ‘down town’.’
‘We don't?’
He pushed away from the table as he had the previous night when he had lost his temper.
He hunched his shoulders, drawing in his elbows, clenching and reclenching his fists, buffeted by invisible punches.
‘Not go down town?
But Jesus, that's, I don't understand you.
How can you not get out?’
‘No.
I mean we don't say ‘down town’, we say ‘to town’, or name the town.’
He dropped his head, hoarding the laughter she would hear coming from the hall a minute later.
‘Well, good for you, Mrs Sutherland.’
‘You can borrow the car and I'll see you in the office later to go over the VAT files.’
‘Sounds cool.’
‘Hey’ she shouted after him.
‘You don't know the way to town.’
‘That's OK, Curtis said he'll come too.’
The front door slammed.
Delia Sutherland remained where she was, examining something unfamiliar in her spirit, something that under X-ray might show like a patch on a lung.
The hall clock struck the half hour, the three-quarter, two o'clock, and still she sat.
Vanity?
Was that David's word?
It wouldn't be like him.
Weightless with introspection she observed her hands as she had in the Big Bamboo, with their veins like injured worms — big, workaday hands — and hid them between her army-surplus thighs.
Mrs Files hesitated with a tray under her arm when she saw Delia Sutherland still there at two-fifteen.
For years lunch had been a twenty-minute affair.
At first Delia Sutherland could not place this slim woman with thick red hair lapping her head in curls.
‘Mrs Files?
What have you done to your hair?’
‘Done?
Done?
Done that two months ago.’
She sounded light-hearted.
‘It makes you look so young.’
‘So I just been told.
Feel young too.’
That glory of hair gone and she had never noticed, not even on Saturday when they had said goodbye.
What had her eyes been seeing all this time?
And Mrs Files had a family to look young for, people who loved her, wanted to see more of her, who would be glad if she retired.
‘Two months?
Really?
Fancy.
Dinner for two, then.’
‘I know that.’
‘How?’
‘Mr Kennedy came to the kitchen and we had chats.’
‘Chats?’
‘About food and such.
He's interested.
So that's all right.
Only he says eight-thirty, not seven-thirty.’
‘Ridiculous.’
‘So what'll it be?’ /
‘Seven-thirty, of course.’
Mrs Files let her shoulders answer while she stacked at the sideboard.
Delia Sutherland thought of asking, So when are you actually retiring, Mrs Files?
But that would only bring, When are you leaving, Mrs Sutherland?
So she went on watching and noticed for the first time that Mrs Files had lovely hands, long-fingered, fine-textured, graceful in their mundane task.
Thirty-five years and she had never noticed her hands.
Family to be young for and lovely hands.
‘I said seven-thirty.’
‘I heard.’
Later Delia Sutherland was sitting at her desk under a fluorescent tube in the estate office.
The yolk-yellow walls were layered with seed merchants' calendars, charts and various photographs of herself in a white coat holding a haltered bull, his forehead dabbed with rosettes, from the days when she bred Herefords.
The fling cabinets and chairs were a union of post-war utility and the cheapest modern plywood.
It was after five and Leon Kennedy had not tried to find her.
She knew he was back from town, had seen him earlier through the window.
Muriel telephoned.
‘What's happening, Delia?
I rang the house  to find out if you left all right this morning and Curtis said you were still there.
That I'd find you in the office as usual at this time.
What's going on?’
‘Well, I've decided to stay on a bit to settle him.’
There was a long pause.
‘I see.’
Another long pause and, ‘So you'll call me soon, will you?
Let me know what your movements are?’ /
‘'Course.
Bye.’
Walking the dogs kept Delia Sutherland out of the house until six-thirty.
She stayed in her room until seven-thirty.
On her way into dinner she heard music from the morning room.
The kind of music she had not heard for a long time.
The food was not in and when she pressed the bell underfoot there was no response.
Dinner had never been late before.
She circled the table while her progress was marked from the darkness under the sideboard by four white crescents of dog eye.
‘Stay, boys.’
She left the room.
‘There you are, Mrs Sutherland.
I've been waiting for you.
It's nice to see you.
Look.’
Leon Kennedy spread his arms.
‘They're for you.’
White roses filled the room, one still in his hand.
‘Dinner's at seven-thirty.’
‘I said eight-thirty, Mrs Sutherland.
I'd get sick eating so early and anyway it's no fun then.
C'mon.
Do you like them?
Roses.’
‘Fun?
No fun?
And of course you'd want some fun this evening, having done nothing all day.
Where were you this afternoon?
Have you no sense of responsibility?’
‘I was buying a car.
And I got you the roses.’
‘Well, there used to be flowers in our own greenhouses.’
‘Yeah.
But not now.
Not any more, yet.
And this is a flower, Mrs Sutherland.
This is a beautiful living flower.’
He approached her, holding out the rose.
‘Keep back.’
She had not meant it so loud; so harsh.
He threw the flower down.
Before he could speak Curtis appeared.
‘Dinner is served.’
‘What?’
She flew round.
Seeing Curtis at the door in that way she did not need him to repeat his announcement.
How long since the formality of ‘Dinner is served’?
For how many years had she entered the dining room at eight-thirty in the morning, at twelve-thirty, at seven-thirty, eaten the food she found there and gone?
If she had a guest it was never more than one and the hour was always the same.
They began with a cheese soufflé.
Delia Sutherland had no idea Mrs Files could cook a soufflé.
The pink lamb cutlets were flavoured with rosemary and brandy; the raspberry sorbet was served with a melba sauce, ground hazelnuts and crumbling biscuits.
She ate without comment but there was nothing left for the dogs.
‘I'm going up.
Good-night.’
‘Mrs Sutherland?
It's not yet nine.’
Leon Kennedy followed her into the hall.
‘Some of us have been up since six-thirty and I like to read.
That's what I do, you see.
I go up at nine and I read.’
‘Why are you angry with me?’
‘It's not working, Leon.
This.
My staying.’
‘Don't say that.
It will.
It's only the first day’
‘Twice today I've waited and you've not turned up.
Twice I've wanted to explain things about your responsibilities here.’
‘So there's tomorrow.
It's evening now.
It's time to relax and talk.
You come down here and tell me about the time you went to the Abacos.’
‘I don't want to.
There's nothing to say.
It's Sleet that should be interesting you but apparently it doesn't.
Good-night.’
‘You come on back here, Mrs Sutherland,’ he shouted.
‘You come on back here and talk to me.’
‘Don't you shout at me in my house.’
The vibration in the banister under her hands travelled down to him; ‘house’, ‘house’, ‘house’, all about the walls.
‘It's not your house.’
‘Your house, then.
What do I care?
It's your responsibility now.’
The dogs whined in a cringing advance towards her.
‘And put the bloody dogs in the kennels.’
So the first day finished with me lying sleepless, listening to that familiar music coming from below as it had years before, the jazz records my mother used to play.
I slept and woke to find the house quiet, settled from the anger that had shaken it.
I thought I heard birds, despite the sky showing no signs of thinning.
I've heard them before like that, distanced but there, singing beyond the night in a daytime of their own.
Perhaps it's the pipistrelle bats and that's why, if I looked, I wouldn't see anything outside but a disturbance of shadow.
Then I heard a new sound: a thin wail more certain than the birds, coming from inside the house, balancing between the shuffling draughts.
Tightening the cord of my pyjamas, blinkered by my loosened hair, I listened outside the door of North One, where the sound had led me, a musical instrument playing a familiar tune, I couldn't recall the name; playing it so far, stumbling on a phrase and returning to the beginning.
Suddenly the whole melody came through.
Not only could I still not think of the name, I couldn't determine the instrument.
This troubled me so much that when, in the morning, I found Curtis running the polisher over the hall floor, I asked him, ‘Did you hear that in the night, Curtis?
What was it?’
‘Music, Miss.’
He didn't even look up.
‘I know it was music, Curtis, I know that.
And don't tell me I have no ear.’
I headed out of the house.
Back in those hours I had remained a long time outside the door of North One, being filled by a sorrow so complete it overflowed, and I covered my ears not to hear any more.
I had run to my room, my bed, pulled a pillow over my head.
‘Curtis?
Curtis?
Where are the dogs?
I told Mr Kennedy to put them in the kennels last night.
They're not there.’
I searched the house, the gardens; and drove over to Frank Grimwood, interrupted his breakfast.
Had he seen the dogs wandering?
No, he hadn't.
‘Get him,’ I said to Curtis and pointed to the stairs.
‘Wake him.
I want to know what he's done with my dogs.’
And when he returned, ‘Well?
Did you wake him?’
‘No, Miss.’
‘Good God, Curtis, what's come over you?
I want to know where the hell my dogs are.’
‘They're asleep on the bed with him, Miss.’
I would have left had I not seen he was wearing something I hadn't seen on him before, and had to ask him about it, certain I knew what the answer would be.
‘Incidentally, what's that copper on your wrist?
Do you have rheumatism?’
‘No, Miss.
I haven't got rheumatism.
Mr Kennedy gave me this.
Isn't it attractive?
See how it's engraved?
Perhaps he thought it might make me nip up a bit quicker with his morning tray.’
He twinkled with his joke.
He played that music every night, that other music in his room.
I'd listen outside, still not knowing the instrument or the name of the tune he practised.
Once he came into the passage and looked around.
My chest ached with a child's fear while I cringed in the deeply recessed doorway of North Three.
When he went back to play again he left his door ajar and I could see him in there naked to the waist, head bent.
A clarinet was in his hands.
Of course, of course , a clarinet.
A terrific heat eased from his room, welding with the air outside making it into a different zone from the rest of the house, like the Gulf Stream off Scotland.
Curtis had taken advantage of it and put an azalea on the table in the passage, a yellow one with a pungent scent.
Leon always opened his door after that and, standing in the same spot where I could see him, he would play.
I never discovered for certain if he knew I was watching him.
Perhaps, like his mother, he was aware of his beauty, wished to have it admired.
Although nothing in his daytime demeanour was vain.
But I was admiring him and remembering Francis; how he had been, once; what it felt like to touch and be touched by him.
My thoughts hadn't run in this way for years.
Now, nightly, when Leon had finished playing and had closed his door again, I would be left sleepless, confused by the force of my neglected senses.
After a week of that I decided one night to leave in the morning.
I wrote a note to Leon, left it on the hall table for him to find  when he came down at God knows what time, and went into breakfast.
From the dining-room door I saw him.
He was standing by the window tilting a folded newspaper to the light, which left his other hand free to knead his hip with an unconscious sensuality so familiar.
Apparently he hadn't heard the door and I stood there until slowly, still reading, he set his head in my direction and smiled.
Gradually he removed his concentration and gave it to me.
‘There you are, Mrs Sutherland.’
I forgot the note on the hall table and he found it later, came to me distressed.
‘You're going?’
I took it from him.
‘No.
I changed my mind.’
‘You could do that, Mrs Sutherland?
Go with only a note?
That easy?’
‘Please, Leon.
Just forget it.
Put it out of your mind.’
‘You could.
You have that capacity, don't you?
Promise you won't do it that way.
Promise.’
He watched me with an anxiety and a pity so powerful I walked away.
No, I didn't leave.
Not that day or on any of the countless occasions I resolved to, because I was sharing my house with Francis again.
It was Francis with his head back laughing, inhaling all the joy of the world; Francis delighting in the flowers he threw together with branches and invited me to enjoy.
It was Francis — it hurts, this, to remember — it was Francis who, bewildered, touched the back of his hand to his eye.
One time, after he had done that, I found somewhere dark, and the Bony Lady cried; cried as she should have done years back.
To the world, of course, I was busy, self-assured Mrs Sutherland; the world did not see my breakwaters sinking lower every day.
In gratitude for what I thought God had given me, a second chance, I ignored Leon's boredom as I talked him through the files — just as I was ignoring Muriel's messages to call her — and I ignored his rarely appearing at meetings with agricultural reps and men from the Milk Marketing Board; ignored his non-involvement with any of the humdrum things essential to the running of a place like Sleet.
Instead I closed him out, continued without him  and became absorbed in my old routine.
Only that is a lie.
Nothing was as before because he was there and if I did not persevere with my patronising offers of involvement it was because my confusion was worsening, the patch on my spirit growing.
The only cure would have been to leave.
I couldn't.
I avoided him instead, sometimes even for a day and most of an evening, until I was in the mood, strong enough, weak enough, who-knows-what-enough to take a sip of Francis.
Then I'd find my fantasy broker — he was never very far — and use his company to restore my past and make it right.
I'm not certain why I should remember this unless it was perhaps my first, unacknowledged, awareness that he was himself and not another; and that that self was, in a dignified, quiet way, reaching out to me.
The outer door to the estate office slammed and the inner one opened with its uneasy stick and snuffle past the strips of draught-excluders worn down and added to over the years.
‘Ah.
There you are, Mrs Sutherland.’
Leon Kennedy leant against the door to shut it and watched her.
‘That's right, Leon.
Here I am.
Good timing, actually.
Sign this, would you?’
She adjusted her half-moon glasses, reached for a document to her left, held it out to him; all without looking up.
‘What is it?’
He turned the paper in his hand.
‘It's the improvement-grant application for the slurry lagoon at Home Dairy.
I know I mentioned it.
Just sign there, at the bottom.’
He placed the paper directly beneath her face, leaning across with his pen, forcing her to tilt back in her chair.
Having signed he lifted his head which brought their faces close.
He did not move away.
His skin smelt of soap and newly turned soil.
‘There is another desk, Leon.’
He capped his pen.
‘So there is.’
‘I've also been sorting out the dates for the let shoots.
The first'll be in September, partridges, on to pheasant in November.
It's  profitable let on a single-day basis.
I don't participate any more but…are you listening to me?’
‘You been drawing cows, Mrs Sutherland?’
He pointed to cards in front of her.
‘They're pedigree forms.
Look, left side, right side and front.
I draw in the markings of each Friesian heifer — they're all unique, you see — and send them off to the breed society, then they're registered.’
‘You know each one that well?
That's something, that's really something.’
‘One does, you know.’
She watched him sifting the batch of cards, momentarily intrigued.
‘Want a walk?’ he asked.
‘Don't be silly, it's dark.’
‘Would Bung or Ho like a walk?’
‘Not in the dark, Leon.
They don't like it.’
‘I looked for you earlier when it was still light.’
‘I had a school governors’ meeting.
Otherwise I've been here.
What have you done since lunch?’
‘Took a nap.
Read some.
Went down town on a few errands.’
I thought nothing of that incident until, maybe a year later, there it was installed and detailed in my mind.
He was living in the real world beyond my contorting imagination.
It was always by accident I'd come upon him with others and watch him converse with people I'd known nearly all my life, lighting them with his interest, vignettes in which I played no part.
Late one afternoon on my way to the kennels with the dogs' bowls I passed the lighted kitchen window and stopped because I heard his voice.
My view was mostly of the aluminium saucepans dangling from a rail above the range.
Shut behind glass doors on one wall were copper pots and jelly moulds which I'd never seen used.
Three light bulbs with white glass shades coated with grease on their upper sides hung in a line over the table where Mrs Files sat, a chopping block in front of her.
She was shredding something by holding the tip of the blade and moving the handle of the knife  around in an arc, her head on one side.
I could hear singing and moaning from a far corner.
Megan must have been there, Mrs Files's senile aunt whom she brought to work when there was no one else to look after her.
Suddenly a hand shot up in the foreground of my view, something glistened purple in its fingers.
I moved backwards and by standing on the low wall that bordered the towering yew hedge, I gained a level view of the kitchen.
Leon lay on his back on the table, with one leg crossed over the other, the preparations for dinner all around him.
He was holding an aubergine at arm's length above him, twisting it about, judging it.
‘I swear to you,’ he was saying, ‘it was this big, Margaret, I'm not kidding.
And it kinda looked like this too.’
Mrs Files picked up a tea cloth, buried her face in it, laughing, then shook it at him with delighted outrage.
Margaret.
He called her Margaret.
I went inside.
I think I thought I wanted to be part of that companionship too but knew it would conclude with my entry But that didn't have to happen because he was closing the kitchen door behind him as I arrived in the passage.
His face was devoid of any warmth or humour; there was no residue of the merry encounter with Mrs Files only seconds before (I would never be able to think of her as Margaret).
This was my first understanding of him.
What had happened in the kitchen was a calculated wooing, tease, flirtation, safely outrageous.
He charmed, teased, involved then abandoned, his mind already on the next thing.
He knew just when, and how, to tap, in order to receive at a deeper level than he gave.
That was his sadness.
He required everyone to love him.
Hence his small tokens, unexpected gifts, to me the Arpège, to David the lighter — when David didn't even smoke — to Curtis, the copper bangle.
No doubt he had just given something to Mrs Files.
Dreaming, Leon almost crashed against me, there in the kitchen passage.
‘Mrs Sutherland, where are you going?’
I pushed past him into the kitchen.
There she was, still radiant from his company, smiling with that freshness that had come over  her since his arrival, reflecting on her exchange with him.
The imbalance of feeling between them shocked me.
‘Mrs Files?’
She glanced up.
There was no doubt I intruded even now she was alone.
She bustled to the dresser and tucked — I saw it — a small package deep inside the drawer.
After spying him through the kitchen window with Mrs Files, so much himself, so much not Francis, I thought I didn't want to see him at all.
I was even beginning to consider myself freed, until dinnertime that evening.
Every evening he would come down wearing the black cashmere jacket he had worn on the first night, and in a mood that was somehow expectant.
‘There you are, Mrs Sutherland,’ he'd say, as if the sun had risen on seeing me, or indeed, I was the sun.
He said it so often I was beginning to expect it, listen for it.
What he imagined those evenings would hold, what possible excitement, was beyond me.
I think I just assumed he was that sort of person and night-time did that to him.
Francis was the same.
What happened was an apparently significant incident, like all the rest.
Simply that he pushed his plate away, turned sideways in his chair to face me, then stretched, crossed his legs.
‘What this place needs is proper heating.
Only lunatics live in this temperature.
An Eskimo wouldn't,’ he said.
We stared at each other.
I was thinking: Why did you do it?
Die like that?
See how happy we could've been.
Look at us now.
I reached over, lifted his hand from where it was resting on the table, toying with a piece of orange peel, and he leant forward with it, allowing me to take it as near to myself as I wanted.
I held it between my own, uncovered it to see the fingers lying on mine: a square hand, fine-boned, fine-textured, not large.
I turned it over, turned it back, recovered it.
‘There are so many things we disagree about,’ I said.
‘I wish it wasn't like that, it wastes so much time and that does run out in the end.
We know that now, don't we?’
‘All right, then,’ he softly prompted, as though I were speaking lines, ‘go on.’
‘Go on what?’
‘Go on about the heating.
About why not.’
I relinquished his hand, heard my voice alter.
‘I've told you a  thousand times we can't afford it, or rather, I'm not going to afford it.
It's not in the character of Sleet and besides…’
‘Mrs Sutherland?’
‘What?’
‘I pay now, remember?
And I've never mentioned the heating before.’
He wasn't looking at me when he said that but into the air at his side as though reading a sad text written there.
I knew it was Leon's hand I'd taken into my own.
I may have been speaking to Francis but I'm not certain of that.
I believe, perhaps, even then, I was speaking to him, to Leon.
In the usual way we'd have gone to the morning room after dinner and sat awhile.
I might have read, checked papers before going up to bed.
I had to explain more than once that that was what I did — go to bed early — until he stopped asking.
What I was really doing, up there in my private darkness, while below he played my mother's old jazz records and new ones he'd bought, why I really went so early was to have longer imagining him into his father.
He was his own father down there and it was that night again when Francis said to me, ‘Don't go,’ and this time I hadn't.
I was still there, you see, rearranging my jigsaw heart.
That evening Leon didn't follow me into the morning room to sit in the armchair opposite mine, slipped deep into it, his elbows on the arms, fingers linked in front of his face.
That evening he didn't come into the room at all.
After waiting some time, instead of going to my bedroom and packing again, as before dinner I'd been so certain, at last, of being able to do, I went in search of him.
I called his name in the hall with the dogs standing beside me.
His car was still outside; it was the open-top Volkswagen Beetle he'd bought himself on that first day straight from the showroom window.
His bedroom door wasn't shut and I listened to the stillness inside.
He was obviously not there but I called his name again just the same.
Dinner had been cleared from the dining room, which looked self-conscious and redundant, as dining rooms do when not in use.
All that space, all that pomp, for just a bit of food.
The kitchen lights were off, Mrs Files had gone home.
There was no one in the staff sitting room, but then, there hadn't been for years.
The dogs followed me along the back passage.
I stopped calling Leon's name and felt unreasonably furtive, wished the dogs weren't with me, they made such a noise.
At the top of the back stairs I made them wait.
On the far side of the landing was the door to Curtis's flat, the knocker was the odious face of a gnome.
I don't know why my search drew me to that part of the house, except that Curtis was the only soul in it other than myself and Leon.
I could hardly ask him, Where's Mr Kennedy?
I was hoping, on seeing his face, an excuse for disturbing him would occur to me.
I had gripped the gnome's face when I heard the weaving, low registers of Leon's clarinet.
I strained to hear if it was a record but it was that tune, broken in his usual stumbling places.
Then a piano joined in.
The playing stopped and I could hear their voices, Leon's and Curtis's, just the two of them in there.
I didn't knock.
I didn't think about Francis any more that night.
I didn't leave either.
Leon gave up wearing the new clothes he'd bought in London, curiously dated, formal stuff, even then, even to my eye.
Instead he wore jeans, old ones that had been moulded into his own shape.
The first time I saw him wearing them was an isolated spring day trying its feet in winter.
He was on the lawn outside the morning room throwing a ball for Ho who'd obeyed his commands of ‘Sit’, ‘Wait’, ‘Go’, until I arrived.
Even before he saw me Ho lost interest, began scenting about.
Leon threw the ball high, running for it himself and falling to catch it just for the pleasure of movement in sunshine.
I ambled towards him.
He lay on his back at my feet.
I said, ‘You should wear a sweater, it's not as warm as you think.’
‘No, but it's sun, Mrs Sutherland.
It's sun.’
He breathed deeply with his eyes shut and I smelt a baked saltiness coming from his jeans and was reminded of Franky.
It was even possible to scent resin oozing from the hot wood of a dock, the air of warmth and freedom.
He must have worn those jeans on countless beaches and fishing trips.
Looking down at him there on my English grass, under my English sun, I knew he was pretending a tie-dyed sky, glass sea, breeze in a fast boat.
Do you miss it?
I wanted to say.
Is it terrible, your homesickness?
I've known it too.
‘Lunch is in.’
‘Mrs Sutherland?’
He came after me with his arms wide, still dazzled and dazzling in his private powerful light; those pale jeans already crumbling for want of their accustomed humidity.
‘Mrs Sutherland, please.’
He was going to hold me.
Intoxicated by a short measure of dilute sun, he was going to hold me.
I waited there on the grass too long.
He came very near.
His arms nearly enclosed me.
‘No, stop it.
Get away.’
But it was I who got away to the steps up to the morning room, Francis's sorry steps.
I did see him, though, standing, looking after me as if he'd been struck, very quiet, very separate.
And yes, yes, his hand moved up towards his eye.
The sun went in.
We had lunch as usual.
He was polite.
Chapter twelve
‘More rain.’
‘It'll pass.
My christening…’
Delia Sutherland's finger pressed a black-and-white photograph of a woman lifting her hair away from the grabbing hand of the baby in her arms.
‘And me on Mushroom, a Shetland we had once.
Not for long, the Caldwells aren't horsy people.’
She had found Leon Kennedy in the ballroom in a wing chair near the window, a leather-bound photograph album open on his knee, more on the floor beside him.
A sweep of light remained between frayed brocade curtains, without a gleam on the parquet floor.
He was tipping the album towards the ungiving light, scrutinising the wide pages.
When she entered he said, ‘Hi there,’ quietly, without removing his attention, his voice resounding along with her footsteps.
‘Albums?’
‘Yeah.
What a lot of people once.
Shooting parties, picnics, fancy dress.
Then the same bunch of faces pop up, standing in exactly the same positions, doing exactly the same things in front of different houses.
They sure got around.’
‘People did.’
She was drawn closer and ended up sitting on the arm of his chair, craning past him.
‘Me at the seaside.’
She touched the image of a gawky-limbed child in a knitted swimsuit.
‘You always wear that ring, don't you?’
She pulled her hand away, curled it in her pocket.
‘It was my mother's.
Not good, though.
All the good stuff went.
Speaking of which…’
‘Oh don't,’ he said because her voice had changed.
He had brought her close by stillness.
Now she was gone again.
‘No, it's important, Leon.
A bill ‘s come in.
Seventy-five thousand.’
‘That's a lot.’
He reached for another album.
‘Seriously.’
‘Yeah, seriously, that's a lot,’ utterly impassive.
‘Good God, you really have no grasp, Leon, do you?
It's my fault, this bill.
I changed the fertiliser order to once a year instead of quarterly.
It was just after Francis died.
I didn't think it through.
But it's due and the farm accounts won't take it.
You're going to have to sell something and there's hardly anything left to sell.
I have to say this is the first time I've been in this position since I took over.’
Standing beside one of the fireplaces she touched a dark oil painting.
‘It's a pity, but this'll have to go.’
‘No.
I like that picture with the little girl passing the corn.
It's just so, I don't know, right, somehow.’
She made a noise like a laugh.
‘Leon, you're not even looking at it.’
‘Not this minute, but I have.
It's a favourite of mine.’
She angled herself on to a stool.
He turned another page.
‘Who's this baby and you, like, tiny, next to it?
Looks like another christening.
Same robe.’
‘My brother.
Cot death.
Do you know who painted this?
He's very famous.’
‘Sure.
I wonder what it is, Mrs Sutherland, that makes you believe I'm an uneducated man?
Hey, the Coronation.
Your mom and dad sure had a fine view.’
‘You've no choice but to sell it.
I've run Sleet for twenty-five years.
I know what's what.’
‘It's not business, Mrs Sutherland, to throw good money after bad.’
‘You don't know what you're talking about.
Buying fertiliser isn't bad money.
It's essential.’
‘Fertiliser's shit.’
‘Ah.’
She hurried to the door.
‘Now I see: you want a row.
Well, you're not getting it.
I'm going out but before I go I'll tell you one thing.
In all the years Francis and I were married I never asked him for a cent.
I ran Sleet myself; under my care it's broken even…’
‘You mean broken.’
He did not say it loudly and she was not sure she had heard right so she continued.
‘I brought it back from the brink, made the farm, forestry, the shoot self-supporting.
And if you think I'm going to bail Sleet out with the money Francis left me when you can't even be bothered to learn the most basic elements of running an estate then you're mistaken.’
‘Sure.
Was there a call for me this morning?’
She was not going to answer but, yes, there had been a call when she was in the estate office waiting to direct a consignment of creosote to the saw mill, otherwise, being a Saturday, the office would have been shut.
A man had rung asking for Mr Kennedy.
‘He's not here.
Mrs Sutherland speaking.
Can I help?’
‘You the secretary, or what?’
‘I told you I'm…’
She rested the receiver.
If her name did not explain her then she was no one; not any more.
The man said, ‘That is Sleet Park?’
‘Yes.’
‘Only, see, I want the proprietor, Mr Kennedy.
Look, love, never mind.
Just give him a message, would you?
Say Happyhol Cabins confirm they'll be over Monday to erect.
He knows all about it.
There's a dear.
Bye for now.’
‘Actually, there was a call.
Some nonsense about cabins.’
‘What did they say?’
‘Erecting Monday.
So you know about it?’ /
‘Yes.’
‘What's it all about?’
‘A surprise.’
‘And the bill, Leon?’
‘The cabins'll take care of that, Mrs Sutherland.
It's so brilliant I can't wait to tell you.’
His enthusiasm carried him to her.
‘I was in the estate office waiting for you a couple of weeks ago and this firm rang.
It's such a good idea.
Genuine pre-fab log cabins hitched  up to the mains.
They're fixing one on Monday so I can see it but I've already talked to other people who've done it and they're so popular.
‘Course the groupings wouldn't be anywhere near the house…’
‘Groupings?’
‘Well, you know how people like to be together, even if they're pretending to be in the wild, so I was thinking of groupings of four to six cabins per lot.’
‘Lot?’
‘Yeah, maybe five to six lots to start.
Each cabin'll take a family of four.’
‘I don't understand.’
But she did; only could not believe.
‘Hey, hey, hey’ Palms towards her, he sidled past, backing from the room.
‘I know that face.
See you later.’
‘Come here.’
‘No, Mrs Sutherland.
Not when you speak to me that way.’
‘You can cancel that ridiculous little man this minute.
How dare you not consult me?’
She followed him to the gunroom, shouting, while he picked up a tweed coat.
‘I've tried to introduce you here.
I've stayed on to help but not once have you met me so much as half-way.
If you think I'm going to play manager while you carry on in your feckless manner with lunatic ideas, ignorant of what really…’
He passed her, holding his face away from every shouted word, interspersing them with his own but not loud enough to be heard: ‘Stop it,’‘This is destructive,’‘Don't say these things,’ until in the middle of the hall he thrashed the coat repeatedly against the floor, yelling louder than he had ever done.
‘That's enough.
Jesus, I detest you.’
And she was silenced as one watching the rerun of an all too familiar catastrophe beyond change.
‘Don't talk to me about help.
Do you really imagine I don't know what you're pretending?
That I'm Francis.
Why do that, Mrs Sutherland?
Kind of silly, isn't it, when it seems he was such a pain to you?
He let you run this place like a fucking doll's house 'cause he loved you.
I see it.
I see it too.
But you remain a cold, remote woman, Mrs Sutherland.
Now let me by’
‘Wait.
Who said that to you, those things?’
He passed her on the  stairs.
His bedroom door slammed.
She did not move.
It would be all right again soon.
Later.
He didn't mean it.
Stand here awhile, calm down and then; and then the rain will have stopped.
I'll ask him if he'll walk the dogs with me.
He likes to do that.
We'll have a drink.
Then dinner.
We'll do what we always do and everything will be all right.
He returned with an overnight bag in his hand.
‘Leon, I wondered if you'd like…’
He spoke from the front door.
‘I can't live like you do with broken tractors and trees lying around, people who can't work properly 'cause I can't afford to let them.
And the goddamn government paying me to do sweet nothing with my fields.
You're no business-woman, Mrs Sutherland, you're lousy at it.
This place is moribund.
Now, I've got plans, and I hoped I could bring those about while you screwed on with this cockamamy set up.
I wouldn't have minded that.
I'd have liked it once, Mrs Sutherland, but you don't care about people at all.
I don't find that easy to live with.
And I can't live with your abuse.
When did you last notice something someone else had done?
Or how they felt?
I know you enjoy your own company and that's a good thing 'cause it looks like it's the only kind you'll ever get.
I'm going away for a while, give you time to pack your things.
Maybe that's best.
Goodbye.’
His voice was subdued and so was hers, ‘Where are you going?’
So subdued that the clock striking four in the dovecot could have drowned it, probably did, because he did not answer her ‘Don't go, Leon,’ did not say a word.
I stood at the front door for a long time being soaked by the rain.
It was night when I became aware of the dogs whining somewhere and called them.
At the sound of my voice they stopped whining so I didn't know where to look.
It's often that way with dogs.
I tried several places before they tumbled through the ballroom doors.
Then I sat down by the letter table.
The dogs circled near by, depressed by my inertia.
Eventually I fed them, shut them in their kennels; didn't go to  the dining room where dinner would have been waiting, already cold; instinct walked my weight to Leon's bedroom.
The most I'd allowed myself to see of the inside of that room during his three months at Sleet was himself half naked ruled into a margin of light.
Now I was standing at the closed door listening to his absence.
I find myself here and now — at my hotel window, the road below crowded with traffic, the fish market gone until tomorrow, the winter sun lighting the exercise book in which I'm writing these events of nearly three years past — wanting to put down my pen, lean back and wonder at my arrogance, such stubborn obtuseness.
But why stop to wonder at the very point where cause for wonder really begins?
Despite Leon's words, despite my certain knowledge that the spirit of Francis had sailed after its living son away, down the drive, out of Sleet to freedom, I entered Leon's room determined to winnow some vestige of that poor ghost, Francis's ghost, from what I would find in there; and, having found it, perhaps my intention was to sit with it awhile uttering such emptinesses as, I'm sorry and, Forgive me.
The blast from a phalanx of heaters struck me on opening the door.
There was an electric blower on the dressing table, another on the chest of drawers, two or three bar fires familiar from nursery days; the fumes from three ancient paraffin stoves hovered in such air as was left.
Vapours made the light from the bedside lamps unsteady and caused suffering to the roses in vases all around.
Sheet music was open on a stand, ‘The Isle of Capri’; there was more scattered on the floor.
His clarinet lay in its case on the stool at the foot of his bed; the very wide bed Francis bought when we married.
I went to close the curtains and found the windows sealed with silver insulating tape.
In the wardrobe his clothes were divided.
Pushed to the left were the tweeds and a green three-piece number the texture of a holly bush in a style unseen since the fifties.
There was the cashmere jacket he wore every evening.
I found my hand on its sleeve, drew it back.
On the other side were  his own worn clothes, loose, light-coloured.
With my face in the folds of his jeans I smelt again the salt.
In the chest of drawers were notebooks, some bound in marbled paper, some in kid.
There were wooden boxes; bangles made of brass and silver; and more jewellery, bright, semi-precious, some items still wrapped as when they were bought.
Thermal underwear was in another drawer, vests sleeved and buttoned, a pair of long johns.
I remembered his amusement about such underwear on his first evening at Sleet, how he subsided into laughter, infectious to everyone but me.
Then, alone there in his room, I began to laugh, as I should have laughed at the time.
When I touched my face it was wet.
This was as surprising as discovering blood from an unsuspected wound.
I peered at the photographs on the dressing table.
A large studio shot showed Euturpia Kennedy at the age when I first met her, shy hope not yet driven from her eyes.
In another frame Leon, about six years old, was embracing his mother from behind and pulling a face, while she stood, hopelessly desirable, in a white dress.
A close-up showed the two of them as they were now, toasting each other with mint juleps.
The quality of their companionship seemed to me palpable in that coloured eight-by-five.
There was a large school group with ‘St Andrew's College’ inscribed on the mount.
Leon's features were singular among the rest.
He was in the photograph of the baseball team too, looking proud, a giant glove on one hand.
There were pictures of him fooling on a mono-ski; triumphant beside a huge fish hauled tail-up by a rope, his arms flung around the necks of two fellows.
I picked up one photograph only: Leon in profile, back to the camera, dancing formally with a girl, his hand raised with hers, his head solicitously inclined to her young, upturned, joyful face.
On the bureau among the pencils, ink, writing paper, was a list:
Toothpaste
Reeds from Mitchell's
Order Johnny Dodds album (get number from Curtis)
14 March: Mrs S birthday.
What?
What?
How had he discovered my birthday?
Sticky bottles of cough medicine lined his bathroom shelf.
Yes, when I came to think of it, he'd had a cough for some time.
I turned off the heaters.
It seemed the safe thing to do.
Straight away the walls, the solid furniture, the dreary curtains took possession, leaving his belongings with the bereft, hastily gathered air of a refugee's luggage.
No need to pack trunks this time.
That sort of thing could be seen to.
Anyone who says, as I did, leaving isn't simple, is lying.
What you do is go.
Only one thing struck me as essential: the dogs' bowls from the kennels.
They'd be too unhappy without their own battered bowls to settle them in Scotland.
The dogs were surprised when I disturbed them in the middle of the night and they chased in their runs when I left again, strained to see me departing through the rain, and hear the car door opening, their bowls clanking as I threw them inside.
The dogs themselves I'd collect at the last minute.
Wet through again I wandered about inside the house touching pictures, clocks, trying to feel loss for these things, but it wouldn't come this time — that sense that had been with me since the reading of Francis's Will had vanished.
What had it all been about, then?
I took the pins from my hair to dry it a bit and it sprang free.
Those tears.
Those damned tears.
The curtains were open in the morning room, no lights on; the objects insubstantial, abstract, in the varying depths of grey.
I sat in my armchair; the fire was cold and so was I, my head shrouded in damp hair.
How do you start to notice people after a lifetime of indifference?
If I could take away with me the beginning of such an understanding it would be enough.
How's it done?
Do you say, ‘How are you?’ to everyone you meet?
Do you actually stay to listen when they tell you?
How did he come by Mrs Files's first name?
And be invited into Curtis's flat?
If I'd been kinder to Leon would he have done those things?
Needed to?
He'd be with friends by now.
They'd have welcomed him because he is as he is while I was remote, cold.
What words; what things to be.
Who do you go to to unlearn them?
My mother  might have taught me.
She was another who was loved because she was as she was.
There was no one else any more.
My conscience, unmoved by this self-pity, kept asking: Why did you stay, Delia?
And I answered aloud, ‘Because I didn't want to leave him.’
Who didn't you want to leave?
‘It could've been a life,’ I said.
‘I would've learnt.’
And Conscience said: No, you wouldn't.
The door opened and I covered the terrible state of my face with hair.
‘Sorry, Curtis.
Did you think I was a burglar?
Nothing to worry about.
Back to bed.’
And I thought then that maybe I should ask him how he was.
It'd be a start.
But not now.
He must go away so I could too.
‘Mrs Sutherland?’
‘Leon.
I thought you were Curtis.’
‘Ah.’
He hesitated.
‘Your hair.
It's, it's huge.’
‘Yes.
Yes.
It does that when it's free and a bit damp, you know, rain and all.’
I was standing, although couldn't remember getting up and, unable to think what to say, sat down again.
I nearly said, What are you doing here?
Rubbed the words off my mouth in time.
‘How are you?’
‘Very well, thank you.’
He came quite close.
‘Can I touch it?’
‘My hair?
Oh heavens.
Well, yes.
Why not?
Gosh.
Who'd want to?’
He rubbed it between his fingers, staring with admiration, then sank, cross-legged, near my chair, the way he'd done on his first night.
‘Fire's dead,’ he said.
‘Yes.’
‘Went to my room.
They're off in there too.’
‘I didn't know when you were returning.
Thought it was dangerous to leave them on.
Don't think I'm hanging around.
I'm not.
You haven't given me enough time.’
‘No.
I know.’
‘So.’
‘Do you want to know where I went?’
‘To see friends?’
He shook his head so I said, ‘Well, it doesn't matter.
Not my business.’
‘I went to find a hooker, Mrs Sutherland.’
He watched my face while I touched the top of my head, patted the arms of the chair, folded my hands away in my lap.
‘Well, people do, don't they?
Men.
‘Men have needs,’ that's what Francis used to say.
‘Needs’.
‘So have I,’ I used to say.
But I don't think we were understanding each other.’
‘So I checked into Park West, had dinner, got talking to the barman, said what I was after.
He asked what I liked, dark, fair, black, white.
It was like ordering in; which I guess it was.
He was serving other people all the while and making out we were talking about the Superbowl.
Experience, I guess.
‘I went back to my room and soon a girl came with flat blonde hair, sickly-looking.
Very young.
She was real brisk.
I could tell she was a user.
I've never had a hooker before so I didn't know the form.
It's just the kind of situation where a man feels he's the only guy in the world who doesn't know the form and it's embarrassing.
She was very young.
Did I tell you that already?’
‘Yes.’
‘She asked me what I wanted.
Do you know what I said?
Jesus, it's pathetic, but I'd had a few bourbons…’
‘They have it in the Park West, then?’
Pinching his lower lip he studied me sideways.
‘That's right.
That's right.
Do you mind me telling you all of this, Mrs Sutherland?
Was your joke to stop me?’
‘No.
What did you tell her you wanted?’
‘I said I wanted…’
His hand distorted the word.
‘What?
I didn't hear.’
‘Never mind.
If I could've chosen I would've got a girl more sophisticated, talk awhile, have a few drinks then screw.
She wasn't that.
She was in a hurry to get the money for her fix.
She started undressing.
I've never seen anything so fast; then she began on me and I said to wait.
Why? she said.
Was I shy?
Did I want something special?
I only had to ask.
I said I wanted time.
She looked kind of disgusted and then, like, eased me back into a chair.
She had real strength in her.
She sort of collapsed me at the knees and I was down there.
Then she unzipped me and sucked me off.
Just like that.
She tried undressing me again and I said no, she'd better go, that I'd changed my mind.
She  said the price'd be the same.
She didn't know it but I'd have paid her double to get her ass out.
I can't believe I'm telling you all this.’
‘Why?’
‘Why can't I believe it?
Christ, Mrs Sutherland.’
‘No.
Why did you take a whore?
You must have friends, contacts in London.
You're so, so…there'd be someone in no time.’
‘There's no one, really.
Yes, I have some numbers.
But you know how it is, answerphones and stuff.
It takes time, all that.
I needed it then.’
‘Sex?’
‘Maybe.
Sure, why not?
But mostly what goes with it, like warmth.
I don't know.’
‘I see.’
‘I miss her, you know.’
His eyes filled, but he did not know it was happening, this overflowing, until I reached down, wiped his face, showed him my wet fingers which he dried with his own.
‘Who?
Who do you miss?’
‘Mamma.
She'd say to me you fight on, Leon.
Fight on, boy.
You're gonna be OK.
There's nothing for you here, she'd say, nothing here that you can't come back and buy.
Take your place there.’
‘You can ring, surely, and have her visit?
Is it me here that's stopped you?
Well, I'm gone now.
Call her today’
‘I can't do that.’
‘It'd be kind.’
Me, all of a sudden, a connoisseur of kindness.
‘She died before I came over, Mrs Sutherland.
I would've thought you knew that.’
‘No one told me.’
‘David could have.
He knew.
But you saw her, you must've known she was sick.
Crack, that's what it was.
She was into it when I got back from college.
I lied to you, Mrs Sutherland.
She didn't want me as a kid.
She was a kid herself, making good.
I could've found her.
I knew where she was, the fancy house in Delaporte, any night at the Big Bamboo.
But I wanted to be the Somebody  when I came back to her.
Corny, right?
But, you know, in those months we had together she really tried to make up.
When we heard about the Will she put her arms around me and said, ‘You go there and fight on, boy.
Fight on.’
That made me feel good, having those words from her.
She didn't want me around 'cause she was sure I'd get hooked too.
She was wrong but it's easy when it's everywhere like it is there.
There's a lot she knew about the danger.
I couldn't leave her, not after so long finding her.
And I couldn't bring her either, she wouldn't have it, and she wouldn't have made it anyway.
So I waited while she died and she wasn't slow.
She'd had enough.
‘So anyway, Mrs Sutherland, she can't come, can she?
And I don't hear those words, ‘Fight on, boy;’ or feel those long arms around me like I dreamed about for years and years.
Sometimes it's OK.
And other times it's not.’
He dug his face into his knees.
The cold in the room was awful.
I turned over the ashes, found the glow within the crust, added some kindling and a log, then stood to stretch with my hands in the small of my back because it was aching.
I lifted my hair, let it fall, and the weight of it brought my head down to see that Leon hadn't moved.
Outside Mike was calling the cows through the dark to morning milking; Bung was howling, Ho joined him intermittently.
The dovecot clock struck five, the clock on the mantelpiece behind me struck fourteen: mad as ever.
I rolled up my sleeves, those tartan sleeves, still damp, closed my forearms together and saw arms which, the same as the rest of me, had received no care.
‘Leon?’
I said, still looking at my arms.
When he didn't answer I crouched in front of him.
‘Leon?’
But he wouldn't lift his head so I put my hand to his cheek, which startled him, slid it under his chin and lifted his face.
I drew my arms together again in front of him, doubtful about my offering.
‘Would these arms do?’
He drew my arms around him; he kissed the palms of my hands and drew my arms around him without speaking.
I stayed wooden, afraid of the power that let me say those words; afraid to hold him too hard or too close.
To move would be to give myself away and frighten him as much as I was frightened.
He knelt up in front of me, our bodies touching from shoulder to knee, his hands in my hair, his mouth at the side of mine.
The temperature of his skin was so much the same as mine I hardly knew we touched, yet I remained very still, my hands laid on his shoulders with the exaggerated formality of one learning to dance.
Which, of course, I was.
He whispered something but so close to my ear the sound was distorted and I said, suppressing my voice to no more than a breath because it can be so harsh, ‘Say it again.
I didn't hear.’
So he said it again, ‘Help me.’
I can't say touch for touch how we became lovers because, really, we had been ever since he came into the room and found me still there, waiting and pretending.
I don't know, either, how I left the room later.
I've no pictures in my head to describe, can't make them up.
It was cold, though, I remember that, on moving away from him.
No doubt the fire had died again.
But was I still wearing some of my clothes or carrying them all bundled in my arms?
He was watching me.
Or was he with his arms over his head on the floor?
Yes, one picture does come to mind: before I broke away we lay facing, learning each other 's features in this new light.
I touched a hair away from his lower lip, kissed the place where it had been, then I left him.
I went into my bed and slept free of any kind of consciousness.
Maybe it lasted half an hour, that sleep, it couldn't have been longer because there was still no daylight when I was woken, although he didn't mean to wake me.
I was on my side, facing away from the door, the covers had been drawn from me.
I turned my head and, partially blinded by my chaos of hair, saw Leon was kneeling naked at my back.
His hands covered his face until he brought them into fists in front of him, in the way he often did, then he opened his arms along the length of me; his palms warm, close, without touching, cruised first my shoulder, then the weight of my breast under my hair, my hip, my stomach.
This body of mine in which I had taken no pleasure or pride, he was honouring, saying to it, ‘I love you, I love you, I love you,’ believing me to be asleep, and I let  him go on believing.
‘I love you, I love you…’
He didn't leave me but brought the covers over us both and closed his body around mine in a grip that was painful, miraculous, unceasing.
He bent his head into the hollow at the back of my neck.
His fingertips travelled until they found my own and, with the lightest returning pressure, I let him know it was all right.