

PROLOGUE
JUNE 1887
She screamed.
Then again, but much louder.
As loud as she could.
Just standing there, scream after scream.
Then, her throat rasped, she battered instead her fists against the bedroom door: pulling at the doorknob, rattling it, straining at the lock.
But no one, none of her family, came to protest.
She must be alone in the house.
It was stifling in the room — hot, stifling air.
Helpless with anger, she walked over to the window.
Then back to the door.
It seemed to her suddenly that the room had grown smaller, the door thicker.
A bedroom that she had known for at least ten of her seventeen years.
Now it was her prison.
The door — a dungeon door.
‘Let me out!’
She banged again, shouting.
‘I want to come out!
I shall be an actress, I shall .
You shan't stop me.
I'll go on the stage — I will, I will.’
She drew breath.
Then: ‘You'll have to let me out for the Jubilee.
I shall petition Queen Victoria.
She wouldn't want her loyal subject imprisoned.
And anyway, it's against the law, there's something called Habeas Corpus, you can't keep someone shut up…
Air, I want air!’
The window was open, just a crack.
Only — it was barred.
Right to the very top.
Bars that had been put there for their protection when the room had been a nursery for the four girls: Daisy, Ethel, Lily, Amy, the little daughters of Alfred Greenwood, founder of a chain of grocery shops serving the clothing trade of Leeds, in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Big daughters now, though.
Except for Amy, dead from scarlet fever.
Daisy already married — but a runaway marriage, a family scandal.
Her name must never be mentioned.
Lily in disgrace too: locked in her bedroom.
Until she comes to her senses, that is.
Only eighteen-year-old Ethel in favour.
She would be, Lily thought now, she would….
‘I want to go on the stage,’ she had said, six long months ago now.
‘I want —‘
But she had said it without much hope.
People like Dad  didn't struggle to make money and to live in a smart district of Leeds, in order to have a daughter living a dangerous, flashy, immoral life.
For that was how he saw it:
‘Never.
Never, Lily.
That I should ever see the day…’
And Ma, who always agreed with him (who didn't dare do otherwise), stout, soft Ma, who should have been a refuge, a lap to sit upon, a bosom to weep on, but who herself looked always in need of comfort — crumpled, creased, forever on the verge of tears:
‘You've upset your father now, Lily — with your foolish ideas.
All we want for you is…’
But Lily knew well enough what was wanted for her.
And I shan't be that sort of person, she thought.
Ever.
That suffocating life of bombazine, of predictability, where a visit to Scarborough was a great event.
Where she too might marry someone like Dad, and then have four little daughters, and perhaps five years later, at last, a son.
(Even if one as dear as her dear , dear brother, Harry.)
And then to grow stout…
No.
It would not do.
It would not do at all.
When I might be out there on the stage, applauded by thousands — however humbly I have to begin.
When I might go,shall go to Paris.
When life, through my own making, could always be exciting, exciting, exciting.
Later, there had been the scene she didn't want now to remember:
‘You think because I've spent money on you, lass — because your Dad's spent money on you, you can do what you like now —eh Lily ?
as if there'd not been trouble enough with Daisy, without we've this now.
What'd folk say, eh?
Alfred Greenwood's lass,gone to join the lakers ….
It's no life for a lady.
And now, over and over, all through this Jubilee Week:
‘You'll promise then?
Give us your word, your mother and I, that it's all done with.
No more of this lock and key…’
‘I'll promise nothing —‘
‘You will’
‘I'll not-’
‘What's that, eh?
Say ‘Dad’, ‘Father’.’
‘I'll not — Dad.
Father …’
The indignity of the chamber-pot, the one with the blue violets on it.
She was going to need it any moment now.
The chamber-pot — for everything.
It was as if she were ill.
Ma hoped she was : only being poorly could make Lily behave like this, she told her.
Ethel had said something quite else, but Ma had turned on her, and said she was lucky to be healthy, and it was no fault of Lily's these ideas had overcome her.
When she came in to see her, Ma's eyes would fill with tears — and then Lily would very nearly give in.
Ma had suffered enough over Daisy, she didn't deserve all this unhappiness.
If I had it in me, Lily thought, to promise…
Downstairs, the piano had started up (the new cottage upright, a Schiedmayer and Soehne's, seven-octave, in walnut, that Dad had paid a whole thirty-five pounds for at Ramsden's).
Ethel, who couldn't tell a flat from a sharp, playing as if her fingers were croquet mallets.
Berceuse .
No baby would be rocked to sleep with that …
A knock on the door:
‘Lily — Lily.
You there?’
Harry's voice.
Full of love for his big sister.
‘Of course , daftie.
How could —‘
‘Lily, we're back.
I saw them — Hussars, Mounted Police.
Practising, they were.
There's to be a twenty-one gun salute —‘
‘Yes — and?’
‘Ma's coming up in a little, Ethel too.
Lily, I've on my new sailor suit.
It's got a lanyard and a whistle.
And you know what, Lily?
It's meant for a lad of twelve —‘
‘And you only nine….
Listen a moment, Harry — listen now.
I want —‘
‘Lily, there's Ethel coming…’
She heard him being pushed from his place at the keyhole.
Ethel's voice was breathy: ‘Ma's on her way.
She'll have something to say to you.
Or rather, Dad will.
We heard you screaming when we came down the road.
Folk'll think you're touched…’
But Lily had only one thing to say to her sister:
‘I'm going to be an actress, Ethel-’
‘You're acting now , Lily.
What you're doing now in that bedroom, that's acting ….
You ought to do what Dad says.
You know what happened to Daisy…’
Lily said angrily, her mouth too near the keyhole, tasting the brassy flavour:
‘Marrying isn't wrong — what if he doesn't ever speak to her again?
And anyway, Daisy married the man she loved.
That's not a sin in the eyes of God.’
‘But Father had said No.
He forbade it —‘
‘He's not God the Father, is he?
Is he?’
‘Lily,please ….
Anyway, marrying a Jew , fancy marrying a Jew, they're awful those Jews here in Leeds.
Common Polish people, Dad says.
Taking the bread out of honest folk's mouths.
You know it…’
But Lily didn't know it.
Not at all.
She had been completely on Daisy's side, from the very beginning.
She was on the side altogether of the newly arrived Jewish community.
Even more so now: now that she knew just a little, a very little, of what it was to be persecuted….
Daisy's drama had begun the day she went to help Mrs Mandelbaum with her party.
The Mandelbaums, who were not strict Orthodox Jews, had lived in Leeds for twenty or thirty years, and through wealth, charm and kindness had become part of a wider social circle than was usual.
Ada Thompson who knew Herbert Varley who was married to a Jewish girl, asked Daisy, one dank and drizzling November afternoon two years ago, to come with her to the Mandelbaums'.
‘It's a party for refugees, I've promised to help hand round cakes — I've done it twice before.
You'll come, Daisy, won't you?’
And Daisy, the gentle, the endlessly kind, who never refused anyone anything (and yet was to show herself later so strong, so tenacious of purpose, so immovable in her loyalties), gave up whatever else she had planned — and went to meet her fate.
The year was 1885.
The first really large wave of Jewish immigrants had been in 1881 with the pogroms of Alexander III in Russia.
They had been coming over steadily ever since, in spite of warnings about the difficulties of living in a foreign land — warnings given them by the English Jewish establishment.
Many were from the Polish part of Russia.
They would travel to Hamburg, then by boat to Hull: many of them  intending to go on to Liverpool and from there to America.
Frequently they hadn't the money.
What they did have was the word ‘Leeds’: often the only English word they knew, passed on to them by relatives who had been early immigrants.
By the time of Mrs Mandelbaum's party, they were arriving at the rate of about fifty a month…
Daisy knew little about them (Lily and Ethel even less), except that they were numerous and had formed by now a ghetto in the Leylands district of Leeds.
Dad was rude about them (but who wasn't he rude about?) and there were notices in shop windows — jobs advertised with the message, ‘No Jews need apply’…
About twenty boys and girls were at the party, ranging in age from ten to nineteen.
Some had been coming for a year or more and spoke quite a little English.
Ada and Daisy's task was to hand round food, and to talk to those who could manage some conversation.
Ada, because she had been before (the parties were held every month), showed off a little.
‘This way, Daisy.
Over here is a girl who dances like a — wait till she does her piece….
That boy there, Stefan something or other, he plays the fiddle…’
Three minutes later Daisy met Joszef.
She told Lily afterwards that from the first moment she saw him, she knew.
‘I just stood there, with the dish of fruit salad — staring.
Till he smiled and took it straightway from me.
And then he dared to start eating…’
It was his beauty, she said.
In spite of the ill-fitting clothes.
His dark shadowed face with its high cheekbones, the eyes, almost black, which she thought laughed at her, the hands with their long fingers: ‘I felt so pale and fluffy, Lily — beside him…’
When the food was all served and before the entertainments began, she had gone over to speak to him.
She discovered that he was nineteen (a year younger than her), that he came from the Kovno province of Poland and had escaped with his widowed mother and two elder brothers and young sister.
He was apprenticed to a jeweller and hoped to become a watchmaker.
All this she learned from him, with the help of two girl immigrants, who laughed and blushed either side of him.
He  himself was only a little shy — and obviously very proud of the English words he'd acquired in the few months since his arrival.
Daisy had determined there and then that she would — somehow — see more of him.
And in spite of being quiet, compliant Daisy (so very, very unlike Lily), that was what she did.
It hadn't been too difficult at first.
For three or four years now, Mrs Mandelbaum had been giving free English classes in her home.
She limited the numbers to those who wished to write and read as well as speak.
So far natural selection had kept the group small enough to be manageable; usually it was filled from among those who came to her monthly entertainments.
Rachel, Herbert Varley's wife, had been helping since the very beginning.
Daisy heard about the lessons that afternoon.
When the tea-party was almost over, and the singing and fiddle-playing done, she went over to Joszef and very prettily told him that he must come to Mrs Mandelbaum's: ‘to make your English better and better’.
Already he'd learned an unbelievable amount, she said.
Here was a chance for him.
Later she spoke directly to Rachel.
She would like to teach.
‘Even though I'm not Jewish, I want to help these people…’
She told Lily everything, but no one else, except Aunt Millie who was Ma's older sister and the two girls' greatest ally.
(If she were alive now, Lily thought, I would not be in this sorry mess…)
At home, Daisy said that she was helping with Sunday school teaching.
Neither Ma nor Dad were really interested.
Aunt Millie went with her as chaperone, and kept her secret.
Not that it was much of a one then: discovery would have meant at the most punishment and a diatribe against immigrants generally, with the chief worry, what contagion she might have picked up.
A litany of nits, ringworm, fleas and unmentionables…
But as the weeks and months passed, everything changed.
Daisy was irrevocably, desperately, in love.
And it was not, she told Lily, just her.
From the blackboard where she or Rachel pointed: ‘take took taken’, their eyes met continually.
When she corrected something with his pencil, their fingers touched…
He stayed behind once and talked with her after class.
Then — every time.
Aunt Millie looked unhappy.
Daisy invited herself to his home, and he looked unhappy.
Aunt Millie even unhappier.
But she went, taking Aunt Millie with her.
His mother spoke only Yiddish, his two brothers were suspicious of the visitors, the young sister hid and would not come out at all.
An uncle from Hull, a cabinet maker, visited while they were there.
A great bald-headed man with a scar on his temple from a Cossack sword: three years in England, he spoke good English.
The whole Ziolkiwski family it appeared would like to have gone on to America.
It seemed unlikely now.
That was April, six months after their first meeting.
In May, Daisy proposed.
‘I know it's very forward — but otherwise, how?
He can hardly ask Dad for my hand, can he?’
Indeed, that very week, Dad had been holding forth again.
‘Yorkshire for Yorkshire folk,’ he said three times in one evening after reading that immigration figures were up.
Somehow, with Aunt Millie's help, it had come all right— if being turned out, forbidden to see your sisters or brother, cut off without a penny, your name never to be mentioned at the family dinner-table, could be called that….
But she had her prince — triumphing first over his diffidence, her non-Jewishness (she had taken on his religion), the problems of his family who did not know what to make of her.
She had poverty too, and ostracism…
For Dad, Joszef was no prince.
He was — but Lily wanted to forget….
For the noise of that scene had filled the house.
Daisy, seeking above all not to betray Aunt Millie, had stood her ground, trembling, white-faced.
Sent up to bed in disgrace, she had left the house within the half-hour, taking refuge first with Aunt Millie.
Then secure in the knowledge that she was of age by six weeks, she had become Mrs Ziolkiwski — and written to tell Dad so.
The disgrace, the shame, had been terrible.
Ethel had taken her parents' side.
But little Harry had wept — for his beloved sister's absence and Lily had taken him secretly to visit her.
Soon they would be moving to live in Hull with the uncle.
This Christmas she expected a baby.
Although Daisy's name could not be mentioned, Dad was ruder than ever now about the immigrants.
‘Yorkshire for Yorkshire folk, let America have them….
They took the   paddies when I was a lad.
In the Famine.
Aye, let the Yankees have them…’
Her bedtime drink.
Tonight, June 20th, the sixth night of her imprisonment.
It was drugged.
She was sure of it.
The bottom of the cup was gritty.
It might be of course possibly just a different, poorer type of cocoa, something Dad was trying out in the shops.
But it made her feel odd, strange.
‘I do feel strange,’ she said out loud.
Perhaps her tantrum had worn her out?
She had all day to sleep if she wished, but: I sleep less than ever, she thought.
I am a prisoner.
But no one can imprison my spirit.
She tried to remember some poetry, any poetry about prisons.
But her mind kept going back to singing, dancing,acting …
I am the Countess, no, the Princess Ludmila Hohenkopetal, imprisoned by my cruel stepfather because I wish to marry the impecunious Lieutenant Longlegs who is really a king's son in disguise.
He hears me singing, and so learns where I am imprisoned….
He comes to my rescue.
Rescue.
Cue.
Cue for a song….
It was difficult to invent a song for a princess.
Maybe, in her nightgown, the gas mantle turned down, the curtains drawn back, moonlight across the floor (and if they don't like the noise, let them come and complain), she could sing…
‘Ladies and gentlemen, the famous Jack-in-the-Box song as performed by Miss Fanny Leslie —‘
Her feet dragged.
I am drugged, she thought…so feet drag….
Drugged, drug.
Dragged.
Best to lie down now…
She dreamed — about the Golden Jubilee.
She was in Leeds, in Duncan Street.
The tram was coming towards her from Boar Lane.
The people on top crowded, standing, hanging over the edge.
The horses wore golden plumes, tossing gilt.
Excitement filled the air.
She thought: I'm glad I'm awake and not dreaming.
A man, dressed poorly and without gold dust, stood near her.
‘What's happening?’ she asked.
When he didn't answer, she looked closer and saw that he was one of Joszef's brothers.
‘We just arrived,’ he said, ‘we are not stopping.
We go to America, you know…’
As the tram drew nearer the crowd could be heard cheering.
‘Who is it,’ she asked urgently, ‘who are they, what is it?’
‘They are cheering you,’ he said.
And then suddenly, coldly, she was alone on an enormous stage.
No audience — just a dark emptiness.
She saw that she was dressed entirely in jewels…
Rubies like pigeon's eggs; sapphires, emeralds, rope upon rope of pearls.
They are paste , of course, she thought.
And indeed they weighed next to nothing, lying lightly along her arms, over her wrists, round her waist…
It was then the diamonds came.
More diamonds than she had ever seen in her life.
They fell on the boards at her feet and she rushed to pick them up.
But the necklace, or corsage — she did not know which — was heavy.
With disbelief and joy, she saw that this one was not paste, but real .
She turned it over and over in her hands.
Held it up — seeing the diamonds catch the light as they moved, changing colour again and again.
Streaming, falling…
She woke with a start.
Sitting up, searching for a light.
They put something in my cocoa .
These are opium dreams.
They are making me into an addict, so that I may never leave home….
She tried to calm herself, but her heart raced.
Going over to the window, she could make out odd moon shadows on the garden.
‘Miss Lily Greene,’ she said out loud, ‘not Miss Greenwood — Miss Lily Greene .’
Then, the curtains round her face like a veil:
‘For insertion in The Stage ,’ she announced, ‘the week of June 21st, 1887: ‘Miss Lily Greene.
Disengaged.
Available for singing, dancing, acting roles.
Address: 1, Wycliffe Avenue, Far  Headingly , Leeds, West Riding, Yorkshire…’’
She had been intended for a respectable life.
Respectable.
Ma used that word.
Dad used it.
Even Ethel used it.
Everything was respectable, or not.
The stage was not.
And especially so, it appeared, if you had done well from nothing, like Dad.
From nothing: in 1850 he'd been just one of the hands at Wm Paul's Tannery in Kirkstall Road.
Now he never spoke of it-except once when they were passing, and the smell of it had been blown down on the wind.
Hard labour at the  tannery, but also: going to Sunday school, learning to read, add, subtract, divide, multiply.
Above all,to multiply .
Starting from a job as shop assistant, gained through his new skills; then, greatly daring, his own small shop in the Marsh Road area.
Then another in Kirkstall.
At first selling just food, then some clothing, and utensils….
Next, real multiple shops, some even selling furniture.
Greenwood's.
By the time Lily knew anything about it there were ten branches.
The Greenwood tree.
She was Lily Greenwood…
Except on the stage.
There she would be Lily Greene.
That idea had come from no less a person than the famous Sylvia Grey — who could sing, dance and play the piano, divinely.
Lily had been to dancing class — but so had Daisy and Ethel, just as all three at Dad's especial wish had spent many hours learning the piano.
It was the dances she'd invented herself which she wished to go out alone and show the House.
(How she loved that word for the theatre…)
Singing: her voice was very small.
She feared often that it might not fill the House, but it was true and strong and she'd been told it was pleasing.
Her looks too: she had hair that could be called golden.
It curled naturally too…
She did not see herself as Miranda or Juliet or even Portia.
It wasn't straight acting that had captured her imagination, but rather the stage itself.
(The Boards — another word she loved…)
Vaudeville, burlesque, attracted her.
Her heroines, the stars of the Gaiety Theatre in the Strand.
Last summer in Leeds she had seen the burlesque Little Jack Sheppard , when the Gaiety's new manager, George Edwardes, sent it on tour.
She had loved Nellie Farren as Jack — but it was Sylvia Grey she admired the most…
From the theatrical magazines on which she spent every spare penny, she learned all that she could about her.
Sylvia had been asked to arrange Sir Henry Irving's dances for The Dancing Girl .
So pleased had Irving been that, in congratulation, he had shaken her foot…
And I have met her, Lily thought…
Six months ago now, the last show at the Grand before the Christmas pantomime.
A Benefit for someone: Fred Leslie, I think.
Moore and Burgess were there and G. H. Chirgwin the  White-eyed Kaffir, Ballyhooley Lonnen, Hayden Coffin singing Love of my life ….
And — Sylvia Grey.
Oh, but it was a wonderful evening.
The special seats were had, for we were there by invitation — Dad was,is Someone in the city of Leeds.
I renewed my vow that evening.
The vow I made four years ago that someday I would go on the Boards.
Then, my head full of dancing rhythms, lights, applause, I thought: Not someday — Now…
As we were leaving the theatre, we had to wait for Dad to shake hands in the foyer with some dignitaries.
It was then I slipped away.
Quick.
I had to be quick.
Asking the way to the dressing-rooms.
Imagining that four male admirers at least would be waiting outside Miss Grey's room, be already inside…
Her voice: a light ‘Come in —’ She was made up still for the stage.
The room struck me as chill.
She had thrown a shawl about her shoulders.
And she had a cold: she sneezed almost immediately after I came in.
Quick, quick.
Again, quick.
My breathless self-introduction.
Her surprise.
(Although she did not seem so very surprised.)
She was blowing her nose.
Then she rubbed her wrists and her forehead with a cologne stick.
I said: ‘I want, you see, to go on the stage, and…’
Then out it all came: what I could do, would do — if given the chance….
And Miss Grey, smiling at me now, a smile of such radiance.
Her reddened nose, showing now through the greasepaint, only enhancing her beauty.
‘You have learned Deportment?’
She was smiling still.
‘I see that you have.’
‘Yes.
At school…’
She was young.
Not so much older than myself.
But greater.
Already successful.
She did not ask me foolish questions such as—‘How do you propose to go about it?’ but instead said with easy grace, reaching into a capacious velvet bag, handing me a card:
‘If you come,when you come to London to try your luck — please visit me.
When I am not on tour, the Lyceum finds me.
If I can help…’
Her voice was so pretty: ‘Greenwood, did you say?’
She put her head on one side: ‘Yes, that is nice.
Nice.
But…don't you think…
How about Lily Greene ?’
But of course.
I should have known.
Greenwood is all right— but for me, it is a shopkeeper's name…
‘Lily Greene,’ she said again, ‘Yes, I like that….
Miss Greene, goodbye, and good luck…’
In the foyer, indignation.
Our  carriage was waiting outside.
Almost everyone else gone.
‘What's the meaning of this, eh, Lily?
Eh?’
‘Yes, Dad.
No, Dad.
I wandered off, then I couldn't find my way back…’
I whispered something to my mother and then Ma whispered to Dad.
Needing suddenly…natural functions….
But Dad said only: ‘You should have taken your sister with you —’(as if I would take Ethel anywhere I didn't have to — and certainly not the lavatory.)
I was so happy, though.
And proud too, when the next day I had caught her cold…
She had never meant to run away.
She had thought that, difficult as her father was, he would see the reasonableness of her ambitions and send her to London with some sort of blessing.
If not immediately, at least when she was a little older.
So just as Daisy had done a year or so earlier, she had made her announcement…
With similar results.
But sadly there was no longer an Aunt Millie to run to.
She had died soon after Daisy's marriage.
I shall run away, Lily had thought then, it's as simple as that.
I shall run away to London.
Money was the main problem.
She had a small legacy from Aunt Millie, but it was hidden away, waiting for when she married.
(‘You'll have a tidy sum to bring with you, Lily…’
Dad had said.)
That was the trouble with money, in Yorkshire: you never had it now.
Hers sat in the Yorkshire Bank or the Leeds Permanent, meant for marriage, when it would not really seem hers.
And so on until the Last Day, when it was always: ‘How much did he leave, what was he worth ?’
Dad, reading the Wills in the Yorkshire Post .
Old Higging (‘best Angel and Bride Cakes in the West Riding’) worth only half of what had been expected — a failure at the time of his possible greatest triumph.
‘No one 'll say that of me, eh, Lily, eh, Ethel?
If things go the  way they should….
Another three shops by eighteen-ninety….
I'll have the Co-operative off the map, eh?’
She had seen an advertisement in the newspaper: ‘£5 — £100 lent to respectable people only on their IOU's and promissory notes without bonds — W. Trees Esq., Park Villas, Heeley.’
‘Respectable people.’
She liked that….
She went, taking Harry with her: she took Harry everywhere so that she might go out alone.
She gave her name, a false one.
Said what it was about.
The parlourmaid went off.
And then, the enormous figure with rust-coloured moustaches walking towards her in the hall.
‘Well, little girl, eh?
My little lassie.
Well —‘
She fled.
In the end she had sold bit by bit anything she could lay her hands on.
Any trinket, small unwanted gift.
Anything larger she pawned, intending to leave behind the tickets.
All those elaborately laid plans.
The timing: when best to go,where to go.
She had the grand sum of ten pounds, and her wicker canvas-covered dress basket packed.
The advertisement in The Stage had read: ‘Well-furnished Rooms to Let from 3/6d per week…’
She had worked out how long the money would last.
In so many weeks she must find work.
The best laid plans….
Harry in her confidence but no one else, not even Daisy.
(Daisy would be upset for her.
She would write to her from London.)
Late at night was the best time to leave.
The last train was half past midnight.
It was important to be at once on it so that she couldn't be followed.
But Ma was in bed always by ten, Ethel even earlier.
And Dad was away, gone for two nights to Halifax.
Or so she thought…
‘And what might you be doing?’
He said it twice, three times.
Each time growing more angry.
Standing at the bottom of the stairs, turning up the gas, revealing her in a pool of light.
It would not do.
Her stammered explanation.
Then her defiant declaration.
His stunned horror.
‘What's this?
What's this ?’
She had not seen him so angry since Daisy's marriage.
Bundling her up the stairs.
A door on the landing opening and Ethel peeping out, nightcap pulled over her forehead, mouth open.
Dad shouting at her, too.
He was rough.
She had hold still of her wicker basket.
Dad pushing her into her bedroom: basket, cloak and everything, snatching the key from the inside, and then — but this she could not believe — locking it from the outside.
The key turned — and removed.
Five days ago now.
They thought that they could wear her down.
That in the end she would give up her foolish notions.
They really believed that …
‘Lily, Lil — it's Harry.
Listen —‘
‘Harry, are you alone?’
‘Yes, hush — I've got to be quick.
You know about the key, Lily?— I've found where Ma keeps it —‘
‘Harry, dearest Harry — go on.
Yes.
Yes?’
‘She locks it in her desk and the desk key is on her belt.
But, Lily, there's a second desk key somewhere.
I heard her say…’
‘Harry, you've got to help me.
I won't do anything terrible, it's not her fault — but I must find a way —‘
‘Ethel's after your blood, Lily.
She thinks you might do something, she says she's always coming up with Ma.
Every time.’
‘Oh Lor’.
Harry, listen, I'm desperately, terrible unhappy.
And I know I'm wicked but —‘
‘I'll set you free, never fear, Ensign Greenwood to the rescue.
God save the Queen.
And trust me…’
Already the second Sunday.
Perhaps the worst day of all Sunday.
With the smell of roast beef from nine-thirty in the morning and a horrible hush everywhere: no piano, not even Ethel, no Harry with his tin trumpet.
Just Dad's voice outside on the landing.
‘She'll be coming to her senses soon enough, will the lass.
Don't fash yourself…’
And through the window, only the sight of people going to church…
To church.
She could not believe her good fortune when it happened.
When suddenly the door opened and Harry stood there.
He was in his sailor suit, dressed for church.
And breathless too, as if he'd been running.
‘You got in here,’ she cried.
‘You got the key!’
‘Quick, quick.
You've got to be quick, Lily —’
‘Harry, how did you do it?’
‘No time to say really — but we were just about off, and I was holding the books for Dad when he said, ‘I'd best get those papers for old Holroyd.’
I followed him, Lily, and then — I couldn't believe it — I saw where he'd a desk key hidden, so then I put the books down sudden, and bent double.
I was poorly, I said — and now I'm meant to be lying down in my room.
Only, Lily, you've got to be quick —‘
It was too much, now that it had happened.
She was all fingers and thumbs — and worry.
About Harry.
‘I don't want you in trouble —‘
‘Don't reckon to me.
Honest.
And Lily, Sunday trains, you're sure?
You know?’
‘Yes, yes, I do.
By heart.
Harry, push this in the hamper for me.
Harry, Harry, Harry…’
‘What'll you do, will you change your name?
They'll be after you, won't they?
Won't they, Lily?’
‘How long have I got?’
Without Harry, it would have been impossible.
Hurry, Harry,hurry ….
In case someone should come back from church early.
Then, down the stairs, out of the door, look right at front gate, left… 
A kiss, a hug.
‘I'll write to you, Harry, I'll find a way…’
Free, free, free, at last.
Hurry, hurry.
‘Harry, I love you best of all.
Best in all the world…’
Hurry … 
PART ONE 1897–1918
1
Roses, roses, roses.
Waiting for her this evening, as always.
Yellow, white, and deep dark red.
Roses.
From Edmund.
In another part of the dressing-room, a great basket of fruit tied with ribbon — hothouse peaches, grapes, nectarines.
‘Miss Lily Greene, star of The Duke and the Shopgirl , Carlton Theatre…’
She looked inside casually, flicking the card over, finger skimming the heavy raised copperplate.
The Hon.
Herbert or Algy or Whatever — the very same who had said (how original!) that her skin was like a peach…
Evie, her dresser, said, ‘Over there they are, ducky — the roses from You Know Who…’
But Lily had seen them already.
‘He's out of Town,’ she said, ‘my Viscount — till Thursday.’
‘Some other gentleman giving you supper?’
‘Yes.
It's the one you don't care for.
Mr Firth.’
‘Romano's, is it, ducky?’
‘No, the Savoy.
But it's a party.
We shan't be alone.’
I am just filling in the days, she thought — until Edmund returns.
Anything, anyone else, it is nothing.
1897.
And another Jubilee.
Diamond now.
My year, as well as Queen Victoria's, thought Lily.
How everything dazzled, this summer of the Jubilee.
Day after day of sunshine, and excitement.
The air shimmered with it.
And then the great day itself — June Two Two, as they called it — it was as if the excitement could no longer be contained.
It had been a while coming.
Sound of hammers and saws, smell of yellow pine.
Carpenters putting up stands along the procession route.
Scrubbing up of statues.
Food imported for a million and a half people.
Celebrations.
Illuminations.
Coloured glass and gas jets.
1837–97 in fairy lamps.
VR in cut glass, and brown paper.
A Procession to St Paul's.
The hero, General Roberts, on his white Arab pony (six medals hanging from its breast): ‘God bless you, Bobs,’ called the crowd.
And inside the Cathedral, someone from the States paying two thousand dollars for a seat.
The fabulous Indian princes, their coats sewn with real diamonds…
For Lily, starring in the most popular show of the Jubilee Season, the excitement felt almost unreal….
That in ten years she should have risen from a frightened, defiant seventeen-year-old to this.
Her name on every smart person's lips….
And — but wasn't this the most important? the betrothed (well, almost) of the Viscount Tristram.
Of Edmund .
It was that, wasn't it, the real excitement?
Fairy-tales can happen in real life, she told herself.
He was altogether too handsome, she had thought at first.
Mistrusting such good looks.
Then — why not? she had thought.
Since for him at least, it was love at first sight.
And for her at the most, third sight.
It had all seemed part of the wonder: that it should have happened just this Jubilee summer.
as if everything had conspired, as if it had been ordained.
Heroine of The Duke and the Shopgirl .
Suddenly to be offered, fruit of ten years' hard work, this plum….
It had even caused Dad to get in touch with her (although apparently for the past three or four years, he had been collecting cuttings…)
Now he was actually proud of her.
Even spoke as if her success were his doing.
While she — she was in quite a bargaining position.
She did not want to see him, and did so as little as possible.
As for her mother: Ma, she felt, had let her down.
Taken the wrong side.
Ethel…well, Ethel was simply jealous.
But what it had meant was being able to see something of Harry again…
Meantime the wonderful enchanted season that had begun with the opening of the show in April went on.
She had never looked so well, and knew it.
Her new way of doing her hair: waved and brushed back high from her forehead — so much better than last year's fringe.
Those photographs: a silk thread held either side of her nose, just tilting it up slightly….
A year, too, when it was the fashion to show off the figure.
And hers was good…
Oh, those lovely dresses, silk, batiste, ninon, lace, all  stitched by hand, all paid for by Max Hochoy whose show The Duke and the Shopgirl was.
Ascot Sunday, and an attentive Edmund — straw boater, white flannels.
Herself, lying back on the punt cushions.
Taking care not to be burned by the sun (had she not promised Max?).
Her parasol of orange and grey chiffon, with its Dresden china handle.
At Bolter's Lock, a crowd singing, as soon as they saw us, songs from my show…
And always Edmund.
So much in love.
(No sooner leaving me in the evening, than he must write to me.)
Suppers, suppers, suppers — Gatti's, the Savoy, private rooms at Kettner's, Romano's with its butter-coloured front, and our favourite table, just behind the glass at the entrance.
Then, every evening — oh, the danger of it — home by hansom.
Not any old hansom cab — Edmund's own private one, with its glittering harness and liveried driver (he is a Viscount, after all…).
Dark green plush velvet of the upholstery into which I sink — and struggle.
But not too hard.
Oh, but there is nothing quite like a hansom cab — as it shakes from side to side, throwing us against each other, deliciously…
Edmund, Viscount Tristram.
He had held the title for a year now, since just after his twenty-second birthday.
His father's death, of a heart attack, had been very sudden.
Edmund spoke of him movingly, as a devoted parent, completely wrapped up in his Suffolk estate and the care of his tenants.
‘I intend to be like him,’ Edmund told her.
That meant marrying, settling down, bringing up a family, thought Lily.
How fortunate that she, at twenty-seven, was just ready for that.
And fortunate too that he should be so much in love…
Her mouth full of pins, Evie said, ‘You're all right with your Viscount, Ducky.
But — I wouldn't be too much with Monsewer Firth —‘
‘Why's that, Evie?’
 Lily said casually.
‘He's not the marrying kind, for a start.’
‘He's here often enough, Ducky.’
‘Only when there's no one else.
When Viscount Tristram's away…’
But then when Evie said nothing further, perversely she  felt a flutter of curiosity.
She said, ‘He seems interested enough in women, if that's what you mean.
Why haunt stage doors here, if men are the interest?’
‘It's….
Well, ducky…it's to do with things that aren't spoken of…’
Lily, laughing, said, ‘Oh, go on.
Tell me, do —‘
‘He's — the kind as….
He buys little ones.
What they call unripe fruit….
Little girls what haven't been touched.
He's to pay for them, mind you — they don't come cheap’
She felt faintly sick.
‘I wish you hadn't told me,’ she said, in a light voice to mask the shock.
She felt unclean.
‘Time to dress, ducky.
I seen to them stockings…’
A little close to the knuckle, she thought sometimes, this tale of shopgirl turned Duchess…(real life was the highly moral tale of a Yorkshire chainstore-owner's daughter, likely, before 1897 was out, to become a Viscountess…).
Indeed, recently a journalist from The Lady had hinted at some connection between the heroine and Lily.
INTERVIEWER: Miss Greene, is it true that you know perhaps, a little, about the life of a shopgirl?
That your part is not all acting —‘
ME (coldly ): I have never served in a flower shop if that is your suggestion — My father owns a chain….
His daughter would hardly expect to stand behind the counter…
INTERVIEWER:(hastily collecting notes together ): There is, has been, a break with your family — now happily mended, I understand.
Perhaps you could tell our readers a little about your early life?
You ran away to go on the stage
ME: Yes.
My father forbade…
Since I have done well, he is quite proud…
INTERVIEWER: Your family?
You said a brother, two sisters?
ME: Yes, one sister lives at home.
She is unmarried.
My brother works for my father.
INTERVIEWER: And the other sister?
ME: Married.
With children…
And I hastily changed the subject.
I had expected the cock to crow, that day.
It was as if I had denied Daisy and Joszef.
Even Harry a little.
There was a photograph of Daisy on the table in her theatre dressing-room.
Daisy from the Wycliffe Avenue days.
She would have been ashamed to have up the present-day Daisy.
(Yes, I send her what money I can, and whatever I send, feel always that I should send more…)
She did not like to admit that she was embarrassed by her sister.
Moving upwards, how could she not be dragged down by the truth about Daisy?
(For that, she thought,I hate myself .)
Yet she continued to keep on her table the photograph which told so little.
Only that Daisy had once been far prettier than her…
What she wanted was to send the whole family to America.
With enough to set themselves up.
(I have heard too many tales of immigrants’ early days — their second state worse than their first.)
If, when, Edmund and she were married, it would be easy: I shall have only to ask.
He will help.
For he has a kind heart….
But first, she thought, I have to tell him.
And that I do not look forward to….
I have become a snob.
The truth was that Daisy had absolutely, but absolutely, lost her looks.
Her figure with its dragged down look, her colourless, drawn skin — once pink and white.
And Joszef, the last time seen: receding hairline, dark velvety eyes bloodshot and anxious.
She could not have believed ten years could so alter two people.
Yet in everything that really mattered, their concern was always for each other— and of course the children.
Two sons, two daughters, born in less than six years, brought up in simple surroundings with no help.
Poor Daisy, disapproved of from both sides (for Joszef's family had still not come round, though she had adopted their religion).
The eldest was little Joe, then Anna, Sam, Ruth.
Any money Lily gave went straight into their mouths and on to their backs.
Or into the small money-box that each child had.
Harry told her:
‘Daisy says that their time , it's over….
But the little ones are to have, one day, the best…
And Lily, as soon as I'm rich — they shall —‘
Dear Harry.
So carefully dressed when he came to applaud me and, with money given by Dad, to take me out to Simpson's.
Already becoming, just a little, the person Dad wanted him to be.
All those years ago, Harry had suffered on her account.
She only learned the details now:
‘…
I didn't know a lad could be so black and blue….
He hadn't the truth out of me for going on three days.
‘I'll have it, I will —’ he kept saying….
He was that certain I knew something….
But he never made to go after you at all.
Every day it was: ‘If she's expecting I'll rescue her off the streets…’
Ma was worried, though…’
And how Dad had punished him…
‘The thrashings, Lily — they weren't much.
It was the disgrace — Ethel and Ma not so much as allowed to speak to me…’
He spoke of it a lot that evening: not to bring home to her all he'd done but rather because it'd been perhaps the biggest single event in his (now rather dull) life.
And of course, because he loved her.
Over and over he told her, ‘I'd do it again tomorrow…’
‘Overture and beginners…’
This hot June evening, Lily could sense already another excited expensive Jubilee audience.
‘They've been turning them away again, Miss Greene — in their droves…
Miss Greene — the Duke of Sedley has the second box on the prompt side…’
(She thought: I mustn't forget to sing a few notes in that direction…)
‘Overture and beginners…’
The Carlton Theatre was a little larger than George Edwardes's Gaiety.
Playing the fringes of the metropolis, Lily had used to hope that one day, looking up on the prompt side, she would see one of George Edwardes's scouts.
Better, that one of his scouts would see her…
The curtain rose on The Duke and The Shopgirl .
The chorus sang plaintively of their long hours in the shop, and short nights in the attics above.
Woken at five, wash, comb, and downstairs to receive the day's stock.
Enter Mr Malcutt, manager.
No real life shop could support so many assistants for so small a stock, but how the audience loved this bevy of beauties who bowed, and sidestepped, in stately fashion (the great stunning picture hats for Jubilee Year would not appear until Act Two — not reach their apogee until Act Three).
Roll-call ‘Where is Miss Dainty ?’
The girls look at each other, finger on lips.
‘Three more minutes — and Miss Dainty is dismissed…’
Consternation.
And then, just in time to save her skin, the bow of her shop dress defiantly askew, here is the tomboyish, the naughty Cynthia Dainty, alias Lily Greene.
An ovation.
But Lily is used to it — a quick glance now up to the box where an evening-coated Duke sits, double-barrelled opera glass trained on her.
(It was from that box, three months ago, that Edmund first saw me…)
Miss Dainty is safe, for today.
Mr Malcutt leaves.
And the Duke of Moberley, Hero, enters.
‘I come to buy flowers and fruit for the most beautiful woman in London…the actress Bathsheba Rebecca.’
And then since we have a real life Duke in the house, what about an apparent ad lib ?
Turning, throwing his voice (Miss Dainty: ‘Why do you stare so?’) and the line with extra meaning: ‘A duke may look at an actress, may he not?’
He has a song in praise of Bathsheba and when he has left, Lily sings it too — in praise of him…
Thirty minutes to go…soon all the complications (rival for the Duke's affections, villainous uncle-solicitor, Duke in disguise as a shop assistant) will be resolved.
A Happy Ending beckons…
As Lily stands centre stage, a basket of fruit in her hand, the Duke sings:
‘What a skin, what a bloom,
It's the very finest peach
If only I could reach
(‘if only he could reach’ sings the chorus)
Up to her room…
What a bloom, what a skin
Would it be such a sin ?’
Any moment now, applause.
Encores.
Calls for Miss Greene.
Lily Greene neé Lily Greenwood.
I am a success .
The Duke back again behind his opera glass.
In the interval, she had been presented to him.
It would do for excitement, since Edmund could not be there….
Then next, supper at the Savoy with Lionel Firth.
Since Edmund…
‘My dear Miss Greene, may I introduce a new, but very fervent admirer…’
Although she had dined with Lionel alone twice, she was happier with him in the company of others.
His dark good looks had about them something raffish, sinister almost, which at once attracted and frightened her.
Cynical and astringent too, which she found satisfying after too much flattery.
(No need to take him seriously, though — even less so after Evie's disgusting revelations…)
‘A new admirer,’ said a deep voice, ‘and already your devoted slave.’
An older, stockier than Lionel, but equally dark-haired man.
Lionel explained:
‘…
My brother has left the family seat for two weeks of the fleshpots.’
Of course.
The brother, the older Firth — so often thrown casually into Lionel's conversation.
(‘…As my dear brother said only last week, evenings spent with actresses…’)
Sir Robert Firth.
Sir Robert.
I think, she remembered, as he walked a little behind her, it was a title received for some public work or other….
A widower too.
Always a pitiful sight.
Rich, too.
Money enough for Lionel to idle away his days, to be all the Season in London, to be up in Yorkshire when it pleased him…
A firm, almost too firm handshake.
A deliberate, slightly monotonous voice.
But in many ways — another Lionel.
Although not, she suspected, an amusing one…
Gilt, plush, chandeliers, cigar smoke.
It was cigar smoke she noticed first always — every time a slight, pleasurable stinging of the eyes.
As she came into the restaurant, the Hungarian band was playing Leslie Stuart's Soldiers of the Queen , revived for the Jubilee.
At once they broke off, and in her honour played What a skin, what a bloom…
Heads turned.
They were a party of six.
She and Lionel, a Mrs Kingswood (a widow — hoping perhaps for Sir Robert?),
Captain McArthur — a friend of Lionel's whom she knew a little— and a Miss Bateman, young and pretty.
Captain McArthur was a musical comedy aficionado, and not pleased when Mrs Kingswood spoke critically of the form.
For him, Lily's show was quite simply the best…
Lionel said, ‘Anything to do with rags to riches is sure of a welcome if brightly done — as happens of course at the Carlton…
Although,’ he added, ‘I'm surprised we have not had yet The Duke and the Typewriter .’
‘Ah yes,’ Sir Robert said, ‘typewriters.
Those ladies who use the new machines…’
Captain McArthur said, ‘Typewriters haven't the romance of Shopgirls.
There's something too worthy about them — an odour of the New Woman.
But it would do for a comic sketch —‘
‘It has been done, I rather think,’ Lily said, spooning her crayfish bisque.
Lionel agreed.
Mrs Kingswood shuddered at the mention of New Woman.
The band played Dear little Jappy Jap Jappy , and The Amorous Goldfish from last year's hit,The Geisha .
Conversation turned to Yankee heiresses.
Always a fruitful subject, Captain McArthur said.
He would not refuse one, if offered.
Lionel who had been catching up on news from Yorkshire, said, ‘My brother tells me Hawksworth at the Hall has netted an enormous fish.
A Philadelphia — or is it Chicago? heiress.
And very oofy, very oofy indeed.
That family won't want…’
‘How was it done?’
‘A visit here.
Earlier this year.
He did not even need to cross the pond.
They marry at Christmas, I believe.’
Mrs Kingswood turned to Sir Robert.
‘How is young Miss Alice?
Any improvement?’
‘A little.
Her governess finds her difficult still.’
‘Your daughter?’
Lily said to him.
‘Lionel told me you have one…’
‘Yes.
Alice.
She is twelve.
She took her mother's death very hard.’
Further down the table, the subject was the Jubilee again.
Captain McArthur said: ‘I was here a few evenings ago, when the band played the anthem.
God save Her if the whole restaurant didn't stand up, cheering and waving napkins.
Food grew cold on the plates….
Really one may have too much of a good thing.’
‘Oh,’ cried Miss Bateman, the first time she'd spoken.
‘How too too TwoTwo, don't you think?’
‘…and such jams with the traffic,’ Lionel was saying, ‘I  saw a fellow walk along the tops of the cabs in Berkeley Street.
Quite a circus turn….
And then the day of the Procession itself…’
‘Ah those Indian princes,’ said Mrs Kingswood.
‘Their coats…the diamonds …’
Lionel turned to Lily.
‘Diamonds indeed.
Diamonds galore.
My brother here is the owner of a remarkable piece of jewellery.
A family possession since the ‘sixties…’
He bent nearer.
‘You've heard of a rain of diamonds?
Well, this is a waterfall of them.
A style favoured by Empress Eugenie and very fashionable at the time.
The diamonds are articulated, you see, and move with the wearer….
It's a necklace so lavish it is almost a corsage.
We call it simply The Diamond Waterfall ….
It is very spectacular…’
Lily made no comment.
He went on:
‘Naturally these past few years it hasn't been worn.
My late sister-in-law, of course….
It is a piece too that wears the woman, not the other way about.’
He spoke in a confidential tone, his voice low.
Miss Bateman, who had nevertheless been listening, said, ‘I should adore to see —‘
Sir Robert, he had heard too, leaning forward said gallantly, ‘You shall, my dear, you shall.’
He turned to Lily:
‘And you, Miss Greene — would it interest you?’
She had hardly been listening.
‘Oh, I scarcely think so,’ she said carelessly, ‘I am not much set on jewellery, you know…’
(Although I have, have I not, a sapphire bracelet from Edmund?
I broke all the rules for that.
Never to accept…)
‘Oh come now,’ Lionel said.
‘That doesn't sound like our Miss Greene —’ He persisted, saying to all the table, ‘It is a beautiful sight.
On or off.
No mere rain of diamonds.
A waterfall ‘
‘Yes, indeed, yes.’
She caught his brother's eye.
Sir Robert stared at her.
To show she had meant nothing by her remarks, she smiled.
At that moment the Hungarian band launched into a selection from Dorothy .
First a light, prancing number.
Then a quieter, more romantic one.
Sir Robert — she saw that he watched her still — said:
‘You know it — what show is this from?’
‘Yes, yes, I know it.’
She thought again: He is a widower  and that is pitiful.
‘Dorothy .
Frank Cellier.
Always popular.
It wasn't new, even ten years ago —‘
Pity.
I don't care for pity.
Once, it was nearly my undoing….
She felt that she could not bear it: this rush of memory, emotion.
Sir Robert was insisting, though: ‘This song — what is it called?’
‘Queen of my Heart ,’ she said promptly.
‘It is called Queen of my Heart …’
2
I had to be hard in those days, she thought.
Yet hearing the song now, she was reminded only of pity.
And the irony of that pity.
I concerned myself with the wrong person, she thought.
A foolish heart (mine) betrayed me, blinding me to what I should have seen.
Two memories the song brings back.
One shameful.
The other of a sadness I can hardly bear now to remember…
Escaped!
That first terrifying, wonderful day.
Ten years ago now yet seeming so much more.
Afraid and happy.
I was both.
Afraid they would come after me, that Harry would be punished on my account; that worse might befall Daisy and I not there to help…
Sitting there in the London bound train (I had thought it would never come into the station, that the whistle would never blow), I saw myself in a play, a melodrama perhaps — I felt I had Runaway Daughter written all over me…
It was a mixed carriage in a corridor train and the man sitting opposite me, heavily bearded, wrapped, though it was a warm June day, in a food-stained Ulster, watching me, watching me.
Outside Peterborough we ran into engine trouble and lost nearly two hours.
I was beside myself with wild imaginings.
How should I not be discovered?
When eventually we arrived at Kings Cross it was raining.
Summer rain.
I had made no arrangements for that first night.
But at once, for very fear that the bearded man who had reached out as I struggled with my hamper (‘No, no, I do very well, thank you’) might follow me and find out everything, I hailed a porter and then a cab, assuming a confidence I did not feel.
(I knew nothing of London.
Might not my pocket be picked, my person assaulted?)
Deep in my hamper was the little notebook with its precious list of theatrical lodgings.
I said miserably, throwing myself on the cab-driver's mercy:
‘If you know where I might lodge, where a young woman alone —‘
‘Does your mother know you're out?’
He scratched his head.
Laughing at me.
Catch-phrase or not, it was too near the truth.
In those few seconds I saw myself returned to Leeds like a misrouted parcel…
Then, ‘Berridge's’, he said, or something that sounded like that.
‘Gray's Inn Road, just off.
There in a jiffy, miss…’
Oh blessed relief.
It was a good hotel — but more expensive than I had intended: next day I must arrange everything.
All night, exhausted, I made plans.
I could not sleep for sheer fatigue.
Train wheels, bustle.
Noise in the kitchens late, and early.
I did not feel completely safe — for I had signed the register with my new name.
Proudly: Lily Greene.
But then I had thought: It is too like.
Anyone searching for a Greenwood, of a certain age and description….
I wanted to be out, quickly.
I told an uninterested reception clerk that I had to catch the boat train (let them look for me in Calais, I thought.
In Paris !), then took a growler and made for the first address I had.
Theatrical lodgings, in Westminster.
When I was almost there (and how would my money do, if I must be always taking cabs?)
I thought: Perhaps they will ask me what play I am in, where I am engaged, and I have no fiction ready.
I turned the cab back, deciding to breakfast somewhere and wait until I could speak to Miss Grey…
(But would she find me work at once?)
Fatigue, indecision.
I changed the order, and then changed it back again.
I had lost the cabby's good will (‘Make up yer mind — can't she?’)
If I was traced, he would certainly remember me….
By the time I reached the address, I could not decide whether I should ask him to wait.
I could decide nothing.
It was not quite half past nine.
I stood on the step with my hamper.
The door-knocker was stiff and my nervous hand rapped too loudly.
A great battleaxe of a woman opened the door a little.
‘Yes?’
‘I want — you keep lodgings, theatrical lodgings?’
I thought she was going to hit me: her hand which was already formed in a fist, went up — but she used it only to swipe at a cat scuttling from under a bush towards the door.
‘Not a room, no.
You might get, perhaps,half a room’
‘I'll pay in advance —‘
‘You have to pay in advance.’
It had begun to rain, the same sad summer drizzle which had greeted me at Kings Cross.
The cat had done well to run for shelter…
‘Seven and sixpence with attendance, five shillings without.
Attendance means you buy the food — and I cook it.’
She lifted her fist again but only to push an insect away.
‘Well — yes or no?
Yes or no?’
‘Yes.
I mean —‘
‘Come in then, if you're coming — and don't bring mud with you.’
I looked for a scraper but couldn't see one.
She led me into a parlour.
I remember it as horrible, with a smell of cold cabbage seeming to come from the upholstery.
The curtains were still drawn.
She did not bother to pull them back.
‘Your boots are muddy,’ she said, then before I could answer, ‘You may use this room for hearing cues if you wish and going over parts.
But no visitors…’
I agreed to everything.
To paying at once, to sharing a room, to buying food for this evening, to waiting in this unpleasant parlour till she would agree to show me the room.
‘Of course they're all out.
They had rehearsals at ten.
How is it you're alone, then?
I never —’ She was used I supposed to lodgings arranged by an advance man, coming ahead of a company and making the arrangements for them.
(Surely she would guess the truth about me?
Runaway Daughter blazoned my forehead, shining in the darkened parlour…)
I had come, I said, to see a certain well-known actress, who would be arranging work for me.
‘Well, draw the curtains back — if you're to wait in here.
And your boots away from the tiger, if you please.’
Daylight revealed a mangy skin lying in front of the unlaid fire.
Half an hour later she took me upstairs.
The room was small and dark.
In the double bed was a large hump.
‘Miss Malcolm!’
She shook and prodded the hump.
I stood in the doorway uncertainly, arm aching from bringing up my hamper.
‘You should be out.
Wake up at once !’
‘Never,’ said a muffled voice.
‘Nevermore.
Nevermore.’
The sheet covered her face.
‘If you're taken sick — this is no infirmary, Miss Malcolm —‘
There was no answer.
I thought she would grow really angry but instead she just pushed past me at the door.
‘Please  yourself, Miss Malcolm, do.
And you, Miss Greene, can wait till her ladyship decides she'll speak.
It's her you've to sleep along of —‘
As the landlady's footsteps died away, Miss Malcolm (how could I ever,did I ever, think of her as ‘Miss Malcolm?’) stirred.
She lifted a ravaged face from beneath the bedclothes.
Her dark, waving hair had not been tied back; instead it stood out from her face, wildly.
‘Dear Lord, I have lost it, you know.
Gone, gone,gone .
I am undone —‘
It was a deep voice of great beauty even when as now, she was over-emphasizing.
Dear Vicky — larger than life (too large for little life…)
She had sat up and was pulling her fingers through the tangled forest.
‘Oh dear God — I must take your name in vain.
Gone, all lost…’
I said, and felt foolish, ‘Is something wrong?’
‘But absolutely a disaster , I couldn't sleep for thinking about it.
Now I sleep too heavily.
I lost it —‘
‘Lost what?’
‘It wasn't very large,’ she said desperately, ‘it wasn't as if it were important — but I have lost it.’
Just as I was about to ask further, she went on: ‘My part — the little part that I had — it is gone …’
‘You are unemployed — does it mean that?’
She said dramatically, ‘Indeed I have the frost…’
She had climbed out of bed, pulled on a wrap.
Suddenly, looking at me for the first time, ‘Tell me,’ she said, ‘oh, tell me — what are you in?’
‘Nothing,’ I said, ‘I am in nothing.’
Enough, but I had had to spoil it then with a little arrogant turn of phrase.
‘Miss Grey, Sylvia Grey —’(how I squirm to remember!)
‘An introduction.
I expect soon to be engaged, you see.’
‘No, but you are very fortunate —’ She looked, it seemed to me, suitably impressed.
‘When do you take this up?’
I explained that I would go to the Lyceum today.
She nodded, all the time moving about the room which was in an incredible confusion.
Clothes and underclothes on every chair, ‘I shall move all these for you,’ she said.
‘And in any case I shall not be here long.
I cannot be here long…’
Presently she went downstairs for hot water.
She washed behind the flimsy Japanese screen, telling me all the while  about everybody in the house, in the company.
‘And the first time we performed it was a screamer, Miss Greene — what doom…and the second time I had not learned my part, not at all, and they said, ‘If you are going to corpse continually…’’
She told me of Mrs Bullivant, whose voice was true still but whose weight was such that —really …
‘And little Mr Zulueta who thinks himself God's gift.
But not for this child!
You will know the kind of person…’
There was Barry Gerard.
‘He is the romantic ju, juvenile, and very aware of it.
His star is rising —‘
She tidied the room a little, attended to her hair, while I sat in the basket chair watching her.
She had not asked me of my previous experiences.
Over-confident, I would surely be found out soon…
Then, her mouth full of hairpins, she asked, ‘Why should we not go together, now, to the Lyceum?’
The rain had let up and we walked at first, then as the first drops turned into a steady drizzle, we took a cab.
I clutched to me the note I had written to Sylvia Grey.
Oh, but I should have guessed….
Fool that I was, I had not even looked in the newspapers, let alone the stage journals…
‘Miss Grey?’ said the man in the deserted foyer of the Lyceum.
His brow furrowed.
‘She's on tour, miss —‘
On tour.
On tour.
Where?
(Cambridge, Canterbury?— please God not Australia .)
I took the note and all my foolish hopes.
Miss Malcolm was waiting in the cab.
‘Well?
You have left your letter?’
‘She's not there.
She is in Scotland .’
And then it all came tumbling out.
I said, ‘I have run away from home.
Run away in the wrong direction —‘
I had not meant to tell anyone — or at least not so soon.
But at once she was warmly sympathetic, giving directions to the cabby, then, clutching my arm: ‘Oh my dear,’ she said, ‘we are both in such trouble.’
My mind raced but I could not speak.
After a few moments: ‘We stop now,’ she said.
Then, paying the cab, pushing my money away: ‘There's a teashop here.
We must talk, at once.
We are rowing the same boat, I think —’
Inside, she asked: ‘What are you going — or rather what are we going — to do now?’
Adding: ‘You might as well tell me everything .’
As I did so, she said, nodding, ‘Yes.
That's right.
You did right.
Especially everywhere to add to your age .
It is wiser.
And I had thought you twenty…’
‘But your trouble,’ I said, ‘you have told me nothing of your trouble —‘
‘Sacked.
I lost my part yesterday and my place in the company.
I answered back, you see.
No more.
And in defence of someone else — a stage hand merely.
But it goes deeper than that.
I tell you in confidence, of course.’
She leaned forward and said in a dramatic whisper: ‘Mr Zulueta wanted what I was not prepared — what I should not be prepared to give — and I repulsed him.
And I was too strong in that, you see.
So now he is my enemy, I have touched his pride, and he has been waiting only the moment to humiliate me…’
She told me some of her story then.
A lot more, later.
Her father was a man of the kirk in Scotland, in Linlithgow:
‘He could have been, should have been an actor.
Instead he frightens people with Hell every Sabbath.
Including my mother.
And then she is not certain whether it's him she's more frightened of, or Hell.’
‘But you are on the stage — what do they think of that?’
‘At first, angry.
No, sad first.
More in sorrow than in anger.
And yet — any talent I have — it is from him.
The same gifts are needed, after all.’
Pause.
‘I left home at twenty-one.
With some sort of permission.
His words were: ‘I can no longer forbid you.
Satan has won.’
But of course it has been all right.
Until now —‘
She seemed more interested, though, in my tale than hers: ‘To have been locked up.
Imprisoned ,’ she said in wonder.
‘You see, I knew nothing like that.’
But of course our talk kept coming back to our plight.
Our joint plight.
We discussed money.
‘Have you some savings?’
I asked her.
‘For a week or two.
And then I shall be in diffs.’
She leaned forward, stirring her tea.
‘I know,’ she said with sudden resolution, ‘we must find something out of London.
Immediately —‘
Together we went back to the lodgings, she packing her belongings, both of us braving the landlady.
Her fellow  actors she wished to say goodbye to, and this was arranged.
We took the night train to Scotland.
Sylvia Grey, we had discovered, was billed this week in Edinburgh.
We sat up all night.
As we passed through Yorkshire I was terrified — and a little homesick.
In Edinburgh I discovered all too soon that Sylvia Grey was not  there either.
She had been taken ill at the weekend and had had to stay behind in Liverpool.
Vicky, however (for in that long night's talking we had moved to Christian names), was not daunted.
I thought perhaps we should go to Linlithgow.
But she said proudly, ‘I would never visit them without work.
To seem even to be in trouble…’
But it looked now like trouble.
That afternoon, between summer showers, we walked disconsolately through the streets.
We visited all the theatres.
And then…
A grubby building in the Old Town.
Outside, a filthy and torn bill: ‘Jubilee Song and Dance…’
We were trying to decipher the remainder, when a man came out.
He said: ‘Will ye buy your tickets now?
We shall play tonight.
Dinna fear.’
A devil got into me: ‘We don't watch shows,’ I said haughtily.
‘We perform —’‘Yes,’ confirmed Vicky, ‘we are players,’and she made as if to sweep on majestically.
‘And can you sing?’
‘Of course.’
‘And dance?’
‘Yes, yes.’
(Now was not the time to say that I had danced only on the boards of my Leeds bedroom…)
Vicky said, ‘This is Miss Lily Greene.
I am Miss Victoria Malcolm.’
She paused.
‘And now — we must leave.’
I would not have risked turning away.
A moment's silence, then: ‘What has happened,’ said the man, ‘it's this, see…’
That very morning, it appeared, they had lost a couple of turns — one of which had been two sisters: a singing and dancing act.
One turn missing, yes, but two — no.
‘Tell your manager,’ Vicky said grandly, ‘that two first-class artistes are by chance free….
Up here on holiday.’
It was she who did all the talking.
By evening we were in business.
That afternoon she and I devised in the small front room of our lodgings (pliant landlady, audience of children) a double act: the Carruthers Sisters.
Vicky sang 0 Bird of Love , and although not quite sure of the words, I did Fanny Leslie's Jack-in-the-Box Song .
Sharing between us our repertoire, we turned up two comedy songs,But I couldn't and Just in the old sweet way .
Vicky could play the banjo.
‘Shall I black up?’ she asked.
We were a success, in a small way.
At least we did not get the goose.
On the Sunday, after five performances and with another week to go, we went through to Linlithgow to see Vicky's family.
Her father was as fierce as she had described — but only on matters of religion, when his face and his whole bearing would change.
At other times he watched Vicky with pride, nodding gravely as she recounted truths — and untruths.
For myself, I pretended that I had left home with full approval, inventing for myself a Harrogate doctor father, fleshing out an imaginary family….
Vicky's mama watched all the while with sad eyes: Vicky's but without the fire.
Two of the three brothers only were at home, and one of her sisters, who hung on our every word.
She said to Vicky often, ‘When you are famous…’
I never took up Sylvia Grey's offer.
Although she was due a week later in Glasgow, I did not go there.
The last night in Edinburgh we were approached by a man, a dubious-looking character who turned out soon to be of an unimaginably boring respectability.
He had a small touring company which had just suffered a couple of deaths in a carriage accident, and he was looking for two versatile and experienced (yes!) players.
I told a few more lies.
Three months later the company folded up.
But we spent the winter of 1888 with another, and the next year had some experience in pantomime.
Staying always together.
A summer season on the East Coast, another in Wales…
We worked hard, but we had fun.
Vicky was the friend I needed.
Before, I had had Daisy: when I had lost her, I had lost both sister and friend.
So it was that although in those days I was often homesick, missing Harry, missing Daisy, it was never unbearable.
I worried, though, for Daisy and Joszef — how could I do otherwise?
But even for the sake of seeing them again, I never longed to be back….
I wrote to them, saying only: ‘I am well  and happy .’
I sent money and a small gift for Harry: ‘if you can speak to him, that is — he will have been in enough hot water already on my account…’
I said that I would try and secure a poste restante in London.
They were to tell him that I loved him…
I became seasoned, gained experience, all the while preparing myself for the lucky chance that would surely come.
In the meantime it was not a bad life — this small enclosed world, more hard work than glamour, with its private language, its unsociable hours.
A life of travelling Sundays (proudly I noticed less and less wicker on my hamper, so covered was it with railway stickers), shunted into sidings to move on later with the consignment of coal, or worse, kippers.
Crewe station at times the beating heart of the universe.
Inhospitable lodgings, homely ones.
The sudden rivalries and petty jealousies.
The sheer drama , so often greater offstage than on…
We travelled up and down and across Britain.
I never doubted that I was on a road that led somewhere.
We acted, sang, danced — hoping always for temperate weather, dreading the sudden heat waves which lost us audiences as surely as rain and snow kept them at home — burlesques with preposterous titles (Very Little Hamlet ,The Vicar of Wideawakefield ), comedies, farces.
The principals would change depending on what the current manager could afford.
Sometimes he would be able to hire a premium artist, one who paid him for the privilege of playing.
But these turned usually to more distinguished companies, those with a classical repertoire.
Everything we did was of the very lightest weight however heavy the humour.
Vicky and I, although occasionally playing roles that had something to do with the (slight) story, were more often in a group (Country Maidens, Serving Wenches, even  Coiffed Nuns…).
We stood out from the rest, who would be played by girls or women — supers as they were called — hastily chosen early on the Monday of our arrival in the town.
Vicky or I, as a singing nun perhaps, would skip forward to chant: ‘Oh, but I am mother prioress/And they would wall me up! /Sir, have mercy, sir, have mercy…’
And as the chorus of supers took it up, ‘Sir, have mercy …’ we would skip back again — until our next big moment.
I did not mind that often the work was well below what I felt certain I could do.
Did not the road lead uphill all the way to Olympus?
I was in no hurry.
With greater beauty, I would perhaps have been sooner there.
Vicky was beautiful — but had no ambition.
It surprised me.
I had thought her, on our first meeting, prima donna material.
(Looking at her, I was often reminded of the famous Lina Cavalieri as I had seen her in photographs.
It was Vicky's bearing, I think, and the maturity, the ripeness, of her beauty.)
Yet when a chance came to her — a few extra lines, a small but important part — she would forget to learn the lines, forget to come in on cue and for a while would not be asked again.
Late for rehearsals regularly, she was as regularly fined.
She seemed hardly to mind at all.
But all that time we were friends.
We would not have dreamed of changing companies unless we both moved.
We giggled together backstage, boiled up tea in railway compartments on Sundays, grilled ourselves sausages late at night on reversible gas-rings.
We flirted from time to time with good-looking or not-so-good-looking men in the company.
Sometimes we were escorted out by some admirer in the current town.
We went whenever we could in foursomes…
Very innocent.
Very happy.
Too happy?
We were in Hartlepool in the March of 1890 when Mr Frobisher, our then actor-manager, told us all as we assembled for a Monday morning rehearsal that he had secured the services of a great singer.
A tenor.
He mentioned no name, saying only that now we should be able to extend our repertoire….
Offstage, rumour proliferated.
It was, must be….
It was Hayden Coffin, Frank Leslie….
When we at last learned his name, we had not heard of him at all.
Frank Donovan?
Frank Donovan?
Everyone shook their heads.
It appeared that once, and once only, Mr Donovan had had a success.
He had understudied Hayden Coffin for three months and had on two consecutive nights gone on for him.
But since then, nothing.
He had not risen.
There was no history of greatness.
But Mr Frobisher, who had been having trouble with his male leads, assured us he was just what was needed.
Instead of untried young men, we were at last to have a pro, and moreover, one with an excellent voice.
We learned soon that the money for Frank had come from the wife of our new romantic juvenile, Laurence Wheldon, a blonde and willowy man whose good looks far exceeded his acting powers but whose wife's money was underwriting the company, to say nothing of her husband's ambitions.
Laurence Wheldon.
I did not care for him.
I did not like the calculating way in which his cold eyes appraised each girl in the company.
Frank joined us together with his wife two weeks later at Sheffield.
(We were often alarmingly near Leeds.
Too near for comfort.)
He would be playing only male leads:Mrs Donovan made that clear.
She did not play opposite him, but was second soubrette usually.
Her voice was not very strong.
She herself did not expect to lead: she had all the success and power she needed, offstage.
I did not like her.
Nor did Vicky.
Perhaps because Mrs Donovan snipped at her:
‘Miss Malcolm, I'm surprised that such a powerful voice, such a powerful manner , that we should not hear it out of the chorus…’
Or: ‘Frank, Frank, do look!
There is Miss Malcolm blown in late again.
In total disarray….
Frank, it is too much —’ And she would fall about laughing.
Me, she scarcely noticed.
‘The little one,’ she called me, although I was at least as tall as she was.
When she was not drawing Frank's attention to Vicky's faults, she was correcting him for his, her high-pitched voice shrill with reprimand.
‘Just remember,’ she would say very loudly, wagging her finger at him, ‘we don't want your trouble again.
Remember ?’
And she would turn for confirmation to Reginald Forrest, who played the comic characters or heavy villains and whose deep voice could often be heard singing, falsetto, some of the women's songs.
He was our light relief.
Constance Donovan thought him extremely amusing.
Once, Frank must have been very good-looking, with his head of curly hair, grey now, and his tall athletic build, grown heavy but still impressive.
His voice.
Ah yes, his voice.
A light but strong, caressing tenor and even if past its prime, still an instrument of beauty.
Certainly, it seemed to me, he deserved better than our little company…
We toured Scotland in a bitterly cold spring.
There was even talk, Frank's idea, of going to Ireland (European tours, filling me with excitement at the very thought, were not for the likes of us).
The outskirts of Edinburgh, Peebles, Alloa.
We played Linlithgow, Vicky and I staying with her family.
It was about this time she began seeing more and more of Laurence Wheldon…
At first it was just to help hear his part: ‘Darling, he looks so utterly beautiful just reciting — and getting wrong — those quite ridiculous lines.
He really cannot act at all.
But —’ and here she sighed, ‘Lily darling, I could look and look at him the whole day…’
‘Well, if that's all you do,’ I said easily.
‘Ah, if he touched me,’ she said.
‘Then , then I think — I think that I might burst into flames.’
She waved her arms histrionically to mimic raging fire…
A week later I fell ill.
A neglected cold turned to a bad fever and I was forced to stay behind in Newcastle, in hospital.
While I was away, Vicky wrote to me regularly.
She said little about herself, instead giving me colourful, often verbatim accounts of everyone else.
In her last letter she announced: ‘SCANDAL!!!
Can you believe —Mrs Donovan has run off with Reginald !
It is truly the greatest excitement….
And by the way, Laurence advises you to hurry back, as you may have the chance of a part .
He has heard something…’
Truly, I thought, our lives were more exciting than any of the crackpot dramas we acted on the stage….
I hurried south immediately.
I joined them in Gloucester where they were playing a particularly foolish burlesque based on As You Like It .
The show following was to be Frank Cellier's Dorothy — a true musical play, or comedy.
Because I had been understudying Constance Donovan I was now to play Lydia, the second lead.
Vicky was happy, so happy for me.
‘It is your chance .
You will never look back…’
She spoke from her place in the chorus without envy.
It was what she would have wished for me: her sister, her friend.
And at that time did she not love everyone ?
Loving Laurence, she loved all the world.
‘Oh, I love, I love,’ she told me over and over, ‘I put nothing in my letters to you.
Only darling Lily, I love and love and love —‘
‘But Vicky — he is married .’
(I was ever the shocked little Yorkshire Puritan.)
Her eyes opened in wonder: ‘But he loves me!’
She  frowned, knitting her dark thick brows.
‘Passion, Lily.
It is a great love!’
‘And his wife?’
‘Oh — but she don't care for him at all .
She cannot even bother these days to tour with him.’
‘Perhaps she has children she must look after?’
‘They have no children.’
‘Oh well — if they have none….
Then…’
I weakened.
‘She is — has no interest, Lily.
Does not care if he is a success.
He has told me that…’
She was completely taken up.
And I was excited by my new importance.
Proud and pleased to be playing opposite Frank Donovan who had once stood in for Hayden Coffin.
Occasionally perhaps I should notice that he was not the jovial, easy-going character I remembered from my humble place in the chorus.
The elopement must have hit him hard.
Dorothy was set in Kent in 1740.
The costumes were picturesque and the songs attractive.
The plot was foolish.
Dorothy and Lydia, the heroines, are at a Harvest Home in disguise, calling themselves Dorcas and Abigail.
They meet there Geoff (Laurence) and Harry (Frank).
Geoff is on his way to marry the rich Dorothy, to pay off his debts….
From then on: tangle of marriage-avoiding stratagems, faked robberies, fresh disguises — all happily ending with the weddings of Dorothy and Geoff, Lydia and Harry…
Then one afternoon, three days before the show opened, we were rehearsing a scene where Dorothy alias Dorcas and Lydia alias Abigail are recognized by Geoff and Harry and….
When suddenly Frank without any comment turned and walked off stage.
Laurence said at once, to the theatre at large , ‘The bottle, the bottle.
My God.’
Then to Polly, who was playing Dorothy: ‘Dearie, run after him.
Do.’
She looked prettily blank.
I said, ‘I will.
Let me —‘
I found him near a pile of stacked ropes.
As predicted, he was holding a bottle, but I saw that it was almost if not quite full.
I pulled at his arm.
‘Are you sick?
Shall I say you're sick, Frank?’
‘Yes — sick,’ he said.
‘Sick.
My soul .
Sick…’
I heard the piano strike up: Polly was to go over again a difficult duet with Laurence.
‘You don't need any of that,’ I said.
(Yorkshire temperance.
Greenwood again.)
‘It won't help your soul, you know.
Or your body.’
When he didn't respond, taking his arm, I said, ‘Come back.
On stage.
They need you.
They love you.
And the audience next week.
You will see…’
(And dear God, I thought, if this show doesn't go on, I shall lose my chance…)
‘Please , Frank, Mr Donovan —‘
‘Yes,’ he said, looking vague.
‘Yes.
I could…’
Back again, he behaved as if nothing had happened.
Mechanically correct.
Singing to me, faultlessly, the best-loved song of the show,Queen of my Heart .
Once Laurence said acidly, ‘You are meant, you know, to be amorous of little Lily — You cannot leave all the passion to Polly and me…’
Polly simpered embarrassedly.
(Vicky had told me she would not be averse to some of the loving attentions she was receiving.)
That evening, Frank asked me to walk in the town with him.
‘To keep me from temptation,’ he said.
‘The devil and all that…’
We walked solemnly around Gloucester in and out of the Cathedral precincts while he told me about his childhood.
He did not mention Constance at all.
The next evening the same, and the evening after.
But — the performance itself.
How he played….
Even Laurence was agreeably surprised.
I knew, though, that it was my doing — that Frank sang not for Lydia, but for Lily Greene.
I knew myself to be, for those few hours, Queen of his heart.
I felt pity then, immense pity.
I could see, as he sang, the years drop away — so that I knew him: the young and hopeful singer, all the best to come, a bottle no more than something to be cracked among friends.
‘Queen of my Heart ,’ he sang.
I scarcely noticed Laurence and Vicky (passing of messages, quick touching of hands in the wings…)
Afterwards, as we all drank together (only a bottle of stout for him), he said: ‘I did it for you.’
‘Did what?’
I asked, all innocence.
‘Played.
Went on.
I'd else not have done so.
I had a mind not to.’
After that, I thought my support could perhaps be less, that I had done the work .
But it was only beginning….
And I, I was not without feeling.
A bond had been forged.
Pity (mine), need (his)?
‘Help me,’ he said, the second evening.
‘Walk.
A short walk.
A drink.
No,no drink —’
‘No drink,’ I echoed.
Well wrapped up, we walked a little way out of the town.
He sang to me, mainly old Irish airs.
‘It is not serious, my drinking,’ he said.
‘I can live without it.
Surely I can.
If you help me …’
Vicky told me: ‘Laurence says it was the bottle that first got Frank into diffs.
He goes on binges.
That's the ‘trouble’ Mrs D used to wag her finger about.
To think we didn't….
Are we not deliciously innocent?’
The next time out with me he broke down and cried for Constance.
‘Her little…she has such little feet,’ he wept.
‘Such pretty feet.’
He was rather ridiculous.
I wanted to take him in my arms, but did not.
Instead (and I was to regret this) I said pertly: ‘I have pretty feet too…’
‘Be wise in time, O Phyllis mine ,’ Polly and I sang each evening.
And each evening after the performance, Frank and I walked, and talked.
He did not cry again.
On the Friday morning we heard that by popular demand we were to stay on another week.
‘A Sunday without even smelling a train,’ exclaimed Vicky, ‘what shall we do with such riches?’
Riches indeed.
For the November weather which had been cold and damp changed suddenly to mild and sunny, the sky unbroken blue.
St Martin's summer….
Eyes sparkling, Vicky told me: ‘Laurence and I are to spend the whole day together.’
Then, ‘And you, dearest, what shall you do?’
But we had arranged already: luncheon in an inn, followed by a walk in the country, and then back to Frank's lodgings for tea.
The perfect weather held all day.
Then as the light began to go: tea-time.
Closed curtains, the kettle singing, warm room.
Muffins on the hob.
Their pleasant yeasty smell.
The scent of the tea as I poured it…
I should have thought.
It is unbelievable that I did not.
Frank, as we approached the house, had said: ‘Now you'll not mind, I'm sure — but my landlady….
I told her it's my wife come down for the day…’
The key firmly turned in the lock (‘She's for ever wanting in — to dust her little bits of this and that…’), we sat over our muffins, our toast, our cakes.
We spoke this time of my ambitions.
Leading roles, visiting Paris, travelling, being seen in London, Rome, New York…
Above all, showing Leeds and Dad, especially Dad, that I had made good .
I did not make good that afternoon.
Frank listened to me  sympathetically.
Head on one side, nodding encouragement.
When I had done, he took hold of my hand —‘You'll do it aren't I sure of that?
Even though I'm just an old has-been who's lost his only love.
And surely will soon lose his voice…’
‘No, no,’ I assured him.
‘No, of course you aren't, of course you won't —‘
‘You really think that now?’
Unsure.
A little pathetic.
Both his hands now enclosing my one.
‘Of course, I had my chances — The Almighty knows I had my chances…’
And he began to tell me yet again (I liked to hear, though — I loved theatre tales) of his early days, his few triumphs.
Of how he had met, courted, wed Constance.
He brought himself- and me, for I was brimming over with pity for him, always damnable pity — to the edge of tears.
All the time, he stroked my hand.
Played with my fingers.
‘Take care of me, won't you, won't you now?
See that wicked, wicked bottle doesn't get me…’
Then he sang to me.
He should never have sung to me.
For I knew, just as he did, that he was doomed now to smaller and smaller parts in smaller and smaller companies.
That without Constance (even with Constance), eventually the bottle would win and he would lose — everything.
But for now, he had still a beautiful voice.
And touch.
For I liked — I was amazed, never yet having had time for or interest in such delights — I liked to be touched by him.
The further his hands explored, the more I liked it.
And that I should be giving such pleasure too.
My boots off now.
My stockings rolled down and off.
My bare feet (but this was ridiculous) caressed, kissed, praised and praised.
And then his hands wandering upwards…
A sharp knock on the door.
Another.
Frank's angry reply: ‘Please !
My wife and I are rehearsing.
Did you not hear me sing just now?’
The footsteps going away.
Then Frank bursting at once into song, laughing and winking at me.
A moment later and his hands were exploring further, further.
‘My princess, my little princess.
Take care of me.
My little princess…’
My head was pulled on to his chest.
Taking fright suddenly, I mumbled, ‘I'm not your princess —‘
‘No, no, of course not.
You are queen .
Queen of my heart, aren't you?’
Stupid words from a stupid song.
But they were my undoing.
He too was undone.
Unbuttoned.
I was amazed at what I saw.
Terrified.
The more so when he thrust this fearful object at me, shamefacedly, hurriedly.
Pushing me back where I sat, opening my legs, thrusting it between them
‘No!’
‘Queen of my heart -just wait now till I — only a moment — still, lie still…’
‘But you're hurting —‘
‘Quick, quick now.
No, don't —’ For I had begun to struggle.
‘No, little love !
It was at just that moment the bells began.
For evening service perhaps.
But a great carillon pealing, pealing.
The room seemed to shake with them.
Their crashing echoed my trembling, my fear, my disgust.
‘Have pity,’ he was pleading, ‘have pity, and let me —‘
‘You have pity, Frank Donovan!
You're hurting —‘
‘Queen of my heart, a little moment — there, there,’ he was panting, ‘and I shall be done, shall be —‘
I pushed him away from me.
Out of me.
So that he fell awkwardly, knocking over an unfinished cup of tea.
A dark stain spread over the grey patterned carpet.
Outside, the bells called good people to pray.
In Leeds…but what had I to do with Leeds now?
He looked ridiculous.
I looked ridiculous.
We were both ridiculous.
And to add to it, he was crying.
‘For pity's sake-no more tears!
Please.’
And then at once, I realized what I'd said.
But did it matter?
Uncomfortable, sore, frightened, I had spent all my pity.
It was an embarrassing week.
I could not avoid him, since we had to play together.
When he sang to me — and he did not sound now as if he meant it very much — I tried to think of something else…
Then half way through the following week, when we had moved on to Lichfield, Constance came back.
It was Vicky who first heard the news.
She rushed to tell me, fearing that I might be upset.
She knew I was no longer close friends with Frank, but of the rest I had told her very  little: her own love-affair would be soiled, I felt, by my tale — so disgusting, so absurd.
‘Does it worry you, dearest?’
She sounded a little low-spirited.
Fighting a heavy cold.
Winter had set in truly now.
St Martin's summer behind us…
If Constance expected her role as Lydia back, she did not get it.
Mr Frobisher said, ‘Miss Greene must finish the week out.
She is billed here.’
‘Ah let her, let her,’ Constance said.
‘No matter.’
She was very pleased with herself.
She had not come running back to Frank.
She made that quite clear: it was a triumphal return, although what the triumph was, was not vouchsafed.
About her escapade: ‘We were not suited,’ was all she said.
Reginald had found work with a company about to leave for Australia.
She approved of the ‘heavy merchant’ who had replaced him with us.
She wagged her finger at Frank, even for the first week behaving flirtatiously with him — while he tried to hide an obvious mixture of embarrassment and pleasure.
I did not care.
Why should I?
Only a week later I was noticed by a scout and engaged for a pantomime in Manchester, to play the Princess in Jack and the Beanstalk .
I was certain that from now I would never look back.
What was more I had secured a place for Vicky in the chorus.
It would be good, I thought, to get her away from Laurence for a while…
Coming off the stage one afternoon, Vicky swayed and fell.
Laurence, standing behind me, said irritably: ‘What's happened now?’
‘It's your little favourite — fainted,’ Constance said.
(Although away, she had not missed any gossip.)
‘It's nothing,’ Vicky told me, as I rushed to her side.
‘I haven't been sleeping, you see.
That is all —‘
But two evenings later, as I stood in the wings about to go on, she came off stage and, separating from the others, clutching my arm, she whispered, ‘Lily, Lily, dearest — the worst, it is all the worst —’ Her eyes, against the wet white, the rouge, were large, frightened.
‘I shall die , it's so terrible —‘
‘Tell me quickly,’ I said.
‘It cannot be so very, very bad…’
But it was.
And after she had told me, I had to pirouette, sing, laugh: a fairy in a burlesque Midsummer Night's Dream …
‘I am certain,’ she said that night, as we were preparing for bed.
‘Quite, quite certain.’
I wished only that she had spoken to me before.
She was wringing her hands, pulling at her lovely mane of hair.
I said: ‘But what shall you do ?’
(It could have been me, I thought.
So nearly — it could have been me too.)
‘What does he say?’
‘Ah him.
Him.
He said only, when I told him (since I must, I had to, had I not) he said only, ‘That's really too bad, dearie.
You are in trouble, aren't you?’
It took my breath away, Lily.
I had thought — even though nothing had been said, and of course he has his moods when he is difficult and cruel…’
‘Did you not press him?
You must press him, Vicky.
He must acknowledge —‘
‘But I am ruined whatever —‘
‘He must pay you.
Then you may have the child — and return.’
I hardly knew what I was saying.
My mind whirled with thoughts and anger.
I asked how long she had?
She thought until about July.
‘Well then,’ I told her, ‘you will be back on the boards for autumn, when the season begins.
And none the worse.’
‘You know I am finished, do you not?’
‘He must be made to pay…and if he will not, you must speak to Mr Frobisher.
He is after all manager, and cannot wish for a scandal…’
But she saw little hope in that notion.
And she was right.
I saw by her face next day that she had not succeeded.
She had learned only that she must leave the company soon, Mr Frobisher not being at all disposed to cross swords with Laurence.
As we might have guessed, the importance of Laurence's wife's money overrode any other consideration.
I said: ‘You could tell his wife…’
‘She has done no wrong —‘
‘Vicky, Vicky.
If you cannot help yourself….
Tell them all, all of them, that you will noise it abroad.
Create a scandal.’
‘And be believed?’ she said bitterly.
‘Who will believe me?
Something like that has happened once before.
A girl in my first  company.
It cannot be proved, you know.
He will deny it.
It is I, after all, who am to have the child…’
And then: ‘Oh but I love him,’ she said.
‘The sad truth is I love him still.’
Stupid Frank, drinking too much in those last weeks before the Christmas season.
Being scolded by Constance — and enjoying it.
I found I had always to be looking at her feet.
I was fascinated to think of how they might be, bare.
Frank abased before them, worshipping them.
Then I would feel faintly sick.
But not as sick as Vicky, who every morning now staggered up to retch helplessly into the slop bucket.
I counted the days until we should leave for Manchester.
She thought that she could manage at least the pantomime season before her condition would show.
And then she would go home.
When we had been in Manchester only a week, a week of arduous rehearsals and long hours, Vicky could keep little food down and, frantic with worry for her, I urged her to go home now .
I knew she was homesick.
I had heard her cry for them in the night.
Without making too much difficulty, she agreed.
Laurence had given her some money which fortunately she hadn't been too proud to accept.
A replacement was found for her and she arranged to travel two days before Christmas.
‘You'll tell them at home?’
I asked anxiously.
‘And you will write to me at once.
We shall meet…’
‘Oh but yes,’ she said, that chill December evening.
A damp cold trying to sleet.
Manchester was still a strange place to me.
Like and yet unlike Leeds.
I saw Jews going about and thought of Daisy and Joszef this fourth Christmas of their marriage.
‘I'll take a cab to the station,’ Vicky said.
Then: ‘No, you dear thing, you may not come too…’
But just as she was stepping into the cab, she clutched me: ‘I have loved you so much, darling Lily.’
I hugged her back.
‘And I too, dearest.
Take care, take care — and you will tell them — at once?’
They loved her too.
She would be all right.
The pantomime was a success.
It sparkled like a Christmas tree.
I was happy on stage, happy with the glitter and the applause.
And on Christmas Day itself, although I was lonely, I thought of Vicky in Linlithgow surrounded by her family — and was happy for her.
But on the Sunday, perhaps because it was a strange town and I had not yet made friends, I felt all day a sense of doom.
I walked in the deserted public gardens with the woman who acted the Queen in the show.
The next day was icy cold.
In the evening I was in the dressing-room after the show when a note was brought to me.
‘Please come.
Soon.
Please.’
It was signed — no, not signed, she had not written it; it was crudely block printed, and misspelt.
The name: Vicky.
A boy waited outside.
I went with him immediately.
I could hear him sniff as he went before me.
Occasionally he wiped his nose on his sleeve.
I wondered if we should have taken a cab.
When I had asked, ‘What is it, where is she?’ he had stared, uncomprehending.
As we hurried now beneath the gas lamps, in and out of the dark patches where the light did not reach, I wanted to cry, ‘But I thought her safe in Scotland!’
I did not know Manchester.
In the time we had been there I had learnt scarcely more than the theatre and the streets about our lodgings.
We had come now to a poor area.
Mean streets.
I had thought where we were lodging, so far from the wealthy industrialists' villas and mansions, to be humble enough, but these…
At last he stopped in an alleyway, turned suddenly.
‘Light,’ he said, speaking for the first time, ‘t'light's low.’
The gaslight flickered in the alley — and then I could not bear that he should be out of my sight.
Afraid, I touched his arm.
He pushed at a door in the courtyard.
The hallway was dimly lit.
I stumbled tiredly up the stairs in the damp chill.
A bang on the door.
Almost at once a head came round: a woman's.
‘Is that her — t'friend?
She'd best —’ She opened the door a little.
‘Well, come in,’ she said to me.
‘Come in.
This way.’
Then, as if to herself: ‘This is a fine kettle of fish, a fine to-do I don't know.’
And turning back to me: ‘You'll do something, eh?
Arrange something?’
Inside the small low-ceilinged room a light showed a bed  in the corner.
There was a curious smell.
In a saucer something burned.
I hurried over…
‘There's to pay, too, you know.
I'd to get t'doctor.
I said to her, ‘Do ye know no one here?’
She asked then for you , miss.
And my boy, t'lad, he went…’
Kindness, fear and, a little on the make.
I saw them all war in her face.
Vicky.
Vicky.
I would not have known her.
All that wild hair spread thin, strawlike, limp on the crushed pillows.
Her eyes stared.
Enormous, dark.
They burned.
‘It's Lily,’ I said.
‘I'm here, darling.
I came at once—‘
I wanted to ask questions.
But I knew I must be careful, careful.
The woman brought me a chair as I bent over her, both my hands enclosing the weak one which lay on the bedcovers.
‘My God,’ she cried out suddenly, ‘my God, God help me!’
Then head from side to side, muttering, moaning.
‘Vicky, what happened?
Tell me, dearest —‘
‘T'doctor,’ said the woman, ‘he'll be back the morrow.
He'll maybe — t'hospital.
Happen it's too late, though .’
She stood behind me at Vicky's bedside.
She added righteously, ‘And she'll not tell us who did it.
They'll never tell, will they?
I'd not have taken her in…’
Who did it?
Why, Laurence, of course.
I would have condemned him, betrayed him at once.
Innocent as I was, ignorant rather, I did not realize it was something else she spoke of.
I said to her, ‘Would you leave us, please?’
Then when we were alone: ‘Darling,tell me —’ I could not bear it that she suffered so.
Her lips were dry, cracked.
‘The pain,’ she said.
‘I shan't be all right.
It cannot be all right.
The pain — you see, it is…everything.
All wrong, all has gone wrong…’
There were sounds in the street outside.
Drinkers returning home.
Rough sounds, from another world.
The light by the bedside flickered.
I noticed the bedclothes…
‘But, darling, you were going home.
What happened ?’
‘Lily, I couldn't .’
Her eyes were enormous.
But sunken.
‘I could not do that to them .
You understand?
Tell me you understand —‘
‘Yes, yes.
Of course, darling.
But the pain —‘
‘I thought, you see…
Mrs Swarbrick, in the show, she's  from here.
She knew someone who knew a woman.
I was going to be here just a week.
Less.
Tell no one.
No one.
It was all arranged.
I had the money.
I got rooms.
They think I am married, you know.
You won't say?
You won't say ?’
At first I could not understand — but then when she had, whispering, explained properly, I was filled with a desolate, despairing horror.
Why, why, why?
‘But Vicky — oh, darling,why ?
I would have helped….
Something, anything — but not….
No, never this —‘
Pain.
The pain had gathered again.
The doctor had left some opium.
She said then, between cramps, ‘I don't understand.
Why.
This pain.
It's so much.
She said — they told me it would be all over soon and that when it was, I would be — all right.
But it,it has left me, you know.
And yet still — Oh Lily, everything is worse,worse .
Lily, dearest,what will become of me ?
I could think only that we must get, at once, the very best of help.
‘The best, Vicky, you shall have the best man.
At once.
I shall see to it.’
I was Dad's daughter.
Lily Greenwood now, never Lily Greene.
But as the pain came again, she twisted my hand.
‘No — I cannot.’
‘Hospital, Vicky.
They will care for you.
I'm going to send now —‘
‘I cannot — Lily, don't leave me, darling!’
She clung to me, as I bent over the bed.
The place was terrible.
It was all terrible.
I did not know the full story — would never know it.
(Some woman botching it up?
Filthy money for filthy instruments.
Or just — an accident?)
‘I'm afraid.
I'm so afraid, Lily.
The pain.
I am afraid of the pain.
Because I did wrong, it was because I did wrong —‘
‘No.
You are not to say that.’
Laurence, I thought.
Laurence shall pay…
The bleeding began very suddenly.
In only a few moments the sheets, the bedding, all drenched.
I shouted for the landlady.
The boy was sent for the doctor.
We tried, with growing despair, everything.
A jug of icy water brought up from the yard was splashed on to her, from as great a height as we could manage.
Brandy was sent for and forced between her colourless lips.
Opium.
More opium.
But in that next hour, before even the doctor had arrived (what, I think now, could he have done so late?), she bled to death.
My dear, dear friend.
The smell of that room.
The sad confusion.
The dawn breaking behind closed shutters.
‘Sweet wine, for the ladies,’ Lionel said.
The waiter poured Barsac into their glasses.
‘Sweets to the sweet, of course.
I only say what is expected of me —‘
‘James eleven,’ said Sir Robert.
Doth a fountain send forth at the same place, Sweet water and bitter?’'
‘The Bible, at the Savoy?
Really, he is impossible…’
Lionel, looking around him, shrugging his shoulders helplessly.
‘Yes,’ said Sir Robert affably to Lionel, but looking at Lily.
She felt again his gaze on her.
‘We are not all savages up in Yorkshire….
I remember that I was put (and you too, I think, Lionel) to learning the Collect for the day….
I say it again to show there is no ill will —‘Doth a fountain send forth at the same place, Sweet water and bitter?’'
It is meant for me, Lily thought: hardly able to drag herself from the journey she had just made (bitter enough surely?) into the past.
It is meant for me.
3
I am sharp, Alice thought, coming down the stairs in the afternoon.
The great wide wooden staircase into the empty hall with its patterned marble floor.
So empty.
No servants about.
Papa was in London.
He had been there for almost two weeks now, visiting Uncle Lionel.
I prefer it like that, she thought.
It's better than when Uncle Lionel comes here.
I don't like him .
He's sharp too, but in a different way.
I like much better Papa's fine soldier brother, Uncle Thomas, who's away serving in India now.
An afternoon that was all hers.
Her governess, half an hour ago: ‘Alice Firth, surely you can amuse yourself?
A lovely home like The Towers…the garden, the orchard, the fountain, the copse.
And in this beautiful September weather…’
Perhaps to Miss Fairgrieves, who was rather elderly, just to be young might seem amusing?
Down the great wide wooden staircase and into the hall: I am sharp, she thought.
She saw herself, all of her, as sharp.
Pointed.
Spiky elbows, heels, toes, fingers.
Sharp as a fox, always watching and waiting.
I have something to watch and wait for, she thought.
I must always be on my guard.
Anything at all, and probably bad at that, might happen at any time….
Sharp, watching…
But only for myself, she thought.
Sadly.
It's not as if I have a sister or brother to worry about.
I am an alone child.
She had said just that to Miss Fairgrieves on her first day as governess.
‘I am an alone child.’
And Miss Fairgrieves had said: ‘You mean, Alice, an only child.
It is called an only child, my dear…’
But she had persisted: ‘I am an alone child.
It is not the same thing,’ she had said, ‘they are not the same thing.’
She often persisted.
They didn't like that.
Just as they did not like her being sharp.
They call me that, she thought, when they are talking about me, for they talk about me a great deal even when I am there.
Almost as if I were not there…
(‘And how is the child doing — she is quite over the loss?
That little upset after.
She eats well?
No more of that refusing to eat, eh?’)
It was then, of course, I became sharp.
I felt sharp all over, like a needle.
I did not want to eat.
I did not want to put anything in my mouth because if I didn't, if I ate nothing , then I would soon go to join Mama.
(They said at the time, ‘If she doesn't take something, she will join her mother soon…’)
It was for Papa's sake only that I ate again.
So that he might not be sad twice.
Gazing at her in the hall was the stuffed body of Grandpa's black clumber spaniel, Pickwick.
He looked very fierce always, even though his eyes were glass.
She thought: What shall I do with the afternoon?
Perhaps she could go and find Fräulein Schultz, the German governess?
They were, in a way, friends…
Fräulein had been two years already at The Towers.
Very fat, stouter even than when she'd first arrived, with a great soft moon face and little spectacles which looked lost.
She'd just come back from a visit home to Germany and was still sad.
She wept easily and often anyway: frequently dissolving in front of Alice, who would then coax or bully her into all sorts of concessions.
German Conversation would become English…
Although the subject of course was, as always, Fräulein's brother Augustin.
It must be better to be an alone child than to have a brother like Augustin.
Younger than Fräulein, he had just finished his first year at university, but was already in trouble.
He spent money that he hadn't got and twice he'd been in a duel.
One of his opponents had almost died, and he himself had a huge disfiguring scar…
‘This alone — we don't worry, although before he made the fight he is so beautiful.
But he does nothing for his studies.
Und the money, Alice — I should not say to you this — it walks away from him…’
She thought now, she might be better to go and sit with Nan-Nan who had been Mama's nurse but who in spite of that was not so very old.
Only moody.
She complained of too little to do now that she lived in the village as companion to an elderly lady.
‘All I ask for, Miss Alice, is another baby in the cradle…’
Alice knew she was talking of Papa's marrying again.
Now that it was three years since Mama had died, people did.
At first it'd been: ‘if he marries again.’
Then, more lately: ‘when he marries again.’
But there were some things one did not think about because they were unimaginable.
And Papa, so sad at her going,could not mean ever to replace her.
Mama could not be replaced.
Mama's going.
Before and after.
Like the Red Sea of the Bible, divided exactly in two.
Before, although everything wasn't always perfect, at least it was not cold and unkind.
After, even if people tried to be nice, it was cold everywhere, and dark.
Most of all now she missed that sacred half-hour in the morning after breakfast, in Mama's sitting-room.
Before other people claimed her.
Before my lessons began at nine o'clock, when Mama was just up, not even her hair done…
She talked to me then.
She needed me (I think).
I wasn't just a child, an alone child; she used to say, ‘Alice, you are my friend.
Darling, sometimes,you are my best friend .
And then she would take my hand and lay her cheek against it.
She would let me brush her hair some days.
It had a lovely smell, something like roses but not so sweet.
I used to bury my face in it, and laugh.
I used to laugh a lot then.
But perhaps the early evening was better still?
Because often I would be alone with her up there: not like other children, having to come down to the drawing-room at five o'clock, brought by nurse, on their best behaviour.
I would sit with her often for a whole hour, she with her feet up on the sofa, resting.
From as long as I can remember, she had to rest a lot.
I had to tell her about my day.
‘Yes,’ she would say, ‘everything.
Of course I want to hear it all.’
Then if something wasn't right — her indignation: ‘No, no!
They shan't say that, Alice/do that/rob you of that…’
She even took sides against Nan-Nan who had been her own nurse.
(‘Alice, we shall speak to her nicely, and it will be all right.’
And it was …)
I was allowed to be her friend.
Because she wasn't always happy, I know that.
But I would never have asked her.
She would say to me: ‘We shan't bother today with how I feel.
We mustn't ever bother with that.
This is your time, Alice.’
Sometimes she complained, very slightly: her head ached, she was a little tired….
Sometimes Mrs Anstruther, Aunt  Violet, came to see her.
Her friend.
(My friend.
Since Mama went, she's been mine too, although Papa doesn't like her very much…)
She thought now, standing quite still: I might go and see Aunt Violet.
She wasn't a relation but she had been told to call her Aunt Violet.
She was a Roman Catholic, which Papa didn't like.
He said Romanists were bad on the whole — though not as bad as Jews.
She heard him say once to Mama: ‘Violet is a bad influence on you.’
But she, Alice, had never been forbidden to go and see her.
She could talk to her about Mama.
Now, when things got too bad, she would say to herself, ‘I can go to Aunt Violet.’
The evenings Mama went out, or people came.
Dinner-parties.
Mama would say of those evenings, ‘Something I have to do, for your Papa.
People can't choose, Alice, what they must do.’
She'd come in to see me when she was dressed — always with so many jewels.
Sometimes even, the Diamond Waterfall.
Then, after she'd kissed me goodnight, she would take my hand in hers and, half closing it, fill it with kisses.
‘Shut your hand up quick, and they will last all night .’
(And they did, they did…)
Rubies, sapphires, emeralds — she wore jewellery always.
Even in the daytime.
Papa liked her to.
Sometimes, alone, with me, she would take it off.
‘It breaks my back, my neck —’ And she would give a little laugh, unclasping a heavy bracelet: ‘It breaks my wrist too.’
But often I wanted her to keep them on because, wearing them, she was beautiful.
Without them she wasn't.
She was just lovely, plain Mama, with the little face that crinkled up when she laughed, showing small white teeth.
Such jewels.
They were beautiful all by themselves, without people.
It was enough just to look at them.
The stones too: kept in a special room in heavy glass cases inside strong cupboards.
When Alice had been smaller she'd been surprised to find that every other home didn't have a room devoted only to precious stones…
But the most beautiful, among so many, many things of beauty, was the Diamond Waterfall.
Not just a rain of diamonds (and they were hardly common, Mama had explained), but a whole waterfall of them….
They gleamed not only about Mama's neck but tumbled almost as far as her  waist — and could seem all different colours.
They were fastened together, too, in such a way that they moved with the person — who was Mama.
Lovely, lovely.
Grandfather had been rich enough to buy the many diamonds it took to make it up.
Just as he had been rich enough to build The Towers….
Grandmother, Alice was told, had been very, very proud of the Waterfall when it was new.
Although Aunt Violet wasn't often rude about other people (she explained to Alice that Catholics were not allowed to be uncharitable), it was she who'd remarked: ‘Just a little bit vulgar.
She wore it, you know,before luncheon.’
It was Mama, though, who wore it in the painting halfway up the great staircase — so that all who passed by could see it and admire.
Grandmother's portrait had been there before but was tucked away now in an alcove in the dining-room.
Only those in certain seats saw it.
Mama looked frightened and unhappy in the portrait.
Alice thought perhaps she'd known already she was ill.
Dying, ill.
She didn't look at the portrait often.
It was not necessary.
She had her own picture, in her own shrine: one like Aunt Violet's for the Virgin Mary.
Hers had a photograph of Mama, taken by Papa.
In his youth Papa had been an eager photographer.
He had had his own darkroom, and had always been taking pictures.
The new wing being built, the sunken garden being sunk — everything.
And soon, when I'm old enough — he has said that I may have his camera, and take pictures for myself.
In the shrine also: a small bunch of flowers, some heather, a pair of gloves that had been Mama's (and still, but only a little now, smelled of her), and her little gold notebook and gold pencil.
Mama had stopped using the notebook when she'd become too ill for them to have any more happy times together.
She'd said then that Alice must have it.
By that time she was in bed all day, too weak even to joke.
Some days she had a fever and spoke very fast.
Her face would be pale except for two red spots high on her cheekbones.
Towards the end, she had been moved to the big green bedroom in the West Tower, where she lay propped on high pillows, often delirious, each day weaker and weaker.
Aunt Violet never spoke of that time.
‘Let's talk about happier days,’ she would say to Alice, ‘I was so careful with  your mother always.
We only spoke of happy things…’
Going out through a side door, she stood a while in the courtyard.
A gardener came by with a barrow, but didn't turn his head.
In the distance she saw Fräulein, carrying a flower basket.
She thought of joining her.
They might pick flowers together.
I might do this, I might do that….
Already it was after five.
In a very little, it would be the time when once she had used to sit with Mama…
Mama's sitting-room.
It was no use to go in there.
It was furnished still, but it was cold, cold.
Like Mama.
It was covered with dust sheets.
It waited — for what?
4
‘Tell me, Miss Greene, what would amuse you?
What would you like to do tomorrow?
My brother, you see, has persuaded me to stay in Town, a further ten days at the least.’
Lily looked at him.
Ah yes.
Sir Robert, Sir Robert Firth.
And beside him the smiling, sardonic face of Lionel.
But she had not been listening.
‘Some idea for the weekend perhaps?’
What?
What idea?
She scarcely heard in her humiliation.
She could only think: everybody knows.
They will all have read The Times , the Morning Post .
They will know.
I am humiliated.
Yet all was glitter in this room, as it had been glitter two months ago when she had been so happy.
The Savoy again, but this time a private room for their, quite large, party.
Twelve people.
Everywhere masses of hateful chrysanthemums.
Everywhere extravagances of decor, ordered no doubt by Lionel whose party it was.
There is money in that family, she thought.
He was giving the party for his brother, visiting London again now, at the end of the summer.
Lionel, in his bright red cummerbund.
Ah yes, he knows, she thought; and I don't trust him not to suddenly humiliate me further — to send some remark flying the length of the table.
The image of the newspaper burned behind her eyes, pricking them.
This very morning, the Court and Personal column of The Times :
An engagement is announced between The Viscount Tristram, son of the late Viscount Matthew Tristram and Mary, Viscountess Tristram, and Miss Augusta Mayhew, only daughter of Sir…
She had not been able to read on.
Just thinking about it now made her tilt her chin higher.
She tried to change the anxiety in her eyes to a proud gleam.
I do not care .
‘Miss Greene — I know I sound like a deuced newspaper reporter…’
There was the Honble Freddie Moore, leaning  forward eagerly, his turn to speak to her (it could not be about that; it must not be), ‘is it true that George Edwardes is after you, and means you to star in his next….
The thing is that I should so like to be the first to know, officially…’
I do not care.
She had read the announcement alone in her bedroom over breakfast.
At first, she hadn't believed it.
She peered more closely.
The name could be mistaken, but — no, it was not a mistake.
And who was she ?
Miss Augusta Mayhew.
Some little girl…
She had sat there, anger and humiliation struggling inside her, so that she was locked.
Even her heart: she felt as if it had barely room to beat.
I expect a letter, she thought.
He will write, surely.
Or he has written and I have not received it.
Perhaps he will even write and say that he knows nothing of it — that it is the Mayhews, Augusta's family, who have announced a marriage.
She had heard of such mistakes.
Only recently — a prank played on some young man by his friends.
An enemy, too, could do it.
Soon perhaps there would be another announcement.
And in it the wonderful words: ‘will not now take place…’
Then the fresh waves of humiliation.
‘…will not now take place .’
But it is Lily Greenwood, shopkeeper's daughter, it is my wedding which will not take place.
The pain was such that in her anger she could not remember how much, or even if, she had loved Edmund.
The image of his face flashed past and together with it all the days of early summer, Jubilee summer.
Of happiness.
Of being wanted.
She had been secure in her hopes.
He had promised, had he not?
But then not exactly…
But perhaps exactly enough?
Still in her wrap, she had hurried over to the drawer where the letters were kept.
They were tied with white ribbons, as if , she thought contemptuously, I were a silly young girl.
They hurt.
How they hurt.
But trying to calm herself, she thought: I'll read them through now a second time, but as though written to someone else.
Her head was suddenly hard.
Dad's daughter.
The letters, they showed a progress through that summer, marking the enchanted moments, the highlights, where pride  and vanity could not now be separated from notions of love.
She tried to tell herself now: It is only my pride.
But then she thought: I have a right to that pride.
I have earned it…’
Each letter, and how many there seemed now, for she had kept each note, even the hastiest (‘half past two a.m., Dearest, I have been away from you only fifteen minutes and already I am dreaming of my dearest Lily and our next happy meeting!’).
Had kept all of them just for the proud thrill of his in truth rather badly formed hand.
Read now, one by one, they formed a  chapelet , a commentary on that summer.
Hurry on, and pass this one.
Ironic now, referring to the evening out with Lionel when she had met Sir Robert for the first time.
Dearest, I know that when I am away my darling goes out with others.
I think perhaps I must try never to go away unless with you — And yet I know when you are out at supper with others , that you are all the time thinking of me, as I am of you (and last evening in the hansom!
Your lips are not cherries but strawberries, and that is why I crushed them.
I wish, dearest, that I was a poet and not just a silly twenty-three-year-old man about town…
And so on and so on— until August, and his departure abroad.
He had had no choice about that.
He had told her, again in a letter:
‘…
I know, dearest, that you could take a holiday this summer — You mentioned it would be possible.
And I would have liked to invite you…’
But she had not thought much about it because of the hint — reading between the lines — that soon they would be together always.
She would become Viscountess Tristram.
There would be the headlines, ‘Carlton Star Weds Peer’.
And the customary nonsense: ‘…one of the loveliest flowers adorning our English stage has been plucked by the aristocracy…’
‘I wanted to invite you,’ he told her again later (his hand over hers beneath the tablecloth).
‘The trouble is — Mother.’
Lily had thought: I should have guessed.
Earlier she'd said to herself: ‘There will be trouble there.
But she had thought herself equal to it.
After all, his mother would be the Dowager only.
I would have always, in the end, the last word.
‘…
Mother.
She hasn't been strong, or well, since Father's death.
The shock.
And upsets over the Will, and claimants.
She would like to go to Austria or Germany, you see.’
His dear face, the vivacity dimmed but shining with affection, with anxiety to please.
(Might not that be, even now, the trouble?)
‘She wants me with her, although a great friend, Lady Bartlett, goes with her sons, and I believe too an aunt of mine.
It will be good for her in the mountains…’
Lily remembered that she had hoped even then that it was not too late to change….
She had said to him, saucily enough:
‘Has she ordered you, Edmund?
Is it a command ?’
‘Not a command -just a plea, darling.
She asked in such a way….
She said, and she's right, dammit, that Father would have wished — that she expected ….
So, how not?’
He had looked pathetic, torn both ways, distressed and (how to think of that now?) so terribly, terribly in love with her.
That same night he had written a letter which she first saw on opening her eyes, which she had read over her coffee, wearing, she remembered now, her new negligee with its neck of coral swansdown.
Perhaps I wasn't able to say earlier this evening, when your dear sweet face was looking at me.
I could not say how very , very much I am going to miss my dearest — except that I know she will understand.
Soon we shall be together again.
And next time — who knows, forever?
You do understand, my darling?
It is not just the duty I owe my mother — but even more, my Father.
A man, that King, Country and Empire could all have been proud of.
I could not let him down, could I?
Their last supper together, at Gatti's.
The promises of undying love, of daily thoughts.
The drive back to her house in the hansom cab, his importuning, her fear that she might yield…
And then the long weeks: the rest of July, half of August.
Letters had come.
Shorter it was true, but no less protesting.
Gifts.
How she was to know, how could she ever have known?
In the middle of August, his note:
I have been ill — the result of a fall.
My wrist was sprained and they think it quite serious [he wrote with his left hand.
It looked like an old man's wavering].
I do not know who I can get to write for me.
How could I dictate to some amanuensis all the love I feel for my darling Lily, the loveliest flower….
This has taken nearly two hours to write.
I cannot, dearest, do this very often.
Shall you take the silence for my love?
Do you still receive flowers three times a week?
I have wired that you should receive grapes now, and a fruit basket each weekend…
Had it been the truth — that damaged wrist?
She had never questioned it.
But now….
The silence had seemed long after the habit of receiving notes, letters.
He wrote once more with his left hand.
The wrist, he said, was not improving.
‘Next week, I will try to write again.
I have some news…’
He had not written.
Indeed he had had news.
News which surely she might have expected to hear from him ?
‘An engagement is announced between…’
The truth had not been too difficult to discover.
Even in the little time she had had since yesterday (and she had sent out at once for gossip papers.
A picture of Augusta in The Queen : ‘a blushing rosebud, soon to be a blushing bride.
The wedding, planned for November…’) she had learned that she was the goddaughter of Lady Bartlett (that mother of sons…) and had joined them at the end of July.
For the rest — Lily thought, I can imagine it all.
Certainly Augusta would be different, younger, well connected, suitable (oh, how suitable).
And — proximity.
There was nothing to beat proximity…
The story was an old one.
But it would not do.
I am a woman scorned, she thought now, in the private room in the Savoy, lifting her wineglass, sipping without tasting.
He has behaved very badly.
And why , in God's name,why should he get away with it ?
She turned to her neighbour, Colonel Crossley-Payne, and very lightly touched his arm.
She smiled sweetly.
‘Dear Colonel, please, the name of your solicitors?
A person you could — recommend?
You see I have a problem of a —’ and she smiled again —‘a rather delicate nature…’
She was up early next morning.
Nothing came for her by the first post.
She took a cab and was in the City just after ten.
The solicitors were in the shadow of St Paul's.
She was able to see Colonel Crossley-Payne's man at once.
He was amiable, grizzle-haired and portly, with a wide smile.
His frock coat strained whenever he leaned forward at his desk.
‘…
My dear Miss Greene, cases of this nature…’ he rubbed his hands.
‘Er….
Some experience….
A good barrister….
I have in mind a QC who cannot be too highly recommended — if he is free and will take the brief.
Essential, of course, that counsel be first class…these cases can be — Not to say tricky…’
She was in it now, and could not back out.
She could see events, already out of her hands, moving faster and faster…
‘You have the letters with you, Miss Greene?’
A strange man, hands unknown to her, reading Edmund's schoolboyish phrases.
There was something wrong.
She felt suddenly weak — last night she had scarcely slept — wanted to snatch them back, saying, ‘But these are private …’
After all, if Edmund was happy what did any of it matter?
Within seconds the mood had passed.
She felt her anger grow colder, not hot, strengthening her resolve.
He shall not get away with it .
She could see the solicitor, his eyebrows lifting occasionally:
‘Ah yes,’ he said at intervals.
‘Ah yes, certainly this would appear to be, if not a proposal, a promise.
The words are not there, perhaps, but the sense — it would be difficult to take the sense as otherwise…’
He looked up from the desk, caught her at a moment when, against her will, tears had filled her eyes.
‘You say that you have heard nothing from him — as regards the future marriage, that is?
Not that, I think, anything he might say now would affect the case…’
When she arrived at the theatre, a letter had just come by the evening post.
The familiar handwriting.
She thought: I shall read it later.
I shall not let it spoil my performance.
But it might have been better to read it, for all during the show, creeping into her mind at every lull (whenever, standing still, she had to gaze up adoringly at the hero, her Duke), an idea….
Perhaps.
Perhaps he has changed his mind.
Perhaps after all I shall end this evening, this year — in happiness?
But she might have guessed.
It was as she had expected  deep down.
A letter which, attempting to excuse and explain — succeeded in neither.
…this may arrive after you have perhaps heard from others.
Although my wrist is not quite right, I could not of course have let anyone else write this particular letter….
I know I should not allow one of my dearest friends to discover so late on of my romantic attachment….
You must have wondered sometimes whom and when I would marry?
You, Lily, who gave me such a happy summer with your delightful companionship!
In days to come as a staid married man and paterfamilias I shall remember my darling Lily with affection….
I should like you to meet Augusta, but think that your two worlds are so different — And that is why I think there was surely never anything serious between us two….
But what fun we had, did we not, Lily?
She could hardly bear to wade through it all.
Her contempt for him was total.
Before her eyes, prince turned into frog…
And so goodbye,dear friend of my youth — for now I am no longer the boy you knew, but a man …
‘Oh rot!’ she said out loud.
‘Rot.
Rot.
Rot.’
Her hand made as if to tear the wad of paper, then halted.
This too must be shown…
That evening she turned down a prior supper engagement, pleading a headache.
She went straight home to bed.
In the small hours she woke, her heart beating.
She could not remember her dream, only that it had been about Edmund and that he loved her.
She felt as she lay there that it was she who had done wrong.
Tears crept down her cheeks, and she wept silently.
It could not be all pride….
She lay for a long while, the tears falling.
In the dark, Lionel's face passed before her.
Dark, saturnine.
Man about town.
Idle memory.
What was he saying?
‘…and of all the jewels — the Diamond Waterfall — it must be seen to be believed…’
She was to have worn a diamond tiara.
Edmund had said once (oh, his foolish streak of poor poetry), ‘Your tears — they are jewels.
Diamonds.’
And now, she thought (because I  have in spite of all, a heart): I weep for him, because of him, a whole waterfall of diamonds…
Events moved swiftly.
Later that month she learned that Edmund would like to settle out of court.
In a letter, he admitted that an intention to marry might reasonably have been supposed from ‘certain phrases’.
But he had quite simply changed his mind — and was willing to pay for the privilege (usually a woman's, he commented).
‘It is possible that by going to Court we shall get a larger sum.’
The solicitor's even voice.
‘It is also possible — so unpredictable is the Law, even with a special jury as we would have — that we might get less.
Or even, nothing.
And the, er, publicity.
While it might be good for your career….
One cannot be sure.
You will be exposed to comments of the public, the judge, his counsel.
And you realize that all, any of these letters may be read out?’
‘No,’ she said.
‘I shall not take him to Court.
And — the sum mentioned — that is completely acceptable.’
That evening after the show she sat in her dressing-room and wrote to Daisy.
She was sending her very soon, she said, the sum of seven thousand pounds.
‘My darlings, you are at last going to America!
And buying a lovely house of your own and sending the children to good schools.
Joszef shall have a business of his own.
I shall explain later….
I am so happy for you both, for us all …’
That night, strangely, she did not weep.
It seemed to her a happy coincidence that Robert (she thought of him now as Robert) should write inviting her to Yorkshire for the weekend.
He suggested two dates: the second involved travelling on the day of Edmund's wedding.
A Friday.
It must have been meant, she thought.
She had due to her a free ten days and decided to take them then.
She would go on to see Daisy.
On the Thursday night, which was to be her farewell to her public for ten days, she allowed an admirer, Frederick Calthrop to take her to supper.
He was an elderly bachelor (‘I shall never marry, my dear,’) and also very rich.
They went to Romano's.
The menu had been arranged earlier together with the wines.
He had taken a great deal of trouble.
He offered that evening to buy her a little dog.
In passing she  had mentioned once that she missed the fox terrier, Rex, they had had many years ago as children.
‘You have only to say, Miss Greene, and the very best, a King Charles, don't you think? will be yours.
I should ask only a smile in return…’
But of course.
And how kind ….
She would let him know in a fortnight.
‘I go north tomorrow…’
They were a party of six travelling up from Kings Cross.
As the train left, looking at her watch, she tried not to think that Edmund was by now already surely married.
She had seen mention of it on a newspaper placard earlier that morning.
Tomorrow or Monday there would be photographs.
Her companions were a married couple, a young man of about thirty, and an elderly, forthright, General's widow, a Mrs Beeley.
It soon became apparent to Lily that the wife and the young man were in the midst of an affaire, which by secret signs and language they seemed able to carry on during the journey.
Perhaps purposely, the husband appeared unaware.
No doubt tonight, thought Lily, there will be tiptoeing along the corridors.
She tried to imagine such a life for herself, but could not.
At Darlington, so that they would not have to wait for a connection, they had hired a special train to Richmond, where they were met.
There was some light left as they motored the few miles to The Towers.
Looking out, she was reminded that East, West or North Riding, she was Yorkshire.
Her emotions were mixed: anticipation, a little(pleasurable) fear, a tingling feeling of going into the unknown.
Something, anything, might happen.
After all, had not Lionel said, lightly enough it was true, ‘My brother is not, you know, immune to your charms…’
I could do, she thought now, with being wanted.
Perhaps with being wanted a lot.
She thought even of a proposal which she could have the pleasure of turning down.
She wondered idly if what she had heard about Lionel's proclivities or tastes in sexual matters were his brother's also?
(Ten pounds — the price of a little virgin, she had learned.)
She wished Evie had not spoken, since she found it difficult now to look at Lionel without wondering whether that day, or the day before, some poor child had been sold to him.
But  then, she thought, perhaps it is none of it true?
And in the meantime, he is amusing company.
She had thought that the village of Flaxthorpe would be larger.
But it was little more than a hamlet: a fine but small Norman church, an inn, a few houses and cottages and in the distance, farm buildings.
The Hall, pleasant, Georgian, walled: it was here the Hawksworth family lived.
The young heir who was to marry the rich American…
The Firth home, The Towers, could be seen from the village.
Even in the fading light it impressed her, if only because it was worse even than she had imagined — or Lionel had said.
Who could have dared to blot the landscape so?
That wonderful stretch of unbroken moorland, the softer hills below, some woodland — and then this monstrosity….
Confused as to its intentions.
Partly baronial, partly (but only a very small part) classical.
The rest — what?
Robert came to greet them.
He seemed different, perhaps because he was in his own home, his castle (and it was almost a castle).
More forceful, assured.
‘Will it keep fine for the shoot?
November — We are often better favoured in the last weeks of the season…’
Everything had been laid on for their comfort.
She was impressed to see they had electric light.
But the house itself seemed vast, echoing.
Upstairs the bedrooms ranged either side of the wide straight corridors.
It was her first experience of staying in a country house.
She distracted herself now with little worries about ‘doing it wrong’.
She had no maid.
But one appeared, a local girl with butter-coloured hair.
Her clothes were unpacked and the low-cut coral chiffon evening dress laid out, with its underskirt of black silk, its yards of ribbon and lace.
But first they had had a late tea in the smaller of the drawing-rooms.
Just before she had gone up to rest and change for dinner, Robert's daughter, Alice, had come down to see the company.
Lily had almost forgotten her existence.
A thin, nervous child, with drab mid-brown hair and pointed features, she was ill at ease.
Her face had a close, guarded look — one that Lily had seen already on Robert.
She supposed her to be about twelve or thirteen.
The only person with whom she spoke at all easily was Mrs Beeley, the General's widow, who somehow struck the right note — chaffing  her about learning French, to which Alice responded with spirit.
To Lily, something almost despairing came from the child.
She felt a softening: seeing how Alice placed her feet reminded her of Daisy and how, when in trouble with Dad, she had used to stand just that way.
Poor child, she thought.
I may have had a foolish mother but at least she was there.
To be motherless?
To have no one to run to….
But Alice did not look as if she ran to anyone.
Downstairs before dinner, Robert paid Lily very little attention, spreading his duties as a host equally among them all.
She began to wonder if what Lionel had said was true?
Her charms….
It was during the meal that everything changed.
As well as the house party there were some local guests.
Mr Hawksworth, Charlie Hawksworth as they called him, was not there.
He had gone ‘over the herring pond to see his betrothed’, she learned.
It was Robert who took her in to dinner.
They ate by candlelight (‘Electricity, my dear, is so cruel,’ Lionel told Mrs Beeley), and from where she sat throughout the meal she could feel his gaze, steady, as if he took the image of her inwards.
In speaking to others, he seemed to be listening for, watching, her reactions.
Now he spoke to his neighbour.
Shooting — the eternal topic.
Broken phrases floated towards her:
‘…after deer…stalking with old Egerton…the sort of chap that uses scattershot in a twelve-bore…’
Mrs Hunnard, the young married, watched by her lover, Mr Johnstone (as she, Lily, was being watched by Robert):
‘Oh well,’ said very prettily, ‘I can put up with mosquitoes since they only take a little nibble.
But midges —’ and she gave a shudder-'this August in Scotland.
Quite ruined.
Tell me, Sir Robert, that you haven't them here…’
They made a little fuss of Lily.
She was asked what it was like,really like, to be on the stage.
‘I imagine,’ said one rather earnest, heavy-jawed man, ‘it to be like any other job of work.
Plenty of toil and tears…’
A rush of disagreement to this: ‘Oh, but the excitement — and you cannot call it work ’(this from Mrs Hunnard).
After dinner Lily was coaxed into singing several numbers from the show.
Then a duet with Mr Johnstone who had a  pleasant light tenor.
She felt that really he sang for Mrs Hunnard.
Lying in bed later, she thought: Edmund is married now.
It is all over, quite, quite finished.
Of the rest, of what would happen tonight, she did not want to think.
But her body, free now of all the lacing, the trammellings, could feel, as if in memory….
In the darkness, Edmund's face came into view.
He was over her.
His hands touched her face.
Remembered touch.
The hands, wandering hands, so often reprimanded, restrained, searched her body now.
She shuddered in memory.
Angry with herself, she sat up in bed, turned on the light (wonderful electric light), and reaching for one of the three modern novels laid out for her, forced  herself to read.
It is over, over, over.
I do not care .
The next day there was a shooting party.
Lionel surprised her by his skill.
She had not imagined him a sportsman.
Little Mrs Hunnard stayed behind at The Towers, resting, while Mr Johnstone said that he did not shoot and would prefer a country walk.
Lily was not deceived.
She and Mrs Beeley walked with the guns.
Lily had not realized how large Robert's estate was.
His grouse moors stretched further than she could see.
Their colour gone now with the setting in of winter.
There was a luncheon-party at a neighbour's house.
Lionel said to Robert, ‘Miss Greene, you know, is more than a little interested in the Waterfall.’
He said it where only Lily and Robert could hear.
She was about to say, ‘But — I never…’ and then, could not be bothered.
Robert said only, ‘All women are interested in the Waterfall…’ and smiled to himself.
The remark made her angry, and for a moment, she would have protested.
But then she thought: Why show I care?
That evening, he approached her after dinner.
‘Mrs Hunnard,’ he said, ‘also on her first visit here, has expressed a wish to see — the stones.
Not the Waterfall, of course.
But my — collection…’
So in the company of Mrs Hunnard and Mr Johnstone (who appeared, an awkward fourth, at the last moment) she  followed Robert for a viewing.
He had been first to collect the keys.
Jewels, jewels.
A whole roomful of precious stones.
She would not have been surprised if The Towers had had dungeons to store them in.
But these were kept in a tall airy room, admittedly with a double door, in locked heavy glass cases.
Sapphires, emeralds, pearls, rubies, peridots, tourmaline, topaz….
Row upon row of them.
All indexed, described, places of origin, dates, histories, interesting facts….
To Lily it was an Aladdin's Cave.
‘Spend as long as you wish — I would like visits to be at people's whim.
But of course I cannot leave such a place open to — anyone.’
Mrs Hunnard was soon bored.
‘And what does little Mrs Hunnard think?’
‘Oh, they are too utterly — they are quite —‘
‘You prefer — jewellery?’
‘Yes,’ she said, and dimpled.
Lily was not asked.
Only, on the way back, as the other two were talking, he said to her: ‘I too prefer jewellery.
I have a considerable amount.
My father, after indulging himself in The Towers, invested what was left in stones.
And some jewellery.
Notably of course, the Waterfall.
I have merely developed the interest — and extended it.
I like them to be on the premises, however.
A bank vault would be meaningless…’
He spoke without looking at her, but as if confiding.
‘Lady Firth.
A great deal of my collection, of the jewellery that is, was bought for Lady Firth.’
The words rushed to her lips: ‘I am sorry,’ she said.
‘That you should have lost your wife.
A man needs…’
Then: ‘Your daughter,’ she went on quickly, ‘she is perhaps lonely?’
‘Perhaps,’ he said.
‘She does not confide.’
He changed the subject abruptly, awkwardly, saying, ‘Ah, but here come the — friends, caught up with us…’
He was equally abrupt, as if embarrassed, when on Sunday afternoon, finding her a moment alone: ‘The invitation,’ he said, ‘was till Tuesday only.
But — could you be persuaded to stay a little longer?
Say, Thursday — or even, dare I ask, until the weekend?’
She told him that she did not play again for over a week.
So, yes, it was possible.
Some rearranging….
‘My sister,’ she said.
‘I had planned to visit my sister and her family —‘
‘But that is no problem, that may be arranged.
Where?
Leeds?
You can be taken there and back….
I shall see to that.
You will stay, I take it?
I should be honoured…’
An invitation perhaps.
But she felt it more of a command.
She was at once attracted and annoyed.
In some ways it was like Wycliffe Avenue, Headingly , all over again.
And I did not like that…
Daisy came alone.
They had arranged to meet at the Metropole Hotel.
It is not, Lily thought, that I am ashamed, but then she thought again of the photograph in her dressing-room and blushed.
I have become, and am still , a snob…
Daisy's face above the frayed collar of her old black coat had shed ten years.
She glowed with happiness.
In repose, she showed still the strain she had been under, but it was otherwise a new Daisy.
She who'd never been one to chatter, prattling away now like a child:
‘…
Joszef couldn't come, wouldn't come, Lily, because he says he will cry if he sees you, tears of happiness and gratitude, and also that we are sisters and must be alone with each other….
I can't say, there are no words.
I tried to write, but you must have thought it not much of a letter, for what you had done.
To have saved so much from your stage success…’
She told Daisy nothing.
At least, even with my sister, let me keep my pride.
I am ashamed still of that money.
Good only for what it can do .
(But what happiness  it was giving!)
‘We sail on January the first.
We begin eighteen-ninety-eight in the most wonderful, wonderful manner — Joszef's second cousin, he's in Boston and we shall go there first.
Ah Lily…’
She spoke quietly, but flushed and non-stop, of their plans, of Joszef, of little Joe, nearly ten, of Anna, nine, of Sara, of Ruth who at five sang enchantingly.
‘And that she gets from your dear self.
’ She said with quiet passion, ‘Ah Lily, Lily, it is after all wonderful to be married and have children.
You, dear, really must marry soon.
Soon, Lily.’
The visit to Leeds was on the Tuesday.
When she arrived back, a little late and with only about forty minutes before she should go down to dinner, she found a small packet on her dressing-table.
The sight filled her with childlike excitement.
Lying on silk in the round leather box was a bracelet.
Emeralds and rubies.
Gold.
Beneath the dressing-table light the stones shimmered.
Vibrant peacock colours.
She lifted it, laid it against her wrist.
She saw that her hand shook.
Her response to its beauty alarmed her.
I am used to gifts, she thought, used to returning them politely, if not on every occasion at least on most.
(That King Charles spaniel next week?
A decision to be made there…)
Always excepting Edmund, of course.
She looked at the bracelet again longingly.
But it's beautiful!
She desired it — there was no other word.
I yearn to possess it.
And it could be mine …
Her day out had exhausted her.
I cannot decide anything she thought.
Accept, or refuse.
She put it quickly back in its box, and into her locked case.
When the little maid came in to do her hair, she had chosen as her only ornament a simple mother-of-pearl choker.
Lady Firth , she said to herself suddenly.
And then thought: I might still have a title.
I did not really love Edmund.
That was not love.
And do I, anyway, need it?
What, really, has it done for Daisy — if I had not been able to help materially?
And for Vicky — what else there but false notions of romance?
Ending in tragedy.
Frank.
Frank, she did not wish to remember.
She thought: When not unhappy in love, I am instead a little ridiculous….
I am, I think, not made for love.
Then she thought with simple and hard resolve:It is time to get married .
Downstairs, she did not know where to look.
But he solved this for her.
After the first glance and greeting (‘All was well with your visit to Leeds?’) he ignored her.
However, once again it was he who took her in to dinner.
As they walked together through the hall, she was about to speak to him (such a gift,some£thing must be said…), but before she could do so, he said, his voice hard, displeased:
‘You are very — as to ornament — simple tonight, are you  not?’
When, discomforted, she didn't answer at once, he went on: ‘You received nothing — interesting?’
‘I — yes,’ she began.
She felt certain that Mr Johnstone and Mrs Beeley walking behind could hear.
‘Sir Robert, I —‘
He cut in angrily: ‘Then why are you not wearing it ?’
She thought him more hurt than angry.
Nor did she see how she could explain here, now.
She said coolly as they came up to the stuffed spaniel, ‘What do you call him, that very fierce dog?’
An unbearable meal.
Robert stiffly angry — surely the others must notice.
Lionel, mercifully, was dining out.
Then an interminable wait till the gentlemen joined the ladies.
She was filled with dread.
There was talk of playing cards, or perhaps Lily would sing for them?
Mr Johnstone was detailed to search for a duet from The Geisha .
Mrs Hunnard gave delighted little cries.
‘If only I had a pretty voice — I'm quite without tune, am I not?’
Her husband seemed deep in conversation with Mrs Beeley.
Lily felt out of patience.
She left the room for a moment.
As she came back towards the drawing-room, Robert was waiting in the hall.
He took her arm, pressing it beneath the elbow, on the nerve.
‘I must speak to you, Miss Greene —‘
She did not refuse.
They walked, he directing her, to the small drawing-room where they had had tea the first afternoon.
There, he asked her to marry him.
She said, ‘The message of the bracelet.
It was not clear…’
‘I think it was —‘
She was surprised to see that he was trembling.
She said, saucy with nerves, ‘Do we speak of love?’
‘I am a widower.
My child needs a mother — as you pointed out.
And I — need a wife.’
‘And you think that I —‘
‘I feel quite certain or I should not have asked.’
‘Then — I shall.’
She had surprised herself.
It was he now who seemed suddenly embarrassed, ill at ease.
There was a pause.
Awkwardly, he added:
‘Of course— I want a son.
I think I should make that clear.’
She said lightly: ‘Oh that, that will be no trouble.’
She turned to him.
‘Accepting — if I am to consent, I should like to make a condition or two —‘
‘Indeed.’
He looked mildly curious, not displeased.
‘The honeymoon.
I would want to go to France.
To Paris,especially to Paris.’
‘Of course.
Of course.’
He took her hands and crushed them between his.
It was not unpleasant.
She thought even that she might grow to want more of his touch.
‘The honeymoon.
And what if I have a condition or two?
Nothing so important of course, but —‘
‘Yes,’ she said, laughing now.
Suddenly happy.
I am to be married .
I have made the decision .
‘Why, yes.
Fair is fair, is it not?
Do you tell me now?’
5
I cannot bear it.
The most terrible, awful thing that could have happened.
Everything is spoilt.
I don't believe it, I don't want to believe it.
It shan't happen.
And then — that I should hear it first from Nan-Nan.
I think she truly didn't realize I knew nothing of it at all.
‘Well,’ she said, come up to The Towers for the afternoon (who had she been talking to?).
‘Well,’ she said, seeing me mixing rose madder and burnt sienna in my paint-box, ‘what's all this I hear about a new mother?’
‘What, what?’
I said, ‘What?’
Papa wasn't even there for me to ask.
And then her funny pinched look.
She pressed her lips together:
‘Oh well, if you don't know, Miss Alice, then it'll be only a rumour — hearsay.’
I ran from her then and rushed into Mama's sitting-room.
Then I rushed out again, and went to my shrine, her shrine,our shrine.
And I knelt for a few moments, head buried in my hands.
I was so stupid I didn't even wonder who it was — it was just the idea.
That was enough to set me weeping.
And then, only a few minutes later, the knock at the door.
Uncle Lionel wanting to see me.
Downstairs, he made me sit on his knee.
How I hate to sit on his knee.
He held my hand too, and pulled at the fingers one by one.
His knees were not comfortable.
They are not safe.
And also, I'm too big for that.
I am twelve.
‘Your Papa has asked me to tell you…’
Yes, that is how it began.
Not even Papa himself to tell me.
Oh, and then, and then that it should be her .
‘Oh,’ I cried, ‘not that one!’
‘But Alice dear, yes — that one.
She —‘
I didn't like her when I saw her.
I remember now that I saw neat features, a nose a little hooked, and a very good figure.
She had a firm speaking voice, which I suppose some might think pretty.
And a tinkling laugh which is horrid.
And  expensive, fashionable clothes.
And, worst of all — she is an actress.
Yes, she is an actress.
And quite, quite hateful.
Aunt Violet is away.
I'd have wanted to run there at once.
I spoke again to Nan-Nan, and she said she was sorry I should have found out like that.
Then she cried a little, and I cried a little .
And she said there would never be anyone like Mama.
But that I must try and look at it like this: that Mama had been her very special baby — and so had I. So that could never be the same again.
They are not to be married until Easter.
Miss Greene has contracted to stay in her show (I shall not go to see it!) until March.
She does not plan to continue working.
There are to be two features on her in the illustrated papers, Uncle Lionel says.
She is determined to be a good mother to me as well as Papa's wife.
I don't like that word ‘determined’.
Often when someone is not pleased with me, they say ‘you are very determined today.’
They are often not very pleased with me now.
Yet I don't think I used to be very naughty.
I don't think I often wanted to be.
It was easy to be good then .
But now when Miss Fairgrieves must write about me, what Papa calls a ‘moral report’, whenever he is away from home for more than a day, then it is always full of: ‘Alice has been as usual rather headstrong, argumentative, even secretive…’
But why should I not be secretive?
I have a secret.
It is that I loved Mama the best…
6
It had grown dark.
The sea glimmered in the March evening.
Lights were strung across the promenade; around the Casino.
The croupier had a high-pitched voice, insistent.
Lily looked at the faces above the dazzling white shirt fronts.
Alert, tense, some wary, some knowing.
Here in the salle priveé were those willing to play for high stakes.
Those who could afford to lose or perhaps could not…
I have played for very high stakes, and I have lost.
Tonight, the fourth of their honeymoon, Lionel was playing, but Robert not.
Later, probably, Lionel would want to play trente et quarante .
Robert would watch quietly, indulgently.
He never suggested she should gamble — it was Lionel only who attempted to persuade her:(‘Not gamble?
Shan't you essay any alteration in your finances?
It is only light-hearted, after all…’)
It did not seem to her always so light-hearted.
Just as the size of the winnings amazed her, so did the size of the losses terrify her.
Two thousand, three thousand, more, in an evening.
She saw it all in terms of Edmund's settlement: a brief holiday on the Riviera, and such a sum could vanish as if it had never been.
(Or, less likely, magically become £20,000, £60,000…)
Clatter.
Turn of the wheel.
Fortune's wheel.
Everything, but everything, she thought, is a gamble.
(Some though are more foolish than others.
And I?)
Lionel had lost heavily yesterday evening at Monte Carlo.
Robert had only laughed.
Tonight, Lionel had said, he would do better.
His theory was ‘suivez la couleur ’.
Red, for him.
He explained that for that patience and courage were needed.
Lily could think only of him paying for little girls.
She  imagined it done with his winnings.
Ten pounds a guaranteed virgin.
Had that not been the price?
‘Le trente…le rouge…quatre fois rouge…’
Earlier that evening she had been recognized as Lily Greene by some people staying at Cannes, to whom Lionel was slightly known.
Invitations had been extended.
Although Robert might not know the beau monde here, Lionel did.
Enough of them to make their days and evenings full of distraction.
Jewellery sparkled, all about the salle .
Her own — so newly hers — shone from her head, her neck, fingers, arms.
She knew that it had not gone unremarked…
Oh how the company glittered.
Lionel, winnings amassed, was having a good evening.
He would attend the other tables.
It was no use her wishing to leave.
He said now, looking across the room:
‘What an omnium gatherum ….
That couple there — no, to the right, he with the magnificent broidered jacket — they are Hungarians.
Quite an embarras of Slavs this year.
And Rumanians.
There are Rumanians rumoured, I hear.
The Balkans are fearfully represented just now.
The Casino quite ablaze with them…’
She lifted a hand to her hair.
Touched the hard edge of diamonds.
Jewels, jewels, jewels.
‘I shall not take on any Hungarians.
The year before last — no, ‘ninety-five, there was quite an imbroglio with a Count Andriyadi.
You would not credit…’
Lionel, Lionel.
On and on.
She wondered that she had ever found him amusing.
Ten days on the Riviera.
She could think only that she would rather be in Paris.
Perhaps, in Paris, everything would be better.
She had been promised Paris.
‘But first, my dear, Nice.
It will suit Lionel better.
Then we can be three weeks in Paris.
Your heart's fill of Paris…’
But why Lionel anyway?
My honeymoon.
Why Lionel ?
They had arranged March for the wedding.
Her contract for the play ran out then.
She had decided anyway to leave the stage.
Had not Robert said, ‘Of course, I want a son…’?
It was not naturally as smart a match as the failed one of the summer, but the reactions were all the same gratifying.
She frankly enjoyed the extra publicity, the little notices in the press.
The congratulations.
The surprise of her family.
There was an unexpected sense of achievement, as of a decision sensibly made.
She was doing a wise thing.
The conditions.
Ah yes, the conditions.
She was to honeymoon in Paris.
He asked only that Lionel might accompany them on the trip.
‘We are not only brothers but friends.
And he is, of course, excellent company…’
He had barely noticed her raised eyebrows.
Had taken her surprised silence for consent.
And the matter had not been mentioned again.
Until perhaps too late.
Lionel's trunks labelled Nice.
Paris…
One of the more pleasant surprises, on a protracted visit to The Towers in January, had been to meet the new bride at the Hall.
Sadie Hawksworth.
Petite, vivacious, full of common sense and bubbling over with ideas for this and that: for life in England, Yorkshire, Flaxthorpe.
She said within hours of their meeting, ‘I can't wait for you to come and live here too.
My, what fun we shall have…’
The Greenwoods were to say the least taken aback at the match.
She did not know what they would have said if it had been Edmund, but it was the title now which amazed them.
(Although Dad, she knew, saw himself as in line for one some day.
Services to the City of Leeds…)
Difficulties had arisen almost at once.
Robert informed her (he did not ask) that the wedding would be in Flaxthorpe.
It would be expected of him, he said, which to her seemed reasonable.
But to Dad, it was an insult.
She feared he might have an attack, apoplectic , so high his colour, so great his anger.
‘Not good enough, eh?
Is that it — only tradespeople, are we?
And what are they — have we heard that yet?’
Ma, standing by, looking anxiously from one to the other, face puckered, tears hovering.
But if I'd not run away, and made good….
Irritably she had said to him, Lily Greenwood again now:
‘If I'd not escaped when you made a prisoner of me….
Do you want me telling everyone how my own dad behaved?
If I hadn't run away and made good, you'd never have been the father of Lady Firth.
You may say that soon —‘My daughter, Lady Firth…’'
Next it was Ethel to make difficulties, because she hadn't been asked to be a bridesmaid.
‘Of course I'd have said no.
But that I wasn't asked — you  always were uppity.
Honour thy father and mother and thou shalt have length of days — you never read the Bible, do you?
Your pride won't go unpunished.
If it'd been me wed…’
But it was not Ethel to be wed.
Grown now into a heavy, sour-faced thirty-year-old, who bullied Ma, when not doing good deeds (how often her victims must have had to remind themselves: the deed, not the doer…).
Harry complained good-naturedly of life with her.
Counting the days and months until he would be twenty-one and could join Daisy and Joszef, happily settled in New York now.
He dare not tell Dad his plans, he said.
‘I'd not put it past him to lock me up…’
In the end it was not Ethel who boycotted the wedding, but Alice.
Not that Lily had had great hopes, so early on, of winning over Robert's daughter.
Indeed the first meeting after the announcement had been a sullen affair, with the child, pinched face, eyes cold with anger, scarcely able to speak to her.
Her only remark, when impulsively (and foolishly?)
Lily had opened her arms to embrace her:
‘I have noticed — actresses are always acting…’
And she had backed away in such a fashion that Lily could only let her arms drop.
Lily had told her, she hoped tactfully, that she was asking six girls from the show to be her attendants.
‘I thought that best.
My own sister, she is not asked either.’
I must not do anything, she thought, anything which draws attention to my taking her mother's place.
I could not expect her to be bridesmaid.
But she had not bargained for a complete refusal to attend.
It had been more than awkward.
Robert would not discuss it.
‘She is often difficult.
I take no account of it.
Lionel frequently finds her impossible — especially if thwarted.’
Nor did he ever speak of his first wife, her mother.
Lily, left to her imaginings, pictured a termagant, for no good reason.
Lionel had mentioned her only once: ‘Florence,Flora rather — we had to be careful not to ask of her more than she could give —’ and had left Lily to puzzle out the meaning.
In the end it had been simply: ‘a high fever unfortunately kept Sir Robert's daughter from attending the wedding ceremony, which was blessed with unwontedly blue skies, as if Someone above were more than glad to know that The  Towers is to have a mistress again.
All Flaxthorpe rejoiced.
The new Lady Firth is of course Lily Greene, the actress…’
More than one local reporter suffered from a runaway pen.
But the sun had shone, and the small church, massed with early daffodils, narcissi, hothouse lilies, was full to overflowing with guests in spite of the heavily whittled down list.
Lionel had been much in evidence.
Harry had looked handsome, very.
She had caught his eye as she came down the aisle.
And in that second had made her glance say: ‘Thank you, Harry, for opening the door…’
Luggage, so much luggage.
Although she and Robert arrived at their London hotel quite late, and admittedly she was somewhat tired from the journey, the strain of the ceremony, she was all the same a little surprised when they booked in and were shown to a suite which Robert explained was hers — alone.
‘I have two rooms on the floor below —‘
‘And Lionel?’
‘He is also on the next floor.
You were — not expecting him to join you?’
She wondered if that were a joke.
If humour, it was heavy.
She said: ‘I'm afraid that really —’ she shrugged her shoulders —‘really — I don't understand.’
He laughed then, and put his arms about her.
‘It's a simple matter of consideration.
I am not tired, you are.
You need a sound night's sleep to prepare you for the taxing journey tomorrow.
A stranger in the bed — is not restful.’
He paused.
‘Later — in France, things will be quite different.’
And so they had better be, she thought, a little indignantly.
She felt a frisson of gratitude at his thoughtfulness; then, reminded absurdly of Ethel (who had not so much wanted to be a bridesmaid, as to be asked ): It is not that I look forward to it, she thought, if Frank was anything to go by, but at least I would expect to be, tonight, a little irresistible…
A night on the train.
That did exhaust her.
She slept badly — again in a compartment to herself, with an adjoining door which Robert had locked on his side.
(She had tried it.)
She locked her own door against Lionel.
He and Robert had in any case disappeared to drink and play cards (the express had a gaming saloon) soon after  dinner.
She had pleaded, more than truthfully, a headache, and had settled to read.
She had brought with her Tennyson's Idylls , and the latest Mrs Humphrey Ward.
But her head hurt too much for either.
Most of the night, the sound of the train wheels had kept her awake.
Nice.
She would have liked Nice — if she had not been in such a hurry to be in Paris.
They had a suite, very sumptuous, in the Hotel Excelsior.
Beneath their balcony the sea shimmered blue.
Almost the end of the winter season now, but a freshness about everything.
The cypresses, the olives, green to grey to green in the ever-changing light.
And roses, climbing, rambling, hanging over walls, draping archways, luxuriantly in bloom.
That first night when she was ready for bed, the maid dismissed, she sat at the dressing=table, moments, adjusting the lace jabot of her wrap.
When Robert came up, before going through to the dressing-room he rang for brandy.
And champagne for her.
‘You should not have,’ she said.
‘Truly, I want nothing.
We drank very well with dinner…’
After he had taken two large brandies, very fast (too fast for what looked like a very fine marque ), he led her over to the sofa and sitting beside her, put his arm around her.
His eyes looked softer than she had ever seen them, but he wasn't looking at her.
He chatted of this and that, idly.
Then getting up: ‘Wait,’ he said, ‘please wait there.’
His voice urgent, constrained.
Then he said: ‘That must come off.’
‘What?’
He fingered the silk nightgown showing a little at the fold of her wrap.
‘That.
The garment.
I want it off.
It's not cold in here, I think?’
What a way of speaking, she thought, as he began to walk away.
While he was in the dressing-room, she took it off, placing her silk wrap round her shoulders.
Waiting for him, she thought of getting into the big bed.
He appeared suddenly in the doorway: he was in a dark blue dressing-gown, frogged.
He carried a large box — red leather, with black corners.
Worn.
She recognized it from their luggage.
He had kept it with him always in the compartment.
He knelt by the fireplace.
She sat on the sofa still, pulling the folds of the silk wrap over her bare belly, her thighs.
It is  the waiting and his strange behaviour, she thought, which makes me shiver.
He opened the box then, and inside she saw — oh, but he could not have brought with him so much jewellery.
And this was but the first tray….
‘Hold out your arm, please.’
She did so obediently.
Old-fashioned bracelets.
Broad gold; gold network, fastened with ribbon of gold; blue enamel medallions, each with a small bouquet of brilliants; a broad gold chain, each link separated with a ruby; aquamarines with twisted gold.
Sapphires…
One, then another, another — he placed them reverently first upon one arm, then the other.
Bewildered, she tried to smile:
‘Some of these — they are very lovely…’
Already the wine from the meal had worn off, leaving her tired, and hollow.
A feeling of haunting anxiety.
Now he was placing the last, low down on her wrist.
‘These — they belonged to our mother.
This one, so simple, is what they called a ‘sentimental bracelet’.
There is some of her hair, you see, fastened in with gold…’
He was breathing deeply.
Her wrap had fallen right off.
She saw her own skin velvety, glowing.
Already, she wore on her arms all the jewellery she could ever have dreamed of.
But not like this….
She thought: I should at least have been a little drunk.
It would have been better to have had something, anything.
The champagne I spurned so imperiously…
She said, since he did not move: ‘And now?’
‘What is the haste?’
It was the tone of voice, cold, edged, which had reproached her that evening at The Towers, when she had not worn the bracelet.
She saw then he had lifted the next tray from the box.
More gold, more stones glittered, shone, reflected light.
Wanting him to use again his pleasant, bluff manner of speaking, she said: ‘Ah, I'm sorry.
Do what you will…’
She shut her eyes, breathed slowly, hoping that the shivering would stop.
She felt him pass over her head a chain, heavy, cold.
Now, she couldn't open her eyes.
Shut, they somehow protected her.
To move would be impossible (and yet I have only to stand up, pull off the bracelets, announce an end to all this…).
Breathing heavily again, he said:
‘Good, good.
Your eyes are shut.’
His voice thickened.
‘My — flower.
Such a gleam against flesh.
No flesh is anything unless it's adorned.
It changes, changes quite — when the stones touch the flesh.
One needs the other — I need, I need…’
She felt the clasp of another necklace.
Then something about her waist.
His hands were behind her.
‘The body adorned.
It will not do.
I —‘
Rings were being slipped on her fingers now.
Some were loose, some went on only with difficulty.
She thought, if I keep my eyes shut, perhaps, perhaps this charade will soon be over.
His hands were warm, but the stones were not.
The cold feel of the stones — and their weight.
I might as well not be here.
I am a dummy to be decorated.
A tree to be hung with rings and necklets.
She felt the weight of something fastened on her head, circling her brow.
Then her ankles.
She said, opening her eyes, Rings on her fingers, bells on her toes…’'
‘Ah yes,’ he said.
‘Ride a cock horse, ride a cock horse.’
She thought the remark unfortunate….
He told her, ordered her, to stand up.
The cheval glass opposite: in the subdued light, she saw herself — surely not a woman, but a freak?
Weighed down with rubies, sapphires, emeralds, pearls, diamonds.
Ringed, belted, fettered….
It seemed to her she must have on every piece of jewellery the family owned.
Everything bar the Diamond Waterfall.
There seemed little of her flesh left.
Her shoulders partly, her thighs and legs above the ankle, the lower part of her belly.
The blonde triangle of hair…
He gazed at her without speaking for what must have been at least a minute.
Contemplating.
She hoped then that perhaps it was all to end here — that the act would be something separate.
For another night, or day.
‘Well — have you seen enough?’ she asked jauntily.
‘I am a fine sight.
Not even a queen —‘
It was then he took her.
Removing first only the belt.
It would not have been terrible — only like Frank — if it had not been for the pain of stones, metal, pressed into soft skin.
(If I had even dreamed…)
She tried to remember she had thought Robert pleasing once.
And ludicrous — it was all ludicrous.
That was the word for it.
She had been once already, with Frank, ridiculous.
And here it was the same again.
But more serious.
She could not now shrug her shoulders.
Escape.
He hardly spoke.
Not even the momentary flattery she might have expected, to make it tolerable for them both.
His only words, just before he took her, ‘My God, but they are lovely…’
Speaking surely of the jewels.
I, she thought, I am not here….
There was just the clumsy pushing, prodding.
Touching, stroking not her but the jewels — touching them with an awful tenderness.
They must not be hurt.
Then, stabbing at her.
A convulsive movement — and he turned away.
He said without looking at her:
‘Take them off.
The jewels.
Dress again, please.
Dress.’
He was embarrassed, awkward.
When he had gone through to the bedroom, tired, shaking, cold, she stripped herself of all the finery — fighting with clasps, pushing and twisting rings.
She laid everything in an untidy heap in the leather box.
Humiliated, disgusted, she joined him.
She said in an unsteady voice:
‘I have left — them, next door.’
He said from the bed, where he lay already on his side, ‘No matter.
No matter.
Shall attend to them.
The morning…’
His voice was thick with sleep.
She curled up on the other side of the bed.
She bit her lip, wanting to cry, but too proud.
As a girl she had lain always on her back, proud, determined.
Now she curled up in a ball, hunched, defeated.
What have I done?
There were marks on her skin where the jewels had pressed — weals almost.
Some of them still visible in the morning.
Robert the next day seemed urbane, sure of himself, even, she thought, pleased with himself.
He treated her with the greatest courtesy, concerned that she should not be tired, or bored; that the holiday should be nothing less than perfect.
‘You look forward to Paris?’
Paris in April.
In the public gardens small children built forts with the gravel.
Girls with skipping-ropes.
Punch and Judy.
In the Champs-Elysées there were roundabouts and goat-drawn  carts.
The particular quality of the light in the early mornings, lilacs after rain, the scents of spring.
Those first few days, it seemed to her very terrible to be in Paris, and not in love…
Paris.
Her dream fulfilled.
But, what have I done? was all she could think.
What have I done ?
It was as if she had made her decision, her momentous decision to marry, sleepwalking.
I must have been asleep.
Yet I seemed at the time to be thinking rationally, to be making common-sense plans.
Even now, she thought, if ordeals like that first night in Nice did not happen again, it might yet be possible.
Indeed, in the eleven days since, there had not been another.
If only the memory, and the humiliation, were not still so alive….
She feared that the air of Paris would be poisoned with it just as the air of the Riviera had been…
And yet, the days were not too bad.
Certainly nothing was spared to make her happy — if money, and attention, and general spoiling could do that.
Their hotel: the Grand, near the Opera, with its nine hundred rooms.
Their own suite.
Every luxury.
Lionel a knowledgeable companion.
Usually it was he who organized their days and evenings.
They went to the races so that he could study form, so that Lily might be seen in the outfits chosen with such care in London in February.
They dined out late.
Were brought back one early morning by a drunken cabman — his red plush waistcoat unbuttoned, white shiny hat toppling on to the pavement, when at last he delivered them.
Robert refused to pay the three francs asked and, supported by Lionel, left a ranting cabman outside…
She saw them for the first time about half way through the second week.
Teodor and Sophie.
Afterwards she was never sure what she had noticed first: Teodor's enormous size, loud voice, even louder laugh, or Sophie's nearly equal bulk, plump, cushionlike.
Their arrival could hardly have gone unremarked, preceded as they were by a number of attendants with trunks, hatboxes and assorted luggage, a little yapping pomeranian on a lead…
That evening at dinner in the hotel they were a few tables away, just out of earshot but plainly visible.
They had a group of friends with them.
Voices were loud.
There was  much gesticulating, Teodor banging the table, his thigh, his friends' thighs, throwing wide his arms.
And everything, but everything, made Sophie laugh.
Lionel looked at them with faintly veiled distaste.
‘An hotel such as this, and filling up already with Slavs.
Depend on it,’ and he sighed, ‘they are from the Balkans.
It is to be Nice all over again…’
Robert commented, ‘Not Russian, I think —‘
‘Oh, but look,’ Lionel said, ‘now they are greeted by more friends.’
And indeed, four people had just arrived to join them at the table.
Waiters were bringing chairs, making space.
‘I shall ask,’ Robert said.
He summoned a waiter.
Gliding over, the waiter bent his head as he was questioned.
Lily could not catch the reply.
‘A Count Baltaretsu-Gadea and his lady,’ said Robert.
‘From Rumania.’
‘Oh, fearful.
Not Slavs at all but Latins ,’ said Lionel.
‘Remains of the ancient Romans.
They are for some reason most dreadfully at home in Paris —‘
Lily said, ‘They look pleasant enough —‘
‘They are boyars, the crème de la crème, the best that the country can do.
They have only just, very lately, sprung from the soil.
They are savages —‘
‘I know nothing about Rumania,’ Lily said equably.
‘They've only recently wrested their lands, or some of them, from the clutches of the Holy Roman Empire.
The usual bloody battles.
Their crown was peddled around Europe and now they have a German Royal family — including a quite absurd Queen who writes sentimental novels.
And only yesterday, it was a land of wild forests and even wilder gypsies….
Frankly, dear Lily, I saw too many of them last year…’
Later that evening there were other people to look at, other amusements.
She, Robert and Lionel were out till late, drinking chocolate and brandy in a café.
The night was peaceful.
Robert sat up in bed reading before turning over to sleep.
‘Good night, my dear…’
If only every night could be like this, from now on and for ever.
Next morning about eleven, in the hotel foyer, a little white dog, a pomeranian, ran into her skirts.
Under them.
She had  been standing alone, hatted, pulling on her gloves, ready to go out.
They were to drive in the Bois de Boulogne.
The dog — it was the pomeranian from yesterday — was pulling at her hem.
Nipped her ankle.
As she jerked her skirts, throwing him forward, he rolled over on his back.
Then up again, yapping excitedly.
She bent forward to push him away.
He snatched at the glove she held…
Then, suddenly, there was the Rumanian countess.
Laughing and scolding, rattling words in low-voiced French.
Looking over her shoulder, perhaps for her husband?
She couldn't rescue the glove.
A messenger boy had joined them, was trying to help.
The dog gripped and shook, as he would a rat.
Sophie threw her hands up in despair.
Then leaning forward, an arm on Lily's sleeve: another flood of French.
Lily, feeling rather helpless, said, ‘Je suis Anglaise …’
‘My dear, oh but yes — pardon, pardon — what shall we say?
The Count — Teodor, where are you?
He speak English better…’
Two of the hotel functionaries had come on the scene.
Also at last, Teodor.
The glove, chewed, wet, unwearable, had been rescued.
More French from Sophie.
Then she told Lily it must be replaced.
She said:
‘We send buy today.
I am so desolate — oh, but please, it is all arranged and say no more.’
She slapped the dog, ‘méchant petit, diable .’
Then she patted Lily's arm again and clasped her hand warmly.
‘Oh,what can I say?’
The Count beamed.
Seen close up, he was even larger than remembered.
Pinker in the face behind the thicket of white beard.
When the incident had been over several minutes, Robert appeared, flustered because Lionel was not yet ready.
He took out his watch.
‘Without him, perhaps?’
‘Lionel is not necessary on every occasion,’ she said.
‘But he so looks forward to the Bois.
To be seen —‘
‘I have had trouble with a glove,’ she said.
‘I have only one.
I must go up again.’
‘If you could hurry,’ he said, ‘Lionel comes now.’
That afternoon three pairs of gloves, in lilac, dove grey and white kid, were delivered to their room.
It was from the card inside that she had learned their first names: Teodor and  Sophie.
Later, at dinner, a message was sent over inviting them to join their party at the table.
‘For cognac.
After, we are all going to a fine place,’ Teodor explained when they had sat down.
Sophie said, ‘There we drink only champagne…’
‘What the deuce,’ Robert had said when first asked.
But Lily, suddenly desperate to go, had argued: ‘They wish to make amends for this morning — they must be allowed…’
‘Come, come.
Three pairs of gloves.
They already exaggerate —‘
But Lionel had taken her side.
Insisting: ‘Why not?
This is Paris — not Flaxthorpe.’
The conversation was partly in French, isolating Robert and, some of the time, Lily.
She found that though she could not speak up herself, she understood snatches.
An effort was made to speak English most of the time.
But what English….
The other friends were all Parisian except for a young couple, Rumanians living in Paris, distant relations of Teodor.
They discovered Lily was on the stage — had just left it.
That she was a ‘name’ in London.
Sophie clapped her hands to show delight, to applaud.
‘And that we shouldn't know!
Just now this evening the manager here he has told us.
And that you are only two weeks espoused…’
Robert was pleased.
It was as if , Lily thought, someone had praised, wondered at, a costly purchase.
(A bargain perhaps?)
‘You have seen Réjane here?
Gabrielle Réjane.
 You know her?
La Belle Héllène, FrouFrou ….
You meet her?’
Lily had not.
She knew only of her fame.
Later when Sophie remarked to no one in particular, ‘Imagine, it is already five years since we was sitting here in Paris —’ Lily said:
‘And I — It is my very first visit…’
‘Comme vous avez de la chance, tout voir pour la premieère fois —’ someone said.
‘Like Eiffel Tour,’ said Teodor, and roared with laughter.
Sophie looked hurt.
‘But no — it is great monument.
Truly.
’ She turned to Lily, then back to the company: ‘And you know it is a Rumanian who has a médaille d'or because he climb it?
Yes, alone by himself he do it.
Such courage.’
She said very seriously, ‘He was engraver of wood, very precise, he can  write on one postcard three hundred thousand words…’
‘My dear,’ said Lionel, stifling a yawn, ‘who would want to write three hundred thousand words on a postcard?
As to reading them…’
They went out to drink champagne as promised.
Lily was enjoying herself, although she thought: I am easily pleased.
Anything was better than being in the hotel bedroom.
Robert too did not seem to be unhappy.
When Sophie praised a necklet of rubies that she was wearing, it appeared to give him great pleasure.
Then Sophie had added: ‘It is she makes it beautiful, no?’ begging Teodor to agree at once.
They did not mention children, and Lily did not ask.
They spoke easily, happily, of their life at home.
They had a house in the capital, Bucharest, and another in Sinaia in the Carpathian mountains where they spent their summers.
Teodor spoke of shooting (‘quite the favourite of his,’ Sophie explained).
There were scurries to translate.
Dumb shows, laughter.
Bears, it appeared, were hunted.
Lynx, chamois, wild boar.
Robert was led to speak of, to compare, his shoot in Yorkshire.
Also in Sinaia each summer were the Royal Family.
Their castle, built by the present king twenty years ago was a mixture of styles, German gothic predominating.
Peles castle, pronounced ‘Pelesh’— Lionel remarked that The Towers (which he described rather cruelly, Lily thought) was like ‘Pelesh’, a mish-mash.
He, all of them, delighted in the sounds the words made…
Sophie spoke now of the Royals: ‘…
Carol, our King, he works you know always standing up.
It is the army has made that.
And she, the Queen, she write — oh, so romantic.
And now there is young English Crown Princess, this Marie of Edimbourg as you will know.
For her it is not being easy.
She was used to live warmer, not so stiff life.
For us, we go to Court or not, as we please.
We are true Rumanian….
But because my mother — twenty years ago, she is part of Court….
And then I, young married…’
Lily listening, wondered: Where am I?
Realizing she was pleasantly drunk.
Robert, seen through a champagne haze, looked distinguished, kindly.
So delightfully muzzy was she that it seemed to her the night in Nice had never happened…
But that very evening, back in their suite at the Grand, holding her arm roughly, he ordered her to undress.
The drink wearing off had left her tired, happily so, ready for sleep.
Taken aback, fearful — this second time she was more afraid — she hesitated.
Then made as if to leave the room.
He pleaded with her then.
‘Oh, if you would.
Dear, I don't ask very much.
I must see you, so that I can….
Lily,adorned .’
His face, close to hers was taut, anxious; his eyes hard.
It is he — another person, she told herself, I must think of him as another person .
Again, she was festooned with the contents of the treasure chest — the terrible red leather box.
But this time he took longer to arrange everything — sometimes changing for better effect.
Twice he asked — no, ordered — her to kneel.
She was shivering now, could not stop, even though a fire burned in the hearth.
She tried to control an urge to pull at the ropes of jewels, coils of bracelets, the heavy tiara pressing into her scalp.
(Somewhere, back at The Towers, the Diamond Waterfall lay in waiting.
That too, must be worn.
Whether in or out of the bedroom had ceased to matter…)
She saw herself once again in the cheval glass.
She thought wildly of dashing to the windows, out on to the balcony.
There in the moonlight tearing them all off, throwing them to the street below.
Down, down.
Crowds appearing to amass them.
Lily Greene the actress — she has gone quite mad…
‘Wait there,’ he said.
His handiwork was finished.
‘Do not, I implore you, move — or alter anything .’
She did not.
She did not dare.
It was so hateful.
Hateful .
The door opened and Lionel came in.
Robert was just behind.
‘What —’ she cried.
‘What?’
She reached angrily for her wrap.
‘No, my dear,no .’
He pulled it from her.
‘Let him see.
Let my little brother see.’
‘Now,’ he said, turning to Lionel.
‘Look.
You wanted — see what I have…’
She could not bear to look at Lionel's face.
At either of them.
She was more naked than if she were wearing nothing.
I would prefer he saw me naked.
I am a slave girl.
Fettered.
She trembled with fear.
Were they to be three in that huge bed?
If Lionel is to touch me too….
If, if: But Lionel yawned.
In the silence later, in the darkness, she thought she would never forget that.
‘Oh dear,’ and he yawned again.
‘Very nice,’ he said.
‘Such a white skin.
Just like a lily.
So apt .
Yes, yes, I do approve.’
It seemed an hour, was perhaps only five minutes — and he left, saying only, ‘I must to the arms of Morpheus.
It's late.
Good night — frère Robert.
And the fair Lily.
Amusez-vous bien …’
It was worse, far worse this time, because she was expecting the pain, the discomfort, the sharp jabbing of the stones.
And of him.
After, she did not get into bed, but took her volume of Tennyson through into the sitting-room.
Sat before the dying fire.
The room seemed strangely without air.
She browsed among the Idylls , trying to still her heart, her shaking, used body — looking to be soothed by the rhythm, the romance….
She read:
Advance and take your prize The diamond; but he answer'd, ‘Diamond me No diamonds!
For God's love, a little air.’
She closed the book and wept.
She thought afterwards, and was to think for a long time, that it was Sophie and Teodor who saved her.
From that first evening together began a series of shared outings: days that were so nearly enchanted — evenings too, when she could forget what might await her return.
When she could just be Lily Greene, on holiday in Paris .
The Opera, invitations to their suite, a cinematograph show at the Grand Café (the thrill: a train arriving at a station, steam directly at them…), drives by the Seine in the spring sunshine.
It had almost ceased to matter that she was in Paris, and not in love.
For she was almost in love.
With the city, and this couple, Sophie and Teodor.
If she could have told anyone of what had happened, what might happen again any night, it would be Sophie….
Often when Sophie admired her jewellery, as she did almost every evening, she wanted to tell her and could not.
I would not.
But if I were to tell anyone….
She fancied that somehow the blend of sophistication and  cosiness that was Sophie would be able, if not to help (how could she?), to understand a little.
And how I need that …
She supposed they had no children, since none were mentioned.
Instead all their talk was of their nephews: the sons of Teodor's brother.
Valentin, Ion, Nicu — their names were often invoked.
‘…
When Valentin hear of this naughty dog —pom you call it? and how he is comporting self in Paris, he shall be not pleased.
They don't like, I think….
By the way, all have English governess some years.
The Count's sister, she is anglophile.
It is from them that I learn what I have.
Valentin most especially, he has such English.
It runs and runs.
He is in your university of Oxford, but only one years — last, no, year before.
Play, how he plays !
Nothing is au sérieux .
Ion too much — he is very so, he have philosophic thought.
And politic one.
Too many…that can be danger,chez nous .
As you, perhaps?’
One afternoon in the last week of their stay she went to a reception in the Rue de Varenne given by yet more of their friends.
Robert had a headache and stayed behind: he wanted to be well enough for the Opera that evening.
Lily, feeling unusually calm and peaceful that day, enjoyed the gathering.
One elderly man, eager to speak English, talked to her about her new friends.
‘It is so sad they lose a daughter.
Yes, they lose one.
They have never I should say make the recovery.
She was dying of inflamed brain, I think.
She was dear little thing, not pretty,jolie laide , it is big loss they have…’
So that was their secret sorrow.
She thought yet again: I make a great fuss of nothing, and have not suffered at all.
Today Sophie was the centre of a circle of admirers.
She threw up her hands in mock horror as the little pomeranian ran yapping among the guests.
Teodor, with good-humoured exasperation, picked him up and handed him to a footman.
Lily, half listening to the woman talking to her, watched Lionel.
He was deep in conversation with the daughter of the house, a little girl of about twelve.
He had stopped her as she was walking solemnly round the small onyx coffee tables, among the guests.
She giggled and pouted as he chatted to her.
His arms encircled her waist.
She giggled again.
‘My little butterfly,’ Lily heard him say.
It was Bizet's Carmen they went to hear at the Opera.
Half way through the second act, she began to feel ill.
Leaving the box, she went to the cloakroom where she was violently and unexpectedly sick.
She thought at first it was something she had eaten.
And indeed for the rest of the evening she felt a little better.
But she awoke next morning to acute nausea.
Her sickness came and went throughout the day.
She said nothing to anyone.
Lying down, having pleaded a headache, she only felt worse.
That evening at dinner, seeing the dish of swordfish cutlets in a rich wine and herb sauce, she knew that she would be ill.
Ten minutes later as she sat in the Ladies' cloakroom, smelling-salts to her nose, Sophie joined her.
Bent over her, concerned.
She said in English, while the attendant, impassive, continued with her crocheting:
‘No, it is not Robert send me.
No.
I see with me , what is not right.’
She took Lily's arm.
‘I have order you some bitters drink.
We are going upstairs.
We speak there.’
Lily, without protesting, let herself be led.
Up in Sophie and Teodor's suite, she said faintly, ‘I don't know — I've drunk none of the water.
It can't be that.
And I have no fever.
The wino, perhaps?
The white, acid…
’ She thought suddenly of the swordfish and nausea returned.
Her throat filled.
Sophie said, ‘Oh my dear.’
She raised her eyebrows humorously.
‘What do you think — perhaps you are not thinking as you should — you see — it's permitted to be frank?’
Yes, yes.
She was beyond caring.
‘I speak of certain matters,’ Sophie said.
‘You are just married, yes? one month?
So you forgive me because I am your friend when I tell you it is perhaps — baby.
No?’
At first she could not answer, for the shock.
For the nausea too.
How could I have been so simple, naive?
Her ignorance embarrassed her.
But of course,of course ….
What she had been used to see every month, postponed she had thought by the excitement, the travel.
Often in the days when she had been touring, had not the same thing happened — and nothing thought of it?
Yet had it been anyone else — I would have guessed.
But as she sipped the bitters, as they dried her mouth, she could think only: these last days, this oasis of friendship, it is all over.
Everything is over….
My life.
I played for high stakes — and I have lost.
‘I can't,’ she said, ‘oh, but I can't.’
She wanted to tell Sophie — all.
She saw the leather coffer, with its massed jewellery….
It seemed part of her nausea.
‘No, but I am certain, yes, I am right,’ said Sophie.
‘Yes.
And you shall be happy, so happy that it is so.
Soon, happy…’
Never.
Never.
7
It would quite ruin Christmas.
No doubt about it.
And so much fuss being made too.
The grave faces: Dr Sowerby calling twice a day.
And two strange nurses, one for day and one for night.
The night one had spoken to Alice in the corridor.
‘So you're the lucky young girl who has a baby brother!
We must take great care if he's to stay with us.
Mother needs care too…’
‘Don't you dare call her ‘Mother’,’ she'd muttered under her breath, hurrying away.
The worst was:no one had thought to tell her .
Not a word until September.
She had guessed nothing.
She was annoyed with herself since she knew after all that babies were carried inside, and once she'd heard the news she saw clearly the difference in Belle Maman's appearance.
(And that was another thing — fancy being told to call her by a name which meant in French not only ‘stepmother’ and ‘mother-in-law’, but ‘beautiful Mama’too….
How dare they?)
Angry too that she had not been trusted with knowledge which concerned her so much.
Knowledge which would change her whole life.
Not only am I expected to love Belle Maman, she thought, but now I must love IT as well.
The son and heir.
And sickly.
She was terrified when the rogue thought came to her: I hope he dies…
Belle Maman had looked tired and wan in the weeks before the birth.
But when Alice was taken in to see her on the second day, she was sitting up in a swansdown wrap, surrounded by flowers.
The baby, lost in drapes and frills of white lace and organdie.
(Her cot, it had been her cot once.)
She could think only: It should be my mother sitting up there, with my brother beside her.
Then someone said, ‘Shouldn't you like a closer look at your little brother?’ and she realized oh, make it not true — that he was her brother…
Aunt Violet tried to help.
When Alice told her a little of how she felt (some of it she could tell no one), and how she was  angry with God as well as Belle Maman, Aunt Violet said God would understand: ‘He is All Wise, Alice.
Almighty.
And your mother, dear, in Heaven, will understand.’
‘But I don't understand…’
Alice wailed.
Nan-Nan let her down badly.
Greeting Alice with: ‘What a wonderful start to eighteen-ninety-eight — back in my nursery again!’
Only Fräulein, dear Fräulein, with her moon face, her hair in that absent-minded crooked bun, only she could be relied on.
Although probably she was thinking about her brother Augustin who was in some fresh trouble at the University.
But when Alice said, ‘Fräulein, repeat after me: ‘We don't need a baby here…’ she had smiled and nodded that great head, floppy on its neck even with her stiff collar.
‘…
Ja, Ja, we are so happy, how we are now .
The life before…’
Christmas Day.
At church the Vicar, Mr Nicolson, preached only a very short sermon.
His voice trembled as he stood in the pulpit.
She looked at him with awful fascination because she had heard his wife was dying.
Mrs Nicolson hadn't been seen out for four months now.
A friend brought her little boy to church.
Presents.
Papa's to her: a camera.
Waiting for her beneath the tree, with all the other equipment she might need, packed in a box.
A new camera.
Not his old one as she had been promised.
He told her the gift was Belle Maman's idea.
She knew that she should be grateful, pleased, surprised, but instead she felt only angry and somehow disappointed.
First she was tongue-tied, then very ungraciously she said, ‘Thank you.’
I shall never use it, she told herself.
But later in the day, after the Christmas meal, alone in her room for an hour's rest, she unpacked it with all its effects.
Papa had said that she might use the rooms in the small tower.
She would set up there her very own darkroom.
It will be my own , the photography, she thought.
She began to think of whom, what, where she would photograph first.
For a moment she felt almost happy…
Early in the New Year Belle Maman seemed much better, and the baby, they said, was safe now.
He was to be called Henry.
He held for Alice altogether a great fascination, but  she steadfastly refused offers to go and see him in the nursery, and ignored him the few occasions he was on show.
She wasn't sure really how long she could keep it up — since after all, he was most probably here to stay…
The second week in January, Mrs Nicolson died.
Alice overheard Nan-Nan and Mrs Platt, the housekeeper, talking.
‘Quite horrible, a growth like that — and lingering so, it was a merciful release.
They say she was no more than a skeleton.
And then at the end…the little lad was there, they let him, I'd not have allowed…’
Alice remembered again the tall figure in the pulpit, with the trembling voice.
She shut her eyes and tried not to think…
Later that same month the Hawksworth baby was christened in the Norman church.
He was to be called John.
Belle Maman was one of the godmothers (she and the American Mrs Hawksworth had become great friends) and Alice was invited also to the ceremony and the family party afterwards.
After the ornateness of The Towers, the simple lines of the Hall always seemed to her a little ordinary, but nice.
Mrs Hawksworth was very kind.
She asked Alice about her baby:
‘Those two are going to have such a good time — isn't it just so lucky, their being born almost together?’
She asked too about Alice's photography.
‘I hear you've gotten so good at it, your parents want you to photograph the christening…’
Well, that was true.
For very soon after, Papa asked.
Again, it was Belle Maman's idea.
It is only flattery, Alice told herself.
Toadying up to me, like that….
She is an actress, and not sincere.
It would be quite on the cards too if, on the day, they were to produce an official photographer as well, saying they never meant it.
‘All right,’ she told Papa.
‘I will take them.’
He asked her then where her smile had gone.
She told him, hearing her voice sharp, cold, ‘It flew out of the window when Mama died.’
On the day of the christening, they played fair.
There was no official photographer, and before tea they were all assembled on the front steps, and she was allowed her moment.
She made the most of it.
She bossed them all.
Aunt Hetty come down from Cumberland, fearsome old Aunt Minnie….
She wished Uncle Thomas could have been there.
Uncle Lionel  she ignored and hoped he would ignore her.
Belle Maman looked white and drawn beneath her pink velvet and chiffon hat, in her arms the baby in christening robes and shawl.
She wasn't very skilled with the camera yet.
And nervous.
Too much to think of at once…
‘One more,’ she insisted, ‘I have to have one more!’
She put her hand up.
‘Papa, tell Belle Maman that if she looks at the baby like that, I shall get only her hat in the picture…’
But then it was over, and the tea-party began.
She went from person to person, taking care to avoid Uncle Lionel.
He seemed, though, to be absorbed in conversation with Belle Maman.
She grew a little bored, restless.
She was sitting in a corner of the drawing-room, nearest the door, when she saw a Miss Hutton coming towards her.
She had by the hand the Vicar's son.
‘Alice, dear, just the very person.
See who I have here….
Gilbert,’ she said, ‘say good-afternoon to Alice…’
He stood there, in black jacket, black knickerbockers.
His brown, nearly auburn hair clung to his scalp as if with misery, sad eyes stared out of a freckled face, his hands were clenched tight.
‘Well —’ Alice began.
(Well, she thought, we cannot surely be meant to play together?
He is only ten, and I am thirteen…)
Miss Hutton smelled of mothballs and good works.
She was the daughter of an old and scholarly man (whom Alice thought to be about ninety-five) and lived on the outskirts of Flaxthorpe.
She handled Gilbert with a firm, no-nonsense grasp.
Letting go of him now, she turned to Mrs Kent, wife of the Master of Foxhounds:
‘What a joyous occasion this is, is it not?
And the Hawksworths too, all in the same year.’
She lowered her voice, half glancing at Gilbert, ‘I am doing all I can, here, of course.
Poor dear Mr Nicolson…’
The boy continued to stand in front of Alice, where he had been placed.
She could not think of anything even remotely polite to say.
She had been intending to go in five minutes' time, when she had drunk her cup of weak tea.
Up to the darkroom to begin at once the pictures she had taken this afternoon.
She saw that he was looking at her.
‘Did you eat some of  the christening cake?’ she asked.
‘Have you been given some?’
He shook his head.
‘No, thank you.’
His voice was so low she could scarcely catch the words.
‘I had enough, thank you.’
His tone was very polite.
She said, ‘I'm not hungry either.
I don't eat very much.
I don't believe in it.
If you eat,’ she said, ‘you can't fly.’
He looked up suddenly; interest flashed across his face.
She could not think why she had said it.
Although it was of course the truth…
He frowned.
‘I don't partic —’ and he stumbled over the word, ‘particular lely want to be a bird…’
She said then matter-of-factly, ‘Let's leave all this food and — people.
Come with me.’
Where to go?
She could not take him to Nan-Nan who would soon be, if she weren't already, fussing, supervising the nurserymaids, the care of the baby….
Fräulein was not in her room but down at the party.
‘Come with me.’
She went out into the hall, not looking to see if he followed her.
‘He's called Henry,’ she said idly as they walked along, ‘after my grandfather, and also I think after my father's elder brother, who died in a railway accident.
But we are to call him Hal.’
(‘See if I care,’ she said to herself, ‘see if I care…’)
‘Did you notice me taking photographs?’ she asked.
‘You were not there, I think.
We could go up to my especial photograph room.
You may see then how I set about developing…’
They went up the stairs to the darkroom.
She rattled the keys importantly.
He may come in this once, she said to herself.
It is a special occasion.
Then as she opened the door, she regretted her offer.
‘Well, here it is.’
But he only stood there politely.
Too politely.
‘Come over here,’ she said.
‘These are tin dishes for washing the plates — I've coated them with bath enamel myself.’
He gazed wonderingly, she hoped admiringly.
‘All the real work has to be done in the dark, of course,’ she said importantly.
Once or twice he asked her a question but it was with great  effort, in a small closed-up voice, as if his throat were sewn too tight.
At one stage, he said suddenly, very politely:
‘Thank you.
It's all — very interesting.’
‘Do you want to go?’
She thought that perhaps he had had enough by now.
And she — she would rather be alone.
‘No.
I mean, yes.
No, I —’ his voice faltered.
Then broke.
He caught his breath.
She saw that he was shaking.
Almost in tears.
She could think of nothing to say.
Nothing to do, either.
After a few seconds:
‘Is it — about —’ she hesitated.
The word was sacred to her too.
‘Is it about — your mother?’
He nodded.
The tears spilled over.
And then he was weeping in earnest.
She did not know what to do.
She was at once elated and frightened.
She must deal with this.
He stood quite still, shoulders shaking, tears coursing along the freckles.
There was no sound except for his sobbing.
He should not, must not cry alone for a mother.
‘I heard — that she died…’
Still he wept.
She laid down the printing frame that she held.
She stretched out her arms, and drew him towards her.
(Almost, she thought afterwards, as if it were done for her.)
Her arms enclosed him just as she would wish to be clasped and comforted.
They were the same height, almost exactly.
As she pulled his head against hers, she felt his tears dampen her cheeks.
His body was bony against her.
She wasn't sure when she began to cry, but it seemed staunchless.
A great well of tears.
They rocked, sobbed, rocked in each other 's arms.
It was he who stopped the first, suddenly drawing himself up, searching in the pockets of his jacket for a handkerchief.
While he blew his nose, she said, surprised by the steadiness of her voice:
‘If there's nothing else you want to see, we must go back, I think.
They will wonder where we are.’
He didn't speak on the walk back.
As they neared the hall and drawing-room, she said lightly, ‘If you are interested — in photography — then I could invite you again.
To see how it is done…’
‘Yes,’ he said, his voice still flat.
‘Yes — please, Miss Firth.’
‘Oh, but I am Alice .
And you're Gilbert —‘
‘Gib,’ he said, and smiled suddenly.
‘I'm Gib.’
Before her supper that evening she had to go upstairs and see Belle Maman, to say goodnight.
Belle Maman had gone to bed early and sat up, not in swansdown this time, but lemon chiffon ruffles and a cascade of lace.
The room was a bowery of hothouse flowers.
Nowadays she didn't have the baby with her ever.
He slept in the night nursery that had once been Alice's.
‘I wanted to thank you — for everything, Alice.
You did very well.
It was altogether a lovely day, was it not?’
She felt light-headed, as if she walked on air.
Almost light-hearted.
She would like to smile, perhaps even at Belle Maman.
To say: ‘I think I have made a friend today.’
She turned.
Better not to look at Belle Maman's face.
She stared at a watercolour of a moorland scene which hung between the two windows.
‘I hope my photographs come out all right,’ she said.
8
Languor.
As winter turned to spring, then slowly into early summer — that was what she felt.
Languor.
A word she had once associated with ease, happiness: ‘A delicious languor…’
Lillie Langtry (a name there, to be reckoned with).
Lily Firth.
Lily.
Lily Languor.
So weak, so languid, that every action, every word, was too much.
Tired before she spoke, tired afterwards.
And always hopeless.
Where, oh where was the Lily of yesterday?
I should not, she thought, really should not feel like this.
In a world full of want, I have more than I need.
Above all, I have a fine baby boy.
Safely delivered.
Whom I love.
And yet, all was not right.
In the long months after her return from Paris, she had felt certain that after the birth (if all went well — and it must, it would) she would be herself again.
Lily.
No longer the much cosseted bearer of Robert's son (he had never thought it would not be a boy), a being set apart: real life suspended until it should all be over.
In those days of waiting, she had been spared any dread of Robert's approaching her.
From the moment he knew of the baby: ‘We must do nothing,’ he said, ‘nothing to endanger my son…’
His tone as matter of fact as if he spoke of arrangements for a day's shooting.
Now, she wondered if this very languor, passing almost for bad health, did not protect her?
She should be thankful for it.
Perfect excuse on the mercifully rare occasions when he hinted, showed any interest.
She held her hand to her head, visibly drooped before him.
That was enough.
It would not do for always, but it would do for now.
‘It takes time,’ she told him, ‘to recover from a difficult birth.’
Dr Sowerby had said exactly that.
She had made sure he had a word with Robert.
An exact time was not mentioned: ‘Strain on the nervous system…delicate tissues…the internal organs…’
Certainly her relationship with Alice was no help — to  either of them.
God knows, she thought, I have tried.
The fund of goodwill, of love even, which she had brought with her just a year ago, must be almost exhausted.
With Alice, she could not get it right.
Affection was spurned, interest misunderstood as interference.
And for Alice herself, how often things went wrong.
The christening, for example.
Those photographs.
All that fuss over photographs.
And then at the end, that they should be complete failures.
It appeared she had put the glass instead of the film side of the plates next to the lens.
The upset had been terrible.
Lily had wanted to be kind and had arranged another grouping — herself dressed up again and as many of those originally present as possible.
But Alice's mood: little better than a sulk, and behaving as if it were everyone's fault but her own…
Social life continued.
She could escape some of it, but not all.
Bejewelled, she sat through dinner-parties, often drowsy before the soup course was through, longing only to escape into sleep.
Once, she had been sparkling…
Paris.
Teodor and Sophie.
How she missed that time — those few weeks, which now she would have to live on for the rest of her life.
Or so it seemed.
Sophie had promised to come to England, even to stay in Yorkshire, but she knew they would not.
They had not forgotten her, though.
She did not expect letters but on hearing from her the news of Hal's birth, they had at once despatched an enormous bearskin: a gift for the child.
She treasured it, feeling that Paris, and all that it meant, was perhaps not quite over…
Gifts.
It wasn't as if Robert were not generous.
If generosity were to be measured by gifts.
For seeing her like this, so low-spirited:
‘Shall I not buy you something?
Tell me what you covet.
Name anything —’ a slight pursing of the lips —‘anything within reason, and it shall be sent for.
Surely something will cheer?’
He sounded almost impatient.
But anything she might want (and what do I want?) would not be ‘within reason’…
‘Of course you don't want more jewellery, you poor, poor thing,’ Sadie Hawksworth told her with feeling.
Lily had confided in her — not all of it, but the general idea.
Where she  did not want to be exact, she hinted: secreting at the back of her mind the disgust, the shame…
She wondered what she would have done without Sadie's friendship.
Sadie wasn't Vicky, whom she would always mourn.
She was different, but good.
Now several mornings a week when perhaps she should have been concerning herself with the house (she delegated more and more to the housekeeper, who after all had run everything before she, Lily, had come), she would go and sit with Sadie, who was expecting another child at Christmas.
Sadie was not languorous, but complained of a restlessness:
‘I mean to organize and overthrow the whole of this part of Yorkshire.
I figured that if I can just get involved in whatever's going on, in some sort of work that helps people…’
Sadie's Jack.
Lily could not boast of Hal when once Jack was seen.
He was the perfect child.
A full head of hair — the fine baby growth had not dropped out — several teeth.
He sat up and gurgled.
Hal, dark like Robert and Lionel, had only scanty hair yet.
A large, lolling, anxious head.
Lily was anxious too.
She could not bear to watch him bathed for fear he might be dropped.
Now Sadie was expecting again.
She did not seem to mind (but then, Lily thought, she is not bedecked in jewels before the act.
Perhaps it is all ordinary, whatever that may be).
Sometimes, sitting in Sadie's room, temporarily energetic, talkative — cups of tea, coffee, perhaps a madeira — she would fall to thinking, looking at Sadie — and imagining.
How was it?
How would it be? and to thinking pleasantly of her not unpleasant husband, Charlie.
So much younger than Robert.
At the most twenty-eight, nine.
Fair-haired with a luxuriant drooping moustache.
Easy charm.
The only cheer, solace, was all the good news of Daisy.
She and her family had been in the States over a year now, and had moved from Boston to New York.
They lived on East Broadway where they had been able to afford property.
Joszef had put capital into the real estate business of a distant cousin.
The cousin was astute, far more than Joszef, Daisy said.
And now with the extra money, making it possible to take out smaller mortgages on apartments for letting on the East Side, they were already doing well….
They were sometimes homesick — she for Yorkshire, he for Russia, but  all in all they were happy — and hopeful….
The children were in school and already Sam and Ruth had been promoted twice, and Joe once.
She herself found time now to help with poorer immigrants.
She had thought of a little simple nursing.
And to think, darling Lily, my darling sister, if it hadn't been for you, I'd as likely be selling herrings on Orchard Street…
Towards the end of May, Robert sent her to the seaside: Filey on the east coast.
Alice too, because she looked peaky.
(What kind of a rest is it meant to be for me with a querulous adolescent?
Lily thought.)
He said too: ‘I shall see if we may not go back to Nice in the autumn, or Austria or Switzerland.
Mountains, you need mountains.’
But when the time came she did not expect he would want to leave his shooting…
They stayed in a Georgian house in the Crescent at Filey.
Days of uncertain weather, riding out, walking over the sands, in the beechwoods.
Fräulein was a heavy presence.
In the absence of Miss Fairgrieves Alice was meant to have lessons with her every morning.
For the last week they had the company of Violet Anstruther, which Lily found trying, although it perked Alice up.
There was much fussing about religion.
A day was spent visiting a convent in Filey.
Lily said tartly, ‘I am surprised Sir Robert is not worried you may influence the child’
Violet Anstruther replied, lips pursed tight: ‘There is no fear of that.
I was her dear mother's friend…a special relationship….
She trusts me…’
But Lily, who avoided her socially when at home, found it difficult to cope with her here.
A scene or two.
Words, Alice bursting into tears.
(‘Look what you have done!’ exclaimed Violet Anstruther.)
Really, it was impossible.
She worried too, as soon as The Towers was behind them, about Hal.
She wrote almost every day to ask for news.
The weather, so cold for May.
What good would it do her, this holiday, if she were all the time anxious ?
One night she dreamed that Sophie and she were alone in a fairy-tale, turreted castle.
Sophie wore the Diamond Waterfall.
She said to Lily, ‘It suits me much better, yes?
You were wrong to want such things….
Come to my country and I show you…’
Suddenly she was among mountains carpeted with dark green forest, pines, larches.
Water tumbled headlong down narrow channels into the valley.
The light was dazzling.
She thought at the time: This is a vision.
She did not want to wake up.
I will not wake up, she was saying, as the morning sunlight flooded into the room from the opened curtains…
She liked to think later that the dream was in some sort prophetic.
For on her return to Flaxthorpe, in balmy early summer weather, it was to find a letter from Sophie, postmarked Geneva.
Part French and part halting English, it said that they planned to visit London and then Scotland, and though it would be almost the grouse shooting season there, they would come for August 12th to Yorkshire, taking up Robert's invitation.
Teodor was very keen.
‘Instead of Scotland he decide he shoot you ,’ Sophie wrote.
Lily said to Robert light-heartedly, ‘I have heard from our Rumanian friends.
Teodor wants to shoot you, it appears.’
He was at the tantalus, pouring himself a whisky.
‘They're coming here?
Why not — if it cheers you…’
She held the letter with trembling hands.
She was filled with longing to see them again.
New breath, life, hope.
It must come to pass.
‘Why not?’
Robert said again.
‘If it'll make you even in the smallest degree more cheerful.’
He lifted his glass.
‘Lionel must come up, of course…’
They arrived, from another world, on a rainy evening in early August.
But it was as if they had brought the sun with them.
She wanted to run straight into their arms.
While longing and longing for their arrival, she had feared they would seem larger than life in the sedate village.
They brought noise, surprise, colour.
Indeed it was the colour which amazed…
Sophie wore an outfit in tartan.
Three tartans, since the skirt, jacket and blouse were all different.
She had had them made up to order while in Edinburgh.
Lily supposed the tartans to be fictitious: no self-respecting Scot would have accepted the commission if real clans were to be insulted.
Sophie asked at once for it to be admired.
Reminding Lily with delight: ‘Our Crown Princess is daughter of Duke of Edimbourg — so I wear this for her, who is so little, so charming…’
‘We are spared Teodor in the kilt, I see,’ remarked Robert.
Lionel, who had been up now a week at Flaxthorpe: ‘Naturally.
They cannot be made wide enough…’
But to Lily, ridiculous or no, they seemed utterly lovable.
And how they bubbled over with enthusiasm.
The first evening, within half an hour of arrival, Sophie:
‘I must see this baby —’ It was half past nine at night, the nurseries sacrosanct.
‘But yes, please, I must .’
And of course she had.
They loved everything.
The heather, purple now, they went into ecstasies over.
It was like but not like Scotland.
When the villagers stared, they smiled and waved as if on a royal tour.
They needed to rest, they said, but showed no signs of doing so.
So many places they had been to, so many people…
‘And happy everywhere.
Laugh, we are all day laughing, you see, look at his face — a laugh, a smile —‘
‘At or with us?’
Lionel asked.
‘Oh, we laugh at with them all one together,’ Sophie said.
‘It is happiness.
And also we see Oxford.
Oxford because our nephew is one year there.
We meet friends of him, of Valentin, and also it rains and rains…’
Alice was allowed down to dinner one evening.
As feared, she did not behave too well, staring at the visitors beneath a furrowed brow.
Teodor chucked her under the chin suddenly, affectionately, and as suddenly Sophie threw an arm about her.
‘What a lovely maman you have!
And a new baby…’
The remark was not a success.
Alice rolled her eyes upward rudely.
On Sunday they insisted on attending the Protestant service in Flaxthorpe church.
Lily had suggested they go in the carriage with Violet Anstruther, since Roman Catholics resembled Orthodox more, she thought.
Sophie shook her head at this.
‘No, no, you see, we are in Rome and must be as Romans…’
Alice, overhearing, shook her head pityingly.
The village, when the staring had worn off, regarded the visitors warily.
People even from other Ridings were foreigners.
Many of the villagers had never been out of the dale.
That someone had come from abroad — be it Calais, Cairo, Boulogne or Bucharest: they scarcely distinguished.
In the Fox and Grapes, Lily didn't doubt that The Towers' staff discussed the servants Sophie and Teodor had brought with them.
Goodwill, sign language, a few misunderstandings.
Common sense and friendliness triumphed over problems.
Her own maid asked her:
‘What is it they talk, m'lady?’
‘Rumanian, Taylor.’
‘Higgins says their mistress talks French —‘
‘Educated people in Rumania speak French, Taylor.
Rumanian is spoken by the peasants, and servants.’
‘Thank you, m'lady,’ said Taylor.
And Lily felt at once, as so often now, that she had done it wrong.
Who is this ‘m'lady, m'lady’?
Plain Lily Greenwood.
I am ashamed of what I have become…
They went to dinner at the Hall.
Sadie, her figure thickening a little now, was a sparkling, proud hostess.
For Lily the evening was spoilt a little because she was persuaded, no, ordered, to wear the Waterfall.
(And I look well in it.
I wish I did not.
Very well…)
It was a successful evening until Robert and Charlie initiated a boring discussion about trouble with the Boers in South Africa, and the possibility of more armed conflict there.
It filled Lily with fear.
Anything of any sort which might rock the world, her world, and her thoughts flew to the cradle.
Might it only be rocked by Nan-Nan's loving hands, she prayed.
Sophie was being drawn out about their visit to Scotland:
‘This bagpipes, they are sounding that remind us of our doina .
Sad, very sad.
We cry.’
‘Pibrochs, laments,’ Lily said.
‘Yes, yes, pibrochs.
Pibrochs and doina .
The same…’
At the end of one day's shooting, Teodor said to Robert: ‘My dear fellow, you shoot us — soon, yes?’
Robert, who had never taken the invitation seriously, brushed it away.
Sophie said to Lily, later the same day:
‘The little one, the baby make you happy, no?
He is strong now.
Very strong.
I know strong look…’
‘Yes, he's all right.’
‘But you — not good, not all right?’
‘No.’
What a relief to say it.
‘You dance.
Theatre again?
You know.’
‘No.
I don't.
I shan't.’
She had thought of this.
She had not the energy.
And how to fight?
It would not be allowed…
‘He, Robert, shall say no?’
‘Yes.’
‘And to come little visit with us?’
Sophie put her head on one side.
‘He says no?
You say no?’
‘I don't know.
I —’ Truly she didn't know.
She had not taken seriously, because Robert patently hadn't, the original invitation.
Nothing could have come of it.
It had not been a serious proposition.
But what if now …
Events moved with lightning rapidity.
It seemed nothing less than a miracle.
No, Robert insisted, he could not, would not, pay a visit to such distant parts.
But had he not offered, Lily reminded him, anything (within reason) to revive her spirits?
Within reason….
What else was this?
Even Dr Sowerby was brought into it.
Sophie's enthusiasm, Teodor's delighted encouragement pushed matters along.
There was Lionel's lifted eyebrow.
Sadie's unselfish envy, out and out.
‘Why, I'm so green !
The very notion.
The very notion…’
It was done.
It was to be.
Lily Firth, Lily Greene the actress, née Lily Greenwood of Leeds, was to holiday not in the South of France or Austria or Switzerland, but in deepest, darkest, furthest Rumania…
Alice showed no interest.
‘Let me show you, dear, in the atlas…’
‘I don't want to see, thank you.
You may go where you please.’
It was not yet decided how long she should go for.
But it  would be at least two months.
The baby.
Hal.
He would be all right.
She thought that she must be a little mad to leave him so easily, so willingly.
She could not hope for news every day….
But, so far away, might not her anxiety lighten, take on some perspective?
‘And when you bring back your traveller's tales,’ Nan-Nan said, ‘he'll be a big bonny boy, won't you, my love?
Your mam back again with roses in her cheeks….
Baby have a bonny mam…‘
It is for the sake of my child that I am going…