

In our own image
Disabled people and ‘normality’
Paul Abberley
In this paper, I examine three different kinds of approach to the notion that disabled people are not normal.
The accounts of our abnormality that arise out of the theoretical perspectives of individual psychology and of non-materialist social psychology are rejected on the grounds of their incoherency, and their ideological nature is indicated.
In contrast, a materialist account of our abnormality, which stresses the unmet needs of impaired people is advocated, and the need for detailed concrete explorations of how this discrimination operates identified.
Individual psychology
The dominant approaches in psychology in the first half of this century were summarised by Kammerer in 1940 as follows: Allen and Pearson (1928) had concluded, on the basis of case studies, that: Whilst the Adlerian Rudolf Dreikurs argued in 1948 that: Since then individual psychology and its therapeutically oriented offshoots have continued in this vein, and debated the degree and nature of pathology supposed to follow, directly or indirectly, from impairment.
For example, Harper and Richman (1978) claim to identify greater degrees of behaviour inhibition that in control groups.
Anderson and Clarke (1982) identify low self-esteem as characteristic of disabled adolescents, and Kasprzyk (1983) finds despondency in people who have had a spinal injury.
These psychological pathologies are attributed to failure to come to terms with impairment (Lindowski and Dunn, 1974; Shindi, 1983).
Such research is systematised and operationalised as therapy through the application of bereavement theory, developed as a way of conceptualising normal and ‘healthy’ mourning of the loss of a loved one, to disablement:
Patients must be allowed to come to terms, they must grieve and mourn for their lost limbs, lost abilities or lost looks and be helped to adjust to their lost body-image.
Personally, I doubt if anyone who has not experienced the onset of irreversible disability can fully understand the horror of the situation.
(Dickinson, 1977, p. 12)
A more theoretically sophisticated account of processes of ‘recovery’ from impairment, which argues that a new ‘healthy but disabled’self can be constituted, again asserts the validity of the metaphor of death.
The transformation of a patient to a healthy person again is a triumphant victory.
Yet a death has occurred; and it is critical that this death is acknowledged.
The body has undergone major alterations.
It is not the same body.
A new self has risen from the ashes of the old body.
(Seymour, 1989, p. 122)
So convinced are such people that to be impaired is to ‘die’ that no amount of protestation to the contrary seems to make any difference.
This should lead us to harbour severe doubts about the ‘scientific’ nature of such research, since it seems to already know the answer before it goes out to investigate.
The main deficiency of such approaches, however, is that they locate the ‘problem of disability’ in the individual and in the effectivity or otherwise of her/his adjustment to a set of beliefs, values and practices which are taken for granted.
In contrast to this, I wish to argue that if disabled people display psychological abnormalities, this is because they have been socialised into such traits as a result of the ways in which society meets, or fails to meet, our needs, and that the claim that such features are a consequence of impairment is itself an aspect of the oppression of disabled people since it misidentifies, and thus does nothing to overcome, the main source of psychological distress.
Disabled people do not need to deny the individual psychological costs they pay; rather, we need to identify them as a most directly experienced aspect of oppression, and dispute not the existence of psychological distress in disabled people but the kinds of causal account that are produced.
We may usefully draw an analogy here with the women's movement in which it soon became apparent that if the real extent and nature of sexual oppression were to be understood, and services appropriate to real needs  struggled for, feminist psychologies which recognised the individual consequences of collective  oppression , and traced their causes beyond the individual to the mechanisms of that oppression, would have to be developed.
Fanon makes a parallel point as regards racism, at the beginning of Black Skins, White Masks , where he states: ‘I am talking of millions of people who have been skilfully injected with fear, inferiority complexes, trepidation, servility, despair, abasement’(Fanon, 1968).
Individual psychological adjustment studies, then, fail to provide a useful analysis because they do not locate the disabled person in a society which contains a whole set of beliefs, practices, and so on, surrounding disability, and fail to see the consequences of these practices as expressed in the psychology of the individual disabled person.
Rather, they present as an individual property, following from the impact of impairment on the ‘self’, what are in fact learnt behaviours.
Ideas about the abnormality of disabled people that arise out of research based on adding together the particular psychological attributes of individual disabled people are then systematically misleading, since they fail to include ‘social forces, structural features of society, institutional factors and so on’(Lukes, 1973, p. 122) in their explanations — in other words, because they treat disability as if it were the same thing as impairment.
Social Psychology
Social psychology, in apparent contrast, has focused on social attitudes towards disabled people as the causal nexus, and is thus not open to this criticism.
For example, Bull and Rumsey (1988) argue that for visibly different children negative social feedback results in low self-esteem.
It is still the disabled person's ‘problem’ that requires explanation, but the explanatory structure is no longer bounded by the individual's psyche; rather, answers are sought in the belief-system of the whole society.
From the general identification of ‘negative attitudes’(Chesler, 1965; Yuker, 1965), these attitudes are documented in more detail (Wada and Brodwin, 1975; Seifert, 1979; Wright, 1983) and ‘distancing scales’ constructed (Tringo, 1970).
Paradoxically, this move beyond the individual to the social has resulted in a much more pessimistic prognosis for disabled people.
If the ‘problem of attitude’ is not primarily located in the individual, but in the society, then no amount of individual effort at ‘adjustment’to impairment can solve it.
Whilst the quantitative researchers referred to above, following the innate cautiousness of their method, make few explicit generalisations and predictions, no such reticence characterises the qualitative studies of disabled people produced by researchers of the interactionist school.
The best known interactionist accounts of disablement employ the concept of ‘stigma’ and have their origin in the work of Erving Goffman (1963).
Whilst mechanisms, sometimes of ‘passing’, more often of ‘coping’, are described, we are left with the impression that ‘shameful difference’ and its consequences are an immutable fact of social life, for physically impaired people: ‘it is possible that there are no exemptions for incapacity in such areas as aesthetic norms’(Haber and Smith, 1971, p. 95).
In this tradition, the proceedings of a more recent conference (Ainsley et al .,
1986) seem to contain all the deficiencies of earlier work which employed the concept.
In her summing up Coleman reveals the ultimate poverty of a perspective which poses questions only to deem them unanswerable.
‘We began this volume with two basic questions: what is stigma and why does stigma remain?
Because stigmas mirror culture and society, they are in constant flux, and therefore the answers to these two questions continue to elude social scientists’(Ainsley et al .,
1986, p. 211).
In answer to the question ‘why does stigma persist?’ the products of interactionism shy away from the realities of social structures, preferring to provide an ‘answer’in terms of the spurious generalities of ‘eternal verities’.
The ultimate answers about why stigma persists may lie in an examination of why people fear differences, fear the future, fear the unknown, and therefore stigmatize that which is different and unknown.
An equally important issue to investigate is how stigmatization may be linked to the fear of being different.
(Ainsley et al .,
1986, p. 227)
Now, it is an extremely dubious proposition that people do, in general, fear ‘differences’, ‘the future’, ‘the unknown’, and that they ‘therefore’ stigmatise people who represent these things.
Rather, people fear and stigmatise fairly specific things, people and conditions, even though they may admittedly know very little about them.
But because it operates only at the level of ideas, without any attempt to specify why particular ideas are held in particular societies at particular times, other than by reference to other ideas, interactionist social psychology can only describe peoples' beliefs, not explain them.
Its accounts, however accurate at this level, remain stuck at this preliminary stage of scientific enquiry.
Furthermore, as cogently argued by Finkelstein (1980), Goffman, in borrowing the concept of stigma from ancient Greece, where it referred to ‘a bodily sign…cut or burned into the body and advertising that the bearer was a slave’(Goffman, 1963, p. 19) chooses to interpret its meaning as one of ‘blemish and ritual pollution’ rather than of the power and inequality which allowed one person to be a slaveholder and compelled another to be a slave.
It is telling that a theory unable to recognise the nature of power relationships in today's society, should exhibit a similar incapacity in its assessment of ancient history.
Theories which ignore power conflicts and subscribe to a consensus view, as interactionism does, have no choice but to see existing inequalities as inevitable.
These kinds of account, which span the blurred borderland between social psychology and sociology, in effect justify the ‘abnormality’ of disabled people by claiming that it is inevitable.
Any society, they argue, must discriminate against impaired people to safeguard its own general social health.
Again, then, we find our ‘abnormality’ being explained ultimately  in terms of our impairment, which qualifies us for admission to an unavoidably disadvantaged category of people.
Material abnormality
For all its deficiencies, the 1988 Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) survey of disability in Britain makes clear that an overwhelming feature of the disabled state is poverty (Abberley, 1991).
It is this, the economic dimension of disablement, that the perspectives we have considered so far so conspicuously fail to address.
Rather, by producing individual or social accounts of disabled individuals' pathology in society, any economic disadvantage is presented as a byproduct of incapacity or of prejudice.
It would be equally reasonable, however, to say that rather than disabled people being generally poor and powerless because people are prejudiced against us, people are prejudiced against us because we are poor and powerless.
Such accounts locate the ‘abnormality’ not in disabled people, but in the society which fails to meet our needs.
This kind of definition is perhaps most concisely encapsulated in the UPIAS definition, where ‘Disability is…caused by a contemporary social organisation which takes no or little account of people who have physical impairments’(Union of the Physically Impaired Against Segregation, 1976, p. 4).
In such a view, our abnormality results from the failure of society to meet our ‘normal’ needs as impaired people, which are different from those of some, but by no means all, of our fellow citizens.
Our abnormality consists in us having, compared to the general population, a particular and large set of our human needs unprovided for, or met in inappropriate and disempowering ways.
The most familiar of these are in the areas of physical access and transportation, but in almost any aspects of life an impaired person is likely to confront a disabling dimension.
It is in this sense, of having an abnormal number of our normal needs unmet, that I think it right to speak of disabled people as not being normal.
This abnormality is something we share with women, black, elderly, gay and lesbian people, in fact the majority of the population.
To understand the specific nature of the abnormality experienced by disabled people we have not only to document a general failure to provide for needs.
We must also investigate how legislation framed in terms of the ‘normal’ citizen systematically disadvantages us, creates and perpetuates our abnormality.
By so doing we start to produce accounts of what needs changing if the oppression of disabled people is to be overcome, we start to develop a disabled perspective which we can progressively apply to all aspects of society.
In doing so we are going beyond the consideration of the facts of disadvantage to uncovering the mechanisms through which it is produced and perpetuated.
For illustration and example, I will consider some recent legislation, and show how its failure to treat disabled people as having special, ‘abnormal’, requirements results in disadvantage.
An examination of the implications of the social security ‘reforms’ of April 1988 (National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux, 1988; Turner and Kepley, 1988) indicates how regarding disabled people as ‘normal’results in a substantial increase in disadvantage.
Under the previous system of benefits, unemployed disabled people could claim social security at a higher rate, and were also eligible for a number of additional requirement payments (ARPs) to meet such needs as extra laundry expenses, special dietary requirements, extra heating, wear and tear on clothing, and so on, which were a consequence of specific disabilities.
For all its deficiencies and inadequacies, this system in principle recognised that the needs of disabled people are often different from those of the ‘normal’ claimant.
Under the new Social Fund, the higher long-term benefit rate was abolished and the ARPs replaced by flat-rate premiums, which are not geared to specific needs but based on two categories of basic and severe disability.
A system of transitional payments is in operation, which slows down the effects of these changes on current claimants.
Under the single payments system grants, involving certain rights to payment backed up by a right of appeal to an independent tribunal, disbursed some £350 million in 1986/7.
The Social Fund, limited in expenditure to £203 million in its first year, made discretionary loans, with no right to appeal decisions.
The system involves an obligation to provide evidence of having sought help from charities, friends and relations, and even if this can be provided and the request deemed a reasonable one, no payment will be forthcoming if it involves the breach of cash limits.
Hardship is clearly caused to disabled people (40,000 on government estimates, up to half a million according to the Disablement Income Group) who are able to live in the community.
With the withdrawal of ARPs some people will doubtless be forced back into residential care as the value of the fixed transitional payment is eroded by rising costs and inflation or as their condition leads to further special requirements.
For individuals hoping to make the move from institutional care to living in the community the situation is far more problematic than it was before.
With no right to payment for essential items, and community care grants cash-limited and discretionary, both the initial move and its long-term viability are thrown into question.
Whilst other sections of the population are clearly severely affected by these government policies, disabled people experience these particular ‘reforms’ as an attack on their human right not to be incarcerated without trial and conviction, in so far as it renders it in some cases impossible to live outside institutions.
The abolition of need-based ARPs, and the consequent treatment of disabled people as ‘normal’ welfare recipients, is by no means a desirable kind of ‘normality’.
The field of housing provision is another area where the special needs of disabled people make it necessary to develop specialised knowledge and  policies, to recognise that disabled people are done no service by being regarded as normal.
The vast majority of owner-occupied housing in Britain is unsuitable for people with major physical disabilities.
The least satisfactory housing tends also to be that inhabited by sections of the population of which disabled people form a disproportionately large percentage, elderly people and people on low incomes.
Local authorities have always been the main providers of wheelchair and mobility adapted housing, and although the actual number of such dwellings decreased between the periods 1970/81 and 1982/6 due to an overall decline in their house-building programme, the percentage of wheelchair and mobility adapted housing increased in this period.
As far as the main alternative source, housing associations, are concerned, an expansion in their activity in the 1980s was accompanied by a declining proportion of adapted housing, and a decline in actual numbers (see Table 1).
On current performance, any contraction in local authority building programmes disproportionately disadvantages disabled people.
Thus the decline in local authority housing budgets has a specific and disproportionately disadvantageous effect upon disabled people, which can only be obscured by regarding disabled people as ‘normal’.
Again, Fry's study of difficulties confronted by disabled people in voting in the 1987 general election (Fry, 1987) indicates a series of problems in the exercise of democratic rights which are to large degree sui generis , and can only be understood through specific knowledge of disability.
Finally, as regards the poll tax, it was on the grounds that disabled people should be treated as ‘normal’ citizens that the government rejected the Allen amendment in the House of Lords, which would have offered extra rebates to poor disabled people to cover the full cost of poll-tax payments wherever they may live.
Such concrete explorations of the effects of social policies and practices on  disabled people indicate that any adequate understanding of the oppression of disabled people requires macro-as well as micro-level investigation.
This is an area which is only susceptible to research via detailed investigation which, however it is carried out, certainly cannot be in terms of the ‘normality’ of disabled people, since its concerns must be to explicate the kinds and degrees of difference between the needs of impaired people and the general population, and with the multifarious features of ‘normal’social life which prevent disabled people from being ‘normal’.
Such investigations also serve to indicate that, rather than being an unchangeable feature of social life, the disablement of impaired people can be overcome, through legislation and practices which remove the impediments to fuller participation in social life.
THE TRAGEDY PRINCIPLE: STRATEGIES FOR CHANGE IN THE REPRESENTATION OF DISABLE PEOPLE
DAVID HEVY
In all forms of the media, disabled people have been represented as tragic.
There has been little discussion, however, about what this ‘tragedy’ might be or mean.
In this paper, I would like to explore the theory behind what I have called ‘the tragedy principle’ in the representation of disabled people.
In the history of disability representation or ‘arts and disability’, we find a history of representation that was done in our name but not done by us.
The beginning of a strategy for change would be to examine some key stereotypes of disability within that history of misrepresentation which are present today and which need to be challenged.
Mr Magoo, Long John Silver and Richard III are examples of disabled people as ignorant, destructive or warlike.
Other examples include childlike (charity advertising), hyperdependent (the BBC television play Keeping Tom Nice ) and flawed (Lenny, from Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men ).
All of these stereotypes (of which the above are a small sample) come about because disabled people have not had an input, let alone a controlling interest, in culture and representation done in our name.
Furthermore, I would argue that the general history of disability representation is one of oppressive or ‘negative’ forms and that this has happened precisely because disabled people are excluded from the production of disability culture and excluded from the dominant ‘disability’discourses.
We are excluded from most history but particularly, and perversely, from the history of ‘disability representation’.
To say this, then, leaves us with the position that historical representation has been either absent or negative, and that disabled people want something positive.
This ‘position’ has become a ritual, where the word is repeated as if that would change things.
Where once disabled people would be represented in a state of sub-consciousness (that is, portrayed as unaware of themselves and their situation), we are now witnessing a small current coming into circulation of ‘positive’ images of the grinning disabled.
This is an extremely superficial gain but it is nonetheless currently considered ‘positive’.
So, what do I mean by disability representation?
Does the gaze fall on the impaired body or on social barriers?
I would argue that what we should mean  by disability representation is the dynamic between the two.
By this criterion, we can see that traditional disability representation is in fact impairment representation .
Disability representation, like black representation and the representation of women before it, is seen as representation on the body.
It is this which unites practically the entire discourse of disability representation, from Greek Theatre to James Bond villains to charity advertising to all the Richard IIIs, Ravens, and so on.
It is that disablement means impairment and impairment means flaw.
This is the tragedy principle.
The basic rule of oppressive disability representation assumes the social non-worth of an impairment or the person with an impairment.
This visual construction is incorporated within representation by characters who carry this invariably destructive ‘flaw’.
This can be seen in Shakespeare's Richard III .
Richard's opening soliloquy (which is also the opening text of the entire play) must count as the clearest ‘policy’ statement of the tragedy principle in representation: Before this, Richard has let us know that he is not happy with the non-warring state of affairs and is set to provide destruction.
The reasoning then comes through his narration of having an impairment.
Doom enters with impairment, and disability is not in society but on the body.
The aesthetic construction of a part or parts of the body as the site of all that is socially unacceptable, a flaw, began life within classical Greek theatre (Boal, 1989) and has continued today.
The villain of the piece may begin a hero and even contain some hope (Lenny, from Of Mice and Men ) then a flaw becomes apparent, and they then disembowel or impair themselves (or have it done to them) as an act of retribution.
The story of Richard III in particular sets up the basic rule of the tragedy principle within representation, which is that fate must be made physical on the body .
For the character to know and demonstrate their doom, their body must physically manifest the flaw through an impairment.
The testimony, the words and actions, of this doomed character will then reveal to the audience the ‘natural’ and inevitable decline of the disabled character.
By their social destruction, the message is conveyed that the impairment represents the greatest fall for a person this side of death.
The purpose of this device in art is that the audience may  cathart their projected anxieties surrounding disablement and ‘able-bodiedness’.
The Oedipus fable, for example, begins with a non-disabled person whose transgressions are dealt with by the addition of an impairment.
This is the conclusion.
In tragic theatre, where the character enters already impaired, then doom enters the narrative that much earlier.
The tragedy principle, then, positions a flaw on the body related to the deepest possible social fall.
Where impairment enters, the character is proven to be socially dead (Finkelstein, 1991).
Whether in television, theatre, cinema, fine art or charity advertising, the tragedy principle uses the impairment as a metaphor and a symbol for a socially unacceptable person and it is this tragedy principle which is the bone-cage surrounding historical and current disability representation.
It is this impairment-as-flaw that is ‘negative’ representation, and this form is intolerable.
What are the underpinnings of this form?
These forms of disability representation naturalise the exclusion of disabled people from societies which are organised on an ability to gain employment and these representations are the target of non-disabled people for the ridding of their fears over their own ‘able-bodied’ decline, mortality or loss of power.
It is important, however, in terms of creating radical and new forms of disability representation, to acknowledge that it is both the organisation of economic production and the projection of (non-disabled) negative desire, which contains disabled people within oppressive cultural representation.
The fall of the tragic character into either a real (that is, narrated) death or a (again, narrated) living death will aid the disavowal, the catharsis, of the non-disabled audiences' ever-present fear for the loss of their own ‘able-bodiedness’.
‘The Disabled’ is a non-disabled construction, a representational framework no more real than a hologram but which has to contain two properties if it is to have any cathartic meaning for society.
To repeat, these two ‘able-bodied’ cathartic needs are:(1) the ridding or disavowal of health, fitness and other physical/functional issues pertaining to the ability to work, and (2) the disavowal of the presence of death and mortality.
This is how ‘negative’ representation serves ‘able-bodied’people.
Its positive active purpose is in supporting the ‘able-bodied’ management of these two fears.
Given the growing criticism of traditional representation and the confusion about what is an appropriate representation, what is to be done?
If we are to move beyond this state of affairs, the cultural task for disabled artists and culture workers is threefold.
First, how to shift disability representation off from the body and into the interface between people with impairments and socially disabling conditions.
Second, how to create aesthetic forms which are seen to deal with this successfully (that is, which can be internalised by disabled people in struggle).
Third, how can this shift be played out in the portrayal of disabled people in relationship to their impairment so that they no longer see themselves as able-bodied people who are flawed.
So, the history of the portrayal of disabled people is that disabled people are portrayed as flawed able-bodied people.
Disabled people have never been recognised as having a distinct identity.
So far so good.
However, an analysis of the mechanics of historical and oppressive tragedy/impairment/ disability representation is not in itself sufficient to change those forms of representation.
What is necessary in the first instance is a shift in the surrounding social relations and economic conditions.
Finkelstein has written on the shift from ‘phase two’ to ‘phase three’within the shaping of social  disablement.
As an extremely broad overview, the shift from heavy manufacturing through the electronics and cybernetics revolution is creating the conditions for a different position for disabled people in society and this theoretical position is currently being borne out.
We have had three Conservative governments that have been and still are committed to the rolling back of the ‘nanny’ state.
One aspect of this has been the Care in the Community programme, which has seen the closure of many long-stay institutions and which has resulted in large numbers of disabled people re-entering the social arena, but still having to struggle for basic rights of access.
Within this, the UK disability movement has grown.
A particular, and in representational terms crucial, development of this new activism (and one which links it to other movements based on class, gender, colour, and so on) is the de-biologising nature of the disability.
That is to say, the issue of disability, like other issues pertaining to women and blacks and gays and lesbians, and so on , is shifting its view away from the body and on to society.
Although the disability movement has taken the initiative in articulating this shift, it is a shift which is affecting all sides of the disability issue.
For example, and again as Finkelstein has pointed out, the dominant form of oppression of disabled people is shifting the medical ‘cure or care’ view to reveal the underlying administrative control.
While this may mean that disabled people are shifting from institutions to ghettoes, it nevertheless heralds an age when disabled people are not to be cured as such.
Despite liberal panic over this new agenda, it represents greater possibilities for the re-examination and re-presentation of disabled people.
In this context at least, new definitions can be re-negotiated.
Since this shift is reflected within the social disability movement, it clearly creates conditions for its emulation within disability representation and the disability arts movement.
Indeed, the shift from ‘arts and disability’ to ‘disability arts’is proof of this movement.
The disability arts movement is the first sign of a post-tragedy disability culture.
To state this clearly, the disability movement is the articulation that:(1) impairment and disability are no longer synonyms, and (2) that they are no longer exclusively focused on the body.
The disability arts movement is the only area which is dealing with the cultural vacuum which now exists given this shift.
However, as much as we have gained the initiative, there are still problems which face the disability arts movement and which need to be unravelled.
One in particular is that we currently lack a theory, or theories, of an alternative process.
The final part of this paper, I hope, begins one.
Part 1: Gazing where?
Moving off the body.
We need to define what we mean by ‘disability representation’.
Do we mean the representation of impairment, or do we mean the representation of social barriers, or do we mean the recording of the interface between the two?
Artistic and cultural disabled-led practice which positions its gaze towards this interface begins to reflect the struggle.
Part 2: Changing the meaning of impairment.
We need to reclaim, in the light of the shifts of disability-definition (from medical to community care interventions, from institution to care in the community, from arts and disability to disability arts), the cultural meaning of impairment.
We need to undo the tragedy principle and the notion of impairment as flaw.
This is clearly linked to Part 1, since what is being projected on to the person with an impairment by ‘able-bodied’ culture is in itself changing.
However, the point of radical art and culture is to create a political poetic of the self and the group.
We will be able to redefine our impairments away from flaws by making culture and art which shows the process of our transformations.
The left has traditionally made a mistake within representation by positioning ‘positive’ images against ‘negative’ones, picket lines against victims.
However worthy this has been (and necessary in places), our purpose should be to create work which records the process of change, not just two ‘negative’ or ‘positive’poles.
Part 3: The control of meaning.
Our artworks and cultural works must tell both of the issue and of themselves.
This is critical.
We must not assume that any reading of any artwork is in itself permanent or natural.
The best new image in the world can have its meaning altered by adding a different text in or around it.
In the final analysis, negativity or positivity within any given cultural form only exists within the positioning of the piece.
It is not implicit in the surface of the work.
Its meaning can be altered by its altered context.
The success of our counter-culture is in our ability to position meaning.
Part 4: The act of showing must also be shown.
Brecht in particular dealt with the relationship between real struggle and the metaphorical or symbolical illumination of struggle in art.
In the Brechtian aesthetic, the real struggles of life and oppressed peoples cannot be shown, as it were, naturally.
Naturalism as an aesthetic may work as a tool of catharsis — we may suffer with those we see suffering — but it does not illuminate methods for action after the catharsis.
Therefore, what is needed is a critical relationship within the story-telling or story-showing within and between the form and the issue.
The aesthetic form of presentation is itself part of the reinterpretation.
This is to acknowledge that the representational forms themselves are conveyers of messages but are not innocent of the struggle.
The point of new methods with new messages is that they convey the sense of a new order (or at least the decline of the old one).
This links itself to the three previous parts because it displays a process which metaphorically or symbolically represents change.
Part 5: The success or failure of a new form.
Again, radical drama theory, particularly that of the 1970s involving class politics and gay and lesbian politics (and, of course, both at once ), dealt with the extremely critical issue of the relationship between producer and consumer.
The success of new forms of disability representation can be judged in my estimation by their consumption by disabled people and their ability to mobilise disabled people into action.
One of the main characteristics that has distinguished all radical art, from that of the Soviet revolution to the art of South Africa, from the art of our movement to the work of the AIDS practitioners in the United States, is its proximity to an active audience.
However, there is the problem of the romantic notion of pure art devoid of social responsibility.
Some people engaging in the issue of disability representation have tried to affect the taste of non-disabled audiences and supporters, rather than engage in a political creativity within and about the disability struggle.
Picasso said that taste was the enemy of creativity and, eventually, those disabled artists who pursue that path of affecting taste will find their work stagnating, since they are facilitating an outsider's vision of themselves.
This is a mistake, though understandable, because we have a profound lack of role-models in this area.
If people entering this issue align their aesthetics and texts to a field which operates between their sense of self and their relationship to the movement, the changes to both will create the base of their continued aesthetic change and growth.
Finally, the strategies for change can be found in an analysis of what has gone before and a cultural intervention in what is socially happening to disabled people.
This dialectic is our terrain.
Within this dynamic, we can affect and create cultural forms and an agenda which bring the non-disabled world to us, not we to it.
BROKEN ARTS AND CULTURAL REPAIR: THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN THE EMPOWERMENT OF DISABLED PEOPLE
ELSPETH MORRISON AND VIC FINKELSTEIN
Introduction
In every society human beings come together in groups and subgroups so that their social and physical environment can be modified to improve the quality of life (in food, shelter and leisure).
How these different groups actively engage in shaping the world they live in, the artifacts they produce and the mannerisms observed in their use, the different interpretations they make of their lives and the way they present and convey these views to each other, all form the sum total of a society's culture.
In all societies, then, we can locate evidence of the real experiences and aspirations of different social subgroups by the level and way their culture is expressed, especially in its concrete form in the arts.
However, from time to time different subgroups can become dominant within a larger social structure, and the culture of this subgroup is then likely to become the dominant culture in the greater society.
When any dominant group asserts its power by imposing its culture on others, or diverts wealth to its chosen art forms, then the cultural expression of other groups in the arts will be suppressed.
The output of these groups may fail to develop, or their culture may disintegrate or disappear.
If culture and artistic developments are interpreted as integral aspects of the human social condition, a subgroup's lack of artistic development could be seen as the result of its failure to develop an active social life, or as a reflection of the dehumanisation and suppression of that group.
The very limited opportunities for disabled people to take part in all forms of the arts as spectators, creators or participants raises questions about whether or not we are an oppressed and marginalised subgroup and what we might be trying to do about this.
It is arguable that while the most powerful groups in society have placed their cultural tastes at the top of a hierarchy of artistic forms, not all people will be equally devoted to these fashions and traditions.
The lower status of their own customs could then well lead to a general loss of interest in the arts and this could gradually spread throughout society.
This could be expressed in encouraging schoolchildren to think that careers in ‘science’ and ‘maths’are for the brightest pupils while ‘arts’and ‘vocational training’are for others.
In this context it seems understandable why those active in promoting empowerment through self-help organisations might not see an equally important role for disability arts and culture in advancing the well-being of disabled people.
Participating and enjoying disability arts could then be seen as only a side-show in the drama of struggle for change, something to provide relief from the tensions of boring or stressful committee meetings.
In this paper we will argue that the presence or absence of disability culture, and involvement of disabled people in the arts, is an indication of the general state of their success in reflecting upon and managing their own affairs.
Cultural dependency
In our society cultural custody has, for the most part, passed into the hands of a small elite who acquire fame and fortune through support and funding from the most powerful sections of the community.
Through its support the white upper middle and upper classes have come to dominate all arts and culture.
Unsurprisingly then, in this climate, disabled artists may look for self-esteem and financial gain in the non-disabled dominated arts and media.
After all, when the little information that does exist about disabled artists is often patronising if not actually offensive, there will be a strong incentive to keep this side of one's life somewhat hidden.
If disabled artists or musicians are recognised, living or dead, all too often their lives are seen in terms of their medical condition and their imagined ability to ‘overcome’ personal tragedy.
Passivity and dependence are attributed to us, and our only collective identity is as ‘the disabled’— as tragic individuals who, to a varying degree, are the recipients of care, unlikely to be creative without the stimulation and assistance of others often in an institutional setting such as the day centre or ‘rehabilitation’ unit.
It is very unusual for interpretations of their creative work to be analysed in relation to how (and if) the person's impairment informs their work.
While we know that Stevie Wonder is blind, there seems to be a lack of interest in how this might influence and enhance his music.
Could insight about the music of one disabled artist have some particular relevance to other disabled musicians?
Isolation due to lack of information about other disabled artists could encourage an individual to develop their creativity no further than as a tool for assimilation into the dominant culture and access to their arts.
They may, then, easily become culturally dependent on the dominant sections of society and miss the opportunity to experience the growth in self-confidence  that can follow identification with others who see themselves as members of a distinctive social subgroup with a unique, but equal, identity to other groups.
Many disabled people feel that there cannot be any such thing as a ‘disability culture’.
Even among the more informed the idea that our shared experiences and perspectives might contribute to the birth of a culture can generate anxiety.
There appear to be two general reasons for hostility towards the growth of a disability culture:
1
In Britain many people believe that ‘culture’ equals ‘opera and art galleries’where the middle class go instead of watching football.
Viewed this way, culture is seen as a possession of the elite and a pursuit of the rich.
‘To be cultured’, it is imagined, is to be rather like a pearl, understated, refined and in the best possible taste.
It is often seen as having nothing to do with the ‘real’ world — that is, as a reflection of one's experiences and perceptions quite independent of those of the dominant group.
Recognition of the importance of participation in the arts and culture of one's own group, as part of human development, is not something that is cultivated in the British character.
2
Many disabled people believe that encouraging a disability culture can only reinforce negative images of ‘disability’— that is, they have not questioned the tragedy view of disability and when they think of a disability culture they assume that this must mean art forms which only present the negative side of disabled living.
They ask: Why should I give credence to a life that has imposed barriers on me?
What is there to celebrate and explore when my life is so grim?
Both these reactions miss the point.
Discrimination against people on the grounds of ‘non-normal’ bodies or intellectual capacity places them outside the mainstream of social life.
In order to participate meaningfully within the community members of this group must actively engage in the issues that confront them.
In doing this they provide the material for their own cultural development that is self-determining and self-governing.
This activity is an affirmation of existence despite insistent illustrations all around us which portray what we will never be!
For example, a deaf person goes to the theatre and experiences a hearing writer being translated; or a wheelchair-user finds art gallery paintings endlessly drawn from the shoe-using artist's point of view.
The struggle against disabling barriers, however, is an active and creative engagement.
From this point of view the struggle to remove barriers could be regarded as the seed bed for human arts.
For us, the only difference is that the barriers which we have to address are dissimilar to those faced by able-bodied people.
Pressure for change
Of course, not all disabled people accept that they are incapable of functioning independently and equally with others in society.
The discussion  among organised and informed disabled people has always focused on finding new ways to integrate into the mainstream community but on their own terms.
Thus the day-to-day experiences of disabled people can be characterised as involving a unique tension which, at one level, involves the passive experience of being prevented from controlling one's own life, and at the other, actively struggling to overturn this situation.
Both the absence, and recent emergence, of disability arts and culture might be thought of as a mirror reflecting the current status of this tension between passive and active roles.
As long as traditional media imagery, and so on, represents disabled people as tragic individuals, with no collective voice and with little access to each other , we can expect the activities of disabled people to go no further than personal complaint.
At an early stage in coming together in associations, then, the first choice is almost always to make a combined plea to those in power for greater access to resources.
If joint action is undertaken, these associations often settle into the familiar pattern of ‘pressure-group’ politics — that is, appealing to existing power structures to be relieved of their debilitating situation.
Arising out of the struggles of individuals , pressure-group politics encourages the development of an elite leadership who then negotiate with those who hold power.
In pressure-group politics the struggle for civil rights is controlled by the active few, while the mass of disabled people remain in their traditional passive relationship to others.
Only now the ‘others’ are not able-bodied benefactors but other disabled people.
For this elite, negotiating for an improved quality of life, there is unlikely to be sensitivity about the absence of disability arts.
This is because they are concerned with clarifying and presenting their own perspective of the issues and an inactive membership has little to express when it is in a passive relationship to others.
The cultural record
Pressure-group politics can be the natural first line of action when disabled people come together.
However, organising a collective voice may perversely end up by only transferring the microphone to the voice of the elite.
The presence or absence of a disability culture and the numbers of disabled people involved, frequency of performances and general social recognition for disability arts can provide important insights into the progress of disabled people moving from passivity to an active role in their own affairs.
If disabled political activists and disabled artists see little point in supporting each other we can be sure that progress towards equal rights has not yet moved beyond the efforts of individuals to escape their own personal restrictions.
The disabled political activist is likely to be locked into pressure-group politics, escaping a passive disabled lifestyle by becoming the active spokesperson for others, who continue in their passive and dependent lives.
Similarly, the disabled artist could be locked into expressing personal life  events in the hope that fame will allow escape from the dependency role that society expects of its disabled citizens.
On the other side, the spontaneous growth of a disability culture, in the absence of support from organisations of disabled people, can be regarded as a symptom of ordinary disabled people losing interest in the issues that an elite leadership regards as a priority.
A developing disability culture can not only increase insight into the progress of disabled people becoming active in the area of civil rights, but can provide important opportunities for individuals to gain confidence by forming a new and independent social identity.
From this point of view the formation of a distinctive and vibrant disability culture is a vital component in the construction of an accessible route to empowerment.
Accountability
Many people are uncertain about accepting that disabled artists might also be accountable to a disabled constituency.
Art involves personal creativity and some people may have difficulty in seeing the disabled artist as anything other than an independent and uncontrollable misfit.
They may dismiss creative works with ‘Well, that is only their view’, or confuse personal dislike of an art form with the observation that the person is generally ‘no good’.
While the portrayal of disability issues in the arts arena should be viewed with the same critical eye as the presentation of issues in the political arena, we should also take care not to underestimate the role of the arts in assisting the processes of change.
While there is broad agreement among disabled people in the UK that the portrayal of the disability experience is generally both negative and inaccurate, it is participants in the arts who can breathe life into alternative images.
This should mean that while we share a common understanding of disability we may express this in many different forms and in different arenas.
Taking part in the arts should also be viewed as a tool for change as much as attending meetings about, say, orange badge provision.
Artistic effects
Gaining access to new ideas or creating challenging alternatives when passivity predominates among the disabled community can be hard work.
Charity imagery, tales of tragedy or outstanding courage in the media, fairy tales and other children's books loaded with disabled villains can all combine to undermine a view of ourselves as valid human beings.
If one of the creative activities of art is to present a mirror to society, what we generally see is a distorted reflection of ourselves.
Disability arts, on the other hand, where, for example, sculpture is designed to be touched as well as seen, and songs are written about the world as we see it, can redress the balance and engage a lot  of people in questioning assumptions that their exclusion from society is a fact of life.
The arts can have a liberating effect on people, encouraging them to change from being passive and dependent to being creative and active.
We may not all want to be ‘artists’, producing and performing work, but arts events can provide another accessible route for looking at the world in relation to disabled people.
Meeting together at a disability arts event can also provide rare opportunities for disabled people to exchange ideas.
Having someone on stage communicating ideas and feelings that an isolated disabled person never suspected were shared by others can be a turning-point for many.
However, unless there is a flowering of cultural activity new artists will not be inspired to develop more sensitive presentations of our place in society and to inform future generations.
One of the ways of understanding long-gone societies is to look at their cultural artifacts.
If historians only uncover images of disability in charity advertising and stories of helplessness or courage, with no alternatives, what will that mean for a future population of disabled people?
Evidence of pride in ourselves is also provided by the legacy we leave behind.
Our cultural development will provide not only a record of an active journey, a passing view of ourselves as we are, but also a perspective on the world for future generations to build on and develop.
Cultural interventions
Arts should provide disabled people with ways of confirming their own identity and, as a secondary gain, inform, educate and attract the non-disabled world.
Until recently the arts have placed too much emphasis on educating non-disabled people rather than providing a medium for communication with each other.
What is needed is that disability arts (and the disability movement) does not simply imitate the view of the world that pleases white, middle-class males.
The arts, and the new cultural development, can provide space for reflection on disability life from the rich variety of experiences of different groups of disabled people.
Helping disabled people to ensure an integrated role for disability arts and culture in the nation's repertoire of cultural life can provide an opportunity to challenge narrow thinking, elitism and dependency on others.
Introducing disabled people to the social role of artistic creativity and opening a debate about disability culture is a dynamic way of assisting disabled people to challenge their assumed dependency and place in mainstream society.
CONTROLLING LIFESTYLES
STRIVING FOR INDEPENDENCE
LIZZ BRIGGS
I had always lived at home with my family.
Mum has rheumatoid arthritis and, as neither of us could manage the stairs, we shared the same room downstairs.
I started at a nearby special school when I was 3.
Mum looked after me at home.
When I was 16 I gained GSE grade one English and chose not to accept the only job suggested, packing boxes; instead I tried further education.
The technical college was next door to the special school, and I was able to continue attending my old school and go to the A-level English lessons in the college.
At this time I was thinking of a career in writing.
I had not thought about much else except .Unlike many of my friends, I did not want to leave home.
I used to be scared of the possibility that one day mum wouldn't be able to get me up.
Even then, though, from time to time, things could be difficult.
A taste of residential care
All the way through school, my mum used to go away for a fortnight's rest during the summer and I would go and stay in one of the various holiday homes for disabled children.
Soon after I got my English A-level, mum learned that she had to go into hospital for quite a long time.
Her only concern was where I should go while she was away.
Mum did all the work of trying to find something.
Being 18, I was too old for many children's homes and too young for adult residential homes.
Fortunately I was able to go to a rehabilitation and assessment centre for two weeks.
Whilst there I was introduced to the nearby Cheshire Home and went there for five weeks.
I hated it.
For the first time in my life I was made conscious of not being able to control my own situation.
All I can remember  was that everything was uncomfortable, especially getting up and going to bed.
It wasn't like having mum around.
When mum came out of hospital I returned home.
District nurses were made available to help mum look after me, though they were very unreliable.
I began to realise that life like this could not last for ever and so I asked to go back to the Cheshire Home for a holiday.
I cannot really remember why.
Perhaps f just wanted to go back to find out why f hadn't got on with the place when everyone else had!
Anyway, mum says I was restless when I returned from my second holiday there.
Next summer mum was told she would have to go back into hospital for a long time, and because I already knew the place, I agreed to go back to the Cheshire Home for this period.
Something went wrong while mum was in hospital and I ended up being in the home for seven months.
During this time I began to realise that perhaps I wasn't going to go home.
Understandably there were lots of tears.
Until then I had always thought that I could go home, but now I wasn't sure.
A diet of residential care
When my mum came out of hospital she was still in plaster and couldn't look after me.
Because the home was planning to cut down its numbers I was asked to find somewhere else to live.
I left in the following March, and went to a local authority home for six weeks.
This place just did not have the necessary staff levels for my needs, as I was classed as requiring heavy care.
Apart from having to get up and go to bed at certain times, I was fed up because nearly everyone else spent the day at the day centre making baskets and playing Bingo.
I did not want to do this and didn't go.
The building, the staff and the food were wonderful, but I wasn't allowed out of the front door on my own.
I spent my days with a lovely old lady who stayed in bed because the staff didn't have enough time to get her up.
Luckily f had friends living locally who came to visit me regularly and I went home every weekend, otherwise I would have gone mad.
I contacted my social worker and told her that I could not stay at this place and that she would have to find me a Cheshire Home.
She came up with the placement centre at Heenan House, which was part of the St Joseph's Hospice for the Dying in Hackney.
Dr Agerholme was in charge and she was quite willing to have me there.
I moved in and was there for three months.
I had a great time.
There were lots of young people working there whose main ambition was to get me into a good home.
During my stay my mother and I went to see Dr Agerholme.
She explained that I could stay at Heenan House until I could find somewhere suitable to live.
Then she asked if I would consider returning home with someone living in to look after me.
She explained what this would mean.
I don't know why, but I felt it would not work in my situation.
I know dad wouldn't particularly like a stranger living in.
Also my mum had to share a bedroom with me and she didn't like watching someone else seeing to me.
What was more, I was 21  years old now and I had discovered just how much freedom I could have away from home!
I chose residential care and so it was that I came to Le Court In September 1977.
Le Court
Soon after arriving at Le Court I knew that this was the place for me.
I was enjoying myself.
I could not get over the fact that people were giving me the responsibility of telling them how to get me up, and that I could choose what time I went to bed!
I quickly settled in and became increasingly involved in the life of the home.
It was the policy that residents were expected to contribute to the life of the community.
As time passed, my feelings towards the home slowly changed.
I wanted to do more for myself.
I was going out of the home more often and people had begun to comment on this.
I began to feel a little restricted.
There was a growing unrest among the younger residents.
Some of us resented the level of continual commitment to the home which was expected of us.
Also, none of us wanted to spend the rest of our lives there, even though we did not know what else there could be.
I think the arrival of a new resident, John Evans, had begun to focus our restlessness.
He was quite determined not to stay in residential care.
During 1979 I went to Taylor House for a holiday.
Taylor Rouse is a very small hostel for disabled students.
It is an enlarged ordinary house in an ordinary street.
The four students and the staff work out the running of the household between them and share the responsibilities.
I was so struck with the place that when I came back to Le Court I told John that he ought to go there for a visit.
Project 81
Soon after John came back from Taylor House several of us started meeting together more formally.
That was the beginning of Project 81.
The idea was that a group of us would move into a big house and have young people as ‘staff’ helping us.
Just like Taylor House.
For a long time I was not exactly sure what I wanted from Project 81.
I just felt I ought to be doing something and so I stuck to it.
We were looking for a big house in Southampton.
A year passed and then a big house in Oxford Street came along.
A lot of personal things had been happening to me during that year.
I was growing up very quickly.
I did not really know what I wanted to do with my life most of the time.
I was able to explore a lot of ideas and possibilities through Project 81, and it gave me something to concentrate on.
I was now certain that I could not see myself in any type of residential home in the future.
I intended being one of the three people to live in Oxford Street, until I saw the place.
I did not like the building, but the others were so enthusiastic about  it I thought there was something wrong with me.
Also, as we discussed details, I found that our ideas of care were totally different.
I felt that I needed to have someone around me all the time, whereas the others did not, and I was scared.
I did not want to be isolated.
I could see that if the others achieved their work ambitions they would not be in the house all day, and I did not want to be at home on my own.
Around this time I went to see my sister.
On the visit I was looked after by a Danish girl called Merete.
We were talking about Project 81, and I had said I was very undecided.
I said that what I would really like was a little place of my own with two people looking after me.
Seeing at close quarters the ordinary domestic life of my sister put this in my mind.
I realised that I fitted happily into that sort of setting.
Merete suggested I try and do just that.
Ideas into reality
I wrote to my home social services and asked them what they would do if I moved from residential care into a home of my own.
They said I would become the responsibility of the local county and they would not help me.
At the prompting of my friends I wrote back and asked them why not!
They sent a social worker to talk to me.
She admitted later that she came thinking this was just some hare-brained scheme, but left with the understanding that it was a well-thought-out and well-planned idea.
My friends from Project 81, the head of home and the head of care at Le Court worked together in order to present a convincing case.
Our proposal was based on the fact that living outside would possibly be cheaper and, if they didn't agree to pay for me to do so, I would remain in the home as an expense to them anyway.
Soon after this I received a favourable response and I began house-hunting and discussing the details of how to meet my care needs.
The only real hiccup was that the local DHSS would not assess my benefits until I had moved in, and social services were not prepared to finalise the amount of their commitment until they knew the DHSS's!
And so we went around and around in circles, trying to get some idea of what money would be available, but never succeeding.
This was a worry to me because I could not work out how much money I would have to live on.
House-hunting
I saw my new home in October 1981; it was about the seventh or eighth place I had been to look at.
The housing association submitted the project to the housing corporation before Christmas and the project was quickly accepted.
Then there was a long watt.
£5,000 was needed for adaptations.
This was much more than we had expected and was largely due to the need  to raise the path to the front door, which involved relocating two man-hole covers.
Delays and frustration
Everything took an age.
At first the cost was queried by the housing corporation.
Eventually they agreed to go ahead, but already 1982 was well advanced.
Then the building specifications had to go out to tender.
The tender had to be accepted by the housing corporation and then the builders had a summer holiday!
The builders said the work would take six weeks, so I planned to move in after this, at the end of July.
When the time came around, however, the work had not even started!
In August, when the builders still had not started work, I decided to move in September, ready or not.
I had already employed an attendant, Toril, who had come over from Norway at the end of July to help me during and after my move.
During this period I finalised the details of how my care needs would be met.
I felt that I needed someone to be with me all day and all night.
I did not want to be left on my own.
My idea was to have my carers living in, as I did not like the idea of people popping in and out to see to me.
I had some experience of this when I lived at home, having to wait hours for the district nurses.
I prepared an around-the-clock chart detailing all my care requirements.
It came to something like 60 hours and I decided that I could share it between two people.
I costed this on the basis of staff receiving standard wages and being told on their contract that they would work 30 hours, to cover 24 hours a day.
At home at last When I finally moved at the end of September, it was an enormous step in my life.
Further, it was a huge step for the staff and everybody else associated with me, because this sort of thing had never been done before.
On top of this there were practical pressures that made those early days very difficult.
I did not go into a perfect situation.
The building work was not complete — indeed, the kitchen was not finished until January, and we had to survive with only a gas primus stove.
The conditions made everybody uptight, and it was very difficult to have a normal working atmosphere.
What annoyed me most was the red tape.
The kitchen was not done because the local authority could not produce the money until I was a tenant, and I was not a tenant until the builders had finished.
And so it was not until January, four months after moving in, that I had a reasonable chance of settling down.
I could not get into a routine because there was nothing to get into a routine with!
Besides the problem with the kitchen, there was no central heating, and my room and the bathroom were incomplete.
For the first two weeks I was  living in a double room with Toril.
It was all so dreadful, but I don't really remember it now.
More than anything else I think I was worried about what other people would say if I failed.
A lot of people were waiting to see what happened to me.
Everybody wanted me to succeed, and I was scared I would fail.
I think they thought they were supporting me, by saying, ‘You'll be OK!’, but really it just increased my anxiety.
I hadn't anticipated so much pressure in my new life.
I had not been prepared for the volume of decisions I had to make.
Simple things, such as: sorting out looing routines; how to use the local launderette; finding out where all the allowances come from and how to get them; sorting out local tradespeople; sorting out dustbin collections, milk deliveries, a doctor, a chemist; and so on .
But the worst thing was the incomplete building work.
I was trying to start a new life on a building site!
In these early days I got overwhelmed very easily.
Sometimes I thought that within a few months I would be back in Le Court, because I did not think I could continue.
If I had not had the support of Project 81 members, the head of care at Le Court and other friends, I do not think I could have survived.
All sorts of things seemed to flood in, including the fact that I was not getting on with one of my attendants.
She decided that she did not want to stay because she did not like the job.
She felt that she did not have enough to do.
I found it tiring to have somebody in the house whom I knew was not really enjoying what she was doing.
Sometimes we annoyed each other.
The long dark evenings, the unfinished building work, the awful autumn weather, and the fact that we could not get out made these interpersonal difficulties, for which I was not prepared, much worse.
Precious moments of light relief came when a couple of friends would turn up out of the blue and say, ‘Come to the Indian Restaurant’.
That sort of thing was invaluable.
Since those early days I have grown considerably in confidence, on top of which all the furnishings and fittings are complete.
This makes a very big difference!
I look back now and wonder how I managed.
Really, I moved into a building site and tried to make a life while work was in progress!
The neighbourhood
I like the area; it is friendly and peaceful.
I think I could probably leave the front door open all night and nobody would walk in.
It takes only 10 minutes to get to the shops in the wheelchair.
It is good for me to get out and do the shopping; I enjoy that bit of fresh air every day, and it is something I have got to do because this is when I meet people.
My neighbours are friendly but I don't really know anybody intimately.
I know a lot of people to say ‘Hello’ to, but that is about it.
The guy across the road keeps me up to date with what is going on, and I have got to know his family quite well.
There is always somebody there.
We have told them about my alarm system, and they would do something if they heard it.
I don't feel that I have succeeded in mixing with the community as well as I  would like to have done.
I think that mixing is difficult because many houses are not accessible and so I cannot just ‘drop in’.
Also, we haven't got things in common— like kids.
I go to night schools and force myself to mix, but I only tend to socialise with my present or former care assistants, former Le Court friends and a few other people.
In conclusion
I feel settled in my home.
It seems as if I have been here a lot longer than a few years, and I do not think that I could ever fit into an institutional regime again.
People say that I have changed as a person.
I don't know.
I think I have become a bit more positive.
A home of my own has given me confidence.
I expect people to regard this as my house and not to abuse my privacy.
I share my home with my dog Holly.
I couldn't think of living here without her.
She relies on me.
I rely on everybody else, but she has to rely on me for her food and comfort.
She also helps with the care assistants, giving them something to do when they are not dealing with me.
She helps break the ice when I am interviewing.
When I am out walking, people stop and talk to her.
Instead of saying, ‘What a nice chair’, they say, ‘What a nice dog’.
She barks at anything in sight, but doesn't bark at night!
She would probably lick an intruder to death.
As for advising someone else who might want to do the same thing as myself, I don't know what to say.
You cannot write a book to tell people exactly how to do things because things change all the time.
The idea of people coming and saying, ‘I want to move out, what shall I do?’, worries me.
I would not know how to tell them what to do, because their disabilities might be completely different from mine, their attitudes different, their ideas different, their hopes different.
All I can do is to share my experience with them and tell them how fulfilling I have found it all, and how I have grown as a person.
I have been living in the same bungalow now for 10 years, and it seems no easier now than it was 10 years ago to find staff.
Three years ago I changed the staffing arrangements and now have one full-time live-in helper.
During week-ends I have two part-time helpers and I also have a couple of part-time helpers from time to time.
But I am managing and am still pleased to be living in my own home.
HOUSING, INDEPENDENT LIVING AND PHYSICALLY DISABLED PEOPLE
JENNY MORRIS
Independent living forms part of the aims of the international civil rights movement of disabled people.
The 1975 United Nations Declaration of Rights of Disabled Persons asserted the right of disabled people to be self-reliant, to live as they choose and to participate in the social, creative and recreational activities of their communities.
If we do not have appropriate housing and personal assistance, then such basic human rights are unachievable.
For many disabled people, unwanted dependence on others would disappear overnight if they lived in a physical environment which did not handicap them.
Those who need personal assistance to enable them to live in their own homes have too often been consigned either to institutions or to enforced dependence on their families.
This paper summarises a survey of housing and support services carried out for Shelter in 1989 (see Morris, 1990).
The role of local authorities
The role of local authorities in meeting housing needs stems from disabled people's lack of economic power.
Only 31 per cent of disabled adults under pensionable age are in paid employment and, for one-half of disabled adults under pensionable age, there are no earners in the family unit at all(Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, 1988a).
Two-thirds of disabled people are over the age of 60 and poverty is correlated with being old.
Forty-five per cent of disabled adults are council or housing association tenants compared to 31 per cent of the general population (Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, 1988a, p. 12).
This is partly because access into council housing is through housing need rather than ability to pay but also because local authorities are the main providers of wheelchair and mobility adapted accommodation, with very little provision made in the housing association, private, rented or owner-occupied sector.
Disabled people find it increasingly difficult to gain access to council  housing, and homelessness among physically disabled people increased by 92 per cent between 1980 and 1986 compared with 57 per cent among all types of household (Morris, 1988a, p. 6).
As homeowners, disabled people are more likely than other households to experience poor housing conditions.
This is partly because of the association between old age and poor housing conditions, but it is primarily because of the association between poor housing conditions and low-income owners.
As the English House Condition Survey put it, ‘Poor housing [is]related, above all, to income’(Department of the Environment, 1988, p. 41).
The Prince of Wales Advisory Group on Disability has drawn attention to the problems faced by severely disabled adults below the age of 60.
The Group's report Living Options Lottery , concluded, ‘The reality of housing and care support options revealed…is alarming…few people obtain the flexible, dependable services essential for personal autonomy.
The amount and kind of help a disabled person receives is determined less by need than by chance — a ‘living options’ lottery’(Fiedler, 1988).
In the context of the new community care legislation, organisations of disabled people are increasing the pressure on central and local government to provide the necessary housing and support services required to enable disabled people to fully participate in society.
Local authorities need comprehensive and coherent policies to meet both these demands and their minimum legal obligations.
The Shelter survey
A representative sample of 21 local authorities in England and Wales was taken and information gathered on knowledge, policies and services relating to disabled people.
Analysis was carried out of the 1988/9 housing investment programme (HIP) statements for each authority.
The number of ‘significantly disabled’ people in each area was calculated using the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys Disability Survey.
This statistical analysis is published in the full research report (Morris, 1990).
The handful of local authorities who were identified as having policies which should be encouraged have been named, but this does not mean that these particular local authorities are doing everything right (indeed most of them recognise that they are not).
It may also be that policies and practices have changed since the survey was carried out, for example because of a change in political control.
Housing departments
Housing strategies and housing policies
Only three housing departments had a written policy on meeting the housing needs of disabled people.
In two cases these policies had been developed as a  result of dialogue between the housing department and local disability organisations.
The policies covered: new building programmes; adaptation of existing stock; modernisation programmes; allocation procedures; grants to private owners; staff training.
However, among the rest very few even mentioned such needs in their housing strategy.
One local housing authority stated that there was ‘a need for greater provision of special needs accommodation for the disabled and handicapped’ yet there was no indication as to how such accommodation was to be provided.
There was, for example, no indication that, either within its own construction programme of housing for single people or in its collaboration with a local housing association, any consideration was given to the housing needs of single disabled people.
Where housing departments were developing strategies on homelessness, there was no recognition that disabled people become homeless as well, and conversely, that some homeless households contain disabled people.
Thus, where a council was developing hostel accommodation to cut down on the use of bed-and-breakfast placements there was no provision within that hostel accommodation for disabled people.
Similarly, a number of housing departments were developing policies aimed at ethnic minority communities, yet only one recognised that disabled people would also be part of such communities.
No housing department had a policy on identifying vacant properties with adaptation potential.
This is a crucial oversight as, with the reduction in new building programmes, it is often only by adapting existing property that any significant increase in the supply of housing for disabled people can be achieved.
There was only one example of good practice in this area.
Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council appointed a housing officer who, working with the local disability organisation, developed a comprehensive policy for meeting the housing needs of disabled people.
Rochdale has built all new housing to mobility standard since 1980, a significant number to wheelchair standard and has an expanding capital budget for adaptations to existing stock.
Awareness of housing needs
There was general lack of knowledge of the housing needs of disabled people.
Information on numbers of elderly and disabled households and of the supply of suitable accommodation, together with adaptations carried out, is provided annually by local authorities to the Department of the Environment, yet the majority of housing departments stated that this information was not available.
This paradox is explained by the fact that the figures are of no relevance to the operation of the housing department throughout the rest of the year.
It must also mean, of course, that the figures provided by the local authority on their HIP returns are highly questionable.
Only three of the housing departments that provided information were able to state how many households on their waiting or transfer list required  wheelchair or mobility adapted housing, and only two of these were able to break this information down by bedroom size.
Only four local authorities could state how many households had been housed into wheelchair or mobility adapted accommodation during the previous year, and five could say whether any such nominations had been made to housing associations.
Again, this lack of information indicates a lack of concern about whether the housing needs of disabled people are being met.
Access to housing
Most housing departments failed to integrate disabled people into their allocation policies.
When a disabled person applied for housing they would generally be referred for medical assessment.
This practice is criticised by disability organisations for failing to take account of the practical difficulties of living in unsuitable housing and focusing instead on health problems.
One typical local authority produced A Guide to the Waiting List , which set out criteria for rehousing.
No mention was made of disability.
The booklet made clear that only households with children, who had no home of their own, or elderly people needing warden-assisted accommodation, had any chance of being rehoused.
A disabled person living in physically unsuitable housing would therefore assume that there was no point in registering on the waiting list, unless they happened to fall into one of the categories mentioned.
Housing departments often exclude homeowners from being eligible for rehousing.
The properly of disabled owner-occupiers may be totally unsuitable for them.
They may consequently be unable to leave hospital or institutional care, may be made dependent on others, or imprisoned within a physically unsuitable home.
They may be unable to afford appropriate housing, or may live in an area where such housing does not exist in the private sector, and thus would look to the local housing authority to solve their housing problem.
In most areas, the door would be slammed in their faces because of the housing department's assumption that owner-occupiers can meet their own housing needs.
An example of good practice in incorporating disabled people into an allocations policy was again provided by Rochdale Metropolitan Borough Council.
Knowledge of supply of dwellings
Five housing departments had information on the numbers of wheelchair and mobility properties in their stock, but only two of these could analyse them according to bedroom size.
Only one knew how many such properties were provided by housing associations in their area.
There was a similar lack of knowledge about the supply of adapted accommodation.
Again, Rochdale Council was highlighted as an example of good practice.
A housing authority cannot develop a strategy to meet the needs of its  disabled population without data on the expressed demand and the supply of dwellings within its own housing stock.
Ideally, there should be more comprehensive information on housing need and the supply of dwellings across all tenures (particularly if local authorities are to take on more of an enabling role).
Lack of such information leads to the common misapprehension that housing for disabled people should consist of one-bedroom properties, whereas the majority of the demand for housing from disabled people below the age of 60 is for two bedrooms and above (Morris, 1986, 1988b; Robinson, 1987).
Adaptation of existing dwellings
Only three authorities had a specific policy on adaptations to council dwellings.
Local authority housing departments require a close working relationship with occupational therapists employed within the social services departments (SSDs), who advise on the technical aspects of adaptations.
However, some housing departments, who had no specific policy on or budget for adaptations to existing council properties, clearly had very little knowledge of the work of occupational therapists.
The survey was carried out before the implementation of the new grant system for adaptations so could not assess its effectiveness (see Morris, 1991, for an assessment of the new system; Royal Association of Disability and Rehabilitation, 1992).
Wakefield Council had set up an Adaptations and Disability Unit, bringing together staff from social services, environmental health and housing departments.
The unit deals with private and public sector residents, minor and major adaptations, as well as requests for equipment, and co-ordinates both the carrying out of the work and its financing.
Partnerships with the private sector
Housing authorities were not considering the needs of disabled people in their dealings with private developers and housing associations.
They attempted to increase the supply of low-cost housing through, for example, shared-ownership schemes, but did not encourage developers or housing associations to build accessible housing.
There are many aspects of the local authority's role as enabler — through the provision of land, planning permission and so on— which should make it possible to exert such influence on the private sector.
Influence can also be exerted where the partnership is with a housing association, yet this did not seem to be happening.
Liaison between housing and social services departments
Only two housing departments had formal regular liaison arrangements with SSDs.
There seemed little awareness of how the mainstream activities of the housing department are of relevance to social services' role in enabling  independent living.
For example, one district council's housing department was proud of its support for a resource centre, jointly funded with social services, which would ‘enable the physically and mentally handicapped to learn life skills’.
Yet the housing department had no strategy for providing the accommodation required to enable people to use ‘life skills’ by living independently.
Social services departments
SSDs had more knowledge of the number of disabled people in their area than had housing departments, and they were more likely to have specific policies on meeting their needs.
However, the extent of the knowledge and of the policies was still surprisingly inadequate.
Residential care
Residential care is still considered as inevitable for many disabled people.
Sometimes this is a solution of last resort, because of a lack of housing and support services.
More often there is little awareness of either the potential for independent living or how its denial is a denial of a basic human right.
The majority of SSDs knew how many disabled people were in local authority institutions, but only two knew how many were in health-authority-run facilities, and five how many were in private and voluntary establishments.
Only three SSDs said that they did not use residential facilities outside their area.
The majority of SSDs are placing physically disabled people in residential accommodation outside their own community and have little knowledge about them.
One local authority admitted that it was placing severely disabled children, including those under the age of 5, 100 miles away or more in residential care.
The role of the social services departments in facilitating independent living
SSDs have two key roles to play in facilitating independent living: working with housing departments to ensure that appropriate accommodation is available; and ensuring that support services are available to disabled people in their own homes.
Three SSDs had developed strategies for independent living and three others were in the process of developing such a policy.
Some SSDs had developed principles which motivated their service delivery to disabled people.
However, with three exceptions, there was little evidence that disabled people and their organisations were properly consulted about the kind of service which they wanted.
Working with housing departments
There was little evidence of housing and social services departments working together to facilitate independent living.
Most SSDs worked closely with health authorities through Joint Care Planning Teams but these often did not include representatives from the housing authority.
When initial policy discussions are held it is rare for housing to be represented.
This is either because SSDs and health authorities have failed to identify the role of housing officers, or because, when they have, housing departments have failed to respond.
Where a local authority had started to develop policies to meet the housing needs of disabled people, initiatives usually involved either the housing department or the social services department, rarely both.
Housing departments commonly complained that SSDs were not playing their full part in offering technical advice on adaptations, or in providing personal assistance support within the home.
In turn, SSDs often despaired of finding suitable accommodation for physically disabled people and complained that housing officers made unwarranted assumptions about the inability of disabled people to live independently.
One SSD, for example, had great difficulty in persuading a district council housing department to offer accommodation to a single mother who had become disabled but who wished to leave hospital and look after her daughter.
Provision of support services
Only three SSDs had a strategy for helping disabled people to achieve independent living; three others were preparing one.
The majority of authorities relied on ad hoc arrangements when providing personal assistance, mainly consisting of utilising the home care service.
Only two authorities actually had a separate budgetary provision for personal care packages.
One was a rural authority and funded 10 disabled clients' personal care needs.
In contrast, an urban authority — with a much larger population — was considering funding two clients.
Whether someone can live independently depends very much on where they live.
Two SSDs that are in the process of developing independent living strategies already provide some support.
One employs 12 care assistants, whose services are provided free to physically disabled clients.
One other authority has a joint budget with the health authority, funding a crossroads care attendant scheme and health care assistants.
Transition to independent living
For some disabled people their experience of dependence makes independence difficult to achieve.
Someone who has been in residential care for a number of years may initially find independent living a frightening prospect.
Younger disabled people are often denied the experiences which enable them to become adults independent of their parents.
Some SSDs recognised the need for transition to independent living services, although unfortunately it is more common to expect the disabled person to find all the motivation within themselves.
Four SSDs either co-operated with the housing authority to provide interim accommodation or made provision out of their own capital budget.
Any such scheme must also plan for permanent accommodation and personal assistance; indeed it was the difficult experience of getting district councils within their area to house people who had tried out the transition project and wanted to live independently which prompted one SSD to address itself to the task of influencing local housing authorities.
Working with disabled people and their organisations
Most of the disability organisations represented on Joint Care Planning Teams were those run by non-disabled people for disabled people rather than organisations of disabled people.
Derbyshire County Council Social Services Department provides a good-practice example of involving disabled people.
For some years the SSD has funded a Centre for Integrated Living (CIL), which is run by disabled people.
Its role is to develop initiatives which would aid independent living.
It also acts as an important source of information for disabled people, acting as an advocate where necessary.
The local authority has continued to respond to new roles as they were identified, for example, by funding the CIL to maintain a register of adapted housing in the district.
Conclusion
The picture which emerges is a grim one for disabled people.
They look to local authority housing and social services departments to help them achieve a basic human right.
A lucky few live in parts of the country where their local authority will be able to respond with the housing and support services that they need.
The majority will find that there is little knowledge of the needs of the physically disabled community, that there are no policies for meeting such needs and that housing and social services departments are failing to work together to help disabled people achieve the things which most non-disabled citizens take for granted.
Not only is there a failure to work together at local level, but central government also fails to provide the framework of legislation and subsidy that would enable housing and social services departments to address jointly the aspirations of disabled people.
During the 1980s, legislation and public subsidies were directed at an increase in owner-occupation and an attack on council housing.
Such policies have been directly against the interests of disabled people, whose economic position and need for housing with particular physical characteristics mean that the private sector has little to offer.
While government policy fails to link housing policy to other social policy areas, local government fails to integrate disabled people's housing needs into their mainstream activities and housing and social services departments fail to work together, disabled people will continue to be condemned to institutional care or imprisoned in housing which unnecessarily restricts their lives.
INTEGRATION AND DEAF PEOPLE: THE POLICY AND POWER OF ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS
MAIRIAN CORKER
Democracy of the shared classroom experience is the cradle of democracy in the outside world.
(Warnock, 1988, p. 6)
Introduction
Integration is, put simply, the education of people with ‘special needs’ with those who do not have special needs, in mainstream schools and colleges.
Deaf people, whether they be children, young people or adults, have always posed something of a challenge to generalised policies of integration, for reasons which will be laid out clearly below.
This paper examines some of the features of present-day policies and practice with respect to educational integration, and argues that the framework of special education has created a ‘dependency culture’(Corker, 1990) of deaf people, which has its roots in alienism.
It is suggested that enabling educational environments can only be achieved by a re-examination of the way in which special education relates to mainstream education.
It is argued that it is the present two-tier education system, as defined by policy and practice, which is the primary disabling factor and not deafness per se.
The paper concludes with one view of how a workable integration practice might be achieved by going back to the drawing-board and examining the aims and objectives of educational integration.
An overview of policy and practice
It could be argued that integration is one of the few educational principles which has gained all-party political support.
Yet an overview of practice suggests that different political philosophies mould very different approaches to educational integration.
For example, we can observe an emerging conflict between the equal opportunities/human rights agenda of the centre-left as  evidenced in the recent Labour Party policy document Every Child a Special Child (1991), and the assimilationist policies of the right which run throughout educational legislation since 1983 and are enshrined in the statute books.
The term ‘assimilationist’ is used here to mean approaches to education which do not recognise the value of individual differences in the structure of today's multicultural society.
It is sometimes used interchangeably with the term ‘integration’, but is quite distinct from the ideal of integration.
It could be argued that the emphasis on ‘special needs’, as defined by the Education Act 1981, is one example of assimilationist policies.
This emphasis frequently serves to obscure the real differences between deafness and learning difficulties, for example, in the attempt to place all people with special needs under one legislative umbrella.
The failure to prioritise needs realistically or to genuinely recognise people's individuality sometimes leads to competition for resources which badly damages the educational chances of some individuals.
The equal opportunities/human rights lobby believes that people with special needs have a right to participate fully at all levels of education on a par with their peers who do not have special needs.
This view is based on the firm belief that people with special needs have many abilities which can make a valuable contribution to education.
The difficulty with this philosophy, however, is that it can be taken to the extreme, as can be seen in some Local Education Authorities (LEAs) which have an all-out integration policy.
Such policy appears to place political beliefs above the concept of needs when some individuals demonstrate that they cannot flourish educationally in an integrated environment.
The Conservative view of the benefits of privately funded education (which, it should be said, includes education in many special schools), opposes such strategies.
Why do deaf people pose a challenge to integration?
The very nature of deafness and the subsequent difficulty in defining the term ‘deaf’, the way it manifests itself in disrupted communication, the history and structure of deaf education and the size of the deaf population, have traditionally given deafness a high profile within special education.
Deaf education itself has been the subject of much dispute relating to the ‘how’ of education — that is, primarily, what method of communication do we use to educate deaf people?
There has been little debate concerning the ‘what’ and the ‘why’of deaf education.
Yet the what, the why and the how are all of integral importance in mainstream education.
The campaigns of the deaf community, from within and linked to those of voluntary organisations such as the British Deaf Association, to be recognised as a separate linguistic cultural group have added impetus to the debate, but have posed problems both for the policy-makers and for deaf people themselves.
This is because the recognition of sign language as the natural language of deaf people would mean that they would become aligned with  members of other cultural minorities who are isolated from special needs legislation because their ‘home language’ is different from that which is the language of instruction used in schools (Section 1(2), Education Act 1981).
For deaf people, this isolation may lead to lack of access to the legal machinery of statementing, which presently conveys at least some protection to those who are struggling with their education.
(A statement of special educational needs is a document which outlines the special needs of an individual and lists what resources should be made available to meet those needs in the educational setting.)
Yet for deaf people the isolation could well be more serious in integrated environments if such a policy change were to be effected which allowed this alignment.
The lack of fully bilingual teachers, the dominance of ‘hearing culture’ among the peer group, and the tendency for the home language of the vast majority of deaf people to be an inaccessible spoken language militate against full integration from birth.
If such integration were the aim, it would immediately have enormous resource implications in an already impoverished education system.
Yet integration could be achieved from the special-school base if policy did not discourage the placement of deaf people in such educational settings.
The disabling education system and the concept of alienism
It remains true, however, that the overall thrust of deaf education policy is towards making deaf people more invisible by encouraging the use of teaching practices which subtly tip the power balance between deaf and hearing people in favour of the latter.
The education system, as viewed from the perspective of deaf people, is therefore seen to be disabling for a number of reasons:
1
Education law is open to multiple interpretations which translate to lack of consistency in approaches to educating deaf people.
2
Integration is viewed in physical terms; policy increasingly concentrates on people but neglects the true characteristics of people in favour of resources-led practice.
This practice dictates that there is only so much money available and so meeting needs, and therefore needs themselves, must fit within financial constraints.
3
Educational policy frequently becomes confused with social policy, as can be seen, for example, in the way that educational integration can come to be viewed as a sometimes misguided way of caring rather than a means of achieving access to society through education.
4
Policy is not consistent at different stages of education; there is, for example, no clearly defined national policy for pre-school education (widely recognised as being the most crucial stage for deaf children), and further and adult continuing education appear to be viewed in terms of direct provision of training and qualifications (Department of Education  and Science, 1991) rather than as routes into training and qualifications from the policy perspective.
5
Integration in its widest sense is about how to fit special education into mainstream education rather than how to devise a single system of education which creates equal access to education for all — a common policy for education (Warnock, 1988).
This concept of ‘the best fit’ becomes synonymous with the survival of the fittest.
It assumes that mainstream education is receptive to special education in its present state when this is far from true.
We only have to look at two key areas of education (the curriculum and teacher training), to see the reality of segregation within the integrated environment.
Policy remains in the hands of people who do not have disabilities and who are frequently so far on the other side of the experiential divide between people with and without disabilities that ‘objective policies’— that is, those which ignore the experiential divide — simply serve to reinforce the notion of disability rather than the values and abilities of those who are different.
This is because objective policies are linked to fear of, or alienism towards, people with disabilities.
Alienism is at the root of all forms of oppression derived from the exploitation of the weaker by the stronger (Southgate and White, 1989).
It describes the process whereby oppression and prejudice come about and is therefore, like the term ‘special needs’, an attempt to bring together a number of behaviours such as sexism, racism, disablism and homophobia.
Unlike the term ‘special needs’, however, the assumption that the underlying process is the same for all these behaviours is correct.
One manifestation of alienism is that deaf people are not seen by the various professions in education to have a professional view.
This happens because alienistic attitudes towards deaf people by ‘professionals’ hinge upon the commonly held view that deaf people are not capable of contributing to professional life because of their ‘limited experience’.
Deaf people are therefore reduced to providing accounts of personal experience of deafness, which fall upon deaf minds supported by the old adage that experience is subjective and can therefore be dismissed.
Alienism obstructs the progress of deaf people aiming to become professionals in education, because it is subsequently translated into policy.
Alienism can also be observed amongst people with disabilities.
An interesting example of this can be seen in the way that people with different disabilities view educational integration.
Some, notably those with physical disabilities, see integration as a human right (Reiser and Mason, 1990) and align themselves with the views of organisations such as the Centre for Studies in Integration in Education (CSIE).
Others, including many deaf people, see integration as an ‘erosion of identity’(Ladd, 1991) and deaf people as a distinct cultural group who have more in common with black cultures, for example, than with disabled culture.
Finkelstein (1991) has argued that this has created a hierarchical view of disability, with groups  higher up the hierarchy adopting alienistic attitudes to those seen to be lower down.
The ideological divisions evident among people with disabilities are exploited to the full by policy-makers.
This may be one reason why sign language has come to be regarded as a special need in itself rather than being aligned with other home languages, which would exempt deaf children from the legislation of the Education Act 1981.
This plays upon the naturally alienistic attitudes of hearing parents who desperately want their deaf children to speak because of parental fear of physical expression and the implications of having to express themselves in a predominantly physical mode in order to achieve basic communication.
Policy props up parental wishes and desires, but does it acknowledge the effect on the deaf child?
Does it adequately outline assessment procedures which will identify the needs of the deaf child?
Putting education in the context of the system
The point about the above argument is that alienistic attitudes can become the prevalent force at every stage of a deaf person's education.
They begin, albeit unwittingly, in the home, but the way in which they are perpetuated by educational policy and practice shows widespread ignorance of systems theory (Corker, 1990).
Systems theory is a way of understanding how human beings in groups work.
It suggests that the individual cannot be seen in isolation from the other parts of the system, and that each part of the system is essential and related to every other part in order to attain a certain outcome.
The constant interplay between the parts of the system determine how the system manages itself.
It is recommended that the reader refers to Satir (1988, Chapter 10) for a user-friendly account of systems theory.
Identity and attitudes are acquired.
They stem from the environment in which the individual lives and from the people with whom the individual forms relationships.
These people in turn acquire their attitudes and identity from their own particular niche in the environment.
The problem with alienistic attitudes is that if they are allowed to become the foundation of the system — the part of the system that everything else hinges upon — they are hard to shift.
If the whole system of deaf education is based on underexpectation and the undervaluing of deaf people's abilities, then it becomes remarkably easy to make sure that the system does not allow them to develop these abilities.
Shifting alienistic attitudes would necessitate a complete restructuring of the education and social systems of which we are a part.
This is what we must be prepared to do if we are to achieve the vision of educational integration that reflects the kinds of values that deaf people would wish to see perpetuated.
Such a restructuring of the education system is something that Warnock (1988) points to as being long overdue, but she makes only fleeting references to the implications that this might have for special needs.
Beating the alienistic system
Towards a common language
We can now begin to examine how the experience of deaf people can be used to structure an integrated education system more realistically and also, more importantly, to identify ways in which this restructuring might be achieved.
Deafness is unique among disabilities in that it is the clearest example we have of the way a different experience of the world can forge a completely different approach to life, which is expressed through a separate and unique language and culture.
The sensory world is a very different world without audition, and sign language is possibly the only way of fully expressing the meaning that this world has, for it is a gestural — visual — spatial language.
We have seen how societies in which large numbers of deaf people co-exist with hearing people can become predominantly ‘deaf’ and bilingual in spoken and sign language (Groce, 1985), and also how some mixed families can become ‘deaf’in an attempt to fully integrate a deaf child (Fletcher, 1987; Luterman, 1987).
What we do not see, except in isolated cases such as that found in Leeds LEA, is an attempt to bring the enabling qualities of these environments into the education system.
Most deaf people are still educated within a system which has at its base a language that is, at best , not fully accessible because it is based on hearing; at worst , it is a language which is completely alien and does not adequately describe deaf experience.
Yet language is the tool of curriculum delivery, training and the expression of experience.
How can equal opportunity of access to education be achieved when there is no common language?
Defining the qualities of enabling environments
Within education, enabling environments are those which allow full access to learning and free expression of knowledge, skills and understanding.
The location of the environment is immaterial compared with the language environment, the breadth of knowledge of teaching staff and the peer group, and the fluency of communication.
Integration in such circumstances is only enabling if communication is based on a classroom experience which is truly shared between all students and teachers, regardless of the source of that experience.
It should be recognised that communication consists of production and reception of language.
A curriculum which facilitates the shared experience will enable an integrated education for all who take part in it.
Educational integration therefore becomes a wider concept than social integration since it involves, among other things, how we use the knowledge given to us by the act of socialisation.
Further, much emphasis is placed upon socialisation with a peer group, but the relationship between child and teacher is also of crucial importance (Gregory and Bishop, 1991).
The above description gives credence to this, and therefore avoids the reality of  integration for many deaf people, which is dependency on a third party.
This is a move away from present LEA policy on support teaching, which dictates that educational support is provided by specialist teachers or, more rarely, interpreters.
Within such policy, there are limited direct links between mainstream teachers and deaf pupils, and mixed ability, mixed age special units of small numbers of deaf students do not help social integration with both deaf and hearing peer groups.
Frequently, the support teacher becomes the source of all forms of support as the boundaries between education and counselling are blurred.
It is this that leads to the dependency culture predominant among deaf people in integrated education.
The importance of an integrated curriculum
Warnock (1978, p. 214) makes several references to special curricula for deaf children within mainstream education without recognising that a special curriculum is also a different curriculum.
It is not possible to achieve equality of knowledge and learning with different curriculum materials and different aims and objectives for curriculum planning.
The typical curriculum for deaf children and young people places so much emphasis on language and communication that it fails to acknowledge the importance of the accessibility and quality of the surrounding language environment or the depletion of general education that withdrawal into units for specialised tutoring in language and communication causes.
Deaf people educated by such approaches may well leave school or college with a (limited) knowledge of language and communication, but what of their knowledge of science, mathematics, sociology, hearing people and sex, to name but a few examples?
In the real world, deaf people have different abilities to ‘hear’; they also have different abilities to see, feel, touch, taste, smell and learn.
Enhancement can be experienced in any one or more of these areas, and where enhancement happens it needs nourishment.
For example, the national curriculum is labelled ‘a curriculum for all’, but is it?
If the national curriculum were an experientially based, integrated curriculum it might be an accessible curriculum for all.
If it were a requirement, for example, that all pupils need knowledge, skills and understanding in non-verbal communication (body language, facial expression, and so on ) and how this influences overall communication strategies, attainment target I for the English curriculum (speaking and listening) might have a more integrated feel about it from a deaf perspective.
If it were a requirement that all pupils need knowledge, skills and understanding of alienistic language and the power of language to challenge and to change experience, we might move more in the direction of a democratic society.
If the national curriculum were about bringing difference Into the open instead of separating the desirable from the undesirable and suppressing the latter, we might see more people who are confident in their identity and can integrate from the basis of knowledge and strength rather than one of weakness.
Integrated training
The divisions between special and mainstream education extend to a division between curriculum and curriculum delivery.
We not only have different curricula, but also different teaching approaches.
Most deaf people in education wither under the onslaught of methodologies, because specialist teacher training remains ‘narrowly conceived’ and focused on the how of deaf education much criticised by Warnock (1978, p. 215).
Too many teachers of deaf people find themselves learning communication skills on the job — a slow process in the absence of total immersion in a deaf language environment — and their deaf pupils mirror their frustrations; too many teachers of deaf people do not have a knowledge of a specialist subject and persist in taking generalist primary school approaches into secondary and further education.
Language modification is about simplification, not about explanation, which deprives deaf people of access to broad-based knowledge.
It is certainly important that teachers working with deaf people acquire a specialist theoretical knowledge of deaf language, deaf culture and deaf education, and most of these teachers acquire this in addition to experience in mainstream education working with hearing students.
However, it is generally true that mainstream teachers do not have access to specialist knowledge beyond very generic special needs training.
This could be seen to increase the gulf between special and mainstream education and lessen the chances of functional integration.
Further, the lack of visible staff-room integration serves to reinforce alienistic attitudes because it can be taken as evidence that these attitudes have a firm base in reality.
Conclusion: the case for policy integration
Throughout this paper it has been argued that separating special education policy from mainstream education policy creates an artificial division between special and mainstream education.
This division reinforces the concept of difference, but it further allows alienistic attitudes to gain a stranglehold, generating an ‘us and them’ approach to education.
There is no conceivable way in which educational integration can occur within such a scenario.
This may be because we have lost sight of what education is about, or, at best, because we disagree on the aims and objectives of education.
But in doing this, we are backtracking into the old dilemma identified by the American philosopher John Dewey (1966).
He recognised the potential conflict between the ideal of education as an instrument and that of education as self-development.
However, he also went a long way towards showing that this apparent conflict could be reconciled by isolating ways in which the two ideals were similar.
Warnock's definitions of integration (1978, pp. 100 — 1), whilst clearly defining the difference between integration practices based on  location (locational integration) and those based on the needs of the individual (social and functional integration), do not fully address the real issues of integration.
Educational policies are generally arrived at through painstaking research into past and present practices, yet policies which ultimately dictate the future are rarely radical enough to reflect all the detail and ramifications of this research.
Once policies are on the statute books, there is reluctance to change them, or change is very slow and largely through non-statutory guidance.
However, just as basic systems theory suggests that every system begins and ends with the individual and, therefore, that all systems are circular, there is good reason to believe that a common policy for education can only be arrived at by looking at the array of experiences of different individuals instead of others' perceptions of these experiences.
Experience is learning, but only when the reality of experience is acknowledged and valued.
This has always been one of the basic ingredients of good adult education.
Educational integration is ultimately based on an integration or sharing of experience, but requires integration at every level of the education system, including the policy level, and an awareness of the place of education in the wider system.
It is not about the promotion of one particular kind of experience over another, for this only creates the kinds of divisions so obvious in the political and religious systems of today.
We cannot reach an understanding of these divisions if we are constantly denied the alternative perspectives.
So, if hearing people are told that deaf people are ‘disabled’ or ‘sick’— a layperson's view which is widespread in the system surrounding the deaf individual — they can never begin to understand how they themselves may be disabling deaf people or can be the source of the infection.
TAUGHT HELPLESSNESS?
OR A SAY FOR DISABLED STUDENTS IN SCHOOLS
John Swain
Introduction
In Ashdown School, a school for young disabled people from 3 to 19 years old, the idea that the students could have a greater say in the decision-making within the school has been a topic for discussion for some time, particularly as part of drawing up the school development plan and of the staff development programme.
In spring 1991 a research project was used to further the debate in a broader context of views about the whole decision-making process within the school.
It was undertaken at the request of the school by John Swain and Carole Thirlaway (from the local polytechnic) and involved the following steps:
observation at five meetings of professionals and parents;
open-ended discussions/interviews with seven groups of people in the school — that is, students, teachers, social workers, physiotherapists, medics (doctor and sister), parents and residential care workers (a total of 30 people);
separate reports of the views of each of the groups to give them the opportunity for further comment;
a full report for all participants, which included the reports for each of the separate groups;
observation at subsequent meetings at which this full report was discussed.
The interviews were around a series of suggested topics: ‘The say that you have in decisions which affect young disabled people's education and lives, and what limits the say that you have’; ‘The say that others have’; ‘The say that young people themselves have’; ‘The implications of ‘disability’ on the decision-making that determines young people's education and lives’; and ‘What you see as the main priorities in terms of who has what say and in working with others in future decisions.’
The present paper looks first at the general context of the discussions within Ashdown School and then outlines some of the issues that emerged from the research.
Student participation in decision-making
The notion of students having a say in decision-making — in planning, organising, managing and evaluating their education — pervades a vast array of positions and movements in education which come under a number of umbrella terms, such as‘alternative’, ‘radical’, ‘progressive’ and ‘libertarian’education.
Educationalists have taken such stances throughout the history of compulsory schooling and they can trace the roots of their position at least as far back as the writings of William Godwin (1756–1836) and J. J. Rousseau (1712 — 78).
Furthermore, the list of relevant topics is also seemingly endless, including: open classrooms; democratic schools; active and experiential learning; children's rights; student councils; and counter-hegemony, in which participation is directed at questioning the prevailing social order, social structure and power relations in society.
Nevertheless, despite the growth of the disability movement and the struggles of disabled people to control the decision-making processes which shape their lives, little attention has been given to the say that young disabled people have in controlling their education.
Even in more recent statements relating to ‘integration’, still probably the dominant topic in the literature, no mention is made of young people themselves determining the process.
They are the recipients (or not) of other people's decisions.
There are a number of arguments to promote student participation generally.
In the light of the disability movement justifications which are particularly relevant to young disabled people reach beyond the school walls into broader social, economic and political realms.
The central proposition of such arguments is that student participation in educational decision-making can contribute to, or be a force for, change in society, towards greater democracy and a more egalitarian society.
Such arguments are not new.
A seminal and key figure, at least in American education, has been Dewey, who was recommending in 1916 that schools should be organised as miniature democracies, and who saw education as a preparation for citizenship in a democratic society (Dewey, 1916).
Closer to home, in their statement of educational principles, for example, a group of teachers from Wigan included the following: ‘Education has the responsibility of operating within a democratic system; of respecting and nurturing democratic principles; of being open to change by democratic process; and, perhaps, most importantly, of encouraging within the young those qualities and skills which enable them to participate in a democracy and ultimately to develop or change it’(Department of Education and Science, 1983, p. 27).
This statement of intent from practising teachers concerns beliefs about the type of society in which people wish to live and how education can shape society.
Hunter (1980) sees parallels with other pressures for change: ‘arguments for participation in the classroom can be seen to be linked with the growing agitation for community participation in politics, industrial democracy and the feminist and anti-racialist movements’(pp. 231 — 2).
Though generally overlooked, as in the above quote, links can also be made with the struggles and arguments  pursued within the disability movement, including the establishment of a social definition of disability as a social status imposed by social barriers upon people with impairments and the rejection of stereotypes of ‘dependency’ and ‘helplessness’.
Democracy within education has the potential to promote the active involvement of young disabled people in their own interests and thus provide a basis for the development of confidence and identity as disabled adults who will join the struggle for broader social change.
Some dilemmas for professionals and parents
The concluding section of the final report for Ashdown began as follows:
There do seem to be some concerns which recur throughout the interviews and seemed to be crucial to people's views about decision-making in the education and lives of young disabled people.
These are not the points over which all or most people agree.
These are the more controversial matters where sometimes people have conflicting views or there are dilemmas and contradictions for people.
Three themes were pinpointed and discussed in subsequent meetings.
They seemed to go some way towards encapsulating the challenges that the notion of a shift of power to students holds for those immediately Involved.
The first theme was, in different guises, consistently the main topic of debate for professionals.
Concerning what may be termed the ‘multi-professional approach’, it was seen as a source of many difficulties for professionals and parents, some practical, some personal and some organisational.
In part it involved differences in perceptions about the boundaries of people's work and what they contributed: in general, professionals and parents tended to see themselves as concerned with the young person and their life as a whole, but they saw others as being restricted in their work and concerned only with limited aspects of the young person.
There was a widely held concern to improve the effectiveness of professionals working together, and to involve parents more fully, so as to create a system in which there is openness, effective communication and negotiated decisions about priorities for young disabled people.
The following two quotes, the first from a teacher and the second from a physiotherapist, are illustrative:
I think the important thing is that we do establish with the other professionals within the school a real understanding about what we are trying to achieve, an agreement and, as far as possible, a sharing of values between us as to what we are trying to achieve with these youngsters.
We've got to be able to set out the implications of the decisions, that may or may not be made, and priorities at a given time.
As indicated here, the perceived ways forward were varied, but it was agreed at the discussion meeting that ‘improved communication’ was at the heart of the matter.
Nevertheless, on the other hand it was widely felt that the system itself denied young people opportunities and circumstances in which they could  have control over their own lives and education.
The system was seen as creating dependency in that young people were passed from the hands of one professional to another, pressurised by the demands of each professional discipline, and had their ‘needs’ determined by others.
Young people were caught up in a whirlwind of activity with, to quote a social worker, ‘the teachers and the physios and the medics arguing out who has this square inch of this kid's time’.
A physiotherapist compared it to ‘a sausage machine’.
The whole process of disempowerment was summarised by a social worker:
I think they have very little say from the point of diagnosis to treatment of anything.
They are made very dependent on a variety of specialists for information and advice…and in fact so are the parents.
They're forced into a position of dependence and in fact how do you expect a disabled child to be independent when even their parents aren't?
Parents, too, voiced such feelings from their viewpoint:
I honestly do not think my child is encouraged in any way, possibly because his life is short…to take charge of his life and I think this might be giving him an unspoken message that you don't count.
The second major theme concerned what the report called ‘The ‘we-know-the-best-for-you’ dilemmas’.
It went on to explain:
In fact they can be seen as the difficulties that are faced with young people generally: how far should they be allowed (encouraged?) to take risks and learn for themselves and how far should they be guided by those who ‘know best’?
With young disabled people the questions become more extreme because their lives are filled with so many more people who ‘know best’(i.e. professionals) and who have power to control their lives.
Furthermore their circumstances, such as pressures to be ‘acceptable’ and ‘normal’, do not allow young people to rebel against the control of others.
The doctor stated this succinctly: ‘It's always a dilemma of how much you impose what you feel is best.’
It seemed to professionals and parents that there are certain ways in which young people can be helped: regimes they should follow; treatments that are essential to their well-being; skills and knowledge they require; and risks that they need to be sheltered from.
Such forms of help were seen as enabling young people, in the long term, to have control over their own lives.
A physiotherapist talked, for instance, of what she saw as the consequences of a young person complying or not with recommended regimes:
If they followed the regime like some of the other young people, they would be a lot more mobile and more ‘well’ generally, because the implications of not doing some things affect not only the mobility but the actual kidney function, digestion and other things.’
Again, however, it was generally recognised that a life in which all decisions are imposed by others is disempowering.
Relationships which impose such forms of help, it was felt, encourage apathy and passivity on the part of young disabled people.
Young people observe that decisions are made by others and they learn to be controlled.
So in later years, when opportunities might arise for young disabled people to have some choices and to have more say, they have no basis for such autonomy.
Again, it was recognised that young people can either be helped or taught to be ‘helpless’.
(For a fuller discussion of the concept of ‘learned helplessness’, see Swain, 1989.)
The same physiotherapist, for instance, simply stated that professionals ‘make them more passive’.
One teacher stated:
I think that it is a problem that youngsters, in many respects, don't have much opportunity to actually influence their work.
I think that probably they labour under a heavier burden in that, right from birth, in many cases, things have been done for them, to them and they have had very little control.
Another outlined what she saw as the consequences:
Yes, I feel that it's very much a case that they have things done to them all the time and our pupils, a lot of them, are quite sort of apathetic in decision-making and are quite happy to accept, or appear to be happy to accept, whatever anybody decides should be done for them, to them.
The third and final theme centred on the definition or, more broadly, the meaning of ‘disability’.
Though discussed explicitly at times, this was more diffuse as a topic and was inherent in a wide range of concerns.
Indeed, the dilemmas for professionals in their ‘multi-professional approach’ could be traced to paradoxes within their different understandings of the meaning of ‘disability’.
In essence, ‘disability’ was consistently viewed, on the one hand, as a condition of the individual.
Sometimes this was stated explicitly, as by a physiotherapist: ‘I look on the disability as being the overall diagnosis…to me the children have got a disability, i.e. spina bifida, cerebral palsy, to me that's the disability.
That's the underlying problem.’
Others were more circumspect.
The doctor, for instance, stated: ‘I use the World Health Organisation classification of impairment, disability and handicap, and handicap is the social effect of the disadvantage suffered because of a person having disability which means a loss or an alteration of function due to impairment.’
It is still clearly evident that the individual young person is the source of the ‘problem’.
On the other hand, however, people tended to see themselves, in helping to overcome ‘disability’, as concerned with the young person as a whole, their lives as a whole, and, indeed, the barriers and opportunities faced by disabled people in our society.
A physiotherapist stated, for instance: ‘What we want to develop in them is the motivation to try and tackle society, take it head on so that they can actually say I want to go and do this, I want to go and do something else.’
There were different nuances in terms of what people thought of as the barriers and how they thought they could be overcome.
For one parent, for instance, it was public attitudes, in that ‘people only see the disability’: ‘That's what's wrong with society as a whole: they don't see the person.’
A social worker included professionals in creating ‘disability’: ‘We cast the disabled person in a certain role.
We fail to see them as people who have a voice, who have needs and feelings.
I mean, they are very basic things but I think that we really don't acknowledge they are people who should be respected along with the rest of us.’
Professionals were in a position in which the interventions they engaged in denied young disabled people the very control over their own lives and education they were intended to promote.
In the final report this was called a ‘circle of disability’:.
the more young people are thought to have ‘special’ needs — the more others help them by meeting those ‘needs’— the more young people's lives are determined by others who ‘know best’— the more passive or apathetic young people become —; the more they become dependent on the help of others — the more they have ‘special needs’.
This circle seemed to be locked by definitions of ‘disability’ which site ‘the problem’within the individual young disabled person, who is thus dependent on interventions by others to achieve independence in every aspect of his education and life.
In this paradox can be seen the dilemma experienced by professionals.
The voice of the students
The research also involved collecting and reporting the views of some students at Ashdown.
Although the time-scale prevented an in-depth analysis of students' views, there were some indications that students seek greater control of their lives in school, as in the following quotes:
You are treated very much as a child even when you're sixteen, seventeen, eighteen years old.
They say you're an adult but because you are still in the school situation you still get treated as a child.
I think we should have more say, now that we're older.
One instance of collective action was discussed by a small group of students:
‘Except for the dinner queue, the dinner nannies always push to the front.
The people in wheelchairs, it's fair enough that they can't get their own dinner, but they should at least go to the back of the queue like we have to, but they push straight to the front.
There's not really much choice left by the time we get to the front of the queue.’
‘And, like we've complained about it but nothing's been done.’
‘To whom have you complained?’
‘We drew a petition up to the headmaster but he hasn't done anything yet.’
‘So what do you think you'll do next?’
‘Talk to someone else.
Try to work something out.’
Nevertheless, the involvement of the students in the whole school development programme was confined to these interviews.
In policy-making meetings in which the School Development Plan is reviewed, in ‘staff development’ meetings at which ‘student participation’is debated, and in the governors' meetings, the interests of students are represented by others.
Furthermore, all the professionals at Ashdown are able-bodied (including the researchers) and no representative from a local group of disabled people has  been consulted or invited to contribute to the school development programme in any capacity.
This, then, is a central paradox which underpins the dilemmas facing professionals and parents at Ashdown: the argument for the participation of disabled students in the decision-making processes which shape their lives and education is largely pursued in the school by able-bodied professionals.
A final note
The discussions within Ashdown School may lead to changes in organisation, management and approaches which will involve a greater say for the students.
Certainly the intention is there on the part of the professionals.
The School Development Plan includes such phrases as: ‘we aim to help pupils learn and practise, from an early age, the skills of making choices and decisions’; and ‘which reflects the close involvement of both children and their parents’.
Nevertheless, student participation challenges existing power relations and structures, and there are possible dangers when such supposed shifts in power are planned and controlled by others.
There is the possibility that ‘participation’ will be a means of social control and manipulation, with students ostensibly having a choice but all the options being determined by others.
Such ‘choice’ can be a means of motivating students to follow through the decisions of others.
Similarly students' attempts to control which have not been predetermined by others may be deemed illegitimate — that is, as ‘behavioural problems’ or a lack of ‘acceptance of disability’.
Ultimately it has to be asked whether able-bodied professionals, notwithstanding their good intentions, prepare young disabled people for life as disabled adults who are conscious of their identity as disabled people and of the struggle for full participative citizenship within our society.
Links with the disability movement are not simply a part of the justification of student participation, as argued earlier; they may also play an important role in change within schools.
The inclusion of representatives from local groups of disabled people in the debates at Ashdown is not likely to provide simple solutions to the dilemmas faced by professionals and parents, but it would provide a different perspective which could help ensure that the interests of the students as young disabled people were pursued.
In this light, too, student participation would become part of the struggle of disabled people in the rejection of roles of ‘helplessness’ and ‘dependency’.
Acknowledgements
Many thanks are due to the students, parents and staff at Ashdown School, and to my co-researcher, Carole Thirlaway.
CONDUCTIVE EDUCATION: IF IT WASN'T SO SAD IT WOULD BE FUNNY
Mike Oliver
The current fashion for conductive education has created a furore in the world of education.
If it wasn't so sad, it would be funny.
We have seen the creation of three new organisations aimed at furthering it, television programmes extolling its virtues, demonstrations at the House of Commons, picketing of the Spastics Society and the alleged poaching of conductors.
To understand why all this is sad rather than funny, it is necessary to look at what conductive education claims to be and some of the wider issues that it raises.
So what is this conductive education that the furore is all about?
Well, it isn't a medical treatment and it does not claim to cure the ‘motor impaired’ as its recipients are usually insensitively called.
Rather it claims to be a method of enabling the motor impaired ‘to function in society without requiring special apparatus such as wheelchairs, ramps or other artificial aids’.
Well yes, but don't we all use artificial aids of one kind or another; try eating your dinner without a knife and fork or going to Australia without an aeroplane.
Its claims are built upon two underpinnings, one theoretical and one practical.
Its theoretical underpinning is that under the right conditions ‘the central nervous system will restructure itself’.
Its practical underpinning is ‘orthofunction’: a teaching method which involves the whole person physically and mentally and which instils ‘the ability to function as members of society, to participate in normal social settings appropriate to their age’.
The word ‘normal’ crops up a lot in the writings of Dr Mari Hari, the leading proponent of conductive education, and her ever-growing band of disciples.
Unfortunately for them, the theory remains unproven for there is no evidence that the central nervous system of any human being has ever restructured itself in the manner suggested.
But does that really matter if orthofunction as practical activity actually works?
The evidence here is, perhaps, stronger; published studies indicate significant improvements in functioning in many motor impaired children, as do personal accounts  provided by the ever-increasing number of visitors to the Peto Institute in Hungary.
But, as any competent undergraduate social scientist will tell you, correlation does not prove causation.
In other words, the relationship between the application of orthofunction and functional improvements may not be a causal one.
It may well be that factors other than orthofunction are producing these improvements; factors such as better resourcing, a purposeful environment, the amount of time spent in active learning each day, or the one-to-one relationship with conductors, may be equally or more important than the specific application of the technique of orthofunction itself.
So, not only is conductive education theoretically unproven but also practically unsubstantiated.
I would go further and suggest that it is also ideologically unsound.
Its constant, uncritical use of the concept of ‘normality’ and its insistence on adapting individuals rather than environments flies in the face of much social scientific and educational wisdom, and, more importantly, the expressed wishes of many disabled people who want society to change, not themselves.
Unsound ideology can quickly turn into oppression and Dr Hari's views are certainly oppressive to a large number of disabled people.
In one example, she endorses orthofunction as a way of teaching people with a spinal injury to walk, and adds that ‘teaching must restore the will of the individual to do so’.
As a person with a spinal injury, this view is oppressive to me, and other people with a spinal injury, in two ways.
First, how dare she assume that our main goal is to walk, without consulting us in the first place.
And second, how dare she imply that those hundreds of thousands of people with a spinal injury throughout the world are not walking because they lack the will to do so.
It is also interesting to note that Dr Andrew Sutton, director of the recently established Foundation for Conductive Education, can endorse these remarks as ‘endearingly characteristic’.
They are grossly offensive to me and many other disabled people, and it is symptomatic of the gap that usually exists between the consciousness of the able-bodied staff of many disability organisations and the disabled people they are supposed to serve.
Given that conductive education is theoretically unproven, practically unsubstantiated and ideologically unsound, why are we currently seeing many local education authorities and, indeed, the Spastics Society itself, besieged by angry parents demanding the provision of conductive education almost overnight?
To begin with, conductive education does offer a positive approach to a clear set of goals, whether you agree with them or not.
That is something that special educators have, so far, lamentably failed to offer disabled children and their families.
For far too long disabled children have been put away in special schools and been made to feel that there is something wrong with them, their disabilities are a burden and a thing of shame.
While conductive education does offer an alternative vision, it is unfortunate that this vision implies the removal of burden and shame through the achievement of normality.
In addition, conductive education does offer higher expectations than those  to which special education has aspired.
Thus Andrew Sutton can comment that conductive education can produce results ‘which seem quite beyond the expectations of children growing up with cerebral palsy and spina bifida elsewhere’.
Given that the expectations of professionals about what disabled people can actually achieve has always been pathetically low, almost any intervention system which raises expectations is likely to produce similar results.
Throughout human history, disabled people have constantly confounded the low expectations of others, and how much better it would be for special educators to raise the expectations of disabled children and their families by giving them an understanding of this, by helping them to accept their disabled identities with pride, by helping them to understand their place in the world and their rights as well as giving them the practical skills to deal with these issues.
Of course, in order to do this, special educators would need to understand these issues themselves.
Finally, it is sad but understandable that the parents of disabled children should clutch at the straw of conductive education as a means of resolving their own problems.
To have a handicapped child in a society which has developed a fetishism for normality and which fails to even acknowledge the needs of these parents, let alone make any provision to meet them, is clearly a profoundly disturbing experience.
But accepting the fetishism of normality can never even address these problems, let alone resolve them.
Those of us who were privileged to hear Paddy Ladd's moving account of the struggles and pride of the deaf community at last year's International Conference in Bristol, England, will long remember his response to a challenge from the floor that many parents regarded the birth of their deaf children as tragedies.
He said that he understood this and was sorry, but could only add that the deaf community regarded the birth of each and every deaf child as a precious gift.
We, as a society, could learn from that, and, if we regarded the birth of every disabled child as a precious gift and were prepared to provide the necessary resources to the children and their parents to allow these gifts to develop, then perhaps we would be spared the distressing sight of individual and groups of parents pursuing the latest fashionable cure for their child's blindness, deafness or other disability at whatever cost to themselves, their families and friends.
So, what kind of a world does conductive education envisage?
One in which we are all exhorted to approximate to the walkie-talkie model of living, where physical and social environments remain unchanged and unchanging.
I have an alternative vision, where difference is not just tolerated but valued, and even celebrated, and where physical and social environments are constantly changing to accommodate and welcome these differences.
What is more, I think my vision is an achievable dream, that of conductive education an achievable nightmare.
My dream is achievable because all we have to do is stop doing some of the things we are already doing: stop using the productive forces we have developed to create disabilities through warfare, environmental pollution and  industrial accidents; stop creating disabilities through poverty by using our vast wealth not in pursuit of capital accumulation and profit, but in ensuring that we all have the necessities to sustain material life; and stop judging and treating people on the basis of the contribution they can or cannot make to the development and operation of these productive forces.
The nightmare of conductive education is unachievable because nowhere in human history have the different been turned into the normal and neither medical science nor other rehabilitative techniques or educational Interventions can assist in this process.
The reason is simple; normality does not exist.
Someone else, not very long ago, had a vision of normality associated with blond hair and blue eyes, and look where such a vision got him.
CONDUCTIVE EDUCATION: A REJOINDER
Virginia Beardshaw
According to Mike Oliver, I am a ‘straw-clutcher’.
By deciding in late 1987 to take my daughter to Budapest's Peto Institute for a spell of conductive education I ‘contributed to the distressing sight of individual and groups of parents pursuing the latest fashionable cure for their child's…disability’—; in her case, cerebral palsy.
Of course, Dr Oliver is partly right.
Learning to treasure my daughter's uniqueness in a world obsessed with ‘normality’ was — and still is sometimes —; a very painful thing.
Search for alleviation and cure is a very basic human reaction, as shrines from Lourdes to high-tech oncology clinics testify.
But by portraying those of us who have sought conductive education for our children as unthinking lemmings dashing off for a dose of Hungarian miracle water, Dr Oliver's polemic does us — and conductive education — less than justice.
More importantly, by castigating conductive education he obscures some very important implications that the method has for the West.
The irony is that Dr Oliver has done more than most to document the real reasons why conductive education is attractive to parents from Britain and many other Western countries.
He and other writers from the disabled people's movement have dissected the inadequacy of current approaches to disability.
Together, they have criticised slipshod, ineffective and oppressive rehabilitation methods, and called for higher standards for the education of young people with disabilities.
They have analysed the way that children with disabilities are encouraged to be passive recipients of care in our society, and have fought against this.
Above all, they have emphasised the need for higher  expectations from society as a whole about what disabled people can achieve, and have argued for the necessary resources to be devoted to helping them achieve them.
Conductive education is about high expectations.
It is about motivating people with neurological damage to achieve things for themselves, and in so doing, get more control over their lives.
For children with cerebral palsy it involves a focused yet holistic approach designed to stimulate them to move themselves out of the passivity that lack of control over their bodies has encouraged since birth.
Doing so allows them to experience and interact with their environment and other people.
That encourages experiential learning and socialisation in a way that few Western special education or therapeutic settings do.
Conductive education is also about setting ambitious goals, and then getting children to achieve them because they want a for themselves .
Doing so requires great skill, and an integrated and wholly dedicated application of the techniques we know separately as physiotherapy, occupational therapy, educational psychology, speech therapy and teaching.
For Dr Oliver to dismiss the knowledge and skill base of the method — which is breathtakingly more advanced than anything we have in the West — by claiming that conductive education is successful simply because it is an ‘intervention system which raises expectations’ is to ignore a number of important points.
But parents like me cannot afford to ignore them, even to permit Dr Oliver to find a totally ideologically sound approach to alleviating disability.
Like him, and his many fellows in the disabled people's movement, we have had direct experience of the unfocused and frequently inept workings of rehabilitation professionals in this country.
We know that, even given half-way decent funding, rehabilitation approaches and much of special education could never work well for our children because they start with low expectations, and are very unclear about what they are trying to achieve.
What is worse still, they start from a wholly inadequate skill base which hinders more than it helps by carving up approaches which should be integrated into arbitrary professional divisions called ‘occupational therapy’, ‘physiotherapy’ and so on.
In other words, we have already learnt the painful lesson that, despite all the kind words and good intentions, for most practical purposes society has already written our children off.
It is unprepared to offer them the skilled attention that they need.
That is not good enough for some of us.
And so — in my case very reluctantly, in a slow process of decision-making that took two years — we have taken the road to Budapest.
There we have found not miracles but dedication, hard work, love and — the phrase repeatedly used by parents at the Peto —‘a lot of common sense’.
I do not think that any one of us expects our children to walk out of the place ‘normal’, but we do know that it is the best place in the world for them to achieve their fullest potential.
With its emphasis on self-motivation, active participation and problem-solving, the Peto.
method is their best chance of doing the best they can with what they have got.
To change tack slightly, I am not equipped to comment on Dr Oliver's  critique of conductive education's theoretical base.
All I will say is that in attempting to develop theories about the alleviation of neurological dysfunction as she has, Dr Hari has been one of very few medical scientists to address an important ‘black hole’ in the research agenda.
Few others have been interested to devote resources and research talent to it, despite the fact that an estimated I in 500 children are born with cerebral palsy and that neurological disorders are one of the largest group of disabling conditions for adults.
I think that this neglect is another part of the ‘writing off’ process that disabled people are still subject to.
I also think that before sitting in judgement on Dr Hari's ‘uncritical use of the concept of ‘normality’’, a social scientist of Dr Oliver's calibre might stop to think for a moment about the social context in which those remarks were made.
Hungary is a much poorer country than Britain.
Few of the flats in which most urban Hungarians live have lifts.
Whole sections of Budapest, with its steep hills, have no pavements at all.
Ramped access to public buildings is all but unknown.
The public transport on which ordinary people depend is inaccessible to wheelchairs.
During the 1980s, social security arrangements of all kinds have broken down.
Hungary is a tough environment for all its citizens — able-bodied and disabled.
Understanding this may make Dr Hari's remarks — delivered as they were in a foreign language — less ‘oppressive’.
PARTICIPATION AND CONTROL IN DAY CENTRES FOR YOUNG DISABLED PEOPLE AGED 16 TO 30 YEARS
Colin Barnes
Introduction
This paper examines user involvement in structured activities, the decision-making process, and social control in a day-centre system for young disabled people aged 16 — 30 — the Contact group.
Observations are derived from a 12-month empirical study conducted during 1986/7 of the interactions between users and staff in three day centres in a large northern town.
The study highlights some of the problems associated with user participation in centres which purport to provide social and ‘rehabilitative’ facilities in an explicitly voluntarist framework.
The Contact group
The centres in which Contact operated had evolved along traditional lines.
In common with the expansion of day services generally during the 1960s and 1970s (Carter, 1981) their development had been fairly ad hoc and unstructured.
Segregative in both appearance and admission policies, they catered mostly for elderly disabled people.
The facilities offered were commensurate with the phrase ‘tea and bingo’(Kent et al .,
1984) and the ‘warehouse’ model of care (Dartington et al .,
1981).
Separate provision for young disabled adults did not emerge until the early 1980s, when a group, known as Contact, was formed to provide a more comprehensive facility than existing services.
Offering a five-day service, the group was not based in one centre but used three.
It had its own permanent staff; hence user — staff interaction was significantly greater than in other user groups.
Contact's staff were well qualified for this type of work.
The two senior posts.
were held by women with experience in youth and social work.
Six of the group's seven ‘care assistants’ were under 25 and on government-sponsored  youth training schemes — having entered the caring industry to escape unemployment.
Although their youth and lack of training were viewed with scepticism by other day-centre users and staff, this was not the case in Contact.
Members, whose average age was 22.5 years, welcomed the opportunity to interact on a regular basis with non-disabled peers.
Such interaction was also viewed positively by Contact's senior personnel, as they were aware that most of the group's 22 male and 14 female members, one of whom was black, were unable to meet people of their own age outside the centres.
Two members lived in local authority homes and 15 in households characterised by unemployment and chronically sick and/or lone parents.
Of the remainder, only four were from homes where the head of the household was a non-manual worker.
Overall, only three had managed to set up homes of their own.
Twenty-six users had attended segregated special schools.
None had experienced higher education, but 19 had been on some form of post-16 provision.
However, 16 of these placements were on segregated ‘vocational’ or ‘independence'-type courses.
Only 12 members had any academic qualifications, and the highest achievers were those from mainstream schools.
Only seven people had experience of paid employment other than government work schemes, and four of these were employed before they acquired their impairment — they had not worked since.
All Contact's members were introduced to the idea of day-centre use by professionals working in either education or the health and social support services.
Even though unemployment was a tacit factor, three main reasons accounted for their joining the group.
Some wanted to maintain long-term friendships, having known each other from school or college.
Others, although aware of the stigma attached to day centres, saw attendance as preferable to the extreme social isolation encountered when formal education ceased — a common problem for disabled young adults (Hirst, 1987; Kuh et al .,
1988; Martin et al .,
1988; Thomas et al .,
1989).
The rest, mainly those with acquired impairments, believed that it would assist their rehabilitation.
The group's general ethos evolved from the interaction between staff and users.
Its aim was to provide social and, in the non-medical sense, ‘rehabilitative’ activities within an explicitly voluntarist framework, consonant with the ‘enlightened guardian’model of care.
This approach has the advantage of accommodating in one framework the needs of dependent people as well as those of less dependent people.
Alternatively, because these needs are contradictory it inhibits progress toward user participation and control (Dartington et al .,
1981).
This was indeed the case in the context of the Contact group.
Structured activities
In principle Contact users had access to a wide range of structured ‘rehabilitative’ activities generally regarded as heightening independence and  self-help.
These included woodwork, sewing, cookery, music and drama, arts and crafts, literacy and numeracy classes, and an access course for further education, which was organised in conjunction with the local education authority.
There were also occasional visits to local places of interest, such as art galleries, exhibitions and shopping centres, as well as spontaneous ‘social, pastimes, such as games, listening to music, watching television and general socialising.
Access to many of these facilities was restricted, however, because of environmental and social factors.
For example, woodwork, sewing and cookery were available at one centre only, which Contact visited three days a week.
Places were limited, participation was determined individually on a first come, first served basis, and the centre's main client group, elderly disabled people, were given priority.
Contact users were also reluctant to join these groups because, in common with young people generally (Brake, 1985; McRobbie, 1990), they preferred the company of their peers.
None the less, Contact staff were under pressure, albeit predominantly implicit, from three main sources — the local authority, users’ parents and some users themselves — to ‘encourage’user involvement in approved activities.
To achieve this they employed strategies similar to those used by schoolteachers and referred to by Hargreaves (1975) as ‘the liontamer’, ‘the entertainer’ and the ‘new romantic’.
The traditional ‘liontamer’ approach, where people are literally told what to do and how to do it, was most evident in the arts and crafts classes.
These were held on Tuesdays at a centre where the manageress and her staff took the view that ‘idle hands make idle minds’.
No other activities were available at this unit.
Users could either join in or sit and do nothing.
These classes were very unpopular with Contact members.
Tuesday was the day of the week with the poorest attendance levels — averaging about 17 users compared with an average of 26 for the rest of the week — and senior Contact staff had little control over the situation.
‘The entertainer’ approach is based on the assumption that motivation is latent and waiting to be tapped.
Hence learning has to be fun or have some obvious use value.
Apart from Tuesdays this was the strategy most in evidence in the centres and used to elicit participation in all activities.
For example, a male tutor from the local college used this technique to cajole some of the male users into joining the bridging course.
Because they were unenthusiastic about ‘more education’ he emphasised the social aspects of attending a mainstream college — notably the opportunity to meet girls.
Rooted in the belief that motivation is inherent and students will participate if they are interested, ‘the new romantic’ technique was used effectively by the literacy and numeracy teacher.
She adopted an individually structured approach to teaching which allowed students to work at their own pace as and when they pleased.
Between six and ten people (there were only ten on the class register) regularly attended these sessions.
Often there was scant evidence of academic activity, and this prompted criticism from some of those users who had been to mainstream schools.
Books were got out but little was done.
Students would sit around chatting, leave if they felt like it, and not come back if they found something better to do.
Commenting on a literacy, or ‘English’ class, Mathew, a male user who had had a ‘normal’education, said: ‘They were just sat about talkin'; some of 'em were drawin' when I went in.
That's not English to me…they don't do owt in there.’
Inspection of users' books, however, showed that work had been done.
Some had written letters to pop stars or relatives, others had written stories and all were doing elementary arithmetic.
These were no mean achievements considering the nature of the subjects, the lack of literacy skills among users and their antipathy to formal controls and school in general.
Indeed, it is doubtful whether the classes could have proceeded in any other fashion.
Moreover, most users saw the centres as somewhere to go to get out of the house rather than somewhere to learn.
Although all expressed alarm about the lack of resources for facilities, only eight, the most autonomous in the group, felt that there was a need for activities specifically concerned with independence training and rehabilitation.
Further, those who requested such facilities wanted them for others — those who had been ‘mollycoddled’ by their parents and by their teachers in special schools — rather than for themselves.
They considered the activities available in the centres incompatible with their needs.
The decision-making process
Though the official rhetoric of organisations associated with day services often espouses a desire to maximise consultation between users and staff, meaningful participation is rare.
One of the main reasons for this is undoubtedly economic.
Sponsoring agencies, notably local authorities, have since the 1970s come under increasing pressure to control costs.
This is reflected in the practices of senior day-centre staff whose primary loyalty is to their employer rather than to the users.
The latter are rarely involved In the hiring and firing of staff and budgets are usually controlled by a central authority.
Where user participation does occur it is normally limited to peripheral activities, such as trips and social events (Catter, 1981; Kent et al .,
1984; Hampshire Centre for Independent Living, 1990).
Moreover, there are other difficulties associated with user involvement in day-centre management.
Factionalism between user subgroups can cause friction which in turn neutralises the democratic process.
This might be resolved with a written constitution and the formation of user committees; but committee members sometimes fail to comprehend that they represent the whole user body and only put forward their own ideas.
Hence, committee membership can seriously aggravate existing user rivalry and conflict.
This opens the way for staff to use their ‘professional skills’ to implement their own ideas rather than those of the users, which effectively renders the notion of  user participation meaningless (Carr, 1987, personal communication; Jewell, 1975).
Similar difficulties were evident in the day centres studied.
Excluding the Contact group, each of the three centres had user committees with written constitutions.
Committee members were elected annually and meetings were held monthly.
Staff did not attend committee meetings unless this was requested by members.
The committees dealt with social issues such as trips and outings, and occasionally users' complaints about day-centre meals and day-centre staff — usually those on youth training schemes.
They had no formal control over the staff or the centres' finances.
Users' attitudes regarding the value of these committees varied considerably.
While some thought that they did a good job, a substantial minority felt that they were a waste of time.
They pointed out that committee members were unrepresentative of the user body but got re-elected year after year.
Some ascribed this to the fact that most people were not interested in committee membership because no one in the centres, including staff, had any real power.
They believed that the real power base lay outside the centres in the social services central offices.
There were no representatives from Contact on any of these committees, although the group constituted almost one-third of the overall number of users at one of the centres and almost one-half at the other two.
Any contribution to centre policy from Contact members had to be made either by senior Contact staff or individually.
This was attributed by staff to the unique organisation of the group when compared with other user groups.
Until 1985 Contact had had its own user committee.
It had performed similar functions to those described above, although there had been no formal constitution.
Its principal members had been five of the most autonomous members of the Contact group.
The committee's demise was generally attributed to factionalism and a lack of interest among other Contact users.
During the study period, however, two attempts were made to resurrect the user committee.
Both were initiated by Billy, a 16-year-old with a recently acquired impairment who had only been with the group for a year.
Sanctioned by staff, a group meeting was held at which Billy suggested setting up a new committee to ‘get a few things sorted out’.
His main concerns were the poor condition of the pool table and the need for more outings.
After some persuasion on his part he managed to scrape together four reluctant nominees.
But at the meeting's close there was no mention of a formal constitution, policy statement or even an agreed date for the first committee meeting.
Little was heard of the committee until six months later when Billy asked for another group meeting.
His reason for calling it was unclear apart from vague statements about ‘getting things moving’.
Just over half the users present bothered to attend.
Nothing came of the meeting and when it broke up there was much animosity between its organiser and the non-attenders.
Because of user non-participation, factionalism and the failure of user committees, periodic group meetings were organised by staff.
There were  seven during the study period.
Their function was to discuss arrangements for forthcoming events, such as trips, holiday arrangements, structured activities, and so on.
User involvement was usually limited to commenting on staff proposals.
Finances were never discussed unless a user requested that the group buy a particular item.
If funds were available the proposal was put to a vote.
Senior staff's authority was rarely challenged during these discussions.
As a result they were endowed with both the legitimacy of their official role and the popular support of the majority of users.
Social control
Although senior staff's authority went unchallenged, social control — the hegemonic and manipulative control of users during the course of daily interaction — was not a significant feature of day-centre life.
It was only one of the staff's repertoire of tasks and when necessary was exercised through a combination of ‘orchestration’ and ‘supervision’, similar to techniques described by Bloor (1987) in his analysis of social control in a therapeutic community.
Discipline was not considered a problem, but this was largely due to external factors rather than to the activities of senior staff.
The principle of individual user autonomy was sacrosanct in the day centres generally and the Contact group in particular.
Apart from on Tuesdays, every effort was made by senior staff to ensure that an unfettered atmosphere prevailed.
This was particularly evident in the delivery of personal services, an important area for disabled people because the body is the principal site of oppression, both in terms of cultural undervaluation and in respect of what is done to it (Abberley, 1987).
There were no ‘bathing or toileting routines’ for the convenience of staff.
Users decided when and where these services should be provided.
They were also responsible for their own medication — although it was common for users, families to ask staff to remind individuals to take it.
Moreover, users had access to files or documents held by social services that concerned them as individuals.
But the principle of user autonomy was limited with regard to freedom to leave the building during opening hours.
Officially users were not supposed to go outside the centres' grounds unaccompanied by staff without senior staff's permission.
Although justified on the basis that the social services departments, and by implication the staff, were responsible for users' safety during opening hours, this policy represented an explicit denial of users' freedom.
It also undermined staff's attempts to encourage users' self-determination.
With this in mind senior Contact staff allowed Contact members to make their own decisions.
Unfortunately most of the group were unable to exercise this right due to factors such as the hostile physical environment outside the centres, lack of resources — either money or essential mobility aids, such as electric wheelchairs — or parental overprotectiveness: some of the group were not allowed to go out alone or with disabled peers when at home.
Moreover, because only a minority were able to leave the centres at will, this policy further aggravated the social divisions within the group.
Some individuals resented the fact that ‘some people can do what they like while others can't’.
Behavioural norms in the centres were subject to abstract principles of ‘common sense’.
Thus, what was viewed as acceptable was determined largely by the centres' main client group — elderly disabled people.
Complaints about noisy behaviour were common, and this was a constant source of consternation for both Contact users and staff.
It also meant that Contact was allotted a specific area in each centre and that generally group members stayed within it.
Not surprisingly, disruptive behaviour — shouting, swearing and general rowdiness — was sometimes evident.
Generally perpetrated by the most physically independent male members of the group, antisocial activities were usually attributed by senior staff to extraneous socio-psychological factors and controlled through ‘rehabilitative’ activities.
For example, one individual's aggressive behaviour was ascribed to his loss of able-bodied friends following impairment.
Senior staff tried to resolve the problem through a combination of individual counselling sessions and by eliciting his help in a long-term project to repair the pool tables.
For ‘serious’ misdemeanours such as fighting, miscreants were asked to account for their actions in a formal setting: the manager's office.
Besides emphasising the fact that certain behaviour was unacceptable, this ritual reaffirmed senior staff's superordinate position in the system.
This was important because they had a predominantly ‘social’ rather than a ‘professional’relationship with users, and it acted as a reminder that in the final analysis they had the power to impose sanctions when necessary.
However, this power was rarely used because both the main sanctions available to staff — contacting users' families and exclusion — have negative implications for both parties.
For example, contacting users' families not only causes unpleasantness for the individual concerned but also damages the centres' carefully nurtured congenial atmosphere.
With exclusion, users are denied access to a valuable social resource.
For staff, because the process involves a protracted process of consultation with the local authority, sometimes other agencies, and the careful scrutiny of all relevant data by other personnel, internal policies might be seen as wanting and senior staff viewed as incompetent.
Conclusion
This paper has highlighted some of the main difficulties associated with user participation and control in a day-centre system providing social and rehabilitative facilities within an explicitly voluntarist framework.
Clearly, Contact users had access to a range of facilities generally regarded as  rehabilitative.
Yet despite staff's efforts to orchestrate it, participation was low; users preferred social rather than didactic activities.
Although ‘swamping’ by elderly disabled people was partly responsible for this situation, the lack of motivation is attributable to users' earlier life experiences: for the majority rehabilitation was inappropriate and for the rest the facilities offered were inadequate.
User participation in the decision-making process was evident in the centres generally, but it was largely tokenistic.
Moreover, factionalism and misrepresentation by a vocal minority prevented its development in the Contact group and staff's authority went unchallenged.
Yet, in contrast to official policy, Contact staff allowed users to come and go as they pleased in the centres.
However, owing to, mainly, external considerations this policy aggravated social divisions within the group.
Controls in the centres were kept to a minimum and despite environmental constraints on Contact's activities, social order was not considered a problem.
However, when disruptive behaviour did occur staff controlled it through a combination of orchestration and supervisory control.
More involvement by Contact members might have been possible, with a radical reformulation of internal policies clarifying the group's primary function.
But this would almost certainly have meant abandoning voluntarism in favour of some form of formal constitution demanding a greater commitment from users.
Whether such changes would have been acceptable to Contact users is open to speculation since social interaction and individual autonomy were the group's main attractions.
Given the environmental, economic and social constraints experienced by these young people in the community at large it is easy to understand why.
FROM STARTRAC TO LEISURE CHOICE: THE FIRST SLOW STEPS TOWARDS CHANGE
Marisa Lawson
Introduction
We hope that the idea of Playtrac will spread.
A mobile training resource based on the Playtrac model is being set up in the North East by Save the Children, in partnership with Mencap and The Spastics Society.
This project will be called STARTRAC (Support Team for Advancing Recreation Training in The Community).
This quote from a chapter in the publication Innovations in Leisure and Recreation for People with a Mental Handicap (Denziloe, 1990, p. 317) sets the scene for the Startrac Project, established in April 1990, which was initially planned and controlled by the three voluntary service organisations mentioned.
The project was to be funded for one year with money from the Telethon Trust, which paid for the author's post, that of development worker, as well as allowing a substantial budget; the overall aim was to establish a leisure service for disabled people within the Northern Health Region.
Since the start of the project, however, this aim has been changed.
The main aim of the project now is to make sure that the people who are on the receiving end of the services have more control and responsibility for the work which is being developed.
The project is not a shining example of a service that now fully involves disabled people and is controlled by them.
We have been taking slow steps towards that goal and have faced a number of barriers along the way.
These barriers must be recognised and taken account of by service-providers if they are serious about consulting and involving disabled people in the planning of services.
The changes that have been made may be small but they are significant.
My own understanding of the role of services in the lives of disabled people has developed, and in the light of this I have reviewed my own working practices.
Those people involved in the project have also gained an insight into the importance of establishing communication with disabled people and gaining advice from organisations of disabled people, before the setting up of services which are aimed at meeting their needs.
It is hoped that the changes have also been important to the disabled people who are now involved in the work of  the project; all of the quotes which appear in this chapter are theirs.
A member of our group had this to say about the writing of this paper: ‘It will be worth doing if it gets read by a lot of people.
More groups like ours might get going to let disabled people have more say about what they want to do.’
The setting up of the project: erecting the barriers
The name ‘Startrac’ stood for ‘Support Team for Advancing Recreation Training in the Community’.
The words may sound very positive and impressive, but what do they actually mean?
The name in itself gave no clues about the nature of the work being planned.
The general aim of Startrac when it started out was to ‘develop a resource within the Northern Health Region to promote leisure and recreation for children, young people and adults with special needs’.
The stated objectives included:
assessment of need
integration into the widest possible range of leisure facilities
support for carers — professional, family and volunteers
looking for interagency co-operation and promoting community-based strategies.
‘Can you put that into English?’ was an understandable response.
The language used to describe the project is difficult to understand.
It is the language of professionals and others working within services, which can in itself be a barrier that stops people discussing those services which form a large part of their lives.
The words we use to describe our services should be clear and without jargon.
This is not always easy; we become skilled at using professional jargon and expect to hear it from others, but if we believe that people who use services should be involved in planning, then it is important that the language we use can be understood.
Startrac was well funded and well intentioned; the project set out to establish a service to meet the leisure needs of disabled people, but the way that it was set up was disabling in itself.
The importance of disabled people being able to integrate into a wide range of leisure facilities in the community was recognised.
The suggestion that disabled people should be consulted and included in discussions about the project had also been made but the implications of making this happen had not been considered.
The professionals representing the three voluntary organisations involved were still very much responsible for control and decision-making within the project.
There is much currently spoken about ‘consultation with service-users’ but this can all too easily become tokenistic without informed advice about how to realise this aim.
The result is often the provision of a traditional service for disabled people to meet their ‘special needs’ with the only real changes being the words used to describe the service.
There was failure to take an important step when the project started its work.
Disabled people had not been consulted about the way planning for the  project should be arranged.
This meant that the views of disabled people from the area were not taken into account and the informed opinion of the representative and organised voice of disabled people was not tapped.
A steering group had been brought together to advise and support the development of the project, but all the members were non-disabled professionals from a number of organisations including social services departments, the health authority and voluntary organisations.
The decision that leisure should be the Main focus of the project's work was also made by the service-providers; disabled people in the area were not involved in setting their own agendas to decide on the important issues as they saw them.
Had disabled people been involved in the planning discussions for the project, perhaps even the main issues addressed would have been very different.
Since the start of the project I have spoken to a large number of disabled people who often begin by describing their daytime occupation or the type of work they would like to do.
Barry Coombs had this to say: ‘More jobs should be available for disabled people.
If I was to get a job outside of the centre [occupational day centre]now and retired at 65 what would be the point of me getting a job?’
Barry has already spent 21 years of his working life doing ‘occupational therapy’ in place of real work.
He believes that there is little chance of him finding a job in the near future.
I asked Barry why he felt it important to mention his long-term unemployment in this article about leisure.
He answered: ‘Jobs and leisure are all one thing aren't they — if you work you build yourself up for leisure.’
What does leisure mean to people who have never had the chance to have real work opportunities?
Unemployment may mean that people have more leisure time available but lack of money restricts the kind of activities they are able to participate in during their spare time.
Adult training centres are still often the only daytime occupation or ‘work’ available to disabled people, and the choice of activities within the centres can be limited: ‘There's no jobs for the young ones leaving school in the adult training centres, they've got nothing to do, they're getting no jobs in — they just do jigsaws.
When they do get jobs in they're finished straightaway and then there's nothing to do and you get bored to tears.’
This is the very reason a member of the steering group gave for becoming involved in the project: ‘It gives me something else to do, gets me out of the factory [adult training centre]and is less boring.’
There are many people wasting their lives wrapped up in services that have been set up to meet their so-called ‘special needs’.
It is these very services which can disable people, limiting the amount of real choice they have in their lives.
Had disabled people been consulted and involved in the planning of the project from the start, the main emphasis of the work may well have been very different.
Three steps forward: shaking the barriers
The main focus of the project is still leisure, but there have been a number of important changes.
As a starting-point the project's name has been changed to  ‘Leisure Choice’ in the hope that it says a little more about the subject we are looking at.
The membership of the steering group has also been changed.
Eight people who are themselves disabled were invited to join the group, to match the number of professionals already involved, and to have a direct influence on the work which was being developed.
People agreed to become involved for a variety of reasons.
David Atkin, for example, was particularly interested in the issue of leisure opportunities: ‘I want to find out how leisure activities can be improved because from what I've seen most disabled people in Hexham are fairly limited in being able to get out.’
Sharon Harrington is a very active member of the group who has also been influential in the setting up of the Blyth Valley Self-Advocacy Group, which she now chairs.
She makes the point that the new members have the most active roles within the group and are the most regular attenders of the steering group meetings.
‘We livened the group up.
I don't think you would have got anywhere if just professional people were involved.’
Another member of the group, Tim Raine, refers to being part of a team that includes service planners and providers.
He sees his involvement as an opportunity to have his views heard by people who have some control of the services: ‘I liked the idea of working with people in authority.
If you are not working with people in authority you are hardly likely to get things done.’
The hope is that the professionals who are part of the group are not only listening to but also acting on the ideas that are put forward by members of the group.
The plan to invite new members to the group raised an important question.
How do you bring a group of people together to work on an equal basis when half the members of the group are experienced non-disabled professionals who are used to taking control?
A way to start to address this difficulty was suggested by the Strathclyde Equality Awareness Trainers, an organisation of disabled people.
They organised a course for the steering group when the new members joined.
The aim of the course was to get group members to think about disability issues in order to take a first step forward in working together.
The course was held over three days.
During the first day the new members of the group followed the programme, which focused on the barriers that disabled people face in society.
During the second day the professionals were taken through the same programme.
On the third day of the course the group came together to share their experiences.
A participant commented: ‘I liked the last day when we teamed up with the professionals.
I think they listened to us.
It was actually disabled people doing the course and expressing their opinions and not the professionals.’
The course was run by trainers who were themselves disabled, providing us with a real example of disabled people in a position of control.
Throughout the training programme we discussed the ways in which people are disabled — not by limited ability but by a number of barriers that keep them apart from the activities that the rest of their communities are involved in.
This had a great influence on the issues that the steering group decided were most important for the project to work on.
As one of the group    put it: ‘It made people think about what they wanted to do for the whole year.’
The list of issues which the group came up with was so detailed that it was discussed over the following weeks.
Given the time and resources available to the project it was agreed that we should concentrate on the topics shown in Figure 1.
Two steps back: the barriers remain in place
We have been working towards establishing a group where all the members have an equal say.
We have equality in the number of disabled people involved and we believe that all should be equal members, but there is no room for complacency; the barriers are still in place.
The amount of real control and involvement that disabled people have had in the work of the project has been affected by a number of familiar issues.
Access
The issue of access is just one of the barriers that we have not tackled as positively as we would have wished.
Physical access to the building where Leisure Choice is based is difficult; other buildings have had to be used for our meetings.
This issue is not only related to access into buildings.
Inaccessible public transport systems have meant that a good deal of time and resources have gone towards enabling people to travel to and from meetings.
People will remain disabled and dependent until they have access to the public transport systems which exclude them.
The lack of access that disabled people have to equipment is also significant.
‘At the ATC [adult training centre]there's a new computer that none of the trainees have been shown how to use.
There are some computers we can use but there's one special one we can't use — it's just for the staff.’
Before working with the Leisure Choice group I did not appreciate the range of powerful tools that service workers can employ.
Telephones, photocopiers, word processors and computers are all there at our fingertips, allowing us to gain and share information.
We have to allow disabled people access to this equipment, if we are serious about them taking part in the planning and evaluation of services.
‘We've got the equipment down here at the training centre but the only people who have the knowledge of how to use it are the staff.
We have had the chance of training courses but we get the information too late.’
Not only does the specialist equipment have to be made available to disabled people; training and advice on how to use the equipment should also be provided.
Perhaps if people were given access to this equipment they would find that they were able to spend their time in the centres a little more positively.
As one group member said: ‘What I'd like to see happening is this room set up with the computer and using it regularly to type up the notes from our meetings.’
My role: the professional person
I am not able to say that the steering group has achieved fair and equal representation of all its members.
That is what we are working towards.
As a non-disabled worker, or ‘professional’, I have been learning about releasing control of the work.
Throughout the development of the project I have had to step back and take an honest look at my way of working.
As workers in the ‘caring services’ we need to ask ourselves certain questions: are we enabling and supporting people to take control of their own lives or are we disabling, taking the control for ourselves?
We may not personally be responsible for many of the barriers in society that disabled people we work with have to face.
We are, however, part of that society and it is essential for individual workers to examine their own working practices.
I have certainly been challenged on a number of occasions.
An example of this came during the disability awareness course.
The trainers introduced an exercise that I believed was too complicated for a number of people in the group to understand.
I spoke to one of the trainers about my concerns and was told not to worry.
I sat back expecting to be proved right and watched as people joined in the discussion and debate.
How often have I excluded people from discussion and decision-making because I believed the information was beyond their understanding?
Of the many exercises we took part in during the course, this was in fact one which members of the group remembered most clearly.
I remain the person with the control, the information, the equipment, the money.
On a course recently someone suggested I had been talking too much and should be told to keep quiet.
The reply was: ‘No fear, she's the boss.’
Just when I thought I was being so enabling.
Our aim should be to foster more equal relationships with disabled people.
A way forward is to listen and value the opinions of disabled people we work with and to seek the informed opinion of groups of disabled people.
We don't always have to agree; we should be open to both receive and give positive comment and challenges.
Time
The time available for the work of Leisure Choice was not enough to guarantee that no short-cuts were taken in terms of involving the steering group members in all parts of the project's work.
Allowing a realistic amount of time is crucial if we are serious about asking people who are disabled to make informed decisions and choices.
People need time to learn about how organisations work and the way in which services are set up.
Workers know the important information which enables them to take part in discussions, meetings and decision-making; disabled people need time to gain access to that information.
The role of the non-disabled workers should be to allow the information to be passed on and to give support to people who want to develop skills and confidence to challenge the barriers they face.
More time is needed for meetings to make sure that everyone has the opportunity to participate fully.
‘I do try to understand everyone in the group but I feel like I'm holding people up,’ said one group member.
It should be made clear that if anyone does not understand what someone has said they should always ask, and that this is meeting time well spent.
‘Like Graham, when you have spent a day with him you understand every word that he says.’
Summary
‘It's a pity it's just been a year.
If I could set something up in Northumberland it would be a good thing.
But we weren't thinking about having professional people in our group — we might have a few to help us out but we'll pick our own.’
When Sharon said this I immediately asked her if she would pick me.
I asked because I wanted to know if I would be in a job if Sharon was in a position to employ me.
How would the caring services react if we knew that our performance was being evaluated by the people we were serving, and if disabled people were always involved in deciding: which issues they felt were most important; how the money should be spent; and who they wanted to employ to support them to get the job done.
These things should be happening if service organisations were really concerned with consultation, offering choices and quality services.
Acknowledgements
With thanks to steering group members: David Atkin, Jackie Beard, Barry Coombs, Sharon Harrington, David Knight, Kevin Pringle, Timothy Raine and Eileen Shell.
THE DUAL EXPERIENCE OF AGEING WITH A DISABILITY
Gerry Zarb
Introduction
The population as a whole in Britain is an ageing one (Thompson, 1987).
There is also a close association between old age and disability (Townsend, 1979; Martin et al .,
1988).
However, the ‘ageing population’ is a far from homogeneous group; there are important differences between particular subgroups which need to be acknowledged and understood.
One particular group of people which has been more or less completely overlooked are those who became disabled in childhood or adulthood, and who are now ageing with a disability.
Only within the last 20 to 25 years has there even been an identifiable cohort of ageing disabled adults; first, life expectancy for many types of impairments prior to this was low; second, people who became disabled as a result of injuries received during the Second World War are now entering older age; third, many children and young adults disabled as a result of the polio epidemics of the late 1940s and early 1950s are now in their 50s or older.
Added to this, there are an unknown number of people with various impairments who may have been disabled since the 1920s and have simply been overlooked by researchers, policy-makers and service-providers alike.
Changing patterns of life expectancy and advances in medical technology, treatment and rehabilitation also mean that the size of this subgroup of older disabled people is increasing.
While there are no completely accurate figures, the two national disability surveys carried out by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) in the late 1960s and 1980s indicate that there are alive today just under 100,000 people aged 50 or older who have been disabled for 20 or more years, and that around another 200,000 will reach this age within the next 10 to 20 years (Harris, 1971; Martin et al .,
1988).
This increase in the numbers of people who are ageing with a disability is also differentially distributed according to both gender and race.
Although the prevalence of a few types of physical impairments is higher among males, many of the largest subgroups of older disabled people contain more women than men.
The most recent national survey estimates that there are a total of 3.6 million disabled women in Britain, compared with 2.5 million disabled  men.
Among those aged 75 or more, women outnumber men by a ratio of nearly 2½ to 1 (Martin et al .,
1988).
The present population of Britain also includes approximately 2.4 million people of minority ethnic origin.
Again, there are no national figures but a number of local studies indicate a high incidence of certain physical and sensory impairments amongst black and Asian communities; the high incidence of sickle cell anaemia and thalassaemia among people of Caribbean and Mediterranean origin is also well known.
(Wandsworth Council for Community Relations, 1978; Department of Health and Social Security Asian Working Group, 1983; Keeble, 1984; Shankland Cox, 1984).
In addition, there are an unknown number of refugees from various countries, several of whom may have impairments associated with war, torture and so on .
Largely because of migration patterns, the non-white population is also younger than the white population; for example, around 4 per cent (approximately 97,000) of the black and Asian populations had reached retirement age by 1986, compared with around 10 per cent of the white population (Patel, 1990).
So, although it is not possible to state any overall figures, the prevalence of ageing with a disability among minority ethnic communities is also likely to increase significantly over the next decade and beyond.
Locating the dual experience of ageing with a disability within existing conceptual frameworks
Next to nothing is known about the experience of ageing with a long-term disability.
While there may be some overlap between the experiences of people who are ageing with a disability and other ageing groups, there are also likely to be important differences.
Among those ageing with a disability there are also likely to be differing experiences and concerns structured around race and gender.
In order to further an understanding of the various dimensions to ageing with a disability, we need a conceptual framework which takes account of the dual experience of both ageing and disability.
While there are numerous conceptual models relating both to ageing and to disability, the problem lies in attempting to link the two together.
Early approaches to the study of ageing attempted to explain how people react to the ageing process in psychological or behavioural terms (Cumming and Henry, 1961; Neugarten, 1968).
Such approaches have been criticised for failing to take account of external or structural factors which influence people's experience of ageing.
More recent approaches have focused on issues such as the distribution of income, housing, access to services, and the needs and experiences of different groups of older people according to class, gender and race (Townsend, 1981; Norman, 1985; Phillipson and Walker, 1986; Arber and Ginn, 1991).
Neither of these two basic approaches provides a completely satisfactory framework for understanding the experience of ageing.
Both share one major  drawback: generality.
Consequently, more recent approaches have placed greater emphasis on the qualitative study of individual experiences and needs.
The concept of the ‘biographical career’ is central to this approach as it allows consideration of the uniqueness of individual biographies, the meanings which individuals attach to the concepts of age and ageing, and how these change over time (Johnson, 1978; Fairhurst and Lightup, 1982).
Clearly, this emphasis on subjective experience and meaning can help to further an understanding of ageing with a disability.
However, the biographies of people who are both ageing and disabled will incorporate both the ‘ageing career’ and the ‘disability career’.
Prior experience of disability will be an important factor shaping people's perceptions of ageing, while their experience of ageing will also influence changing perceptions of disability.
We have used the concepts of ‘biographical careers’ and ‘significant life events’in our research on the experience of long-term disability, and ageing with a disability (Oliver et al .,
1988; Zarb et al .,
1990; Zarb and Oliver, 1991, 1992).
First, we suggested that the occurrence of disability as a significant event in an individual's life is only a starting-point for understanding the practical and personal consequences of living with a disability.
Other factors, such as the social environment, material resources and — most importantly —; the meanings which individuals attach to situations and events, are also essential to the development of an adequate conceptual framework.
Second, just as the onset of disability cannot be seen as a one-off life event, neither can the intervening impact of ageing be considered as a self-contained life event, or even a series of discrete life events.
Thus, the concept of career is essential to an understanding of the impact of ageing on the experience of long-term disability as it allows consideration of how people's subjective experiences are shaped over time.
Building on these basic premises, we constructed a conceptual framework which integrates the dual experience of disability and ageing in what we have termed the ‘disability/ageing career’(see Figure 1).
Basically, the ‘disability/ ageing career’ is viewed as a series of physical, emotional and social processes punctuated by various ‘triggering events’likely to occur in older age.
For example, periods of ill-health, retirement, changes in family circumstances or bereavement, all of which can trigger a range of personal, physical and social consequences — such as an increased need for support.
The consequences of such triggering events will usually be mediated by certain ‘predisposing factors’(for example family circumstances), which may themselves have personal or social consequences.
The personal, social and physical consequences of ageing will, in turn, lead to both ‘objective outcomes’ and ‘subjective outcomes’which relate to the meaning of such experiences to the individual.
These outcomes can be either positive or negative, although, obviously, an individual's total life experience will usually be characterised by a mixture of both.
These outcomes will also be very much dependent on the personal, social and material resources available to the individual.
In particular the level of social support, as well as financial and housing resources.
However, these   resources cannot be viewed separately from the meanings and values attached to them by the individual.
It is also important to keep in mind that both the objective and subjective dimensions of the disability/ageing career will be shaped by race and gender.
First, social and material resources are differentially distributed among the ageing population (differential access to pensions, for example).
Second, the ways in which disability is experienced subjectively throughout the disability career will be mediated by both race and gender.
It follows, therefore, that such prior experience will also have a crucial influence on the subjective experience of ageing, and the values, expectations and meanings that people attach to any changes in their lives.
Drawing on the findings from three original research projects, the rest of this paper will illustrate some of the main features of the disability/ageing career, focusing in particular on people's subjective experiences of the ageing process and the perceived impact on their quality of life.
The first two studies examined the experiences of one particular subgroup: people with spinal cord injuries; the first (Oliver et al .,
1988) included 77 men who had been disabled for up to 15 years and the second included 42 men and 10 women disabled between 20 and 50 years (Zarb et al .,
1990; Zarb, 1991a).
The third study (in progress) is examining the experiences of people with a wide variety of physical impairments or disabling illnesses, including diabetes, polio, multiple sclerosis, scoliosis, Parkinson's disease, muscular dystrophy and various forms of arthritis.
The findings from this study are based on responses from 300 people (177 women and 123 men), 100 of whom have also been interviewed; this group has been disabled for between 20 and 80 years (Zarb, 1991b; Zarb and Oliver, 1991, 1992).
Physical changes/problems associated with ageing
Although the specifics vary between and within disability groups, there is a surprising degree of similarity in the kinds of physical changes experienced with ageing.
First, many people's experiences are consistent with the notion of ‘premature’ physical ageing; for them, ageing is characterised by a process of ‘general deterioration’which appears to be more closely associated with the length of time since the onset of the impairment than with age itself.
Typically, there is a noticeable ‘downturn’ in physical well-being and health status around 20 to 30 years from onset, regardless of chronological age.
Second, many of the physical changes that people experience are perceived as being long-term effects of their original impairments.
For some groups, there are also common secondary impairments caused either by the original impairment, or the long-term effects of medical treatment or rehabilitation.
The most common of these is the high incidence of arthritic and rheumatic problems; other specific examples include blindness and neurological problems associated with long-term diabetes; chronic pain resulting from building up immunity to certain drugs, such as morphine (various groups); chronic respiratory problems caused by spinal deformity (scoliosis); and a variety of physiological problems coming under the heading of ‘post-polio syndrome’.
Regarding the pattern of these physical changes over time, different kinds of impairments appear to have different ‘trajectories’, although there is also a certain degree of overlap in this.
Some groups (for example people with long-term rheumatoid arthritis) typically experience a progressive deterioration which usually starts fairly early on in the disability career.
Others (for example people with spinal Injuries or polio) often experience a similar process of gradual deterioration, but only after many years of relative stability.
For some, such deterioration may be increasingly progressive rather than gradual, while others (for example people with multiple sclerosis or Parkinson's disease) may also experience fluctuations between periods of deterioration and stability.
Perceptions of, and satisfaction with, the quality of life
The characteristic downturn in physical well-being and health status around 20 to 30 years from onset of impairment is often accompanied by a parallel downturn in satisfaction with the quality of life.
For people who become disabled when they are young adults or when middle-aged, the first 10 to 15 years are usually marked by a steady increase in satisfaction levels, followed by declining satisfaction after 20 to 30 years (Zarb et al .,
1990; Zarb, 1991b).
This is also the same stage in the disability career when most of the physical consequences of the ageing process typically start to take effect.
Thus, it seems that this ‘downturn’ in satisfaction is closely related to the perceived onset of the ageing process.
For some people, satisfaction tends to rise again after around 30 years, but this is certainly not universal.
The situation for people disabled from childhood or from birth appears to be slightly different; there is the same pattern of increasing satisfaction preceding a downturn in later years, but the start of this upward trend often seems to be delayed until early adulthood.
Often, negative experiences in institutions during childhood and youth play a major part in this.
Further, women often describe these early experiences in noticeably more negative terms than men.
Although the numbers are small, this appears to be related to women having been more likely to have lived in institutions during their childhood.
Many people describe the impact of ageing as representing the onset of a ‘second disability’.
Often, this realisation is quite sudden, being triggered by a particular problem or crisis.
Sometimes these triggering events are related to physical ageing, but are just as likely to be related to personal changes, such as a death in the family.
However, this kind of relatively sudden decline in levels of satisfaction is not necessarily permanent.
Rather, while ageing is often experienced as a disruptive life event, some people find that they are able to accommodate themselves to the changes — both practical and emotional — in their lives.
Physical and emotional well-being are inextricably linked, not just in older age, but throughout the disability career.
For many people, ageing is associated with a decline in emotional well-being.
This can also become a vicious circle; the drain on their emotional reserves means that some people feel less able to cope physically, which, in turn, contributes to a further drain on both emotional and physical resources.
On the other hand, some people with similar experiences may not view these in exclusively negative terms.
Many older disabled people may also perceive themselves as ageing more rapidly than their non-disabled contemporaries.
This is closely related to perceptions of life expectancy; some people not only anticipate that they may  age more quickly, but also that they may die at a younger age.
Interestingly, most people's attitudes towards this appear quite accepting; often, the anticipation of dying seems to be less traumatic than dealing with the problems associated with ageing itself.
The meanings which people attach to issues such as their own mortality need to be seen in the context of perceptions of life expectancy throughout the disability career.
At the time that many of the people participating in our research became disabled, life expectancy for people with various impairments was often very low.
Several had been told, or simply assumed, that they would not survive adolescence, or would only live for maybe 20 or 30 years.
This means that they had had a heightened awareness of their own mortality more or less throughout the disability career.
At the same time, some people also said that although they were aware that they may face an early death, they also felt fortunate to have lived as long as they had.
This reflects how expectations formed very early in the disability career can subsequently influence perceptions of the possible implications of ageing 20, 30 or more years later.
Ageing and independence
Perhaps the most important factor influencing changing perceptions of the quality of life among older disabled people relates to independence.
Many older disabled people feel that their independence is threatened by physical and/or personal changes associated with ageing.
In some cases this only extends to personal or physical independence, but for many people ageing represents a threat to their independence in the much wider sense of losing control over how they wish to live their lives.
For example, several expressed concern about the possibility of having to make major changes in lifestyle, such as having more personal assistance or changing their living arrangements.
Anxiety about the possibility of having to move into institutional care has a particularly strong influence on these perceptions — particularly for women.
Some people may even prefer the option of suicide or euthanasia, as such changes simply represent an unacceptable degree of compromise over how they wish to live.
Others take a more philosophical view, regarding the provision of extra help as the best way of maintaining their independence, or at least avoiding any further loss of independence.
On the other hand, some may never have placed such emphasis on independence in their lives, or never felt that they had very much independence in the first place.
Consequently, the perceived disruptive effect of ageing may be minimal, or even non-existent.
The important common denominator is whether or not changes associated with ageing are compatible with how an individual wishes to live his or her life.
It is very difficult to understand the significance and meaning of ageing without an appreciation of this crucial factor.
It is also essential to place these  contrasting perceptions in the context of attitudes towards independence, autonomy and responsibility that have developed throughout the disability career.
Many older disabled people perceive the achievement of independence (however they may define it) to be one of the most significant features of their lives throughout the disability career.
Achieving this independence will often have taken many years and will certainly have involved a great deal of effort.
Further, it is important to emphasise that ‘independence’ is not a fixed state, and maintaining control over their lives will often become increasingly hard as people grow older.
Consequently, it is easy to see why the possibility of losing some of this control should be a source of great anxiety for many people.
The fact that some see it as totally unacceptable, and view death as a preferable option, shows just how important it can be.
As stated earlier, subjective responses to ageing are also shaped by social and material resources.
The availability of appropriate and acceptable support is particularly important in this context.
The present structure of support provision fails to meet the needs of the majority of disabled people, let alone those who may have additional needs associated with ageing (Beardshaw, 1988; Fiedler, 1988).
Consequently, many people who are ageing with a disability simply fall through the net.
When potential problems, such as lack of appropriate living options, inadequate pensions and enforced dependency on ageing carers, are added to this objective reality, it is not difficult to see why many older disabled people feel that ageing represents a threat to their independence.
Gender and race dimensions to ageing with a disability
Although practically all the issues discussed in this paper are of universal concern, it would clearly be mistaken to imply that the subjective experience of ageing is the same for men and women, or for people of different races and cultures.
Both old age and disability are dimensions of experience which are fundamentally linked to gender (Morris, 1991).
Gender is also a particularly important factor in determining whether or not individuals are supported or prevented in their attempts to live independently.
Because women are generally expected to take a more dependent role in society than men, disabled women face a particularly acute struggle to overcome the obstacles against them controlling their own lives, or even defining their own identities (Morris, 1989; Lonsdale, 1990).
It is not surprising, then, that many women place an even stronger emphasis on maintaining their independence in older age than men.
Further, it is important to realise that many older women (disabled or not) are also supporting others.
This is not to say that older men do not take on the role of ‘carer’, nor that the perceived threat to independence is only an issue for women.
However, both of these issues are likely to be particularly important  for women throughout the disability career and, consequently, are also likely to be crucial factors shaping their experience of ageing.
Practically nothing is known about the race dimension to ageing with a disability.
However, what evidence there is highlights a number of ways in which — relative to older whites — black and Asian elders are disadvantaged (in income, housing, health and access to services), and are part of a minority group which clearly suffers racial discrimination.
There is also considerable evidence of unmet support needs among disabled black and Asian people of all ages (Greater London Association of Disabled People, 1987; Ahmad, 1988).
This has led to the conceptualisation of older people from minority ethnic communities as being in ‘double jeopardy’(Dowd and Bengtson, 1978).
Class and gender are also seen as important dimensions of inequality in addition to race and age; the cumulative effect of these factors has, in turn, led to consideration of triple or ‘multiple’ jeopardies in describing the experience of different subgroups, particularly within the black population (Norman, 1985).
Concluding comments
If pushed too far, there is a danger that characterising people's experiences in terms of multiple jeopardies may only serve to marginalise their experiences even further and divert attention from common concerns and issues.
Many older disabled people feel that their needs — and even their existence — has been overlooked.
While the particular experiences shaping these perceptions may vary, there is also a considerable degree of similarity to the objective situation in which many disabled people find themselves as they age.
Clearly, there will also be some overlap between the experiences and concerns of different groups within the ageing population, and between disabled people of all ages.
However, this paper has attempted to demonstrate that there is a whole range of dimensions to the experience of ageing with a disability, and also that both the subjective and objective reality of ageing can be understood only in the context of prior experience.
A conceptual framework based on biography, identity and meaning is, therefore, essential to the development of an understanding of the dual experience of ageing with a disability.
IN CHARGE OF SUPPORT AND HELP
THE CRAFTING OF GOOD CLIENTS
Ken Davis
Becoming disabled brings us into some odd relationships with people.
One that most of us are familiar with is the doctor — patient relationship.
When we're in it, we play a role, the sick role.
We're expected to play it whether we're sick or not.
Most of us know that it is in our best interests to play it — we've never been taught the lines, but we soon catch on to what we're supposed to say.
Soon enough, we're bumping into the disability ‘professionals’.
There are lots of them, they have different titles and work for different agencies, and often we get a bit confused as to who they are.
They learn about disability by doing courses and reading books.
Some of them are given diplomas for doing this, so they can then prove how expert they are in disability matters.
These paper qualifications help them get jobs and make careers out of our needs.
Sometimes these ‘professionals’, such as occupational therapists and social workers, call us their ‘clients’.
Even people who help us to keep our homes clean such as home helps, or people who work in day centres, also call us their ‘clients’.
This confuses us even more.
Most of us probably thought that becoming a client was a matter of personal choice.
Like going to a solicitor if we can afford it — or if we can't afford not to.
Solicitors, accountants, consultants of all kinds, they too are regarded as professional people — but should we use their services, we have the choice, we decide.
If they don't come up to scratch, we can complain to their professional body and seek redress.
Or we take our custom elsewhere.
But the situation with disability ‘professionals’ is different.
Well, yes, we can complain about their performance and we may or may not get redress via their employers.
But if we decide to take our custom elsewhere — well, unless we're very well-heeled, it's best to forget it.
To all intents and purposes, these denizens of the disability industry are the gatekeepers to the services we need.
We either go through them, or do without.
Take it or leave it.
No wonder many of us get confused.
We grow up to expect that, if we become a client of some professional service or other, that it is a voluntary thing, something we do as a matter of choice.
But, in terms of disability services, the choice available to us amounts to little more than Hobson's choice.
The law gives local authorities the power to decide and they, in turn, define the kind of workers they want.
Various schools, universities and other training establishments chum out the ‘professionals’.
Together they decide what we get.
Whether we're happy or unhappy about this situation is merely academic.
Going over the top of our heads is well-rooted and par for the course.
Despite the growth of the disabled people's movement these paper professionals still think it quite normal to sit down round the table and decide what's best for us.
So it is quite natural that, along with all their other decisions, they should define the nature of their relationship to us.
Given that this is the case, it is interesting and instructive to reflect on why it is that these people have decided to call us their ‘clients’.
I mean, they know just as well as disabled people what is usually understood in terms of the professional — client relationship.
So why have these workers been so keen to graft their ambitions on to terminology, the Latin root of which lies in patrician — plebian; master — slave; patron — dependant subservience?
One possibility is that they do actually see themselves as superior — as opposed to seeing us as inferior or helpless.
Maybe they do think of themselves as being professional in the same, or similar, sense to that which is commonly understood.
Or maybe they have forgotten that they are involved in a relationship, and that the consequence of setting themselves up as ‘professionals’ automatically cast us in the role of ‘client’.
Hearing some of these people explaining the terminology can be equally interesting.
For example, they may say that ‘client’ is a nice easy word, which avoids the anonymity of ‘person’or ‘disabled person’.
Or that you can't use ‘person with a physical impairment’ all the time because the phrase is too long!
Or that ‘client’ gives a disabled person some dignity, some status.
That one is particularly pleasing, as it conveys the idea of equality wrapped up in more recent connotations which assign customer status to both patron and client.
A very neat bit of professional sleight of speech, suggesting equivalence in choice and control, even though they and we know that the reality is very different.
When you look more closely at this apparently innocent use of words, it is easy to see that it is all part of a very carefully engineered process.
Just how consistent it is with the prevailing relationship of disabled people to our able-bodied society comes clear when you look at some of the many questions which can be raised.
For example, how did these so-called professionals come to get involved with us — and what is at stake for them in the way they define their relationship to us?
The first question begs many others — but those of us who are familiar with some of the history of the disabled people's movement will recognise that today's ‘disability professionals’ are on a career path which has been carefully and painstakingly carved out by generations of their predecessors.
Aware that society has been constructed by able-bodied people in ways which serve and perpetuate their own interests, these people have used our consequential marginalisation and dependence not as a starting-point for developing with us a struggle for social change and equal opportunities, but as a handy and convenient fact to justify the development of all the inappropriate disability services with which we are now so familiar.
This disingenuous acceptance of the status quo, pregnant with career opportunities, is basic to those who feed on the effects of social problems rather than engage in the struggle to deal with causes.
It is a well-established form of parasitism, resting on bits of biblical dogma such as‘the poor always ye have with you’(John, xii.8).
The updated version of the old Poor Law, which sustains most of today's welfare professionals, depends for its continuity on such counsels of despair.
It has become, let's face it, a nice little earner.
Nowadays, these people have got it made.
As a body, they have influenced government and secured their future so effectively that they and their agencies are written by name into the Statute Book.
For our part, the barrier-ridden, able-bodied world of inaccessible streets, buildings, transport and information — coupled with limited services of personal assistance — has severely inhibited the extent of disabled people's own influence.
Nevertheless, our movement is growing rapidly, as a reaction against these oppressive social conditions.
But we have yet to eclipse the influence of these professional disability parasites.
Although the day will inevitably come, we have yet to secure legislation appropriate to our real needs.
At this juncture, our lives are still substantially in their hands.
They still determine most decisions and their practical outcomes.
Their control over the decision-making process has been carefully reinforced by ensuring that the climate of ideas which surround the making of disability policy is also under their influence.
Which brings us back once more to the web of words they have spun to entrap us.
Effective control of the climate of ideas requires a thoughtful approach to the choice of words.
This is why the selection of ‘professional’ and ‘client’can never be dismissed by disabled people as irrelevant or innocuous.
There is, to address the second question, much at stake for the disability industry, in terms of jobs and status, pay and conditions, and career opportunities, if they begin to lose their grip.
To obviate this, they need to contain the idea of their dominance and our dependence within a coherent philosophical framework designed to encapsulate, reinforce and sustain the interests of the industry.
Such a framework needs to be flexible enough to move with the times, keep abreast of public sympathy, but ensure that their control over our lives remains essentially untouched.
Thus, it has come to be that the disability ‘professionals’ and us, their ‘clients’, live within the carefully crafted, mechanical embrace of ‘care’.
Today's generation of ‘professionals’ are packing this artificial ethos with endearing little  catchphrases such as‘community care’‘caring professionals’and the soon-to-be-foisted-on-us ‘care managers’.
The idea of ‘care’ has been  carefully nurtured until it has become the hallmark of solid acceptability, the key to political creditworthiness, and the disability industry's SDI designed to shield their programmes of social control from criticism.
It is an increasing obligation on our movement to challenge both the mythology of care and the reality of their manipulation of disability policy and decision-making.
Part of the process of gaining control over our lives involves us in resisting their attempts to box us in the pigeonhole of ‘client’— and to expose their self-styled, self-seeking efforts to elevate their second-hand knowledge about disability into a ‘profession’.
The disabled people's movement has already done much solid work in redefining disability and in creating the basis of a new hegemony of ideas which rests on direct experience of the problems we face in our daily lives.
We have carried some workers in the disability industry along with us.
In supporting our own active participation in, and control over our own affairs, such people are giving us the right kind of help.
However, for the majority of the ‘professionals’, despite their need to cling to power, their careful crafting of our dependence is disintegrating before their very eyes.
EXPERIENCE OF DISABLED HEALTH AND CARING PROFESSIONALS
Sally French
It is frequently argued that having personal experience of an event gives a dimension of knowledge that others cannot fully share.
Childbirth is an example of this, where mothers may assume that neither men nor childless women can fully appreciate the experience.
Various self-help groups have been formed because of dissatisfaction with the help that professionals provide or a realisation that such help is limited.
Many believe that minority group members have better insight, more commitment and greater rapport with similarly affected people than does the general population (Shearer, 1981) and that people with extensive professional training do not necessarily help those who are disabled (McKnight, 1981).
Disabled people are widely discriminated against in most types of employment including the health and caring professions.
Chinnery (1991) points out that there are far fewer people employed in the caring services in the United Kingdom than the recommended 3 per cent, and that most of them manage to ‘pass’ as able-bodied.
In a content analysis of the career literature of 26 health and caring professions and occupations (French, 1986a) it was found that disabled people were never specifically invited to apply, yet 10 of these occupations explicitly sought candidates with the ability to empathise and understand ill and disabled people.
The radiography profession, for example, was seeking people who displayed tact and empathy (College of Radiographers, 1985) and the audiology technician was required to have ‘a sympathetic and understanding personality’(British Society of Audiology, n.d.).
These are qualities which disabled people, by virtue of their experiences, are likely to possess.
Burnfield (1985), a psychiatrist with multiple sclerosis, states: ‘I believe that having MS has helped me to become more sensitive to the needs of others and that it has enhanced my skills as a healer.
I often think of myself as being doubly qualified, firstly as a patient and secondly as a doctor — the order is important.’
Similarly, a blind physiotherapist said: ‘The frustrations of disability are much the same inasmuch as it is a physical limitation on your life and you think ‘if only’…
Having to put up with that for   so long I know ever so well what patients mean when they mention those kind of difficulties' (French 1990).
Most of the overt justification for the exclusion of disabled people from the health and caring professions is in terms of the disabled people themselves.
Their presumed inability to cope, the adverse effect they are presumed to have on patients and the assumption of proneness to accidents (Browning, 1980; Chickadonz, 1983; Libman, 1983).
Others believe, however, that disabled people have unique assets to offer these professions (Hutchins, 1978; Biehn, 1979; Gavin, 1980; Bueche, 1983; Turner, 1984; Wainapel, 1987; O'Hare and Thomson, 1991).
Negative attitudes are sometimes rationalised and disguised as concern, emphasising that disabled people may damage themselves by undertaking such demanding work (Safilios-Rothschild, 1976; French, 1986a).
To my knowledge there has been no research specifically addressing the  experiences and perceptions of people who have become health and caring professionals despite being substantially disabled.
It is hoped that the following study goes a small way towards describing their experiences and situation, as well as highlighting what the inclusion of disabled professionals reveals about the orthodox professional/client relationship.
Method
In this study 24 disabled people currently employed or training in the health and caring professions were interviewed, and one person, who was working abroad, sent a written account of her experiences using the interview schedule as a guide.
The sample consisted of nine men and 16 women and represented eight professions and 17 types of impairment; two people had dual qualifications.
All but two people were accepted for training as disabled people, the others acquiring their impairments during training; 10 people had trained within the last five years and 14 within the last 10 years.
The professions and impairments represented were as shown in Table 1.
Findings
Perceived advantages and disadvantages of being disabled
All the disabled professionals could see advantages relating to being disabled in the work context.
The most common response was that they felt better able to empathise with their patients and clients and understand the social and psychological implications of disability.
Some of the professionals believed that they had greater patience than their able-bodied colleagues, and often pointed out that their patients and clients had greater confidence in them and were more likely to take their advice.
One person said: ‘Many clients thought they'd get a slightly better deal through having a blind social worker because they thought I was having to pull out all the stops to prove that I was good and therefore they would get a spin-off.’
Most people felt that they could empathise with and understand those with a similar impairment best.
A partially deaf therapist stated: ‘I've got a lot more patience with deaf people and I get more out of them.
The doctors say ‘Forget it, ask a relative’ but I speak to them.’
All the deaf people found the ability to lip-read helpful.
One mentioned her skill at communicating with patients who had had a tracheostomy and another found that she could lip-read patients when nobody else could understand them.
One spoke sign language fluently and was sometimes used as an interpreter.
Most of the disabled professionals believed that they had more knowledge of disability than their colleagues.
A prosthetist who had a lower limb amputation himself stated: ‘They [patients]want to pick your brain for every bit of knowledge they can get.
They're very interested to find out  how you coped.’
He found that he was able to identify the causes of patients' problems, especially the small, less obvious ones which other prosthetists might miss or regard as trivial.
Many reported that their patients and clients frequently commented on the advantage of the disability from their own point of view.
A prosthetist with an amputation himself remarked, ‘Patients say, ‘You've got one, you know what I mean.’’
Similarly a doctor said: ‘Very many people have told me they can talk to me because I know what it feels like to have an illness.
Once you get over that hump of being accepted [for training]then you can use your disability.’
Many people found that being disabled helped to break down professional barriers.
A deaf therapist said: ‘They don't see me as a health professional who knows it all, but who doesn't really understand; they see me as a disabled person.’
A doctor found his patients' interest in his electric wheelchair useful in this respect, and a social worker found that his guide dog helped: ‘Even when there's an awful atmosphere he's wagging his tail.
He's definitely an ice-breaker.’
Several people spoke of the advantage of needing help from their patients or clients.
A counsellor explained, ‘By me needing help it's actually saying ‘This is a partnership’.’
Similarly a blind social worker commented: ‘I'm able to say to my clients, ‘I'll help you, but there are certain ways in which you are going to have to help me’, and the client doesn't feel totally taken over or totally worthless.’
Some people mentioned that they acted as models to their patients.
A counsellor said that many of her clients would say, ‘If you can do it, so can I’, and a physiotherapist found that the misconception that all physiotherapists are very fit helped because her patients assumed that this applied to her even though she was disabled.
Several people mentioned that fellow students had learned a great deal about many aspects of disability through having them in the peer group.
Many people felt that the advantages of being disabled not only cancelled out any disadvantages there might be but actually outweighed them.
A doctor commented: ‘MS has been something I've used.
Having MS has been an added dimension in my training, in my understanding of people, and in the development of my expertise and skills.’
And a prosthetist said: ‘You have a great understanding of their problems because no matter how good a prosthetist is, if he's got two legs he falls short of really knowing what it's like.’
However, two of the disabled professionals firmly believed that being disabled gave them no additional insight into other people's disabilities, and one congenitally disabled person said she had no special understanding of acquired disability.
Some people pointed out the advantages of their work from a personal point of view.
Several physiotherapists mentioned that the active nature of the job benefited them physically and a number of people with sensory impairments believed that the nature of the work prevented them from becoming isolated.
A profoundly deaf therapist said: ‘I do feel that if I didn't  have this type of job where I'm meeting different people every day I would withdraw very quickly into myself.’
Many people had been asked to counsel patients or clients who were similarly disabled or to demonstrate their ability to cope.
Many others helped their patients and clients informally, especially if they appeared anxious.
Several people said that they had been asked to lecture to a wide range of students and colleagues on the subject of their particular disability, or disability in general.
A number of the disabled professionals were actively involved in disability issues.
Several had written books and articles and others were involved in voluntary work.
Some had given radio talks and one had founded a society for people with his own impairment.
In contrast, a few people pointed out the disadvantages that could arise as a result of being disabled when interacting with patients or clients.
One blind person found lack of non-verbal communication a problem, though others felt able to compensate and even viewed blindness as helpful in some situations.
For example, a social worker felt that clients could speak more openly to him because they knew he could not recognise them in other contexts, and a counsellor reported that her clients would sometimes say that they could speak more openly knowing that she could not see them.
A few people found that being disabled had the effect of trivialising patients' problems.
This could be a disadvantage but sometimes served as a motivator.
A disabled doctor reported that patients would say, ‘I'm off work with a sore knee and there you are working on your crutches.’
Another doctor found that his severe disability inhibited psychiatric patients from discussing their problems, and an occupational therapist found that elderly confused patients occasionally lacked confidence in her but she managed the situation by reassuring them and immediately focusing attention back on them.
The prosthetists with amputations noted that patients could be discouraged by seeing them cope so well.
They would sometimes say, ‘If only I could walk like you.’
The prosthetists were, however, acutely aware of this problem and were very careful never to compare themselves with their patients.
Access to training
Of the 23 disabled professionals who had been accepted for training as disabled people, eight reported that their entry qualifications were better than average, and five thought that this had been a major factor in their acceptance for training.
A further eight people said that they had been helped to gain access to training by an influential person.
Such people were either doctors of high status who knew the individual personally, or someone on the selection panel with particular knowledge of or interest in disability; for example, a person interviewing a blind candidate had had a visually impaired son.
Twelve people felt that their acceptance for training had been strongly influenced by one of these two factors.
In addition a doctor mentioned the  advantage of his privileged background and several people indicated that they came from medical families.
All but one person had revealed that they were disabled before interview.
Several, especially those with relatively hidden disabilities, were uncertain of the wisdom of this and spoke of being in a dilemma over the issue.
A profoundly deaf person felt that it was best to reveal her disability after contact had been made because of the ‘funny ideas’ people have about deafness.
Of the 23 health and caring professionals who had been accepted for training as disabled people, eight had experienced difficulty.
An occupational therapist stated: ‘It didn't matter what I said, they said I couldn't cope’, and a physiotherapist recalled that: ‘His parting words were ‘Nobody will accept you as a physio, no school's going to accept you.’’
Interestingly she was later accepted by the very person who said this.
Several people mentioned that getting as far as the interview was the main problem.
A counsellor concluded that professionals ‘Have conditioned themselves to believing that the disabled person is the person who should be helped rather than the helper.’
It must be emphasised, however, that the majority of the disabled professionals, 15 of the 23, had experienced no problems regarding their acceptance for training.
Attitudes of tutors
Some people had experienced negative attitudes from their tutors.
The most common complaint was a general lack of adaptation of teaching strategy to meet their needs.
A physiotherapist recalled: ‘They weren't obstructive, but they didn't go out of their way to be helpful either.’
And a deaf therapist said: ‘I couldn't follow the lectures at all, yet I didn't feel I could keep saying, ‘I'm deaf, will you look at me?’’
Some felt that they were viewed in terms of being disabled while others mentioned that their tutors lacked confidence in them.
Several blind people complained of the excessive concern over their inability to make eye contact with clients and the difficulty they had convincing teaching staff that they could cope.
A doctor who acquired his impairment during training felt unable to confide in the staff.
He stated: ‘I was very frightened that if I had a disease like that they might suggest that I wasn't able to continue the training and that I wouldn't qualify.
I felt if I mentioned them [the symptoms]they'd think I was skiving or malingering or being a hypochondriac or neurotic, and I wasn't going to be labelled as those things.’
Similarly, a physiotherapist said: ‘I had to try and keep a brave face on it and not let on.
I thought it might affect my career, they might just chuck me out.’
Only two of the 25 disabled professionals were given substantial concessions during their training.
Some people were openly informed that there would be no special help.
A deaf therapist said: ‘They felt that if I wanted to be on the course, I'd got to manage the same as everyone else.
The foreign students got more help.’
Their feelings about concessions were, however, mixed.
A blind person remarked: ‘If someone said to me ‘You'd better not do  this placement’ then I'd rather walk to Australia on my hands than admit that I couldn't.’
Despite all these problems, only six people failed to complete their courses in the minimum possible time.
Twelve of the disabled professionals could recall negative attitudes from their tutors, although they all related instances of positive attitudes too.
The remaining 13 regarded the attitudes of their tutors as either neutral or good.
A physiotherapist said that she could not recall any aggravation at any level, and an occupational therapist said: ‘It didn't matter what problems I had, I just had to go to them and they'd say ‘OK, there's a way round it.’’
Employment
The attitudes of colleagues were reported as being overwhelmingly good, although a few people mentioned a certain lack of understanding, saying that their colleagues tended to forget or deny that they were disabled, which could create difficulties.
Both during training and after qualifying some people said that they had been encouraged by senior colleagues to work with disabled people or in areas of medicine of low prestige.
A blind person was accepted for a post on the condition that initially he would work with blind clients.
A counsellor commented: ‘They always assumed I'd do disability counselling; they were hanging a label round my neck.’
A physiotherapist was asked, ‘Don't you think you should be working with the young chronic sick?’ and an occupational therapist was advised to work in psychiatry.
After successfully qualifying, two people were advised by members of their own profession to do full-time voluntary work.
Some people decided to work with those having the same type of impairment as themselves.
This could lead to suspicion: two people complained that colleagues thought they might ‘over-identify’ and therefore lack objectivity.
Most people, however, had met with very positive attitudes at work.
A deaf therapist commented: ‘I depend a little on the staff but they never seem to mind, they never force me into anything.’
Only three people reported any instances of negative attitudes from patients or clients.
Just four of the disabled professionals had had difficulty in finding work.
However, a few had met with negative attitudes in the process.
At her first interview in a large London teaching hospital, an occupational therapist was told: ‘I must be perfectly honest, I don't see any point in showing you round.’
One problem encountered was the expectation in some of these professions that newly qualified staff should ‘rotate’ to different medical specialties thereby gaining varied experience, a practice not possible for all the disabled professionals.
Some people observed that working in senior posts was easier.
A deaf person spoke extensively of the advantages of being in charge.
She explained: ‘I'm the boss and I delegate what I can't do.
I'm in control and I know what's going on; all communication comes through me.’
Many people felt that in order to cope, both during training and at work, it  was necessary to work harder and be more determined; they spoke of a need to ‘prove’ themselves.
Others had come to the conclusion, however, that these feelings originated from within themselves: a blind person had started to ask himself, ‘To whom am I proving what?’
Where possible, people had tended to specialise early.
They tried to find work where they could function well; for example, a deaf person said she would avoid a position which involved treating patients in groups and would never work in a very large hospital.
However, people with the same type of impairment had differing views concerning the suitability or unsuitability of various areas of work.
This variation seemed to be due both to the severity of the impairment and to personality factors; it would therefore be simplistic and unwise to make generalisations based entirely on impairment.
Fifteen of the disabled professional were restricted in the type of work they could do.
For example, the doctor who used crutches said that he would find surgery difficult and could not visit patients at home because of access problems.
However, by choosing their specialties and places of work carefully, most people reported that they could fulfil all of their work obligations.
Conclusion
This research indicates that the majority of the disabled professionals had, in the main, received positive treatment from colleagues, clients and patients during training and at work.
A sizable minority, however, had experienced some degree of negative discrimination as a result either of work structures or of their colleagues' attitudes and lack of understanding.
Most of these problems had occurred when people were attempting to gain access to training and during training.
There is much evidence to suggest that disability may be just one attribute which is considered undesirable in members of the health and caring professions; race and class discrimination are well documented (Young, 1981; Watkins, 1987; Baxter, 1988) and gender discrimination is also marked (Young, 1981).
In addition French (1986b) found that various characteristics which go against the stereotyped image of the physiotherapist are stigmatised by that profession; for example, to be very overweight was considered more of a barrier than blindness or needing to use a wheelchair.
The social acceptability of a disability may, therefore, be more important than the limitations it may give rise to.
But not all professionals subscribe to the view that disabled people are unsuitable as health professionals.
Turner (1984) notes the hypocrisy of excluding disabled people from these professions, stating: ‘How can we tell patients they can lead normal lives when we don't allow their peers to become our colleagues?
Though not yet illegal to discriminate on health grounds, there can be no doubt that it is immoral and unethical to do so.’
The degree of discrimination against disabled people working in the health  and caring professions cannot be fully answered by this research.
Dissimilar professional ideologies might suggest that there would be different levels of discrimination among the professions.
This was not found to be the case, although the number of people in each profession was far too small for this finding to carry much weight.
It also remains unclear to what extent disabled people working in the health and caring professions have a better understanding of illness and disability than their able-bodied colleagues, although it can be argued that this should not be a central Issue as disabled people should not be expected to perform better than other people in order to be acceptable.
It is evident that further research is needed in this little-researched area.
This small study does, however, suggest that disabled professionals are no less capable than their able-bodied colleagues and may have unique assets to bring to these professions.
However, their presence may well undermine traditional professional values and beliefs, and there is little evidence that the senior members of these professions are actively seeking to recruit disabled people.
MEDICAL RESPONSIBILITIES TO DISABLE PEOPLE
John Harrison
As a profession, we in medicine do not spend much time thinking about our philosophy.
We are constantly approached by people who want our help, and we respond in the best way we can.
If our patients have problems we cannot cope with, we usually say so; we may then simply advise going elsewhere, or we may act as advocates to ensure that the issues are properly taken on by others.
It is a matter of professional honour to keep our standards as high as possible.
We are usually open to proposals for improvement or change.
Anyone with an illness or injury of any severity is disabled for as long as the condition lasts.
In that sense medicine and disability are inextricably linked, yet the approaches of physicians and surgeons to disabled people are criticised as well as praised.
Why the criticism, and why do we often get things wrong?
The medical culture
Medical students learn to distinguish ‘acute’, which means something of recent onset, from ‘chronic’, which means a condition which has lasted and will probably continue for a substantial time.
Doctors are essentially interventionists, trained to diagnose, treat and either cure or admit defeat.
This ethos fits the ‘acute’ model far better than the ‘chronic’one.
Until the 1960s disability had a limited meaning: it referred to the effects of injuries but not often the effects of illness.
People who were ‘chronically sick’, on the other hand, were familiar: they had failed to benefit from medical treatment and were therefore a problem, usually best left to themselves or to others to cope with.
Medical education is rooted in the natural sciences.
The rule has been that young people intending to study medicine must forsake the humanities and social sciences for physics, chemistry and biology.
In their undergraduate years they are drilled in factual knowledge and scientific method, and rarely see patients outside hospital buildings.
Interpersonal skills are usually expected to develop without formal training, or are just taken for granted.
In acute illness, doctors take full responsibility for treatment and develop the habit of making decisions which their patients do not wish to challenge.
In hospital wards, short admission — discharge sequences reinforce the acute model, even if the condition being treated is not acute at all.
It is a poor environment for learning correct approaches to disability.
Hospital outpatient clinics are better: many people attend regularly, precisely because they do have chronic illness and are therefore likely to be disabled.
Many clinics are beyond reproach but others, while giving doctors the opportunity to monitor their patients' progress, can appear unhelpful to the patients themselves.
For more than ten years, general practice has required that doctors must now undergo further training.
Together with inevitable involvement with patients and their families over long periods, this encourages a change of emphasis from diagnosis/treatment/cure to assessment/assistance/care.
But specific education about disability and rehabilitation remains uncommon.
Why do disable people need medicine?
A person with an established, stabilised impairment who develops a complication of that impairment, or suffers an independent illness or injury, will seek medical advice and treatment in the same way as anyone else.
A person may also elect to undergo medical or surgical treatment to help correct the impairment, without being at all ill: hip replacements, and lens implants to replace cataracts, are obvious examples.
People whose disabilities begin with severe illness or injury find themselves in medical hands whether they like it or not.
Once their condition has stabilised they may have to face a whole range of issues: new restrictions; new sensations; new embarrassments; new lifestyles.
They do not expect the medical profession to be disinterested, and are disappointed if it does not provide advice and support.
People with progressively severe impairments, due to illness such as multiple sclerosis or rheumatoid arthritis, must constantly cope with new problems.
Medical treatment may be relatively ineffective but also may not be useless: advice on therapies, equipment and future outlook in health terms may be invaluable.
New problems may take the form of crises, such as sudden and/or final loss of ability to walk, or the development of pressure sores.
Crises may, of course, be primarily social: leaving school; loss of employment; illness of a close partner; separation or bereavement are examples.
Medical help is not then the main requirement, but it may be relevant: advice, advocacy and co-operating to make new resources available may all be deeply appreciated.
Disabled patients who speak well of their doctors often say that they spend time with them, they listen, are helpful, visit regularly and are reliable.
This doctor/patient relationship, so essential to good medical practice, belongs to  what has traditionally been called the ‘art’ of medicine as distinct from its science.
The gatekeeper role and limitations of choice
More controversial is the command of access to resources.
The growth of options for disabled people has been relatively recent.
Forty years ago the National Health Service was almost the only establishment they could turn to.
Even now, disabled people find themselves in hospital because it is the only place that will look after them and for that reason alone.
A common institutional response is to be intolerant, not of the circumstances but of the patients and their families.
Doctors such as geriatricians and psychiatrists have been cast in the role of fixers and gatekeepers to protect the institutions.
That unpleasant responsibility is less necessary than it was but the habit of mind, in society as much as with the professions, lingers on.
Hospital doctors, for example, are still expected to have the last word about their patients' discharge dates, or about their transfer to other institutions, or to decide whether they should be offered facilities such as regular readmission to relieve carers.
These are not necessarily medical decisions, but the constant demands on the hospital service require someone to take responsibility.
Other assessment and gatekeeper roles exist because, at least in the past, there have been few alternatives to doctors as sufficiently skilled and entrusted guardians of limited public resources.
Assessments for benefits and equipment, still widely delegated to doctors, are now matched by other professionals' assessment procedures, for example when housing adaptations are required.
The real problems are the need for assessment at all, and that doctors who undertake the responsibility may not be adequately trained (or experienced) for the task.
Teamwork
The practice of medicine has always depended on nursing, and the therapy professions have grown up to supply new kinds of skills.
Most of the ‘paramedicals’ are relatively specialised, but a disabled person may have many requirements and many people may therefore be needed to meet them.
Success depends on working together, with the added advantage that teamwork brings a variety of personal perspectives.
Some brief case histories may illustrate why disabled people make use of hospital help, and the scope for teamwork response.
Arthur B had just passed retirement age when he suffered a very severe stroke.
Depressed and bewildered because it had inexplicably impaired his ability to think and concentrate, he soon guessed that his paralysis and clumsiness would make him always dependent on a wheelchair.
His wife and family were  as supportive as they could be, but found the staff in his first hospital ward uncommunicative and discouraging.
The staff of the rehabilitation unit, on the other hand, where he spent several months before returning home, became their close partners and friends.
Back home, Mr B experienced frequent complications including pain, embarrassing incontinence, uncontrollable temper, and frustration because of being housebound, but he also regained most of his old mental ability.
The team remained supportive yet in many ways felt powerless because of social factors beyond their control.
Medical involvement was continuous, mainly because his physical and mental health (and the couple's emotions) remained unstable.
Judith C had been disabled since birth, getting about with sticks and, for much of her life, leg calipers.
The medical diagnosis was cerebral palsy.
As a child her health had been well supervised: she attended an ordinary school and at the age of 19 obtained an office job.
The network of health and social work support she had enjoyed fell away, but she led a full life and drove her own car, though she still lived with her parents.
Then her legs developed new spasms and new deformities: she gave up her job and stopped driving.
She agreed to undergo corrective surgery but the result disabled her further.
She became depressed and lethargic, asking (with her parents) for more medical advice.
She needed careful, patient help from an interdisciplinary team, together with ‘time out’ in a residential institution, before she was ready to embark on an independent wheelchair life in a home of her own.
Medical involvement was mainly in the background, but it included expert knowledge of abnormal neuromuscular function and its alleviation.
Mary D had multiple sclerosis.
When she first developed her symptoms the doctors had told her it was ‘neuritis’, and she discovered the diagnosis herself by picking up a magazine article in a cafe.
Years later her increasing helplessness was causing unhappiness at home, yet there was still no one to whom she could turn: her parents had died; her children had left her; her sister was in Canada; the family doctors and hospital doctors were uninterested; and, apart from arranging adaptations to her house, social services were too overworked to be accessible.
Sudden and final loss of ability to walk turned a chronic problem into a crisis: emotionally she could not face this added challenge, and her marital relationship collapsed.
Almost too late to be of real use, a rehabilitation unit took her in and began the slow, hard work of helping her and her family reconstruct and make sense of their situation.
Again this could only be achieved by teamwork, the medical component as important as all the others.
Agnes E lived alone, had reached her ninetieth year and had retained her independence of mind.
For some years her vision had only enabled her to find her way about her house: she could not read and could scarcely see her television.
One day she fell and broke her hip: it was repaired in hospital but she remained in some pain and was even more precarious on her feet.
Her  family believed she should be ‘in a home’ but she did not: though just a little forgetful, with the help of an interdisciplinary team she showed that she had kept enough living skills to get home again.
There she stayed, with the help of the home care service and a watchful nurse specialist; one short illness a year later was managed by the hospital team which already knew her.
She carried on for another year and then died suddenly from a heart attack.
One of the medical responsibilities had been to assess the ‘risk’, advise the family and allay fears, and reinforce confidence that the hospital team would never let them down.
Interdisciplinary teamwork is now widely practised within hospitals and rehabilitation centres but is still rather unusual elsewhere.
The same principles need to extend throughout community care, so that the medical approach to disability becomes just one part of a response involving a whole range of agencies, professions and interests.
And the team must always include the disabled person in question, besides key members of the family and friends.
Concepts of disability
Population surveys of disabled people help governments and service-providers to be aware of numbers and needs.
The extension of the idea that disability confers the right to certain benefits, to the identification of a group with civil rights of a more comprehensive kind, moves the concept of a disability a very long way from chronic sickness.
Yet people with more or less stable impairments, struggling to make their way as oppressed citizens, do not usually appear in professional eyes to have much in common with the majority of bewildered, vulnerable people who seek medical help.
Public health, and monitoring the health status of populations, are part of the medical culture.
Most surveys of disability have made use of medical advice in identifying the responsible injuries and diseases, which usually helps to confirm the pluralistic nature of the disabled population.
For example, arthritis and deafness are the commonest impairments.
Most disabled people are old (and the distinction between old age and disability is regularly confused).
Young adults (aged 16–29) amount to only 5 per cent of the disabled population if everyone is included, a little more than that among the most severely impaired.
Mental illness and loss of mental function are impairments too.
Although disabled people as a group experience many difficulties in common, specific problems are linked to specific conditions.
Asthma, multiple sclerosis, osteoarthritis or Parkinson's disease, for example, each carry their own set of implications for disabled living, and yet, of course , this is only part of the picture.
The enormous complexity helps explain why different groups have evolved different concepts of what disability really is.
With the aim of clarification, medical epidemiologists have introduced the impairment/disability/handicap triad: loss of function or loss of part of the  body (impairment) leads to difficulty with the tasks of daily living (disability), resulting in economic and social disadvantage (handicap).
Challenged by disabled people as disregarding the physical and social environment, and still not widely known within the medical profession, the triad does emphasise important issues and is useful in the education of professionals and as an adjunct to practice.
The fact remains that most health professionals would still speak of and regard someone like Arthur B as an old man with a stroke, not a disabled person with rights and entitlements.
A great deal of work is needed to close that conceptual gap.
Rehabilitation medicine
In spite of the relatively poor understanding of disability in medical and hospital practice, health professionals cannot remain aloof.
Many examples of good rehabilitation practice have developed simply because medical teams have seen obvious need: cardiac rehabilitation, or the support given to people on long-term dialysis or those who have undergone organ transplants, are a few examples.
But although doctors know that they must do all they can for their patients, the limits of their responsibilities have never been, and perhaps never can be, defined.
Physicians and family doctors vary in the extent to which they feel comfortable outside the strict limits of medical treatment; for psychiatrists, on the other hand, this is the essential nature of their work.
The medical commitment to disabled people still lacks a generally agreed term with which best to describe it.
‘Disability medicine’ has not found wide support, if only because it has been (wrongly) interpreted to imply the medicalisation of disability.
‘Rehabilitation medicine’ at least sounds more positive, provided that it is recognised to mean far more than physical therapy and more than helping someone to recover from a single injury or illness.
It hardly suits disabled children who have to learn about life as they experience it and cannot recover something that they never possessed.
But for everyone, rehabilitation is at least partly a learning process.
Many people achieve it on their own, within their families, or with the help of friends or untrained helpers.
Equally, the value of professionals who are trained and experienced in rehabilitation can hardly be in doubt, and all doctors should at least understand the basic concepts.
If they did, and if they understood them thoroughly, rehabilitation medicine as a speciality might not be needed.
But in hospitals the extent of technical specialisation makes delegated expertise in medical aspects of rehabilitation virtually essential.
One difficulty is that, like geriatric medicine, rehabilitation medicine in the past has been regarded within the profession as a ‘soft option’ bringing limited benefits, being unexciting and scarcely medicine.
Such negative attitudes hardly encourage success.
Yet the climate of opinion is slowly changing, reflecting the gradually  widening appreciation of disability in society as a whole.
The medical Royal Colleges, as guardians of high standards of practice, are adding their influence.
Public opinion does not go unheeded, and disabled people are not the only group which is asking for its own wishes and opinions to be recognised.
There are grounds for cautious optimism.
Conclusions
We in medicine are privileged to be members of an influential profession, and society will probably ensure that we always will be.
It is unthinkable that we should be unconcerned about the difficulties that our disabled patients face: it is essential that we are better informed and respond to them more appropriately.
And that includes constant readiness to do so on their terms.