

The seeds of Greek art: Geometric and Orientalising
1 Geometric
There were great civilisations during the Bronze Age in the peninsula and islands which became Greece, and they produced splendid arts.
We now know too that in the later part of that time a form of Greek was widely spoken there.
However, in the last centuries of the second millennium B.C. the Bronze-age cultures collapsed, and among the casualties of that troubled and impoverished age of retrenchment was the whole tradition of monumental art and architecture, and of representational art in any form.
The renderings of men and animals in what we call Geometric art are a new beginning, whereas from that point there is unbroken development into archaic, classical and Hellenistic.
The obscure circumstances of the collapse of the old culture involved invasion, or infiltration, by further Greek-speaking tribes; and it is with their assimilation that the new world begins.
In the schematic dating we apply to this period it seems to be around the last century of the second millennium that an upward turn becomes traceable, notably in pottery and specifically the pottery of Athens.
Here the degenerate ‘Sub-mycenaean’ style common to Greece gives place to what we call Protogeometric.
The change is marked by improved technique, introduction of new and tauter pot-shapes, and the replacement of old decorative motives, derived from naturalistic floral and marine designs of the earlier age, by purely abstract drawing: triangles and other rectilinear forms, hatched or crosshatched, and especially concentric circles or semicircles drawn with compass and multiple brush.
Much of the vessel is often black, and there seems a desire to emphasise the sharply defined contours which is to remain a feature of Greek ceramics, and mutatis mutandis of Greek art in general.
Protogeometric is tentatively imitated or paralleled in other parts of Greece, and the fully developed Geometric of the succeeding centuries becomes a universal Greek style; but it is in Attica that the  development can be most clearly seen, and all other Geometric pottery-styles remain provincial beside Attic.
It is on Attic Geometric pottery too that representational art first appears again in Greece.
In Protogeometric an occasional animal is seen, haphazardly placed, but it is first in Attic Geometric of the eighth century that a figure-style is incorporated in the decorative scheme.
This scheme differs from the Protogeometric in a reduction of the black areas and of concentric circles and semicircles, and in a careful selection of the  rectilinear motives and the ordering of them to cover the pot with a skin of graded zones which emphasise its shape.
The most characteristic of these motives is the hatched maeander or key-pattern, which occurs constantly in a great variety of simple or complex forms.
There is no natural place for figure-work in this sophisticated decorative system; but when the urge to represent prevails, forms are fascinatingly adapted to make them fit in.
The occasional row of repeated birds or quadrupeds may be substituted for abstract designs in one of the zones; but much more interesting is the introduction of complicated scenes of human activity.
The most important of these are on huge pots, designed not for use but to stand on graves.
Some are as much as five feet high, and the floor is pierced, whether for libations to the dead or just to prevent accumulation of rain-water.
Fig. 1 is an example.
It shows both the classic system of abstract geometric decoration: small black areas, graded zones of pattern with varied maeanders; and at the same time the introduction on the neck of two zones of repeated animals (grazing deer, resting goats) and just above the broadest point of the body, on the shoulder between the handles, a scene of human action.
The picture is of a body on a bier, mourners around; that in fig. 2 the same, with warriors in chariots, part of the funeral procession.
Others have battles by land or sea; all subjects connected with death, as suits the purpose of the pot.
Fig. 2 is the picture on an open bowl with a high foot, a monumentalisation of the krater, mixing-bowl for wine and water, the centre of the symposium (drinking-party).
This was essentially a male occupation, and vessels of this form stood on the graves of men, while the monumentalised store-jar (amphora, fig. 1) adorned those of women.
A plain stone sometimes stood beside the vessel on the grave.
In earlier times carved or painted tombstones had occasionally been used.
It seems as though, when the need was felt again for a monument to adorn the last resting place of the rich and great, it was met by monumentalising the only existing art, that of painted pottery.
The distinctive character of the drawing is determined by two quite independent principles.
First, it is basically conceptual, like a child's drawing.
The artist puts down less what he sees than what he knows is there.
The corpse is drawn suspended above the bier, the cloth that covers it suspended above again, and individual figures are similarly itemised.
Profile is the natural elevation for figures in narrative art, since  they are concerned with each other and their activity, not with the spectator; so head and legs are in profile; but the chest is shown frontal, because that is its fullest extension and the attachment of both arms can be made clear.
The conceptuality is not consistently applied.
The chariot is itemised as wheels, car, people standing in car; but the two horses that draw it are allowed to overlap, so shown as one body with two necks and heads and eight legs.
Confusion is not always avoided: the two wheels here are probably near and far wheels of a two-wheeled chariot, but in some cases rather the two near wheels of a four-wheeled cart.
The other principle which determines the character of the drawing is its deliberate adaptation to fit in with the character of the surrounding ornament.
These pictures are not the work of children but of highly skilled craftsmen, and the thin silhouette with the triangular torso and angled, linear arms is carefully planned to dominate but not to stand apart from the overall pattern.
What seem to be the earliest human figures on Geometric vases are less precisely geometrised than these, and later they fill out and loosen up a little; but from beginning to end of the period they are thin silhouettes conceptually conceived.
When this approach is finally abandoned in the late eighth century, it is under the influence of eastern arts; and it seems clear that in Geometric Greece there was no indigenous drawing, not on vases, of a freer kind.
These vase-figures are the real beginning of Greek art.
The same style is found in another art which develops in Greece during the Geometric period: bronzework.
This is manifested in big tripod-cauldrons and in statuettes, sometimes adornments of cauldrons, sometimes independent.
The bronze tripod-cauldron, like the clay grave-vase, is the monumentalisation of a piece of household furniture: a cooking-pot.
In its monumental form this was not to mark a grave but to be a prize in the games and other competitions at festivals in the great sanctuaries of Greece; especially Olympia, where the games were traditionally founded in 776 B.C. and where most of the best of these vessels have been found dedicated.
The form is a basin supported on three stout legs and with two big ring-handles standing upright on the rim, these often supported by human figures and crowned by a horse.
The legs have geometric relief-decoration, with in late examples an occasional geometric figure-scene; and the figurines, whether on tripods or separate (fig. 3), have the same conceptual itemisation and the same sharp geometric forms as those on the painted pots of Athens.
Clay figurines are also made, but they are mostly styleless work (as are some bronzes), toys or cheap offerings.
There are however a few large and careful  terracotta figures of more significance.
From a late Protogeometric grave at Athens comes a stag, body made on the wheel, head with long neck and limbs hand-made and attached, the whole decorated in contemporary vase-painting style.
Closely similar but even larger (some fourteen inches high) and more splendid is a Centaur (fig. 4) from a near-contemporary grave at Lefkandi in Euboea.
Such impressive figure-work at the very beginning of the Geometric period is surprising.
Large figurines mainly thrown on the potter's wheel and decorated in vase-painter's technique are known from several Greek sites in the late Bronze Age; and this may be a line where we shall one day be able to trace continuity of production through the dark ages.
The Centaur, man-horse, appears in late Geometric both in bronze and on vases.
It has generally been thought a manifestation of the taste which in the immediately following period adapted many fabulous monsters from the East; but it has no close eastern parallels, and the discovery of the Lefkandi Centaur pushes back the concept in Greece a long way.
We shall meet it often again, for it remains a powerful symbol throughout the history of Greek art and beyond.
2.
Orientalising
Greek Geometric shows little contact with contemporary arts in neighbouring lands.
In the preceding dark age, it seems, there was real lack of communication, isolation; but in the high Geometric time this was hardly so.
Geometric pottery is found in Cyprus and Syria; goldwork of oriental origin in Attic graves with Geometric vases.
Local goldsmiths evidently learnt from this, but in general Greek craftsmen and patrons seem to have been content with their own style.
During the second half of the eighth century this gradually changes, part of a larger change.
Growing prosperity, growing population, encouraged trade and colonisation, and consequent closer contact with foreigners led to emulation and borrowing.
It was now that the Greeks (illiterate for several centuries, since the clumsy syllabary evolved in the later Bronze Age had died with the social system it served) borrowed the suppler consonantal alphabet developed by the Phoenicians and improved on it by using some of the symbols for vowels.
It was certainly also from the Phoenicians, the other great traders of the Mediterranean and famous craftsmen too, that Greeks took some of their new artistic ideas.
Phoenician art was itself a great borrower — from Egyptian, neo-Hittite and Assyrian — and it is impossible to disentangle the particular influences, direct and indirect, on Greek artists at this time.
What is clear is that it was by looking at these eastern arts, whose strict conventions embodied far more of nature than the near-abstract Geometric, that Greek artists were able to break from that and establish a comparable style of their own.
In painted pottery precise connections are particularly hard to trace because this, the leading art of Greece, was an unpretentious craft in most eastern countries, and the influential works were of other kinds.
In bronze the great tripod-cauldrons give place to a new fashion: tall, conical stands supporting big bowls with incurving rim, their ring-handles held by attachments in the form of human-headed birds (sirens); and, standing round the shoulder between these, long-necked griffin-heads.
Fig. 5 shows a contemporary representation on the leg of a late tripod-cauldron from Olympia; fig. 6 a griffin-head from Rhodes.
This type of vessel seems to have originated in Urartu (south of the Caspian), but it was imported and imitated all over the Near East and in Italy as well as Greece.
Oriental examples have heads of lions or eagles rather than griffins; and while the sirens on Greek pieces are purely eastern in style, the griffins, often of superb quality, have a distinctive character of their own: Greek.
The griffin, an ancient oriental creature, known in Bronze-age Greece and now reintroduced, is essentially a lion-body with eagle's wings and head, but the head is modified in various ways.
Greek specimens of this time have always eagle's beak, hare's ears and a knob or spike on the brow.
In complete figures the head generally sits straight on the lion-neck, but the long, sinuous bird's neck is a constant feature of the cauldron-heads.
The sirens are cast solid, like Geometric bronzes, but the griffin-heads are the first examples in Greece of hollow-casting, another thing now learnt from the East of immense importance for Greek art (below, pp. 50f.).
These cauldrons, like the Geometric tripods before them, are found mainly in the great interstate sanctuaries, especially Olympia and that of Hera on Samos.
Two spoiled griffin-heads were found at the Samian Heraion, showing that they were made there, as no doubt they were at Olympia too.
Whatever the social and political structure of Greece in the Bronze Age and its aftermath, in the Geometric and Orientalising periods we see the pattern emerging which persists in archaic and classical times and in some degree even after Alexander: small, independent city-states, often at war with each other but united by language, legend and religion.
One expression of this unity is the growth of great interstate sanctuaries, many of which had four-yearly festivals and games open to all Greeks.
For that at Olympia, the oldest and most prestigious, it was customary for cities at war to call a truce.
If bronzework is particularly associated with sanctuaries, painted pottery is essentially local to cities.
We saw that Attica produced the best and most influential Geometric.
So it was again later, but from the mid eighth century to the mid sixth she found a rival who at times surpassed her, Corinth.
Corinthian Geometric goes in for small vessels of very high technical quality, simply and elegantly decorated.
Before the middle of the eighth century a system prevails there of ringing the vase with close-set fine lines, giving a very different effect from ordinary Geometric.
New shapes are developed with this, especially the aryballos, a tiny round pot with a very narrow neck (a later example, fig. 7).
The city's site on the Isthmus made her a natural centre for trade, and the aryballos seems to have been created to meet a new need: to bottle scented oils, imported from the East, for re-export east and west.
Corinthian aryballoi are found far and wide, especially in Sicily and Italy, where Corinth long dominated trade and was early involved in colonisation.
Dating in this period is largely dependent on correlating finds of Corinthian pottery with traditional dates for the founding of western colonies; an imprecise and unreliable method but, with a little help from the East, the best we have.
The earliest aryballoi have abstract linear decoration, but it is on this shape, linked to the eastern trade, that the first oriental motives appear in Greek vase-decoration, perhaps not long after the middle of the eighth century.
Most of the pot is still covered with fine lines, but a zone left for decoration with animals or flowers — forms drawn in outline.
A free zone not divided into panels, outline instead of silhouette, florals drawn as though growing, mark a break with Geometric, conscious emulation of another approach; but it is all very cautious.
Decorative stylisation is very marked, surfaces are dotted or outline clings round a solid core.
The potter-painter seems afraid of losing the necessary decorative emphasis on the surface of the shape, and his next step shows a brilliant solution.
In seventh-century Corinthian vase-painting beautiful outline drawing is still found, but it belongs to a  special style which seems intimately related to free painting on a flat surface.
The literary tradition associates the beginning of painting with Corinth and neighbouring Sicyon.
This is part of the rebirth of monumental art in Greece, treated in the next chapter where these and other exceptional vases will be considered.
The accepted way of drawing on a pot at Corinth in this time is different: a reversion to silhouette, but not the thin silhouette of Geometric figures adapted to geometric ornament — full, rounded forms with swinging contours, inner details marked with sharply engraved lines and patches of added colour.
The forms tell strongly on the curving surface and the figure-zone is widened for them, its background left bare or scattered with small flower-shapes, a calyx of pointed leaves or petals at the base and the areas of fine lines reduced to narrow borders of two or three (figs. 7 and 8).
This ‘black-figure’ method of vase-decoration was to become widely accepted throughout Greece for a long time.
The best Corinthian work of the seventh century, with its tense strength and controlled balance of decorative and representational, has just the same character as the great bronze griffin-heads.
The breakdown of Geometric tradition under eastern influence in Attic vase-painting follows a rather different course.
There is still a superficial resemblance to the old style, especially on larger vases which often have a figure-frieze on neck and body, the rest being covered with graded bands of abstract ornament; but this has shrunk to little more than varied groupings of zigzags, while massed zigzags among the figures of the main friezes make a shimmering ground on which the fuller, curvier silhouettes or dot-filled outlines of men, women, animals, monsters, flowers stand out.
Soon the subordinate zones shrink to narrow pattern-borders and all the concentration is on the figure-scenes, executed in a variety of techniques: outline, outline filled with white, a mixture of black and white silhouette, and sometimes black-figure, used with more colour than is common at Corinth and seldom for the main figures.
The tradition of large, sometimes very large vases, probably still grave-markers, continues and the spreading of the figure-zones on these leads to drawing on an unprecedented scale (fig. 9): a monumental art of which there will be more to say in the next chapter.
Corinthian and Attic are far the most interesting styles of orientalising vase-painting.
A provincial style in Boeotia looks towards Attic, another in Laconia towards Corinth.
One important piece from Argos is  discussed below (p. 13).
In the cities and islands of the eastern Aegean a provincial Geometric is followed by a pretty but conventional orientalising style: jugs and bowls, the clay covered with a white slip, adorned with friezes of animals (goats, deer, geese; sometimes lion, sphinx, griffin) and florals in outline and silhouette with added colour but no incision.
The Cycladic islands had produced a good late Geometric, and their orientalising is finer and more varied than the East Greek but still a minor flowering.
The finest Cycladic products of the time are huge jars decorated with figure-scenes not painted but in relief, the best from Mykonos with panels on the body showing warriors putting women and children to the sword: a savage view of the sack of Troy, as is made clear by the superb rendering on the neck of the Wooden Horse (fig.10).
Stories from legend, rarely and doubtfully recognisable in Geometric, are common in Corinthian and Attic vase-painting from this time on (fig. 9, and probably the battle fig. 7), the figures sometimes named — vase-painters are early literate.
The shape of these Cycladic pots is that of the common store-jar (pithos), and such decorated relief-pithoi are found elsewhere also, particularly in Crete which has an artistic history different from that of the rest of Greece.
A sub-Minoan tradition in painted pottery lingers long, and is replaced by a very individual form of Protogeometric, the later stages of which show, surprisingly, powerful influence from the East.
Probably contemporary with this are some bronze shields with relief decoration of purely if crudely oriental character.
It looks as though there had been a Phoenician settlement on the island which introduced this strain; and though in pottery a true Geometric style supervenes, the eastern tradition seems to linger on, especially in fine gold work, to link up with the orientalising phase proper.
Crete plays a full part in this and, as we shall see in the next chapter, in the revival of monumental art, but around the end of the seventh century goes into decline and for the rest of antiquity is an artistic backwater.
Another important source of inspiration from the East is ivory.
Its first workers in Greece probably came in with the material, but they soon found native pupils.
Some special pieces are discussed below (pp. 12, 23), but there is a big body of early dedications from sanctuaries: animal and human figurines, ornaments.
Some have intaglio designs, as though for sealings.
It is doubtful if the material was actually used in this way, but the engraved sealstone is another art that does revive in Greece at this time.
The inspiration for the first stones seems to come less from the East than from Bronze-age pieces found and imitated.
The Cyclades seem to take the lead, especially perhaps Naxos; the same area that a little later sees the beginning of monumental marble sculpture.
The beginning of monumental Greek art: the early archaic period
1.
The ‘Daedalic’ style and the early stages of monumental sculpture
In an ivory sphinx from Perachora the oriental creature is given a head of a distinctive style found in Greece at this time in works on many scales and of many materials.
Commonest are small terracottas, but the bronze statuette fig. 13 and the large limestone statuette fig. 12 both show it, and the big marble fig. 11 is almost the same.
A long straight nose forms a T with the straight fringe close down on the brows; a rectangular block of hair frames a triangular face which tapers to a pointed chin.
The straight lines and angles are curved and rounded off in the interest of naturalism, but the geometrical basis remains most marked; and the imposition of this formula is analogous to the reimposition of Geometric discipline in the changed form of black-figure on the experimentalism of orientalising vase-painting.
Heads with wiglike hair are frequent in various eastern arts and surely served as a model, but the Greek geometry is entirely absent from them.
This style is conventionally and conveniently known as Daedalic, after Daedalus, the first sculptor in Greek tradition.
By another of the technical innovations or borrowings which mark the art of this time, terracotta figurines and heads are no longer generally made freely by hand or turned on the wheel but pressed into moulds.
The quality can be high, but terracottas are on the whole cheap products for the local market, and so give valuable indication of the styles prevalent in particular places.
Daedalic terracottas are found in quantity in the Peloponnese (Corinth, Argos, Sparta), Crete and Rhodes, all Dorian centres.
The Dorians were traditionally descended from Greeks who entered the country during the dark ages, the Ionians and Aeolians from those who were there already.
Daedalic has been claimed as a Dorian style; but purely Daedalic heads are found on marble lamps made in the Ionian Cyclades, and the first monumental marble sculpture from the same area is inseparable from the Daedalic tradition.
In general differences in artistic character seem to follow less tribal divisions (Ionian, Aeolian, Dorian) than geographical (the mainland, the Cyclades, East Greece).
The first Daedalic pieces seem to date before the middle of the seventh century, and the style merges in other movements before the end.
The earliest large-scale sculpture we have in limestone or marble does not go with the earliest Daedalic; but the wide acceptance of such an individual style is most naturally explained by supposing it the creation of one artist or school producing major works at major sanctuaries.
This might be an argument for postulating a stage of monumental sculpture in wood, now lost to us, preceding that in stone.
We know from literature that wood was used for statues in the archaic period, and very early wooden statuettes (some Daedalic) have been found on Samos.
The oldest-looking piece of Greek sculpture we have is an over life-size marble of a woman (fig. 11) from the sanctuary on Delos which Artemis shared with her brother Apollo.
A verse inscription on the skirt tells that it was dedicated to the goddess by Nikandre of Naxos, whose father, brother and husband are also named.
This was evidently an important offering, neither cheap nor provincial; Delos was one of the great sanctuaries of Greece.
Behind the weathering, however, one can clearly see that it is a work of primitive technique, simply, even crudely, shaped from the shallow rectangular block.
This is surely not only the earliest marble statue we possess but one of the first made.
The marble is Naxian, and Naxos dominates early marble sculpture, though quarries soon opened on neighbouring Paros and that marble was afterwards preferred.
Rather later Attic sculptors began to use their own marbles, but early sculpture from Attica is in Naxian marble and under Cycladic influence.
Peloponnesian and Cretan sculptors work at first not in marble but in local limestones; later sometimes in marble imported from the Cyclades, but the softer and more readily available stone is long used everywhere  for building and for architectural sculpture.
The body of Nikandre's statue is as formally constructed as the head, and similar clothed bodies with Daedalic heads are found on a smaller scale in many materials: terracotta, bronze, ivory, gold-relief.
A well-preserved and slightly more elaborate example is a large limestone statuette in the Louvre (fig. 12), known as the Lady of Auxerre since when first noticed she was in the museum there.
Her origin is unknown, but there are resemblances to Cretan work.
She seems a little later than Nikandre's marble.
Shoulders and upper arms are covered by a cape, or perhaps rather a cape-like adjustment of the dress: seen from the back it does not seem to be a separate garment.
The right hand is laid on the breast, but as with Nikandre the belted waist makes a sharp horizontal accent below which the skirt is a straight pillar, emphasised here by rectilinear incisions, guidelines for paint no doubt also present on the marble though perhaps more discreetly (see below, p. 28).
The upper dress has a curved pattern of overlapping arcs, and in spite of the extreme formalism the work has vivid charm.
This beginning of monumental sculpture in Greece accompanies a revival of monumental architecture and apparently also of painting.
In this renaissance the influence of the East seems present in a new way: not the effect on craftsmen and their patrons of the style of imported objects, but the emulation of a way of life seen by travelling Greeks who reported the great enduring buildings and statues of Egypt and the eastern monarchies.
In the case of architecture it is the idea that is seminal — little or nothing of the form is taken over; but in sculpture what was to become the dominant type of Greek statue through the archaic period, the naked young man, kouros, owes a direct debt to Egyptian models.
There are fragments of kouroi from Delos as early or nearly as Nikandre's girl, but before we go on to these a few more general remarks are in place.
Monumental architecture in Greece was first developed in temples and long largely confined to sanctuaries; and sculpture in the archaic period and even after is exclusively associated with religion.
Statues were either images of deities, especially the cult-statue within a temple; or dedications, that is gifts to the gods, set up in the temple or more often outside it in the temenos; or they stood on graves.
The cult of the dead at the tomb was a strictly religious function.
Relief-sculpture was likewise confined to adornment of temples and other sanctuary-buildings, or of tombs.
Cult-statues were often of precious or perishable materials and few survive.
Grave-statues were the fashion in various times and places; but the majority of the statues we have were dedications like Nikandre's.
These might represent the deity, the donor, or neither.
Of the many marble figures offered to Athena on the Acropolis some have attributes of the goddess, but the great majority are girls with nothing to suggest that they are she; many have inscriptions showing that they were given by men; and they seem to be simply themselves, servants or companions for the deity.
In the case of Nikandre we cannot know.
The male figures from Delos were gifts to Apollo, and again the question is open.
When archaic figures of this type first became known they were called ‘Apollo’, and it may be that they have an early association with his worship, but certainly not all can represent him and the non-committal ‘kouros’ is preferable.
Three fragments from Delos are plainly very early.
One torso is so weathered that little can be said but that it does seem to show the same primitive technique as Nikandre's.
Two others are more sophisticated.
One, head to waist, is fearfully weathered; the other, waist to one knee, has on the contrary a finely preserved surface and forms of great if primitive power.
We are lucky in being helped to envisage these statues by possessing a fine bronze statuette of identical character (fig. 13).
This was dedicated at Apollo's other great sanctuary, at Delphi in central Greece.
The beaky profile resembles works from Crete, but the likeness to the Cycladic marbles is also great and we cannot say where it was made.
The boy stands, arms at sides, absolutely frontal without turn, twist or bend; were one to bisect him vertically the two halves would be mirror-images, except that the left leg is forward, the right back.
The lower marble fragment from Delos stood in the same way, and no doubt the  upper also; and throughout the archaic age the naked male statue stands always just as these.
Constant too is the bare chin — youth is the rule; but this bronze and the Delos marbles share two features which are not regular in later kouroi: the Daedalic wig, and the belt.
The pose is certainly borrowed from Egypt, where it had been used for male figures for centuries.
Only, the Egyptian is normally skirted and, while putting the left foot forward, keeps all the weight on the right, whereas in the Greek works the weight is evenly distributed, as though in the act of walking.
Egyptian sculptors had long known far more than their first Greek emulators about the structure of the human body, but the general effect of their work is (as it was surely meant to be) much less alive.
A concern with life (manifested in relief-sculpture and painting as an interest in story-telling) is a central feature of Greek art.
This is what sets off its archaic phase from the oriental arts to which it owes so much; what drives Greek artists to be always changing, developing, till they find themselves forced to abandon the inherited conventions and create their own, classical, style which becomes the basis of European art.
In the kouros this development takes the form of ever more accurate rendering of observed natural forms, always controlled by a strong feeling for pattern; but the idea is hardly yet present in these first efforts.
The grandest and perhaps latest of them, the lower fragment from Delos, the first truly impressive piece of Greek sculpture, shows a beginning in knee and thigh and genitals (and from the side in the powerful buttocks); but it is not only weathering that makes, in the upper fragment, the relation of shoulders, breast and arms so wholly inorganic — it is the same in the little bronze fig. 13.
Probably that is why these earliest youths wear a belt.
Odd on an otherwise naked figure, it is a borrowing from the belted dress of Nikandre and her sisters, to make an accent at the centre of the statue, achieved later by a schematic pattern of musculature.
The nakedness itself is much stranger.
It is paralleled but surely not accounted for by the Greek practice of naked athletics; but, whatever its origin, from now on it is a basic convention of art in Greece that males (not females) may be shown naked in any context.
The next phase is best illustrated by statues from Attica.
An exceptional sense of sculptural form is already present in ivory figurines of naked women (on an oriental model but wholly Greek in character) found in a late eighth-century Athenian grave.
The marble statues of a century later, though in Naxian stone and closely derived from the Cycladic pioneers, show the same quality.
The unnatural caesura at the waist of the ivory points to the reason for the belt on the early statues, but the Attic marbles, illustrated here (fig. 14) by the best preserved of several colossal figures from the sanctuary of Poseidon at Sunium, are not belted.
The torso is unified by being mapped in linear anatomical patterns: exceedingly schematic; but this is the beginning of the road to the classical athlete-statue.
The feeling for structure — something which endures in Attic sculpture — is well illustrated by comparing a splendid head (fig. 15) from an over life-size grave-statue in Athens with a Daedalic head, or  with those of two contemporary large marbles made in a centre of Daedalic tradition (fig. 16).
These are the famous twins Kleobis and Biton, in Cycladic marble but signed by an Argive sculptor (…medes) and dedicated by the people of Argos at Delphi, where they were seen by Herodotus who tells their story.
The faces of the Argive youths have a more natural look than the Athenian, but the Attic artist has a far stronger grasp of form, of the relation of face to skull.
Beside it the others look like masks set in wigs.
I previously called this the ‘second generation’ of sculptors, but ‘phase’is safer since dating is difficult.
The relations of Daedalic with orientalising pottery, and of the earliest marbles with Daedalic, suggest, in our schematic time-structure, a point around the mid-century for Nikandre's dedication, the Delos kouros fragments and the Delphi bronze coming perhaps a little later.
The evolution of sculpture through the sixth century, however, makes it hard to date the figures we are now considering before 600 and they might be well after.
Possibly the beginning of marble sculpture should be brought down.
Other works from this and even from the earlier phase will be discussed in the last section of this chapter, on relief and architectural sculpture, since that is the area in which the formation of the ripe archaic style can most clearly be traced.
Before we do that we must see what we can glimpse of what seems to have been another major achievement of the seventh century, the revival of the art of painting.
2.
The beginning of free painting
The beginnings of monumental architecture and sculpture in Greece are evidenced by actual remains.
For the inception of monumental painting, as for most of its history, we are reduced largely to conjecture, based on often ambiguous evidence from vase-painting and on the literary tradition.
That tradition claims Corinth and Sicyon as ‘inventors’ of painting; and the material evidence too points to that region.
A fine fragment from Argos of the mid seventh century, with the blinding of Polyphemus (fig. 17), differs in composition and colouring from the run of vase-painting.
Within a black outline skin is brown, as in Egyptian wall-painting; and the figures, of varying heights, are irregularly disposed in a roomy space.
Contrast the same scene on the neck of a contemporary Attic jar (fig. 9), where the figures are conventionally coloured black or white and reach from bottom to top of the picture.
The Argive krater is far smaller than the Attic amphora; and it looks as though Athenian artists  preferred to monumentalise vase-painting rather than venture into the new world of free painting.
No early Attic painter is named in the literary tradition.
Corinth on the other hand had kept its vase-painting on a small scale; and the tradition of an early Corinthian school of painters is borne out by certain vase-paintings which stand aside from the rest: not in scale (indeed they are often miniature work) but in composition and colour.
Black-figure's incision is used for details, but men's skin is coloured brown, women's drawn in outline, and compositions show much overlapping which, with its implication of depth, is foreign to most Greek vase-decoration.
The most remarkable example is a battle on the shoulder of a jug (the Chigi vase), drawn out in fig. 18.
The feet are all on the base-line of the picture, and there is no diminution in size with distance, so that the surface-plane is still emphasised; but the notion of a receding space in which ranked armies meet is inescapable.
That the difference of this style from that of ordinary vase-painting is due to influence from wall-painting is confirmed by the existence of slightly later terracotta metopes from temples at Calydon and Thermon in Aetolia, an area under Corinthian domination.
These square panels from high up on a  building, with only one, two or at most three figures on each, are not the kind of model on which the vase-painter drew for his battle.
Moreover they are provincial and inferior in quality to the vase-paintings; but the colouring is the same and on one metope there is similar overlapping.
Surely both vase-paintings and metopes (which run over the middle and later decades of the century) owe much to great wall-paintings in Corinth.
Evidence for wall-painting is also given by fragments of painted plaster from the exterior of an early temple of Poseidon on the Isthmus.
3.
The beginning of relief and architectural sculpture
I have left this subject to the last because of the peculiar character and importance of relief-sculpture in the development of Greek art.
A statue in the round was surely conceived as in some sense a being to be met face to face, so was designed primarily to be seen from in front.
Drawing and painting are narrative arts where the figures are concerned not with the spectator but with one another and the action they are taking  part in, so the opposite convention prevails: they are normally shown with faces and feet in profile.
In Egypt and the Near East relief-sculpture (mostly in very flat low relief) goes in this respect with drawing and not with sculpture in the round.
Such low relief is found in Greek art too; but Greek sculptors seem to have begun with free-standing statues, and when they came to relief their approach was affected by the conventions of that art.
Moreover from an early stage the Greeks used sculptural decoration on their temples in a way which had no close parallel in earlier arts and, as it developed, encouraged a new approach to relief.
The earliest Greek temples were small buildings, simple in construction and design: a rectangular or apsidal room, entered through a porch at one end and centred on a hearth or sacrificial pit.
In the age of monumentalisation a new architecture is created, in a radically redesigned temple: a long, narrow room, its focal point a cult-statue at the back looking out through an entrance-porch at the east end.
This is balanced by a false porch at the back, and the whole surrounded by a close-set colonnade and covered by a low-pitched roof which gives long, low gables at the ends, the pediments.
The function of the sacrificial pit is transferred to an altar outside (often opposite the east door) and the building becomes a house for the god in the statue.
This Doric temple was created in the Peloponnese in the middle or later seventh century.
There are many variations, but plan and elevations remain fundamentally unchanged in the great temples of the fifth century: of Zeus at Olympia (plan fig. 120) and the Parthenon (view fig. 129).
Fluted columns rise without bases from the topmost of three steps.
Their simple capitals support the plain beam of the architrave or epistyle, and between that and the cornice comes the frieze of triglyphs (a grooved upright over each column and each interval) and almost square metopes.
Apart from the statue within, sculpture is not a necessary part of this design, but it is often added, always in certain set positions: akroteria, freestanding statues above the three angles of the gable; and reliefs on the metopes and in the pediments.
These relief-areas are high above the viewer's eye-level and are overhung by cornices.
The sculptor is encouraged to deepen the relief to make the figures stand out better; and this in turn, making them more like statues, encourages him to treat them in the convention of free sculpture rather than that of drawing.
What starts as a kind of confusion between the rules accepted for sculpture in the round and those for drawing, ends with the realisation of a new art-form, sculpture in high relief, with conventions of its own: figures given their full bodily roundness but grouped in two-dimensional compositions against a flat background to which they are attached or, in developed pedimental sculpture, from which they are carved separate as complete statues.
This enrichment of the repertory of art, achieved by the end of the archaic period, is of incalculable importance for the development of Greek art and in general of art in Europe.
The earliest temple-sculpture we possess is not from a Doric temple but from an attempt to monumentalise the old form.
A little temple at Prinias in Crete, centred on a sacrificial pit, is built in part of dressed stone and adorned with sculpture.
Somewhere on the outside was a frieze of armed horsemen; and over the doorway in from the porch was a stone beam with animals in low relief on its outer face and, seated above it, two statues of goddesses (or a goddess) facing each other.
This seems an effort to fit a cult-statue into a building with a sacrificial pit; and though it was in profile that one saw these statues as one came in or went out, if one looked up as one passed under the beam which hid them, one saw them again, carved in very low relief on its underside, standing frontal and looking down at one: altogether an astonishing conception.
The horsemen outside too, whose position on the building is not clear, instead of being in profile like their mounts turn each his face towards us.
These sculptures must date from the middle or later seventh century, and from much the same time come the first carved fragments plausibly associated with a Doric temple.
These are from Mycenae, and perhaps were metopes.
The most interesting shows the upper part of a woman wrapped in a cloak, who was evidently standing in profile but turns her Daedalic face to us.
The carving is quite deep, and the frontality is surely because the sculptor, used to working figures in the round, felt that this is how a carved figure should look.
The same may be true of the Prinias horsemen, but the relief there is rather low, and an alternative is that they turn their eyes on us as guardians of the house: the ‘terror-mask’, a concept we shall meet again.
The first substantial remains of sculpture from a Doric building are from a temple of Artemis on Kerkyra (Corcyra, Corfu), which must date from the first decade or two of the sixth century.
The outer metopes were, as most commonly, left plain, and only scraps survive of sculpture at this level above the entrances within the colonnade; but both pediments were carved and much of one remains.
In the centre a huge Gorgon (fig. 19), some ten feet high, kneels or runs; a swastika-like arrangement of the limbs, the rear knee almost on the ground, is a regular archaic formula for swift motion.
At either side of her lies a leopard, face turned to us like hers.
These three big creatures dominate the composition, but around them are introduced small figures.
Next to the Gorgon are a winged horse and a youth, who again looks out at us.
Behind the leopard on the left a man now lost thrust a spear at a seated figure (fig. 20), behind whom a corpse lies, his bearded head in the corner turned to face us.
At the other end a beardless Zeus in near-profile brandishes a thunderbolt against a kneeling figure who again turns his bearded face towards us, and in the angle beyond must have lain another corpse.
Masonry is traced on the background by the seated figure and a tree by the other group.
This is a singular mixture alike of scales and of subjects.
Gorgon and beasts with their ‘terror-masks’ are apotropaic, guardians.
An early temple in Sicily had a huge terracotta Gorgon-mask in the gable-centre; and groups of fighting animals, which seem to have the same function, adorn other early pediments.
The Gorgoneion (Gorgon-face), adapted from eastern models, appears in Greek art in the mid seventh century and long retains this generalised protective role.24 From the start, however, it is also associated with a particular story: the head of Medusa, cut off by Perseus with Athena's help, and thereafter  worn by the goddess on her aegis.
As Medusa died the winged horse Pegasus and a son Chrysaor sprang from the severed neck.
Here the monster is alive and well, but the children identify her as the Medusa of the legend.
In the other groups the figure with the thunderbolt can only be Zeus though he rarely lacks a beard.
The one enthroned by a building has been thought Priam in Troy, and if so there are two subjects: Gigantomachy (Battle of Gods and Giants) and Iliupersis (Sack of Troy).
There are arguments, however, for making the seated figure Rhea, Mother of the Gods, and then both scenes could belong to the Titanomachy (Battle of Gods and Titans) which would suit a young Zeus; a more economical theory, though there are difficulties.
In any case there is no connection with the story of Medusa.
We seem to see here a first concept of temple-decoration, the guardian symbols, beginning to give hesitant way to the idea which was to prevail: the devotion of temple-gables to narrative scenes from myth and legend.
In style the seminal confusion of a transitional phase is no less evident than in subject.
The big creatures stand quite high from the background, but this depth of cutting is only to make the contours clear; the surface is a flat plane, details lightly modelled or engraved on it.
Cutting the small figures to an equal depth, the sculptor found himself forced to consider their three-dimensionality, to think of them as statues; and it is this probably rather than emulation of the terror-masks that makes so many of them turn to look at us.
The complicated postures are such as no freestanding statue of the time could show, and the sculptor has had great difficulties.
The transitions are extremely awkward and the modelling angular, but this is the first step in the evolution of the new art of high relief.
A similar phase in metope-sculpture is seen in the remains of a set from Delphi.
They were used in the foundations of a fifth-century building raised by the citizens of Sicyon; one of the little ‘Treasuries’ which crowded the site (below, pp. 40ff.).
The metopes presumably came from an earlier monument of the same city, not apparently a treasury but an open colonnade, perhaps a baldacchino to shelter but not conceal some large offering.
Instead of being nearly square uprights they have a length almost half as great again as their height, which is nearly two feet; the triglyphs apparently stood only over the columns, not between.
Four are relatively well preserved, one showing a boar (no doubt the Calydonian), another Europa forcefully hunched over the bull's neck like a jockey.
Both are carved in a basically flat plane parallel with the background, like the big creatures from Corfu though the modelling here is subtler.
The other two are more complex.
Fig. 21 shows the Dioscuri (Kastor and Polydeukes) rustling cattle with the sons of Aphareus (one is missing; the names are written beside them).
The artist has created a marvellous pattern out of the limbs of beasts and men superposed in parallel planes stepped back to the ground and punctuated by the frontal heads of the near oxen; a sophisticated and brilliantly successful design.
The fourth (fig. 22) is perhaps less successful but even bolder.
The side of a ship, the Argo , shields along the gunwale, lies in a plane parallel to the background.
In it stand two heroes playing the lyre (one no doubt Orpheus; a third figure is lost), and at either end, outside the ship, a horseman, the Dioscuri again: and all these figures are absolutely frontal like statues.
The difficulties of realisation have not been overcome entirely, but in a  rigid and primitive form this is truly the concept of high relief: statues in the round grouped in a two-dimensional composition.
The phase of confusion is strikingly illustrated in some metopes from a large Doric temple at Selinus in Sicily (fig. 23).
All the figures in the three complete metopes and many in fragments of others turn their faces directly to us, in total disregard of the action they are taking part in, as though smiling at the camera.
Compare this rendering of Herakles carrying off the Kerkopes (mischievous goblins who had annoyed him) with the same scene on a metope from a building at Foce del Sele on the west coast of Italy not far from Paestum, a sanctuary of Hera.
The figures here are carved in a flat plane and in the profile view normal in low relief, which much better illustrates the narrative (fig. 24).
The Doric temple became early popular in the western colonies and many more sets of archaic metopes are known from this area than from the homelands.
It has been suggested that the carved metope was in fact a western idea only later imitated in Greece proper, and that the metopes from the foundations of the Sicyonian Treasury were not from a Sicyonian building but perhaps a Syracusan.
This however is unlikely, and that the idea of decorating a  metope with a figured scene goes back to the beginning of the Doric order is shown by the painted terracotta examples of the seventh century (above, p. 13).
The buildings which these adorned were in large part of timber and terracotta, but they were true Doric temples like those in stone.
The dating of western sculpture is difficult, since there is certainly some provinciality.
The lively and delightful pieces from Foce del Sele are in a style which finds its nearest parallels in minor arts, bronze and terracotta reliefs, and seems outside the main line of sculptural development.
They can hardly be very late in the first half of the sixth century.
Selinus, to the far west along the south coast of Sicily, evidently became very rich very early, and of the many temples, some vast, which rose on its huge acropolis several belong to this early time.
Remains of at least two sets survive which must be older than those of ‘Temple C’(fig. 23), but the date of those is hard to determine.
One shows drapery-folds stacked in a way, based on observation, that becomes regular in Greek art around the middle of the second half of the century, but it is almost impossible to believe that the original date of these carvings is so late.
It has been plausibly argued that the cutting of the folds (which is very shallow) was done during a retouching of the colour (something which must have been a regular operation; on colour see below, p. 28).
The style of the figures is manifestly provincial and need not be so early as it looks at first glance, but it can hardly be after the mid century.
The gables of this temple were adorned with the huge Gorgon-masks in moulded and painted terracotta already mentioned (p. 16).
Painted terracotta decorations for architecture are found in all areas of Greece in the archaic period and later; figure-work too, but that is far commoner in the west than in the rest of Greece and reaches its acme in Etruria.
An enchanting Greek relief (metope or section of a frieze) from Reggio (Rhegium) with two running or dancing nymphs (fig. 25) shows in its sophisticated movement and modelling that it belongs later in the century, but from the fall of the hair we can see that here too the faces were turned towards us.
Of the third type of architectural sculpture, the akroterion, we have fragments from the Acropolis of Athens: a Gorgon in marble.
All the architectural sculpture we have looked at so far is, like the buildings it adorned, in limestone (sandstone at Foce del Sele).
The harder and finer material only made its way slowly in this field.
The modelling of the Gorgon's face resembles that of the Dipylon head (fig. 15), and she stands to her perhaps slightly later sister of Corfu very much as that stands to the Delphi twins (fig. 16): the Attic works have perhaps less charm but more power.
Fragments of this Gorgon's body show that she too was in the knee-run posture.
Later akroteria are often such flying figures; it is a natural choice for the position high above the roof and was probably always common.
Another marble figure of the type from slightly later, towards the mid century, is relatively well preserved: a winged Nike (Victory, fig. 26) from Delos.
Near it was found a fragmentary base with a reference to Chios and names including Archermos.
Pliny names Archermos in a family of Chiot sculptors, and another writer says he was the first to give Nike wings.
Almost certainly in my view the statue belongs to the base and the two were the source of that story and of Pliny's apparently garbled family tree.
Others have thought the figure an akroterion, and one can be fairly certain that the idea of making a free-standing statue in motion was first developed in that architectural context.
The figure is flatly composed, like an ajouré relief, and though head and breast front us the legs are in profile.
One sees here a complementary tendency to the influence of free sculpture on relief apparent in the evolution of high relief: a free-standing statue influenced by the conventions of narrative art.
One other type of statue is integral to the idea of a Doric temple, though not a part of it: the cult-statue within.
A possible survivor is a colossal limestone head wearing a polos (small crown or hat) found outside the temple of Hera at Olympia.
It probably comes from a throned statue of the goddess ‘of simple workmanship’ which Pausanias saw within the temple, Zeus in a helmet standing beside her.
The columns of this building were originally of wood, replaced over the centuries by stone.
Olympia has yielded magnificent bronzework from right through the archaic period, but stone sculpture there in this time is sparse and generally poor.
This limestone head, for all its ambitious scale and care, seems hardly comparable in quality to the best work of the age in marble.
Ripe archaic art
1.
Sculpture: the rise and influence of an East Greek style
So far we have hardly looked east of the Aegean; and it does seem that the distinctive and influential East Greek style made a later start.
The kouroi and early female figures all carry the aura of the block's four faces; the geometric basis of sixth-century East Greek sculpture is curved forms: sphere, ellipsoid, cylinder, cone.
There are naked kouroi from the region, some from Samos colossal, but the marked preference is for clothed figures: an occasional draped kouros (something rare on the mainland or the Cyclades); but female figures are far more frequent, and they show a concern with the rendering of stuff and its relation to the body, clinging or hanging free, quite different from anything we have yet seen.
The beginnings of the style appear in some ivories from the temple of Artemis at Ephesus.
They seem to date from the early sixth century, and while some are pure Greek others are almost purely oriental: a late phase of ‘orientalising’.
One of the most Greek, and most beautiful, is the so-called hawk-priestess (fig. 27), the handle of a wand topped with a hawk; the religion as well as the art of Ephesian Artemis was deeply impregnated with oriental elements.
The round-faced, round-skulled head tops a body on which the skirt is almost a cylinder; and the cylindrical skirt reappears even more emphatically in a magnificent over life-size marble, now headless, dedicated a little later, perhaps already in the second quarter of the century, by one Cheramyes to Hera on Samos (fig. 28).
Structurally there is some resemblance to Daedalic clothed figures of the previous century (Nikandre's dedication, the Auxerre girl) in that the composition is cut at the waist by a belt; a more primitive concept than the unifying pattern of the naked male torso.
Like the Auxerre figure too, Cheramyes's lays one arm (the left) across her breast, while the other is held at the side.
The right hand is closed on the cloak, the broken left no doubt on a bird or a fruit.
The essential  character, however, is a world away from Daedalic angularity.
On a basically cylindrical figure like the hawk-priestess's the swelling forms are modelled with far greater strength and subtlety, due not only to the slightly later date and much larger scale: this is the work of a great sculptor.
This figure also illustrates that other interest, in problems which scarcely seem to have presented themselves to sculptors in the rest of Greece: alike in the patterns discoverable in the pull and hang of clothes, and in the relation of clothes to the body beneath.
This was to be the most influential East Greek contribution to the sculptural tradition.
In Cheramyes's great figure the experiments are not perhaps perfectly integrated but show amazing boldness.
On the back, quite without superficial decoration, the artist has concentrated on revealing the forms of the body, not adapted to a linear pattern but swelling in majestic simplicity under the smooth cloak which originally veiled the hair and falls almost to the ankles, held in the right hand and brought round under the left elbow to be tucked into the belt in front.
The belly swells out under the belt, but the skirt falls thence to the feet free of the legs, and its simple cylinder, fanning out over the feet, is closely channelled in vertical folds which contrast with the smooth cloak (a scheme of oriental origin).
It is in the treatment of the upper torso that the artist really shows his mettle.
An upper garment is drawn diagonally across the breasts, revealing their broad forms and falling loose below them over the tight belt which it conceals at the sides, and it hangs in a shallow curve on the left hip, a long trail on the right.
Where it hangs loose in front it is given wide, shallow vertical folds, plastically carved, and these are crossed by sharp-cut diagonal pleats.
Such a play with different natures of fold in one area of drapery becomes a favourite ploy in the quite other conventions of Hellenistic sculpture (below, p. 199).
It is scarcely found in the intervening period, but its presence here is no accident.
This is the work of an exceptional artist, but he is only carrying further than usual ideas that occupy all archaic East Greek sculptors and are soon transmitted to those of other areas.
This masterpiece lacks its head; but if we look from the hawk-priestess to some marble heads of the later sixth century we see the beginning and end of the tradition in which it must have been made.
Fig. 29 is from Ephesus, from a carved column-drum in the temple of Artemis (below, p. 40).
Others are from similar drums in the temple of Apollo at Didyma, and there is one from a small statue at Miletus.
They show the same combination as the ivory and Cheramyes's statue almost geometrically rounded forms with an extraordinary sensitivity of handling.
Two fragmentary statues with a strong superficial  resemblance to Cheramyes's were found on the Acropolis of Athens; but they are much less subtle, squarer, and the head of one is preserved (fig. 30), long-faced, not at all in the East Greek mould.
It somewhat resembles the Nike of Archermos (fig. 26), much more a colossal sphinx dedicated at Delphi by the Naxians.
There can be little doubt that these are Naxian works, deeply influenced by the East Greek style and transmitting the first impression of that style to Athens where soon, as everywhere, its influence was to become pervasive.
East Greek sculptors soon found ways to make drapery and its relation to the body more complicated.
In the sanctuary of Hera on Samos a long base (fig. 31) bore, between a seated and a reclining figure, four standing, three certainly and perhaps the fourth too girls of varying age, each grasping her skirt in her right hand and holding it out, so that the folds curve and it is drawn tight against the left leg.
Each figure bears its name, the seated Phileia also that of the sculptor Geneleos; the recliner, whose sex is uncertain (the name is mutilated) but is probably a man, is described as dedicator.
It is a ‘portrait’ group, though the lost heads will not have been likenesses: a family (or, if all are women, a group of temple-servants).
Seated and reclining figures are not uncommon in East Greece, and a massive simplicity is their usual character.
In some of the seated some play is made with clinging and hanging stuff, but the principal vehicle for this interest is the standing figure.
When clothes were put on a kouros the forward step made for play between stuff and limb; the forward step and skirt pulled aside were combined in the creation, in the second half of the century, of a new type almost as regular as the kouros and known to us as kore, girl.
Most often she stands with the left foot forward (a borrowing no doubt from the kouros, but it is not like his a full stride, rather so short a step as to seem like a dance-motion), left hand pulling the skirt to the side and letting a swag hang free, right forearm raised forward with an offering.
She wears two garments: a long, short-sleeved shift of thin stuff, the chiton; and over that the himation, a heavy wrap brought over right shoulder and under left arm so that it makes a curved diagonal across the breast, an important accent in this complex design.
Its heavy vertical folds mask much of the body and hang free under the right elbow, while the thin, tight-drawn chiton shows the legs almost as though naked.
Figs. 32–35 are all from the Acropolis of Athens, but the large 594 (fig. 32) is probably East Greek work.
It displays the extraordinary virtuosity which this scheme encourages, but has at the same  time great sculptural power.
More typical is 674 (fig. 33): small, elegant, pretty, slight; but the face 643 (fig. 34) shows how much strength, as well as exquisite subtlety, can be achieved in this style.
681 (fig. 35), a little earlier than these last (which must belong to the very end of the century), is exceptional in being very large and in having the virtuosity deliberately played down, flattened out, in an attempt which could hardly be quite successful to monumentalise the type.
There are innumerable variations on the basic scheme, but more satisfying than any is Acropolis 679 (fig. 39).
Influence from East Greece becomes general in the second half of the century, not least in Attica, but there native tradition remains powerful too.
We have more archaic sculpture from Athens than from anywhere else.
An economic and political crisis around 600 was resolved by the reforms of Solon.
His economic measures bore fruit, but the constitution was overturned by Peisistratos, who made himself tyrant early in the second quarter and held power (with interruptions) and his sons after him till the expulsion of Hippias in 510.
They were patrons of the arts, and the Acropolis became covered with dedications and decorated buildings.
These were thrown down by the Persian invaders in 480, and shattered remains preserved for us in terraces and foundations of the fifth century.
We noticed the early Gorgon-akroterion in marble (above, p. 21).
Most of the architectural sculpture from  the Acropolis is in limestone: pediments, some from small buildings, some from large temples.
The small ones show mythological scenes, but from the temples are several groups of lions pulling down bulls: terror-symbols analogous to the Gorgons and leopards at Corfu.
The latest of these (very fine) was probably flanked by two mythological groups: Herakles and Triton, and a three-bodied man-snake of uncertain identity (fig. 36).
These are still before the mid century, and the splendid style is closely paralleled in a marble work of subtler finish, the statue of a calf-bearer (fig. 37) dedicated by one Rhombos (probably; the beginning of the name is lost).
The powerful structure is in the direct tradition of early Attic heads (fig. 15), but has been brought far closer to natural forms.
The man stands like a kouros, left foot forward, but differs from one not only in the calf and the arms raised to hold it, but in having a beard and a cloak.
The garment leaves the front of the body bare, and clings tightly to the parts it does cover, marked only by the hems and a tiny free hang below the elbows.
Cloak and beard are symbolic, turning the traditional statue (naked youth) into a ‘portrait’ of the dedicator making his eternal offering.
The artist has achieved more than that though; he has created a real group.
You cannot think the calf away: man and beast are integrated into one whole; and there is an intimacy and charm, reached partly by a slight shift off centre of the man's head, a slight tilt of the animal's.
The eyes were inlaid (so also 681, fig. 35, where there are remains of glass and a metal socket), and hair, beard, cloak, calf will have been painted.
The limestone sculpture (fig. 36) is covered with paint, but other marbles preserve much colour and show that it was more selectively applied, the skin being left in the bare marble, the texture of which can be sensed also through the colour.
Colouring is unnaturalistic: blue beard on fig. 36, carmine hair on fig. 39.
There are very many sixth-century kouroi from all over the Greek world.
They form an incomparably useful line on which to trace the gradual mastery of natural forms, and a few of them are great works of sculpture.
One of the grandest is a colossal torso of the mid century from Megara (fig. 38): all the power of the youth from Sunium (fig. 14) with a new subtlety.
The calf-bearer is one of the comparatively few male figures dedicated on the Acropolis.
The long series of girls begins before that with some rather blockish figures in the simple symmetrical belted dress of mainland tradition.
Around the mid century the new complex fashion comes in from East Greece, but later than the first of these is the last of the old, the exquisite ‘Peplos kore’(679, fig. 39).
Here the Athenian artist (the face is directly in the tradition of the calf-bearer) has learnt from beyond the Aegean to realise the body under the clothes but has rejected the elaborate  schema.
Face and figure are vibrant with life, yet seem in no way constricted by the old formal structure.
This masterpiece gives us the classical moment of the archaic style.
The last archaic temple on the Acropolis, built by the sons of Peisistratos perhaps around 520, had marble pediments, one a group of lions and bull, the other a battle of Gods and Giants; fine work but horribly ruined.
Not much later the temple of Apollo at Delphi was rebuilt.
The contractors were a rich aristocratic family of Attica, the Alkmaionidai, exiled for opposition to Peisistratos, and they evidently employed an Attic artist.
The west pediment, a Gigantomachy, was in limestone, but the east front was finished in marble.
The pediment showed a rather stilted composition: a frontal chariot, probably an epiphany of the god, flanked by kouroi and korai, groups of lions pulling down stags in the corners.
The korai, and a fine Nike-akroterion, are strikingly like the big kore 681 from the Acropolis, fig. 35.
The base on which this is probably rightly set bears the signature of Antenor.
He, we know, was employed by the young democracy of Athens at the end of the century to make bronze statues of the Tyrannicides two aristocrats who had failed in an attempt on the life of Hippias but killed his brother Hipparchos.
The same man might well have worked for the Alkmaionidai in exile.
None of these Athenian Doric temples had carved metopes, but fine big relief-slabs from the Acropolis (fig. 40) seem architectural and have been thought part of a continuous frieze from the Peisistratid temple, like that of the fifth-century Parthenon.
The style, however, seems decidedly later than that of the pediments and the pertinence is not sure.
These slabs are carved in low relief, which is also used on a series of Attic tombstones.
We noticed that some graves in the eighth century had a plain stone beside the big Geometric vase.
About the time of the early Attic kouroi, some of which (e.g. fig. 15) stood on graves, a fashion begins for a tall, narrow tombstone supporting a sphinx.
Later the stele is adorned in low relief, sometimes still with a sphinx (fig. 41), sometimes with simpler palmette-finial.
Generally there is a single figure, as suits the shape and purpose, but sometimes a second is added, as in fig 41: brother and sister, as the epitaph tells us, the monument erected by their parents.
Reliefs or statues on Attic graves in this period seem to have been a fashion among the rich aristocracy, especially for those who died young.
The statues (a late example, fig. 72) seem always to have been undifferentiated kouroi or korai, but the stelai, perhaps because low relief belongs essentially to narrative art, show the dead man bearded or beardless and often as warrior or athlete.
Splendid examples are a youth with a discus and a bearded boxer, his hand bound with thongs, the face almost a portrait as we understand the term.
The quality can be very fine indeed, as in the exquisite youth's head, fig. 42.
Women's stelai are much less common, and a broader format is sometimes, perhaps regularly, used, the figure seated; so the lovely mother and child, fig. 43.
Low relief was also used for bases, of statues (fig. 94) or of stelai (fig. 44).
The heads of these charming horsemen are so like that of the boxer that one might think his was the stele this base supported.
Statue-bases and stelai from Attica are sometimes signed, and the artist sometimes indicates that he is not Attic but Cycladic, at least in origin (so Aristion of Paros).
Much fine sculpture of the period has been found on Paros and Naxos as well as other islands, especially kouroi and korai.
There is a big series of kouroi from Boeotia, others and other types from the Peloponnese and elsewhere.
Samos has yielded stelai with floral finials but no figures; Laconia an uncouth series of limestone reliefs, gravestones or dedications to the heroised dead.
There are beautiful marbles from Cyrene in Libya; and the west has produced other things besides the architectural sculptures noticed in the last chapter.
In the next chapter we shall touch on archaic sculpture again, but there is no room to do justice to all its riches.
2.
Painting and vase-painting
By a rare chance some fragmentary wooden panels with pictures of high quality, datable to the third quarter of the sixth century, have been found in a cave at Pitsa near Sicyon.
They are small easel-pictures, but stand clearly apart from vase-painting and in the tradition of wall-painting as we glimpsed its beginning on the Chigi vase (fig. 18) a century earlier.
The most complete (fig. 45) is a charming picture of a family going to sacrifice at an altar.
The ground is white, and  on it women's skin is outlined in red, men's and boys' in black filled in with a pinkish colour, the same distinction as on the Thermon metopes (above, p. 13), and clothes are in flat washes of clear, bright red and blue.
Names are written beside the figures in the Corinthian alphabet, and a dedication to the Nymphs by a Corinthian whose name is lost.
The writing on the background, the figures all in profile, their feet all on the base-line: these are the same conventions as are kept in contemporary vase-painting, but the effect is wholly other; not only in colouring but in composition.
The figures are irregularly spaced and of varying heights, like those on the much earlier Argive fragment (fig. 17).
Before the end of the seventh century the black-figure convention had been accepted by Attic vase-painters to the virtual exclusion of any other, even when they painted flat plaques analogous in intention to the wooden ones.
Corinthian vase-painters use more colour, and on plaques approximate to the manner of panel painters.
Some other centres produced figured vases in outline and polychromy.
Athenian work, however, dominates sixth-century vase-painting, not only by the quantity produced and exported but by the superb quality of the best.
The first Attic black-figure coincides with the last phase of the old Geometric and orientalising tradition of the monumental grave-vase.
Comparing the Gorgons on the body of the amphora fig. 46 with those in fig. 9, or the better-preserved pictures on the necks of the two vases, one sees why vase-painters felt black-figure a better decorative system for their  curved surfaces.
This type of grave-marker, however, now gave place to marble monuments, and the masterpieces of sixth-century black-figure are on a more modest scale.
After a generation in which we can detect only rather humdrum work in the Kerameikos, the Athenians established their supremacy in the second quarter of the century.
For us the key piece of this period is the François vase (detail, fig. 47), found in an Etruscan tomb at Chiusi; Athens is now capturing the western market from Corinth.
It is more than two feet high, a very big vase for its time but little more than half the height of the grave-vase fig. 46.
In place of the few massy figures on that we see scores of small ones, ranged in six registers which give us seven stories from legend as well as a band of animals and florals, a battle of Pygmies and cranes on the foot, and other figures on the flat of the handles.
Everyone is named (many things too) and on each side are the signatures of the potter Ergotimos and the painter Kleitias, who share a wonderful precision of eye and hand, combining elegance with strength.
Besides the detail I illustrate (fig. 48) a fragment of another vase painted by Kleitias and dedicated on the Acropolis, where the surface is better preserved.
The François vase is a krater (mixing-bowl for wine and water), a shape with many varieties of which this, with high-swung volute-handles, only becomes regular  in clay later.
Ergotimos had looked to a metal model (a slightly later example is the superb huge bronze from Vix, fig. 58), but he has rethought it in his own medium.
Kleitias's style tends to miniaturism, and a miniature tradition develops from it, especially on cups.
The type of cup commonest at this time is shown in fig. 49, by a decent but less distinguished painter, whose love of rich colour, red and white, links him to Corinth.
Ergotimos and Kleitias seem to be the inventors of a more elegant type, the ‘Little Master’, which in the next generation settled into two forms, ‘Lip-cup’(fig. 50) and ‘Band-cup’(fig. 51).
They are decorated in a miniature style, and the name ‘Little Master’ derives from the German use of Kleinmeister for the minor artists around Dürer in the sixteenth century.
An integral part of lip-cup decoration is an inscription, often a signature.
One potter names Ergotimos as his father; and Tleson, who signed the cup in fig. 50 as well as many of the best others, names Nearchos as his.
We have works signed by Nearchos both as potter and painter (fig. 52).
This lovely fragment from a larger drinking-vessel, the kantharos (one is held by Dionysos often, as in fig. 56), shows how Kleitias's elegant strength could be raised to monumental weight and power; and it is this combination that marks the central tradition in Attic black-figure.
One painter who carried it on was Lydos, active from before the middle of the century (fig. 53) for many years; a younger and greater, potter as well as painter (but see below, p. 68) is Exekias (figs. 54, 55).
Figs. 53 and 54 are plaques, not dedications (like the Pitsa panels and many clay pieces) but facings from built tombs, the last ceramic monuments among the marbles of sixth-century Attic graveyards.
These are serious painters, Exekias (like Nearchos before him) showing sometimes a sensitivity of feeling one would hardly have thought attainable in this formal decorative medium.
An agreeable contrast is furnished by the light-hearted productions of an exquisite artist who worked with, and may have been identical with, a potter Amasis (fig. 56).
The surface of this vase has  suffered, but the figures on the right show the skilful, sophisticated rendering of this roistering scene.
If the mood contrasts with Exekias's hieratic death of Penthesilea (fig. 55), the handling sets it off as sharply from the no less charming but more rustic picture in fig. 57.
This is an early example of a class made outside Athens from before the middle of the century till towards its end.
Known as ‘Chalcidian’ from the alphabet its painters use, it was probably made by Greek colonists in South Italy.
Analogous to these are some fine vases, all of one shape (hydria, water-pot) and decorated probably by only two painters, found mostly at Caere in Etruria and probably made in the Greek quarter there.
Good black-figure cups were produced in Laconia, and clumsy imitations of Attic in Boeotia and Euboea.
There are also independent traditions in the Cyclades and East Greece; but the central line of vase-painting is now and for many years to come in Athens.
3.
Other arts
During this period Greek sculptors learnt, no doubt from the East, to hollow-cast bronze statues on a large scale.
Almost nothing survives, however, and the real significance of this immensely important development comes later (below, p. 51).
Bronze statuettes, often very fine, continue to be cast solid, and these are o–ten very bold and free in pose and structure.
Here, as in pediment-groups and the high relief of metopes, sculptors worked out ideas which ultimately undermined the accepted conventions of archaic art.
Such statuettes often adorned vessels.
One such vessel, the masterpiece of archaic metal-work, is a prodigious volute-krater (the shape of the François vase but two and a half times as high) found in the grave of a Gaulish princess at Vix on the upper Seine (fig. 58).
The grave is of the late sixth century, but the krater was probably  made some decades earlier, most likely in Laconia though some argue for a South Italian colony.
Without this single find in a remote country we should only have doubtful knowledge, from some remarks in Herodotus, of archaic decorative metal-work on this scale.
Another archaic art-form known to us only from one find is the gold-and-ivory cult-statue: not on the vast scale of Pheidias's creations in the next century (below, p. 102), but fragments of several life-size figures have been found buried under the Sacred Way at Delphi, probably from a burned treasury.
The series of bronze statuettes is paralleled by terracottas, slighter, poorer work as a rule but some very fine.
A small-scale art which reaches the heights is that of seal-engraving.
After the dark age this was revived in the seventh century, evidently under the influence of Bronze-age stones, and the centre of production seems then to have been the Cyclades (above, p. 8).
It is especially in East Greece that in the middle and later sixth century engravers (like two Samians, Theodoros and Mnesarchos, father of the philosopher Pythagoras) produce the first tiny masterpieces of this art which is to flourish on through classical and Hellenistic times.
Fig. 59, an Ionian reveller, or perhaps rather serving-boy, with cup and jug, may stand for them; as may fig. 60 with its charming nymphs and their wine-jar, for the related craft of die-sinking.
This is a silver coin of Macedon.
The great change: late archaic and early classical
1.
Late archaic architectural marbles
Work like the Peplos kore (fig. 39), Exekias's neck-amphora (fig. 55) or the Vix krater (fig. 58) show archaic Greek art in its assured prime: craftsmen who are masters of their craft can develop their styles and express what they want happily within the general limitations of inherited convention.
In the work of the next generation or two one often feels that this balance is lost or only precariously preserved.
Sculptors of korai seem often content with virtuosity and prettiness which can become trivial (cf. fig. 33); or if, like Antenor in fig. 3 5, they try to monumentalise the form, the effect is uneasy.
In much of the best late sixth-century work one senses a struggle, the artist hardly able to contain his vision within the conventions he has not yet brought himself to break.
There are hints of this even earlier.
It seems a miracle that Exekias can make black-figure carry all he puts into it, while sculptors working on the decoration of buildings sidestep the conventions they respect in their independent statues.
A particularly instructive example is not a temple but an exquisite and in part well-preserved little marble building, the treasury set up at Delphi by the islanders of Siphnos.
We know enough of the historical background to be sure that it was built little before 525 B.C.
Such ‘treasuries’ abound at Delphi and Olympia: a small building raised by an individual city to house offerings and to glorify the place which erected it.
They are like miniature temples: one gabled room, entered through a columned porch but without a surrounding colonnade.
The buildings we have looked at so far have all been ‘Doric’, the order (style) evolved for temples in mainland and western Greece (above, p. 15).
During the sixth century another order, ‘Ionic’, was brought into being east of the Aegean.
While all early Doric temples are in limestone (generally with a wash of marble-stucco) Ionic from the start are usually in marble; and the harder, finer stone encourages a taste, not found in Doric, for marking junctions with bands of delicately carved ornament.
Other related differences are in the number and nature of flutes on a column, which has a moulded base as well as the complex volute capital, and the division of the architrave into three registers.
An example from the later fifth century is illustrated in fig. 166.
At frieze-level there are not triglyphs and metopes but usually a row of small, close-set blocks, dentils, which offer no field for figure-carving.
There is more variety of design between buildings than in Doric, and at first no regularly accepted positions for sculptural decoration.
Some temples are on a huge scale, unparalleled on the mainland, with a forest of columns suggesting, and no doubt suggested by, Egyptian or Near-Eastern buildings.
Such are the temples of Hera on Samos, Artemis at Ephesus and Apollo at Didyma near Miletus; the last two with sculpture of which only tantalising scraps remain.
Both had some drums of some columns carved with figure-scenes (above, p. 24 with fig. 29), and both stretches of low relief carved on a continuous band: at Didyma parts of the architrave, at Ephesus parts of the gutter.
A frieze in relief along all four sides of the building was to become the accepted vehicle for figure-sculpture in classical Ionic, but in a different position from either of these: above the architrave, either below the dentils or replacing them (fig. 166), corresponding to the metopes and triglyphs in Doric.
The first building so adorned which we know of is the Siphnian treasury, which is Ionic in character though it lacks the typical capitals, since instead of columns in the porch it had two Caryatids: supports in the form of girls, here canonical korai of immense elaboration.
The pediments also bore sculptures, but those from the front are lost while those from the rear, for whatever reason, are markedly inferior to the rest of the work.
The importance of the building for the history of sculpture lies in its superb frieze, or rather friezes, since the four sides have different subjects and show two distinct styles.
The building, which faces west, lies below a turn in the Sacred Way which zigzags up the steep site to the  temple, on a little terrace just above the south wall of the sanctuary.
The west frieze was in three slabs.
Hermes at the left end holds the winged horses of Athena's chariot which she is mounting; on the central slab another goddess, almost certainly Aphrodite, steps down from a chariot which faces the other way.
The southern slab is lost, but the design seems to demand a third chariot.
It may have been Hera's, the scene connected with the Judgement of Paris.
Chariots and horses are designed in strict profile and carved with great skill in a series of recessed planes parallel to the background.
It is exquisite work of an artist content with the archaic tradition, and the same designer is clearly at work on the fragments of the long south frieze (chariots, horsemen, an altar; fig. 61).
The long north frieze shows a Gigantomachy, and on one Giant's shield is cut a signature.
It was deliberately defaced in antiquity, but though we cannot read the sculptor's name we can make out that he carved these figures ‘and those at the back’, the east frieze that is.
We do not in fact need this document to tell us that on these two sides we are in the presence of a different master from him of the west and south.
The recessed planes are used in places, but more often they are broken up by bold three-quarterings and massings which give a quite different sense of the third dimension.
The depth of carving is not significantly different, but this artist is clearly strongly influenced by the concept of high relief evolved in metope-sculpture (above, pp. 17ff.).
Design and execution throughout are of the highest quality; but while the artist of west and south is an untroubled archaic, the other is in the van of those whose innovations were to lead to the classical revolution.
The east frieze has a combat before Troy (some painted names of heroes can still be read), and an assembly of gods no doubt disputing its outcome.
The combat is flanked by chariots (fig. 62), which present the sharpest possible contrast with those of south and west.
The teams are shown as though turning into three-quarter view, the charioteer appearing behind them, and the chariots are not carved at all but finished in paint on the background in bold foreshortening.
Painters were no less involved than sculptors in the breakdown of archaic conventions, and this shows how closely they could work together.
Here one would think, and perhaps often, they were the same man (see also below, pp. 64ff.).
The combat is on the right, the assembly on the left; and looked at in isolation this abrupt division of the continuous frieze appears awkward.
When one thinks, however, that coming up the Sacred Way one's first sight of the building would be the corner, the long Gigantomachy stretching in front of one, the combat of the east abutting on it and the seated gods closing the composition at the end, one understands that it is so designed to suit its position; as the formal archaic structure of the west frieze suits the highly decorated frontally approached entrance-façade.
Much thought must have gone into the adornment of this little building.
North and east friezes of the Siphnian treasury stand at the beginning of the late archaic movement which culminated in the classical revolution.
To the end of that phase belongs the sculpture of another treasury, built a little higher up the sanctuary slope by the people of Athens.
It stands on a terrace the top step of which bears an inscription recording a dedication for the victory over the Persians at Marathon in 490.
Pausanias thought this applied to the building.
Some scholars follow him, but the step certainly carried offerings, and the style of the building-sculptures is often felt too early for that date.
It has been thought a monument of the new democracy, immediately after the expulsion of Hippias in 510; by others placed, perhaps most convincingly, somewhere between the two, around 500.
The marble building is Doric, and there was figure-sculpture, now terribly ruined, for akroteria, pediments, and a full circuit of thirty metopes, six on each end, nine down each side.
Hardly anything survives from the gables.
The akroteria included mounted Amazons, a theme which carries on from the metopes.
These had deeds of Herakles and Theseus, and an Amazonomachy, presumably that at Themiscyra, the city of the Amazons, where Theseus accompanied Herakles on his quest for Hippolyta's girdle and himself brought back an Amazon bride, Antiope.
There is little legend attached in early times to the name of Theseus; and his build-up  at this period as a companion and analogue of Herakles seems as a propaganda-figure for the Athenian democracy.
The carving, of superlative quality, shows two styles, analogous to the two styles on the Siphnian treasury though the difference here is less marked.
Some metopes, for instance the beautiful and comparatively well preserved Herakles and the hind (fig. 63), show a precise, linear definition of forms in the archaic tradition.
The broader, freer modelling in others, such as the Theseus and Amazon (fig. 64), looks forward to the classical style.
The tight circle of the composition in the hind metope is relaxed here too, and the tilted heads inform the figures with a tragic emotion lacking in the other.
All however show the full development of the idea of high relief: figures given the bodily roundness of statues but grouped in pictorial compositions against the background to which they are attached.
These metopes are small, not much more than two feet high.
Theseus is shown again at just about the same time, lifting Antiope into his chariot, an over life-size group from a pediment (fig. 65).
The complexity of action and posture demonstrates the liberties sculptors were prepared to take with archaic conventions in the context of gable-structure.
The execution is elaborate almost to the point of fussiness or mannerism, in strange contrast to the bold strength of form and movement.
The group is from the pediment of a temple of Apollo at Eretria in Euboea.
The rare story, part of the new Athenian Theseus-legend, is briefly popular on Attic vases at just this time.
Athens and Eretria were the two cities west of the Aegean which sent help to the Ionians in their ill-fated revolt of 498 against the Persians, and were the object of Persian vengeance in 490.
The two cities were evidently closely linked; and one might possibly see, in the apparent contradiction here between structure and detail, an Athenian artist's design executed by craftsmen trained in another tradition.
Only fragments of this composition survive.
The most important other piece is an upper torso of Athena, who occupied the centre of the gable.
Theseus and Antiope are finely finished all round; but the back of Athena is left rough (an important document for archaic technique) and she clearly stood in the old formal kore-pose.
One might be surprised to find Athena dominating the pediment of a temple of Apollo.
It was the rear gable, but in any case the Greeks seem to have been less concerned than we should expect to relate the decoration closely to the temple's deity.
Athena bears on her breast here a huge Gorgoneion, which perhaps deliberately recalls the terror-mask at the centre of early pediments (fig. 1.9); but the goddess is present here probably as part of the legendary scene: the hero's divine helper.
We see her so with Theseus again on a near-contemporary Attic cup (fig. 98); and it is presumably in the same role that she dominates the latest and best preserved of all archaic pediments, at the two ends of a temple on Aegina, dedicated to Aphaia, a local deity associated with Artemis rather than Athena.
Here we have no historical grounds for dating, but the work is clearly on the border of archaic and classical.
The temple was Doric.
It had akroteria (at the centres elaborate florals supported by small korai, sphinxes at the outer angles); metopes not carved but perhaps painted panels; and marble pediments, each with a battle, Athena in the centre.
Almost certainly these illustrate the two sieges of Troy: by Herakles over the east front and the Homeric in the west.
Herakles was accompanied by Telamon, an Aeginetan hero whose son Ajax was prominent in the second siege.
The style of the west is pure archaic and distinctively earlier than that of the east.
The example of the Delphic treasuries shows that it is not safe to assume that it is actually earlier in date, but it probably is so.
There is evidence that the present east gable is a replacement, made very soon, for another, likewise with a battle, which seems then to have been set up on  a base in the sanctuary, its centre akroterion also.
The remains of these figures resemble the present west pediment in style.
This raises questions at present unanswerable, and complicated by the existence of a second long base in the sanctuary which seems to have supported a pursuit-scene (possibly Zeus and the Nymph Aegina on whom he begot Aiakos, Telamon's father); and this might have been a first west pediment.
Here we can consider only the final versions.
The Athena of the west (fig. 66) stands almost as a kore, only her left foot is turned to the side.
The battle rages on either side of her in two self-contained halves which balance each other closely: a combat; an archer shooting towards the angle; a crouching figure despatching a fallen one; a figure, his head towards the angle, struck down by the bowman's shaft; and beyond him, in the corner, gear (a shield, a helmet).
At a glance the design of the east (fig. 67) looks similar, but it is both less crowded and knit more subtly into a whole.
Athena (largely lost) moved to her left, aegis stretched out before her.
In the combats on either side of her the outer figure falls back and another bends swiftly forward to support him.
The archers face inwards, shooting across the composition into the opposite angle where the stricken victim lies, his feet towards the corner.
The figures on the west still wear the archaic smile.
It has faded from the lips of those in the east, and the dying man on the right has his teeth bared and one eye half closed; a kind of realism found in some late archaic and early classical vase-painting and sometimes in sculpture too.
Many of the figures were excavated in the early nineteenth century and acquired by Ludwig I of Bavaria, for whom some were heavily restored and arbitrarily grouped by the neoclassical Danish sculptor Thorwaldsen.
At the end of the century Furtwängler made a new excavation, finding many more pieces, and he went far towards recovering the compositions on paper.
Lately Ohly excavated further and also removed Thorwaldsen's restorations; and succeeded in arranging the surviving remains in what must be very close indeed to the original scheme: a revelation.
The shooting Herakles from the east (fig. 68) illustrates the beauty of these carvings.
Most pedimental sculpture has a weighty, massive character.
The sinewy elegance of these figures is unusual, and has perhaps to do with the fact that the Aeginetan sculptors are recorded as preeminent in bronze.
A fine bronze head from the Acropolis of Athens is very like in style to the gable-figures, and is surely Aeginetan work.
2.
Sculpture at Athens in the time of the Persian wars
Around the mid sixth century the Greek cities of Asia Minor had come under the control of Croesus of Lydia, and when he fell to Cyrus of Persia in 546 they became part of the huge Persian empire.
In 498 there was an attempt to get free, the Ionian revolt, to which Athens and Eretria sent aid.
It was put down by Darius, who in 490 sent a punitive expedition which burned Eretria but was defeated by the Athenians at Marathon, a victory which became at once a legend.
Ten years later Darius's son Xerxes led a great invasion to conquer Greece for the empire.
In face of this the Greek cities achieved a brief and uneasy degree of unity.
Xerxes's  fleet was destroyed in 480 at Salamis under Athenian leadership, and his army defeated the next year at Plataea under the Spartans.
However, after the initial annihilation of the Spartan force at Thermopylae, Greece north of the Isthmus had been abandoned, and Athens was twice put to sack by the Persians, in 480 and 479.
It is this destruction that has given the wealth of shattered archaic sculpture from the city.
It also gives us a date for the great change: the abandonment of archaic conventions (which we have seen being worked towards for some decades) and the creation of the new, classical, style.
This statement is a simplification in more ways than one.
First, such a change does not take place overnight among all artists; and secondly it is very hard to be certain that a given statue from the Acropolis was actually set up before the invasion.
However, as to the first point it does seem clear that changes once made by a Greek artist were assimilated by others with extraordinary celerity.
On the other question, new temples were not built on the Acropolis until after the middle of the century (a ‘Cimonian Parthenon’ appears to me a mare's nest, and even its proponent does not think it was begun before the sixties; below, p. 93).
It is clear too that sculptural dedications fell off sharply after the return.
The statues in question are inseparable from the archaic series; their freshness of surface suggest that they did not stand long above ground; and it seems to me a reasonable conclusion that they were dedicated in the years immediately before the invasion.
One of them bears a close anatomical resemblance to the marble copies we have after the bronze statues of the Tyrannicides by Kritios and Nesiotes which we know were set up in the Agora, the city centre north-west of the Acropolis, in 477.
This leads some to claim it for immediately after the return, but it can as well be immediately before the flight, and in any case it dates the change securely to the time around 480.
Is there more than a temporal relation between the Persian wars and the change?
In classical art we see the Greeks finally leaving behind any subservience to earlier traditions, and establishing their own style.
One can imagine that if Xerxes had been successful and absorbed Greece into the Persian empire, Greek archaic art might have crystallised in the decorative academic formulae which characterise Achaemenian; while the threat and its repulse can be seen as the catalyst which released the spirit of Hellenism, flowering in the fifth century as richly in literature and thought as in the visual arts.
The girl in fig. 69 is a kore, no different in dress or in formal structure from her sisters, and no one has  doubted that it was before 480 that Euthydikos, whose name appears on the very simple base, dedicated her; but she evidences a revolutionary change of spirit.
The two fragments do not join, but they certainly belong to one figure and they share an extraordinary simplicity.
Prettiness, elegance, virtuosity are out.
The upper garment clings almost as closely to the forms as the under, which is carved without folds while those of the upper are flat and straight, or just indicated in light diagonals across the naked-seeming legs.
But it is in the face that the change is most dramatic: no smile, a deliberate rejection of prettiness and grace; brooding, almost sullen; inturned, as the finest archaic faces seem to shine with an extrovert delight in life.
The polarity between the ideals the kore-type was evolved to express and the new ideals evident here perhaps makes this moving work not quite an artistic success.
Sculptors after this give statues of women a new dress which better suits the changed mood.
It is however in the naked male figure, always the central theme of Greek art, that we first see, alongside the changed spirit, the vital loosening of formal structure by which sculptors of this generation made clear their break with archaic conventions and opened the way to classical developments.
The carving of the features on the youth's head, fig. 70, is so like that of the girl's that they may well be the work of one artist; but this has none of the other's contradictions.
It is known as the fair-haired boy; yellow paint still faintly visible on the hair was much more strongly apparent when it came out of the earth.
The statue cannot have stood long in the weather, and one would guess it one of the last set up before the Persians came, the girl perhaps a few years earlier.
One would no more apply the word pretty to the boy than to her, but here one can speak of charm and surely of beauty; and these qualities are in great part achieved by the tilt.
The girl looks straight before her, as a statue had always done; her brother's head is gently turned and bent.
The same thing is seen in a more hesitant form on another boy (fig. 71), and here the very slight tilt and turn of the head are part of a change in the pose of the whole figure, as they must have been in the fair-haired boy also.
This is the figure mentioned as so resembling the copies of the Tyrannicides that it is known as the Kritian boy.
It is slighter than the fair-haired boy, and the face is a much less powerful evocation of the new spirit, but it is a work of quality and a perfect demonstration of the break with archaic conventions.
Compare it with a late kouros (fig. 72), a larger work set on a grave in central Attica, of one Aristodikos, and beautifully preserved through having been taken down and buried when it cannot have been standing very long, perhaps to avoid desecration by the Persian invader.
This differs from most earlier kouroi in having arms and hands carved free of the sides, but the sculptor has cautiously supported them by struts from hip to wrist: an extremely rare feature in Greek work but regular in marble copies of the Roman period after Greek bronzes; and bronze becomes the favourite medium for freestanding sculpture in the period we are entering.
The anatomy of Aristodikos and the Kritian boy alike is simplified from nature, not quite in the same way, but in both natural forms are perfectly understood; only Aristodikos stands (like Euthydikos's kore) in the formal way a statue has always stood, the other relaxed as a boy might actually stand.
The weight is on the left leg, the loose right bent at the knee, so the plane of the hips is not horizontal.
That of the shoulders is neither quite horizontal nor quite parallel to that of the hips, and the head is very slightly bent and distinctly turned to the figure's right.
These relaxations are minimal but vital.
They open to the sculptor a whole new world in the balance of straight and bent limbs, taut and slack muscles.
Henceforward the composition of a statue is based on its structure, not on its surface pattern.
Euthydikos's kore is classical in spirit but stands formally within the archaic series.
What we may see as the first classical statue of a draped woman, corresponding to the naked male of the Kritian boy, is  likewise from the Acropolis and could likewise have been set there just before or just after the interruptions of 480/79.
It is a figure of Athena (fig. 73), headless, which stood on a column inscribed with the names of Angelitos as dedicator and Euenor as maker.
The goddess wears her aegis symmetrically over both shoulders, and under it not himation and chiton but a peplos, in a different form from the archaic (fig. 39).
It is a single piece of thick stuff fastened (as other representations show) on the right shoulder, the unjoined edges meeting down the right side in a broad simple pattern of stepped folds.
It is belted over a long overfold the lower edge of which makes a second horizontal accent, less marked and less regular than that of the belt.
The weight is on the left leg, and the bent right knee breaks the folds of the skirt, but over the left leg in front and the right behind the heavy stuff falls in broadly spaced columnar verticals.
The right hand was high and rested on a vertical spear, the left is on the hip.
The left shoulder is a little forward, and the long, narrow strip of hair down the back, the helmet-crest following it, shows that the head was slightly turned in that direction.
This is the first statement of a theme, the fluted skirt broken by one knee, variations on which were to engage sculptors throughout the classical age (cf. figs. 80, 124, 142, 159, 161, 162, 190, 202).
A different treatment of the same garment, the columnar folds hanging virtually unbroken, is shown on a beautiful tiny relief from the Acropolis (fig. 74).
This scheme too is found in free-standing statues (e.g. figs. 75, 76), but only among the first generation or two of classical sculptors.
On the relief the girl Athena, without aegis or shield (she is shown now even without helmet, or with it in her hand) leans on her spear, hand on hip, looking down at a small stele.
We do not know what is meant.
She has been called the mourning Athena, since the bent head suggests grief.
This is fashionably dismissed as a sentimental modern aberration, but it is how I read the figure.
The way the long folds follow the lean of the body instead of falling vertically is a primitive touch (offset by the charming observation of the skirt-edge caught on the lifted heel), but the treatment of the face seems to fix the work later than any we have so far looked at.
If the dedication must have been made after the return, might the goddess be shown mourning her ruined citadel?
3.
Bronze statuary and Roman copies
Historical circumstances allow us to trace the change from archaic to classical most clearly in Athens, but other cities — Argos, Sicyon, Aegina — figure largely in the literary sources for this period, especially for their artists in bronze, and it is likely that these were prominent in the revolution.
Greek tradition ascribed the ‘invention’ of bronze-casting to two Samians, Rhoikos and Theodoros, who worked for the tyrant Polykrates as architects (Theodoros also as gem-engraver, above p. 39).
Their date is unsure, perhaps around the mid sixth century, and it seems likely that it was near that time that Greek sculptors did learn to hollow-cast bronze on a large scale.
We now possess one over life-size kouros in bronze, found in Piraeus in a cache of statues of various dates and origin.
Its rather  strange style finds its nearest parallels in the third quarter of the century, and primitive elements in the technique suggest that it is an early piece of its kind.
It differs from most kouroi in having the right foot forward and the arms raised from the elbow, something (probably a bow) grasped in the left fist and something lying on the open right palm.
Such a scheme is described for cult-statues of Apollo, and this was probably one.
The character of the design does not differ from that of contemporary marbles, but arms and hands free of the body (cf. fig. 72 where, in spite of the struts, the hands are lost) demonstrate the much greater tensile strength of bronze, which was to allow its use in the classical period for compositions which the Greek marble-worker would have shunned.
All Greek bronzes were probably cast by some form of the lost wax process.
In hollow-casting by the direct lost wax method, a core is modelled in clay on a metal armature, the surface finished in wax to the thickness aimed at for the bronze.
Bronze tie-rods are built in to hold the core to a clay mould then applied round the wax.
The wax is melted out and molten bronze run in.
The mould is broken away from the hardened bronze, the ends of the tie-rods sawn off, faults patched and the surface cleaned; and though much fine detail was completed in the model, more can be chiselled on the cold bronze.
In the indirect method the model can be of any material.
A mould is made round it in detachable pieces, and in these a wax casting-mould is moulded or cast and then filled with a core; and the bronze is cast from this as in the direct method.
The mould-pieces are removed, and in principle can be used again to produce an identical statue, but there is little evidence for this being done in Greece.
From the beginning of the classical period large bronzes were regularly cast in sections, which is impossible in the direct method but easy in the indirect.
The Piraeus kouros appears to have an iron armature inside, so was cast in one piece (one of the advantages of sectional casting is that the core can be removed); but it has not been properly studied or published and we cannot say what methods were used; nor do we know what was the nature of Rhoikos' and Theodoros's innovation.
Our discussion has already made apparent a great paucity of large-scale bronzes compared to what survives in marble.
The reason is simple.
Marble can be sawn or broken up for building or burned for lime, and a great deal has certainly gone that way; but the melting down of bronze for conversion to tools, utensils, armour, coin, is far more tempting.
In fact almost every large Greek bronze we have owes its survival to some accident which sequestered it in antiquity: a shipwreck, a fall of rock.
Thus from this moment, the beginning of the classical period, when bronze becomes the favourite material for freestanding statues, the number of originals which has come down to us is sadly small.
We have marvellous architectural sculpture, tombstones, votive reliefs and other things which continued to be made in marble; but most of what the Greeks themselves, and the Romans after them, considered the masterpieces of their sculptors are gone.
An inadequate compensation is provided.
This period, which saw the triumph of bronze, is also the first which interested Roman collectors.
The demand for Greek work in the early centuries of the Empire far exceeded the supply, and a  busy industry arose in the production of marble copies (few could afford bronze) after popular bronze (and rarer marble) types.
Hundreds of these survive; and though they can never be a substitute for the originals, and raise very difficult problems of reliability, the best are beautiful and many are of real value to the art historian.
We shall often have to invoke them in the following chapters, though we shall rely all we can on originals.
By luck we have one original bronze which can be dated to the earliest classical phase, immediately after the Persian defeat, and one pair of marble copies after bronze originals of the same time.
The copies are of the Tyrannic ides, Harmodios and Aristogeiton, by Kritios and Nesiotes (the nature of whose collaboration we do not know), set up in the Agora at Athens in 477/6 to replace those by Antenor, carried off to Persepolis by Xerxes.
Antenor's were returned to Athens after Alexander's conquest, and stood beside their successors in Hellenistic and Roman times, but we know that the copies we have are from the second pair because they correspond to sketches on Athenian vases of the fifth century when the others were not available.
What those looked like we do not know, but they too were in bronze.
Antenor also signed the base of a marble statue (fig. 35).
He belonged to a transitional phase, but it is likely that most sculptors at most times, though some certainly worked chiefly in one material, were at home in both.
The later group are figures in action.
All the freestanding statues we have so far seen have been quiet.
The rendering of figures in action had been developed in pedimental sculpture, and perhaps extended occasionally to an independent group in the later sixth century: a fine marble torso from the Acropolis, under life-size, These us fighting one of his opponents, seems not to be from a pediment.
In the new age the ‘action statue’ becomes a regular art-form.
Since action implies narrative, such figures are generally designed primarily for a profile view (cf. above, p. 14), while the ‘repose-statue’(the Kritian boy, Euenor's Athena and their successors) is meant to be seen from the front, like kouros and kore.
The second Tyrannicide pair exists in fairly complete copies in Naples (probably from Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli) and fragments of others.
The statues are on separate bases and the original disposition is unsure.
Aristogeiton had his left arm extended, a cloak over it, his right back with a sword, so that his body is half turned to his right.
Young Harmodios, left arm back, half turns the other way, his right swinging the sword behind his head for a cutting stroke, the sharply bent elbow a peak at the top.
They are generally arranged back to back, and a rough little relief of Roman date shows that then at least they were so set.
The fifth century sketches are inconclusive on this point, and some scholars prefer to place them front to front.
In the fifth-century versions Aristogeiton is a pace in front, on the Roman relief a pace behind — perhaps only for clarity; in the original they may have been level.
They are generally thought to be striking at Hipparchos not shown, an interesting but rather surprising concept; one might rather see them as defending themselves against the bodyguard which cut them down.
It will be seen that these copies raise many problems, yet they are an unusually straightforward case.
We know the authors and date of the work copied, and the identification is sure.
They have the awkward  supports and struts which mark and mar marble copies after bronze, and the crisp detail and bright surface of the metal are dulled in the stone.
We shall meet copies in which something of the original beauty seems to live through these disadvantages.
Here we get little beyond some knowledge of the design of these figures; but that is something.
The original we possess from these years is the famous charioteer of Delphi (fig. 75).
Like most Greek bronzes this was cast in several sections: skirt, upper torso, limbs (one can see where the lost left arm was attached): and the side-curls separately from the separate head.
Less the arm the figure is complete in itself, but it was part of a larger whole: a four-horse team, the charioteer in the car holding the reins, possibly the dedicator as a warrior behind him on the ground or mounting, probably a groom at the horses' heads (a small-scale arm was found, as well as scraps of the horses' legs and tails).
The group was buried in a rock-fall (a common  occurrence at the site); the rest no doubt salvaged for scrap, these pieces preserved for us.
One piece of the inscribed marble base survives with them, and shows that the dedicator was a Sicilian, one of the Deinomenid family who made themselves tyrants in these years of Syracuse and other cities.
A line erased and recut seems to have described him originally as tyrant of Gel a, and the political events reflected in this claim and its cancellation can only belong to the seventies.
The dedication is for a victory in the Pythian games, and the possible occasions are 478 and 474.
Thus it is very close in time to the Tyrannicides; and the face has very much the character of Harmodios or the Kritian boy.
Names and schools have been freely suggested, but where one guess is as good as another one had better ignore them all.
The fragments show that the horses were standing, or walking quietly (a lovely little contemporary chariot-horse from Olympia may help us see them; and cf. fig. 84), and the charioteer stands quite still, feet together, weight evenly distributed, hands forward with the reins (perhaps a goad also in the left).
There is a slight twist of the torso to the proper right, and the head is turned a little further.
The treatment of the short-sleeved belted chit on of light material is assimilated in the taste of the time to that of the heavy chit on (figs. 73–4, 76), though the structure of the garment is quite different.
The deeply fluted skirt is unbroken by the limbs beneath.
Cords over the shoulders and under the armpits cross on the back to hold the garment down at speed, and break up the surface in a more superficial pattern of folds.
Arms and hands, feet, are modelled with a finely controlled naturalism, while the hair on the scalp is exquisitely engraved in a design of still archaic formality.
There is silver on the hair band, copper on the lips, and the eyes are inset in coloured glass.
The face has the deliberately expressionless gravity of early classical.
Often this is modified or informed by a tilt of the head affecting the character of the whole figure.
That it is  not so here is perhaps because the charioteer was not designed to be looked at on its own but as part of a larger whole.
Several statues of women in the peplos show the same unbroken or scarcely broken skirt.
Most impressive is the ‘Hestia Giustiniani’(fig. 76; the best known copy was long in the hands of the Giustiniani, and the statue certainly represents a goddess, though perhaps rather Demeter, Hera or even Aphrodite than the rarely represented Hestia).
The belt here is hidden under the over fall, and a further garment, a veil, is worn over head and shoulders.
The heavy stuff masks the whole body, but the structure is as clearly realised as in the Peplos kore (fig. 39).
The fall of the skirt is slightly broken at the back but in front shows columnar fluting, like the charioteer but fuller and broader.
The treatment varies a little in different copies; but though one always feels the mechanical copyist's hand and the loss of the glancing metal, all convey a consistent beauty and power which surely reflect a masterpiece.
The back of the right hand rests on the hip; the left, lost or restored, certainly held an upright sceptre.
She looks a little to her right, and this is a case where the even classical features are somehow charged with meaning.
The simple, broad-based figure calls for no supports or struts to betray a bronze original; but the treatment of face and forehead-hair is so like that on two male figures, one a bronze original, the other known in many marble copies certainly after a bronze, that one can be pretty confident that that was the material here too.
The statue known in copies is of a long-haired youth, almost certainly Apollo.
The work, evidently popular; is known in several nearly complete figures or torsos and a dozen heads.
The independent head or bust is not a sculptural type known to the Greeks (except in the special case of the Herm, below p. 119); and the common copying in the Roman period of the heads alone from Greek statues shows a failure of understanding.
Two copies of this figure are outstanding.
One in the British Museum (fig. 77) has been known since the eighteenth century and is called the Choiseul-Gouffier Apollo after a former owner.
The other, found in the theatre at Athens, is known as the Omphalos Apollo (fig. 78), since a base in that form lay near; but this is now seen not to belong.
It would have clinched the identification as Apollo, which is probably correct: a head was found in the temple of Apollo at Cyrene; and the long, braided hair bound round the head, though a fashion of gilded youth at the beginning of the century (the fair-haired boy, fig. 70), was probably by now a sign of divine or heroic status (cf. fig. 79).
With these statues we are well into the second quarter, probably the sixties or even fifties.
He stands with his weight on the right foot, his face lightly  turned in that direction.
The Kritian boy looked even more slightly to his right, but his weight was on the other leg.
From now on the head is generally turned in the direction of the firm foot.
The anatomy is also more strongly stressed in this than in the earlier statue, perhaps to tell against reflections in the shiny metal; and this is something that becomes even more marked in succeeding generations.
Copies seem to have been made from casts of the original, with the help of a pointing machine which allowed certain basic measurements to be reproduced mechanically.
Within this framework, common to every copy and reflecting the original, there is considerable variation in detail.
These two are very close to one another and probably reproduce the original fairly faithfully, but they are not identical.
The finish of the Athens copy seems both clearer and subtler, though this is no doubt due in part to overworking of the Choiseul-Gouffier during its long modern history.
In spite of this, and of its stump and strut, the Choiseul-Gouffier, perhaps because of the mutilation of face and feet in the other, makes on me a more powerful and moving impression.
Here too, though not so strongly as in the Hestia, I seem to glimpse a masterpiece behind the marble.
Hestia and Apollo are repose-figures (above, p. 52) in the central tradition.
The original bronze which goes with them is an action-figure: an over life-size bearded god, naked, striding, left arm straight out in front, right back and up to hurl some weapon (fig. 79).
This is often restored as a trident and the god called Poseidon; but a trident-head would sit awkwardly with the head of the god, and a hurled trident is hard to parallel (as a fish-spear it is stabbed with, not loosed: cf. fig. 212).
Almost certainly it is Zeus with a thunderbolt; that is usually grasped in the fist, but this open grip is found.
The statue was dredged from a ship wrecked off Cape Artemision at the north of Euboea, with later works (below, p. 204).
It is often called the god from the sea, and this may have encouraged the identification as Poseidon.
The figure is widely extended in one plane, evidently designed for a primary view from an area in front of the torso with the head approximately in profile.
The opposite view, with the fine back, is good too, but in between the extended limbs telescope awkwardly though the full-face is splendid.
This ‘two-dimensionality’ of composition (the statue is of course fully realised in three dimensions) is common in classical action-statues (cf. fig. 157), and is inherent in the narrative character which relates them to gable sculpture.
The hair is like Apollo's, and it is particularly in the incisive detail of the head that one sees how much one loses in the marble.
The figure is burlier, as suits a senior god.
I have no doubt that these three great creations represent the work if not of one artist at least of one school; possibly Argos or Sicyon, both prominent at this time.
The athlete statues of Polykleitos, later in the century, might well stem from this tradition, and he is claimed for both cities.
We have no bronze original which stands to the Hestia as the Zeus to the Apollo.
The charioteer is the nearest, but he is earlier and surely from another school, a man, and wearing a different, lighter garment.
There are however very many statuettes (freestanding, mirror-handles, supports), some very fine, which show a variety of types of ‘woman in peplos’.
Perhaps the most beautiful is from Delphi, a girl supporting an incense-burner (fig. 80).
Here we have the glancing metal and the freshness of original work, but besides the small scale the skirt is strongly broken by the left knee and the whole treatment is looser and freer than in the Hestia.
In feeling, though not in detail, this stands closer perhaps to another figure known in many copies through which a really great original seems to shine: ‘Amelung's goddess’(fig. 81), after the scholar who reconstructed her from copies of the head (known by a quaint tradition as ‘Aspasia’) and of the body, one with a Roman portrait-head.
He has since been proved right by the discovery first of a statuette, then of an unfinished statue, which combine head and body.
She does not wear the peplos, but the old chit on and himation, treated however entirely in the new spirit.
The close folds of the fine chit on appear only near the feet.
Above that a heavy mantle is wrapped all round the body and brought over the head.
The right hand is on the breast under the mantle.
The open left issues from the wraps at waist-level, close vertical folds hanging from the wrist, while over the rest the stuff lies in broad, smooth areas cut by a few sharp  folds determined by the left knee.
She looks a little to her left.
The face is younger and tenderer than the Hestia's.
The work is surely from a different school, and there is nothing here to say for certain whether the original was in bronze or marble.
‘Truth to material’, like any other passionately held belief, can inspire good work, but it is no more a necessary than it is a sufficient condition, and Greek art is none the worse for being innocent of the notion.
This figure is often confidently stated to copy a famous statue which stood on the Acropolis, the ‘Sosandra’ by Kalamis (which in turn is identified, probably rightly, with an Aphrodite by the same artist on the same site).
The sole grounds are that Kalamis belongs to this period and that the Sosandra's head was covered.
There are more cogent reasons for believing that ‘Amelung's goddess’ is not really a goddess but the heroine Europa.
A headless statuette of the type is inscribed with the name, and clear derivatives of the figure appear on a late fifth-century Athenian vase and a Roman sarcophagus, in Cretan contexts where Europa would be entirely in place.
4.
Early classical relief
The carved tombstone suddenly goes out of use in Attica in the late sixth century, possibly forbidden by a law of the new democracy.
The fashion then appears in other places, perhaps spread by travelling sculptors.
A tall, narrow stone like the Attic ones, of the early fifth century, was found at Orchomenos in Boeotia and is signed by Alxenor of Naxos.
The basic design, a man leaning on a stick and playing with a dog, is found on archaic fragments from Athens and on several early classical pieces, one from Apollonia Pontica, a Milesian colony on the Black Sea which boasted a statue by Kalamis.
A series begins in Thessaly in the second quarter of the century and lasts through several generations.
Many of these are of a broader form, with two figures; the most beautiful an  early fragment from Pharsalos (fig. 82).
The woman on the right was probably seated, the girl standing in front of her.
They wear the peplos, and the style has much of the classical, assuring its date; but there is a charming archaic calligraphy, especially but not exclusively apparent in the hair and hair-ribbons.
This attractive mixture is found in a good many works of this time, particularly reliefs.
Some, like this, are provincial, but there is a beautiful head from Athens (where there is also a parallel in vase-painting, below p. 79), and one cannot really apply the word to the masterpiece in this manner, the ‘Ludovisi Throne’(fig. 83), though one can fairly say that it is outside the main stream.
This three-sided relief, and a second, the ‘Boston Throne’, of the same form and character but different and inferior style, present unsolved problems of use, interpretation and indeed date which cannot be discussed here.
They were found in Rome, where they were presumably brought in antiquity.
Both, but particularly the Boston, show stylistic likeness to small, pretty reliefs in terra cotta dedicated to Persephone and Aphrodite at Locri in South Italy; and this may well be their place of origin, though the Ludovisi might be the work of a sculptor from mainland or eastern Greece.
The scene on the long side shows, I believe, the birth of Aphrodite from the sea, the figures on the wings her votaries, a veiled matron burning incense and a naked girl, a hetaira, piping (one of the first naked women in large-scale Greek sculpture); but many other views are held.
The style seems to achieve a perfect fusion of late archaic grace with the gravity of the new age.
A similar character is found in some coinage of this time, in South Italy and particularly in Sicily which takes the lead in this art.
The great silver decadrachm of Syracuse (fig. 84), commonly associated with the historically attested ‘Demarateion’ of 479 but now thought by many scholars to be a decade or  more later, is a marvellous example.
The greatest sculptures from Sicily in this period have none of this backward-looking character: the metopes from the temple of Hera at Selinus.
There were many archaic temples at this site in the southwest of the island, some huge, most showing local characteristics in mouldings and plan and marked provinciality in their sculptural decoration (above, pp. 19ff. with fig. 23).
The temple of Hera was built in the second quarter of the century, clearly under mainland influence.
The plan is canonical, and the carved metopes confined to the same positions as those on the contemporary temple of Zeus at Olympia (below, pp. 79ff.), within the colonnade, six above each porch, though only four survive relatively complete.
Two show combats: Athena and a Giant from the west, Herakles and an Amazon from the east, on almost the same design.
The attacker on the left presses forward against the defeated who leans away to the right.
More interesting are the other two, both from above the main porch at the east: Artemis and Act aeon (a subject which, like other brutal divine punishments of mortal error, becomes frequent in classical art; cf. fig. 119 and p. 72, below); and Zeus with Hera.
Act aeon leans sharply across the field from the right bottom corner, struggling against three hounds, while the goddess stands at the left, quiet, head a little bent, lending a curious still beauty to the cruel scene.
The other (fig. 85) is perhaps the masterpiece.
Zeus sits on the right, his right hand raised to Hera's left wrist as she stands before him unveiling: the hieros gamos , holy wedding.
Still groups are liked at this period, and this is one of the noblest.
All marble used in the west at this time had to be imported from the Greek islands, so it was husbanded.
Here the reliefs are carved in the local limestone of which the temple is built, and only the naked parts of female figures (faces, hands and arms, feet) added in marble.
The marble-stucco with which the rest was washed is gone with the colour, and the stone has weathered badly.
I think this is not wholly responsible for a certain effect of fussiness in the drapery and slackness of form compared to the contemporary marble metopes of Olympia (figs. 121–3).
A charge of provinciality might perhaps be justified, but the nobility of the design overrides the criticism.
A curious problem may be mentioned here.
An early classical type exists in Roman copies, statues and reliefs: a seated woman turned to her left, leaning forward, left hand behind her on her chair, right elbow on knee, cheek on hand, an attitude of sorrow.
The identical type is used on fifth-century vases and small terra cotta reliefs for Penelope or occasionally Electra.
A fragmentary marble statue of the type, an early classical Greek original, has been found in the ruins of Xerxes's treasury at Persepolis, burned by Alexander.
The Roman copies cannot have been made from this, since it was not then available; so it gives the only incontrovertible evidence for an exact replica being made in classical times.
After Plataea an alliance of cities was formed under Athenian leadership, the Delian League, vowed to free the eastern Greeks from Persia (an aim largely achieved in the next quarter century, though not for long).
Might this type have been a symbol of the League: Penelope or Electra awaiting their deliverer standing for Hell as (or Ionia) in bonds?
Had there been a version in each city, one might have fallen into Persian hands while another or others survived to be copied under the Empire.
The type adapts easily to relief or drawing, since it is an extreme example of the ‘two-dimensional’ statue: broad rather flat front and back views, with very little depth between them.
5.
The revolution in painting, 1: the red-figure technique and the Pioneers of the new style
In the generation after Lydos, Amasis and Exekias a new technique was introduced in Attic vase-painting: red-figure.
Basically this is simply a reversal of black figure.
The figures are left in the orange colour of the clay, the background painted in round them in the shiny black: a purely decorative variation; and it has been plausibly suggested that the strange ‘negative’ idea was inspired by the custom of washing the background of marble reliefs with a blue or red against which the mainly white figures were left standing out.
The style of the earliest red-figure does not differ from that of black-figure, and for long they flourished side by side; but the new technique was to prove better suited than the old to new ideas of drawing and composition that developed as part of the general late sixth-century movement which undermined the conventions of archaic art.
The invention can be dated with fair assurance, since some of the earliest-looking examples, by a painter who may well be the inventor, show stylisations extremely close to those found on the friezes of the Siphnian Treasury at Delphi, carved little before 525.
The links are closest with the west and south friezes (fig. 61), and like the sculptor of those the Andokides Painter (fig. 87; called after a potter with whom he worked) seems content with the archaic heritage; but a generation later his invention is exploited by artists developing a new style, foreshadowed by the forward-looking sculptor of north and east (fig. 62).
Pictures by the Andokides Painter often occur on vases which also carry black-figure pictures, repeating the scene (as in figs. 86–7, Herakles driving a bull to sacrifice) or different.
These black-figure works are by a pupil of Exekias; but whether he is identical with the Andokides Painter or a regular colleague (the  Lysippides Painter, after a youth whose beauty he praises) is disputed.
In the case of another very early practitioner, Psiax, who also worked with Andokides but whose stylistic links are with Lydos and Amasis rather than Exekias, the highly distinctive hand is unmistakable in both techniques.
In black-figure details were engraved in the silhouette with a sharp tool and all is hard, precise.
Much of the figures is covered in close-set pattern, and the decorative effect enhanced by patches of white and purple-red.
The general effect is taken over in the first red-figure (fig. 87); but the black line which replaces incision is drawn with a brush, so by nature more malleable and fluid.
Red-figure turns out to combine the silhouette-principle, dear to vase-decorators for its strength on the curved surface, with the freedom of outline drawing; and this encourages its practitioners to look outside the closed tradition of their craft to the work of painters on flat surfaces (cf. fig. 45, painted perhaps about the time of red-figure's inception).
Technically however red-figure is not simply outline drawing with the background blacked in.
If one does that, the background absorbs the outline and the figures appear unnaturally thin.
To ensure their proper fullness they are first blocked in with a broad contour-band (the ‘eighth-of-an-inch stripe’) which gave the painter's eye the sense of the background to come.
The inner lines are of two kinds: a brush-stroke of variable thickness and employed with colour of varied dilution, from full black to a thin golden brown also sometimes used for washes; and the so called relief-line.
It is not certain how this was produced, but it is a strong black line which does actually stand up in relief.
It has the emphatic clarity of black-figure incision but is capable of much more subtle modulation.
It is used not only for inner lines  but often also to strengthen contours.
Red-figure avoids colour-effects.
Men and women's skin are the same colour; white is scarcely used, and red in a strictly limited way: for linear adjuncts like wreaths, for blood from wounds, and for inscriptions on the background.
Fig. 88 shows a plate, with a charming fancy of a boy riding on a cock, signed by a painter Epiktetos.
One of his earliest works bears also the name of the potter Andokides, and he seems to have been a pupil of Psiax.
He must have started working not many years after the invention of red-figure; but though he and his contemporary Oltos use black-figure on their early cuptondos, and in their red-figure still show some liking for overall pattern, they differ from their masters in having been evidently trained from the start in the new technique.
Added colour is much reduced, and the lines have a new suppleness.
The Andokides Painter surely ‘thought’ in black-figure; Epiktetos thinks in red-figure; and one of the differences is a  renewed concern with drawing as we understand it, something hardly possible in black-figure.
It is with a new generation of painters in the late sixth century that red-figure really comes to its own.
They form a clearly defined revolutionary group, and have been called the Pioneers.
They were fond of writing on their vases and several have left us their names, including the man who seems to have led the movement, Euphronios, and his great younger rival Euthymides.
The vase in fig. 89 is signed by Euphronios.
It is a large mixing-bowl of a form we have not met before, the calyx-krater (not an ancient name).
The complete form is shown below (fig. 108), a later vase, taller and slenderer.
It seems to have been invented by Exekias, and there are a few late black figure and early red-figure examples, but Euphronios is the first to make it a regular vehicle for major work.
Most early red-figure appears on only a few shapes: cups, and pots like the one-piece amphora (figs. 86–7), in which much of the pot was traditionally black and the extension of that to the background of the picture was an easy step and one which integrates the picture more fully with the pot.
A traditionally light vase, like the black-figure neck-amphora (fig. 55) was avoided, and when it was later taken into the red-figure repertory the shape was rethought.
This happened in the circle of the Pioneers, where many shapes were reworked and new ones created.
The pattern above the red-figure picture in fig. 87 is taken unchanged from black-figure.
Fig. 88 abjures pattern, making its effect entirely by the balance of light figures and dark ground; while Euphronios in fig. 89 makes his patterns too in red-figure: two ways of integrating the picture still further with the pot, both carried on in later generations.
The picture in fig. 89 shows winged Sleep and Death struggling with the weight of Sarpedon's huge corpse.
The elaborate surface-pattern of wings and corslet is in the black-figure tradition; the symmetrical spear men framing the scene also; but the strain, sensible in the humped backs, and the minutely observed anatomy are quite new, and the new spirit informs the whole.
The same interests appear even in slighter work: for instance the backs of the boys jumping to the pipe on  an enchanting pelike (fig. 90; one of the new shapes, a version of the one-piece amphora).
This stands close to Euphronios but is hardly his; perhaps a youthful work of Euthymides, whose masterpieces are on big amphorae (details, figs. 91–3).
We noticed that the red-figure technique integrates the picture more completely with the pot than the black-figure (figs. 86–7).
The process is carried further here by spreading the picture down the vase and reducing it to three big figures.
This artist is less interested in ornament than Euphronios, often content with borders in black silhouette rather than red-figure; but in other respects he takes on from him and goes further.
The way the girl carried off by These us on an early unsigned vase (fig. 91) overlaps the border — the action breaking out of the frame — is symptomatic.
Old Priam (fig. 92) watching Hector arm is made bald and stubbly; and in the three great revellers on the back of the same vase (fig. 93) Euphronios's écorchés are given a more natural layer of fat over the muscle, and the foreshortening of the torsos is really remarkable.
Euthymides felt this himself, for he not only signed this vase on the front: among the figures on the back he wrote ‘As never Euphronios’.
This boast suggests that the vase-painters were not just copying the innovations of great artists but felt themselves in the van of the movement, true pioneers.
Indeed there are things which suggest that not only did vase-painting at Athens in this time move pari passu with free painting and sculpture but that the same person may sometimes have worked in more than one of the three crafts.
Interdependence of sculpture and painting is demonstrated on the east frieze of the Siphnian treasury at Delphi (above, p. 41).
Of three bases, which were built together into the city-wall hastily thrown up by Themistocles after the return from Salamis and which probably originally supported a single group of statues, two are carved in low relief.
The third bore instead a painted scene (obliterated), but also the signature of Endoios who is known as a sculptor.
The signature no doubt referred to the statues, but the bases show that painting as well as relief was practised  in his workshop; and the style of the low relief on the other bases (fig. 94) with its red background throwing up the figures of athletes is so like Pioneer red-figure that one could easily imagine it produced by one of those artists.
When a craftsman adds his father's name to his signature it can often be shown that the father was a craftsman too (e.g. above, p. 34); and the practice may regularly have meant that.
The sculptor Antenor (above, pp. 30, 52) names his father Eumares; and it is tempting to identify him with a painter of Athens, Eumaros, known to Pliny, whose pupil Kimon of Kleonai is credited with innovations like those seen in the works of the Pioneers.
(The difference in the name is not significant; Kritios, whose name is assured by signatures, invariably appears in the literary tradition as Kritias, a commoner name.)
Euthymides regularly gives his father's name, Polias or Polios (the genitive could belong to either); and on the Acropolis have been found signatures of a sixth-century sculptor Pollias (double letters are written double or single indifferently at this time).
Also from the Acropolis come fragments of a large plaque dedicated to Athena by a Polias.
The large figure of Athena is drawn in a modification of black-figure but in a style that could well be Euthymides's.
A second Acropolis plaque, with a warrior (fig. 95) is very close in style both to the Athena-plaque and to Euthymides's red-figure, and is painted not in vase-painter's technique but partly in outline, mainly in brown wash outlined in black, like the Therm on metopes of a century earlier (above, p. 13); only the cloak knotted round the waist is black with incised folds.
Finally it has been suggested that the likenesses between the Andokides Painter's work and the Siphnian frieze might be explained by his having started as a sculptor there, then come on to the  Kerameikos to invent red-figure under the inspiration of relief-colouring.
Good black-figure continued to be produced.
In the generation of the inventors of red-figure the Lysippides (Andokides) Painter and a companion of Psiax, the Antimenes Painter, head the principal workshops, specialising in neck-amphorae and hydriai, shapes not much used in early red-figure.
They are succeeded by a big workshop known as the Leagros Group.
The beauty of Leagros (possibly a commander killed in battle in 465) is praised on many vases of the Pioneers (figs. 89 and 90 for instance), and a few of the black-figure group.
These artists clearly stand close to the Pioneers and are attempting to adapt black-figure to the new movement, with some success: crowded compositions, figures overlapping each other or the borders or cut off by them, vigorous drawing with rather slap dash incision; but the elaborate fore shortenings and musculature are not much attempted and do not come off very well.
Greek artists always preferred to combine vigour with fine finish, and red figure proved better adapted to that ideal.
Black-figure continues in use long for slight work, and for the prize vases at the Panathenaic games it far outlasts red figure, going deep into the Hellenistic age; but from the generation after the Pioneers all major vase painters work primarily in red-figure.
The artistic ferment of the late sixth century led in sculpture directly to the abandonment of the central archaic convention, the formally posed frontal statue in traditional stance; a change which inaugurated the Greek classical style and set the course for European art.
There is a corresponding and no less seminal change in painting: the abandonment of the single ground line on which all figures rest; a change which makes painting no longer simply the decoration of a flat surface but at the same time a feigned window on the three-dimensional world.
This revolution, however, was not launched until a generation after that in sculpture.
For painting other than on vases the evidence is as usual indirect; but it seems certain that the emergence of a great new revolutionary style of wall-painting with broken ground-lines belongs after the retreat of the Persians, in the seventies.
In vase-painting the late work of the Pioneers and the formation of a new generation of masters seem to come in the years around 500.
These pupils of the  Pioneers are less concerned than their masters with experiment, rather with exploiting their teachers' discoveries for their decorative value.
In varying degrees they reveal the new classical feeling, but formally their work, which includes some of the loveliest vase-painting, is the last flower of the archaic tradition.
They fall into two groups (with some overlap): those who concentrate on the decoration of big pots, and those who prefer the kylix; pot-painters and cup-painters.
Little Master cups (figs. 50–1) had gone out of fashion before a new type: a short stemmed, deep-bowled vessel without offset lip, perhaps invented by Exekias; at least the earliest we have is decorated by him and bears his name as potter (fig. 96).
This is the form used in early red-figure, at first with the same decorative eyes; but the later works of Oltos and Epiktetos, and those of the Pioneers, are of a new kind: a wide, shallow bowl curving in a single sinuous contour through a shortish, narrow stem to a low foot (fig. 97).
This, the kylix par excellence , remains for a long time a vehicle for some of the finest vase-drawing, in the ton do and in many figured compositions between the handles.
This example is unusual in having the stem deliberately fired a bright coral red, also found within round the tondo-picture; a rare technique, practised in a few workshops from the time of Exekias.
Within is a young horseman, inscribed with the praise of Leagros (above, p. 66); outside Herakles and Geryon, and (fig. 97) Geryon's cattle guarded by warriors.
The cup bears the names of Euphronios as painter and Kachrylion as potter.
‘As potter’ is ambiguous.
Euphronios egrapsen certainly means ‘Euphronios drew’;Kachrylion epoiesen , ‘Kachrylion made’, may mean that he actually potted the cup, or that he was owner of the workshop.
I believe the former more probable, but the matter is in doubt and practice may not have been consistent.
The presence or absence of signatures on vases, whether epoiesen or egrapsen , appears to conform to no rational system, a matter of whim.
They are commonest on cups, a tradition probably established by the lip-cup (fig. 50), where an inscription is an integral part of the design.
Euphronios as painter worked with at least two ‘potters’, Kachrylion and Euxitheos (whose name appears on the vase fig. 89) both of whom worked with other painters.
Painter-signatures of Euphronios and Euthymides cease around 500, and their styles of drawing cannot be traced further; but the signature Euphronios epoiesen begins about the same time and continues for twenty years or more, always on cups, most of them painted by one man, evidently his pupil and one of the greatest of the next generation, Onesimos.
An early masterpiece of his is a lovely cup-tondo (fig. 98) with the boy These us in Amphitrite's underwater palace, Athena assisting.
This is unusual in the size and complexity of the composition and the border of palmettes within the rim.
Commoner is a small circle in the centre of the black interior, often a two-figure composition: so, These us and Sin is (fig. 99) a tiny masterpiece by a minor painter; or the two revellers (fig. 100) by Douris, a prolific cup-painter.
He is a less subtle draughtsman than some, but many of his cup-interiors, like this, are beautifully composed.
He constantly signs his vases, whereas Makron regularly puts the name of the potter Hieron, hardly ever his own (so also Onesimos with Euphronios).
Of many cup-painters the greatest, perhaps, with Onesimos, is one who worked regularly with a potter Brygos but has not left his own name, so the Brygos Painter.
His fiery Sack of Troy (fig. 101) will be discussed in the  next section (p. 76), together with a rendering of the same scene in rather different mood (fig. 102) by one of the greatest pot-painters, the Kleophrades Painter, in connection with Pausanias's description of a wall painting by Polygnotos of Troy Taken.
The early amphorae of the Kleophrades Painter are almost indistinguishable in style from those of Euthymides, whose pupil he must have been; but he also favours the calyx-krater, something he owes to Euphronios's example.
The Pioneers were surely one workshop, and the pupils of one will have had much to do with the others.
The Kleophrades Painter is the most classical in spirit of these artists.
His heads often remind one of the fair-haired boy (fig. 70): so the ecstatic maenad (fig. 103) on a calyx-krater with the Return of Hephaestus.
The girls who accompany Dionysus and his satyrs earlier (figs. 56–7) may be called nymphs.
From the later sixth century they are characterised by features of maenadism as actually practised: the ‘wing-dance’ here, and the thyrsus (a bunch of ivy-leaves tied to a fennel-stalk), as in fig. 104, from a picture of the Death of Pentheus by the Kleophrades Painter's great rival the Berlin Painter.
A late amphora by the Kleophrades Painter carries further Euthymides's integration of ‘picture’ and ‘pot-decoration’: the frame dissolved into a strip of pattern under the two big figures on each side.
The Berlin Painter's name-vase (fig. 105) goes further still: two figures and an animal superposed and contained in a single complex but harmonious contour-line, a narrow strip of pattern below and an ivy-wreath between the handles above.
On other vases, especially on his favourite form, an egg-shaped amphora with narrow neck, like those used for prize oil at the Panathenaic games, he reaches the logical conclusion of this trend: a vase totally black except for a single figure on each side, without even a ground-line (fig. 106); the figure is the whole decoration.
He spreads such figures, with great care for the contour which is echoed by supple and delicate inner detail.
He has not the Kleophrades Painter's weight and power, but his grace has a spare strength.
There are many more good pot-painters, as cup-painters, but these are the unquestionable leaders.
6.
The revolution in painting, 2: wall-painting and vase-painting after the Persian wars
The idea of a single base-line for all figures is not universal in pre-Greek arts.
Both Egyptian and Assyrian painting and relief often show a kind of bird's-eye view against which figures are set in profile at different levels.
Sometimes a real sense of space is achieved, as on the second-millennium stele of Naramsin, where figures move up and down a tree clad hill under the stars; but in general it seems no more than an alternative convention for the organisation of narrative over the surface.
When the Greeks begin to use it, it is also part of their interest in mastering the appearance of nature, and leads on to perspective and chiaroscuro, to European painting.
Etruscan tomb-painting seems largely dependent on Greek wall-and vase-painting, and generally follows the rule of the single base-line.
In the late sixth century Tomb of Hunting and Fishing at Tarquinia, however, the artist has produced an astonishing seascape: rocks, boats, dolphins and birds, a diver in mid air.
It is interesting to compare this intuitive vision with the more inhibited adaptation of it by a Greek artist at Paestum a decade or two later (fig. 107).
In other parts of this small tomb he paints reclining banqueters, such as are constantly found on Etruscan tomb-walls and Greek vases, following the old conventions, though he puts much more variety into the expressive faces than is found anywhere else.
In the diver-picture he shows himself ready to adumbrate the idea of a spatial setting, but he is far more cautious and conventional than his Etruscan predecessor.
Ancient writers speak often of a wall-painter, Polygnotos of Thasos (the greatest member of a painter-family) and his colleague Mikon of Athens.
They worked together in Athens, and are associated with Cimon, son of Miltiades the victor of Marathon, who became the leading political and military personality in the city as the position of Themistocles declined (he was exiled before 470), until he himself went into exile in 461.
The earliest recorded work of these artists is in the shrine of These us, built or rebuilt by Cimon after he brought back the hero's bones from Skyros in 473; and there is a detailed description by Pausanias of Polygnotos's two murals in a lesche (clubhouse) dedicated at Delphi by the people of Knidos, perhaps after the liberation of the Asia Minor Greeks from Persia in Cimon's campaigns, which culminated in the victory at the Eurymedon in 468.
The terms of this description make it absolutely clear that Polygnotos did not adhere to the single ground-line but placed his figures up and down the field with some rudimentary indication of setting; and a few Athenian vases which must have been painted around the sixties show the same thing.
Most vase-painters of the period ignore the innovation, and most of the pieces which show it are big, elaborate vases from a single workshop.
The exact relation of what we see on the vases to what was shown on the walls is something we shall have to consider, but that in some way these vase pictures do reflect the revolution in wall-painting cannot be doubted.
The clearest demonstration is on a big calyx-krater from Orvieto, by an artist known as the Niobid Painter after the picture on the back of this vase.
That most terrible of the stories of divine punishment out of all mortal proportion to the offence appears often in the fifth century, like the punishment of Act aeon, and evidently had a powerful meaning for the time.
The subject of what is evidently the principal side of the vase (fig. 108) is much argued over: the Argonauts, the Seven against Thebes, the Underworld; the morning of Marathon; but I believe it has now been made nearly sure.
At the bottom centre are two youths, their weapons about them, one a large and noble figure spread across the foreground; above him the other, seated, melancholy.
In the middle above them stands Herakles, flanked by two warriors; behind one of these Athena, looking at the central group; more warriors to left and right.
They stand or sit on thin irregular lines painted across the black in a white which has somewhat faded.
The suggestion is of steeply rising broken ground, and one figure at the top left (hardly visible in the photograph) is half hidden behind such a fold in the land.
It has been noticed that the six figures whose naked torsos are seen all show an extra horizontal line  in the abdominal muscles, a feature which does not occur in the Niobid picture or elsewhere in the painter's work.
It is found, however, on some figures in an Amazonomachy and a Centauromachy on a big volute-krater (fig. 109) by a less talented companion of the Niobid Painter known as the Painter of the Woolly Satyrs, in whose work too it is abnormal.
These pictures too show compositional features which imply influence from the new wall-painting.
The inclusion of this peculiar detail consistently throughout one picture strongly suggests that that picture is a direct copy of another man's work; and the Centauromachy and Amazonomachy will at least include elements from pictures by the same man.
Pausanias describes Cimon's Theseion as including a picture by Mikon of Theseus at the bottom of the sea (the subject of fig. 98), and pictures of a Centauromachy and an Amazonomachy which he does not ascribe to an artist.
(Polygnotos's participation in this project seems to be recorded in a brief and corrupt passage of another writer.)
Pausanias goes on to talk of stories of Theseus's end; irrelevantly, it seems, but it has often been thought that the subject must have been suggested by a fourth mural which he does not specify.
Theseus, having been helped by his friend Peirithous to carry off the girl Helen, in his turn accompanied Peirithous to Hades in an effort to abduct Persephone.
Both were caught and held, till at long last Herakles came down to the Underworld and took Theseus back with him, leaving Peirithous behind.
There are variant versions, but this perfectly fits the vase-picture: Theseus, the hero in the foreground; Peirithous, the sad figure above him; Herakles; Athena, his constant aid; dead heroes gathering round.
It is extremely tempting to suppose that this picture and the Centauromachy and Amazonomachy on the other vase are copied from three of the murals in the Theseion.
A vase from the end of the century with Theseus at the bottom of the sea may perhaps in its central group give us the design of the fourth, but it is not a document of the same kind as these contemporary vases.
Whether the artist of these three was Mikon or Polygnotos the evidence does not allow us to say.
We may reasonably think that the vase-picture of the Underworld does bring us really close to the composition of a lost wall-painting, but it is adapted to the small, curved surface of a pot (though, being a calyx-krater, the curve is only horizontal, and it does retain some of the character of a wall), and there are other important differences, in particular the nature of the red-figure technique.
There is evidence to suggest that the walls which carried these pictures were not normally plastered but panelled, though plaster is used in the tombs of Etruria and Paestum, as it had been in Bronze-age palaces and was to be in Hellenistic tombs in Greece (below, p. 176).
Whatever the material it is likely that it was primed in white and on this the scenes were painted; the shiny black of the red-figure vase must give a quite contrary effect.
Etruscan tomb paintings and earlier Greek work — the little panels from Pits a, the Acropolis plaque, the walls of the small Paestum tomb (figs. 45, 95, 107)— help us: unmodulated white background for the sky; male skin in pink or brown within a darker outline (less strongly marked, this, in the Paestum pictures than earlier); female drawn in outline on the white; washes of colour for garments and the like.
Whether ground was distinguished from sky in any other way than by being outlined against it the evidence so far cited does not tell us, but probably some trees and flowers were shown on it, and it may have had something in the nature of shading.
A tree is shown in the Niobid picture, trees and small plants in the vase illustrated in figs. 109 and 116.
A primitive shading is found on a few vases of the generation before, by the Brygos Painter for instance to indicate the roundness of shields; and in this time it appears, very sparingly, both in red-figure and on another class of Attic vase which we have not yet considered, those with a white slip.
From about the time of the invention of red-figure some black-figure vases are given a white slip covering the orange clay.
The Andokides Painter experimented with a ‘white-figure’ vase: red-figure technique but over a white slip, choosing purely feminine scenes for both sides.
This did not take on, but from the time of the Pioneers some red-figure artists sometimes draw in outline on a white slip, most often on the interior of a cup where there was not the problem of the receding surface.
At first much of the drawing is in relief-line, as in red-figure, but freer use is made of washes in thinned glaze, as in a lovely Triton from Eleusis (fig. 110), drawn in the circle of Euphronios, perhaps by the very young Onesimos.
Gradually the technique develops its own style, moving away from red-figure as red-figure had early freed itself from the black figure tradition; only white-ground long remains no more than a sideline of red-figure painters.
Relief-line, and indeed any use of undiluted black, virtually disappears.
All is drawn in variously diluted glaze, and there is increasing use of washes of colour.
A cup from Locri (fig. 111) with a satyr attacking an unperturbed maenad is by the Pistoxenos Painter, whose career seems to begin about the time of the Persian invasion, and one of whose earliest cups is the last to bear the name of Euphronios as potter.
A little later, to the time of the ‘Polygnotan’ red-figure vases, belongs a very small piece, not a cup-interior but the slightly domed surface of a covered cup (fig. 112; one can just see the orifice for drinking at the bottom).
This is from Attica, and most examples of the rare shape are from Greece or the East, not Italy.
A Muse sits on a rock, and Apollo before her stands not on the base-line but on an irregular indication of ground just clear of it.
This is, as it were, an extract from a big wall painting; and while fig. 108 gives us a whole composition, this brings us much nearer to the colour effect, though not quite there since the vase-painter is limited to clay-based colours which will withstand firing.
Apollo's cloak is a dark purple, the Muse's dress a lighter red-brown.
A clearer red, blue and green are found in the traces of painting on architectural members, and were no doubt in the wall-painter's palette, but there is no evidence for much mixing of colours and some for a deliberate restriction of choice.
There is no shading on the rock here, but it is used on two out of three tiny, marvellous cups from Athens (figs. 113, 114) made by a potter Sotades and painted by the ‘Sotades Painter’ who may well have been the same man.
The fragmentary fig. 113 has an uncertain mythological subject, possibly the death of Opheltes (Archemoros): a man starts back, raising his arm to throw a stone at a huge snake which rears, belching smoke, from among reeds; and there is part of a figure  falling against the framing circle behind or below the man.
The hatching on the skin-cloak is surely meant for shading, and it definitely appears on the complete cup fig. 114.
This illustrates another rare story: the seer Polyeidos shut in the tomb with Minos's dead child Glaukos, and reviving him by means of a leaf with which he has seen a snake revive its mate which he had killed.
The tomb is a domed chamber, crowned outside by a tripod.
It is drawn as though opened up in section, but shading marks the concave interior and a strip of the pebble-floor is shown beneath the figures.
Glaukos in his cerements seems to be watching what is going on; Polyeidos to be striking at the snake; but the living snake is shown at the bottom approaching the dead one.
These ambiguities in the narrative (which perhaps find some analogy in the conventions of tragedy as composed at Athens in this time) correspond to the ambiguities in the spatial conception, oddly (to our eyes) combined with the interest in naturalism.
They remind us that this is the very beginning of the idea of representing the world about us as it actually appears; that we must think away our hindsight and remember that these artists could not see the way ahead.
The limbs of the fallen figure in the snake-cup show through the clothes, a feature recorded in Polygnotos's work and which reappears in the third Sotades cup, again fragmentary, with a charming picture of girls (perhaps Hesperides) picking apples.
These cups have little colour, but the subtle strength of the drawing, in spite of its miniature scale, surely brings us close to the great painting of the time.
The same quality is found in the best of the painter's red-figure work (fig. 115).
This vase is in the form of a knuckle bone.
There are others from the period; they were perhaps knucklebone-containers, a passing fashion.
By the orifice, as though outside a cave, a man with vividly drawn, unideal features (so also the man with the snake) directs a dance of girls.
Three advance hand in hand over irregular ground, the last half-hidden by the rim, and around the other sides (fig. 115) others, some with transparent drapery, have taken off into the air and  float free — an imaginative adaptation of the black background to the new idea of spatial setting.
It has been called the Dance of the Clouds.
It is of interest to compare Pausanias's account of Polygnotos's Troy at Delphi with two earlier vase pictures of the Sack.
The Brygos Painter's (part, fig 101) covers both sides of a cup-exterior, a palmette under one handle marking the beginning and end.
A boy, Astyanax, runs away at one end, looking back as his mother Andromache heaves a great pestle to club a Greek who has struck a Trojan down.
Behind him a Trojan woman storms by, hair wild — Cassandra?
Another Greek has cut down a Trojan who falls under the handle, leading us to the other side.
In the centre there Priam sits on an altar, a huge tripod behind, and reaches in supplication to Neoptolemos who strikes at him with the corpse of his grandson not saved by Andromache's effort.
At the end Polyxena looks back as Akamas leads her away a prisoner.
The night of horror is wonderfully suggested in half-a-dozen groups, beautifully related in the surface-design but episodically conceived and covering different times (Astyanax alive and dead).
The Kleophrades Painter's picture (part, fig. 102) is on a similarly shaped field, between two concentric circles, but while on the cup the feet rest on the smaller circle, which encourages an explosive spread, the hydria-shoulder has the feet on the wider circle and the figures tend to lean together in more static pyramidal groupings.
The only really spread figure is Neoptolemos, striking at Priam on the altar with a sword.
The dead boy is on the old man's knees, and he clasps his bloody head and pays no attention to the attacker.
The lordly tripod is replaced by a broken palm-tree overhanging a mourning woman.
There are many more still figures, especially Trojans (dead men, mourning women and children) but some Greeks too: the spirit is changing.
There is also more overlapping, of a kind which insists on the notion of depth: a despairing woman on the far side of the statue from which the lesser Ajax is about to drag Cassandra to rape her; hidden faces (Priam's and Aeneas's — he is shown at one end, escaping with his father and son).
Nevertheless the single base-line is adhered to, so we still have a series of episodic groups only formally united.
The Brygos Painter's picture is pure archaic; the other has a strong infusion of the classical though held strictly within the archaic framework.
Polygnotos, it is clear from Pausanias's description, took two important steps which allowed him to express the classical spirit without the constrictions of the archaic tradition.
First, he changed the dramatic time.
His picture is not given, either by Pausanias or in the epigram, supposed to be by Simon ides, inscribed on the wall beneath it, the name Iliupersis , Sack of Troy, the title of several early poems and a correct description of the archaic vase-pictures.
In the epigram it is ‘the citadel of Ilium taken’, and Pausanias calls it ‘Troy taken and the departure of the Greeks’; and so the description shows it to have been — not the night of terror but the morning after.
Not consistently: Neoptolemos was shown still slaughtering Trojans, but he alone, and even his action was changed.
A man was crouching under his stroke, a child clinging to an altar beyond; but they were not Priam and Astyanax.
Astyanax was a prisoner with his mother in the Greek camp (to be killed later), and Priam's corpse was shown lying among others within the wall.
The artist uses images from the archaic tradition but adapts them to his new purpose.
Dead men and grieving women are important already in the Kleophrades Painter's picture.
Here they dominate the mood, and the victors too are mostly quiet.
Ajax was not dragging Cassandra from sanctuary but standing trial before his peers for that impious act; yet she was still seated on the ground clasping the image fallen from its pedestal.
Nor was the scene confined to the city: half the picture was outside the wall, a stretch of which was shown near the middle; and this brings us to the second great change, the opening up of space.
It is evident that the figures and groups were set up and down the field, surely very much as on the Underworld vase; only on this wall there were scores of figures and also certainly more indications of setting.
The area outside the wall of Troy included both land and sea, with a strip of pebbled beach.
There are pebbles under the feet of Aphrodite's helpers on the Ludovisi throne (fig. 83); and one thinks also of the pebbled floor of the tomb on the Sotades Painter's cup (fig. 114), where the ambiguities of time are likewise reminiscent of the Troy.
On the sea was Menelaus's ship, a gang-plank to the shore, and on land his tent and another being dismantled.
Within the city were two altars, a basin on a column, and at the further end a house: Antenor's, who had made his peace with the Greeks and was spared.
His family were shown outside, loading a donkey and preparing with sad looks for their journey into exile.
The group corresponds to Aeneas and his family escaping in the Kleophrades Painter's picture, and this change too marks the shift of time from the sack to its aftermath.
The reason for the choice of different time is probably the liking for scenes of stillness rather than action which characterises much early classical art and almost all the subjects ascribed to Polygnotos in the tradition; in particular the Underworld, the great pair to the Troy in the Delphi club-house.
This taste probably played an important part also in encouraging the abandonment of the single base-line.
As the archaic sack-pictures show, the movements of figures in action can be used to build an effective unity from essentially disparate groups juxtaposed in the surface plane.
To group interestingly in a unified design inactive figures ranged along a single base-line is much more difficult.
Once they are set up and down the field groups can be interlocked, and figures united by gesture and look.
The direction of gaze is often noted in the description of Polygnotos's work, and its importance can be seen on the Niobid Painter's vase.
It is notable that the use of different levels is much more emphatic in this quiet scene than in the Amazonomachy of fig. 109, though it is found there too.
(The retention of the single ground-line for the Centauromachy is probably due to its adaptation to the narrow field of the vase-neck; other reminiscences of the same picture do show broken ground.)
On the other hand action-scenes perhaps made more use than quiet ones of the partial concealment of figures by folds of ground.
In an Amazonomachy by Mikon in the Stoa Poikile at Athens was a notorious figure named Butes of whom only the helmet and one eye were to be seen, and there are less dramatic examples in some Amazons on the vase (fig. 116).
Names were written by the figures in the wall-paintings, as often on the black ground of the vases; another example of the hesitancy with which the creators of this revolution approached the idea of the illusion of depth.
The three-quartered face of the stricken Amazon in the other extraordinary group in fig. 116 is a disaster; but this is a ham-handed painter.
No doubt his model was better, and the Niobid Painter's Peirithous is not so bad though still not a great success.
This was something the Pioneers seem not to have tried.
The  attempt is found occasionally in the work of their pupils, and at this time becomes quite frequent, but in vase-painting at least it is not successfully achieved until quite late in the century.
Peirithous is surely meant to look sad, and we often hear of sadness in the faces of Polygnotos's characters.
We can get a feel of it in a magnificent detail from a huge cup by the Penthesilea Painter (fig. 117): Trojans grieving as they watch Memnon killed by Achilles.
This master, who seems to have learnt from the Pistoxenos Painter, is clearly much influenced by the great painting of his time but always remains faithful to the single base-line, feeling it perhaps a proper convention for vase-decoration.
Such is in fact general practice among early classical vase-painters and even later.
They carry on their craft in its old conventions, but inform their work in varying degrees with the spirit of the new age.
The figures in a picture of the Birth of Erichthonios have all the weight and solemnity of classicism, but the Loves unusually and charmingly introduced into the ornament of the vase (fig. 118) carry over a lyrical grace from archaic (the artist was a pupil of the Berlin Painter).
A few painters seem to look deliberately away from their own time, nostalgically retaining the late archaic style.
Most of these are not of great quality, but they include one master, the Pan Painter, who plays the old conventions against the new spirit with exquisite skill.
His great Death of Act aeon (fig. 119) has the same kind of fusion of old and new as the Ludovisi throne (fig. 83), and is no less effective.
7.
The sculptures of the temple of Zeus at Olympia
I have left this monument to the last because it gives the fullest and most splendid expression to the first phase of fifth-century classical art; and a comparison of it with the Parthenon makes clear both the essential unity of that style and the difference between its phases.
Also there are elements in these sculptures which cannot properly be understood if one has not first considered the contemporary revolution in painting.
The building and decoration of this temple can be dated within fairly narrow limits.
Zeus had been immemorially worshipped in the Altis, the sacred area between the little Hill of Kronos to the north and the river Alpheus to the south, just above the point where it is joined by the smaller Cladeus which skirts hill and sanctuary on the west.
There was a temple here from the seventh century, but it was dedicated to Zeus's consort Hera, though in the early sixth-century reconstruction which endured throughout antiquity his primitive image, helmeted, stood beside hers enthroned (above, p. 22).
The god himself had his altar, not as commonly of masonry but a mound piled from the ash of sacrifice.
In Zeus's other great sanctuary, at Dodona in the north, he seems likewise to have been without a temple until the fifth century; perhaps it is a function of his ancient role as sky-god.
The building was completed by 457 B.C., for Pausanias saw on the apex of the east pediment a golden shield or bowl with a Gorgoneion and below it an inscription (still partly preserved) saying that it was dedicated by the Spar tans, a tithe from the spoils taken from the Argives, Athenians and their allies at Tanagra, a battle which took place in that year.
The building was paid for, we are told, out of the spoils of another internecine war, in which the people of Elis conquered Pisa (which had originally controlled the sanctuary) and its territory.
This obscure conflict is thought to have occurred about 470; and the temple-builders' dump overlaid a statue-base signed by the Aeginetan sculptor Onatas who is known to have been active in the years after Plataea.
The temple must have been built and adorned in a period of some twenty years at most, probably less.
The building fell in an earthquake in late antiquity, but all its features are recoverable.
It was in plan (fig. 120) and elevation a perfectly canonical Doric temple (above, pp. 15 and 59).
Besides lion-head waterspouts, in Parian marble like the rest, figure sculpture consisted in twelve metopes, those above the east porch and the false porch at the west (those of the outer colonnade being left plain), and the figures in the two gables.
Akroteria were later added in bronze: Victories at the apices and basins at the outer angles.
Pausanias describes the sculptures, and the substantial surviving remains can be fitted to his description, though there is doubt about the arrangement in the east pediment.
The metopes show the Labours of Herakles.
Among the hero's many adventures the twelve labours imposed by Eurystheus are only listed later; but the regular list corresponds to the choice here and it is likely that it was in fact these twelve carvings at the heart of Greece's greatest sanctuary that determined the canon.
This is suggested by the fact that a local, Elean, story is included, the cleansing of the Augean stables.
Findspots and masons' marks confirm Pausanias's division of the subjects between east and west, and his order (except that by a slip he omits the dragging of Cerberus from Hades).
The series begins on the west, at the spectator's left, with the lion of Nemea, traditionally the first, and in this alone here Herakles is shown as a beardless boy.
It ends at the east on the spectator's right, with the stables.
Often Cerberus, the remotest and most difficult task, is made the climax, but here it is pushed into penultimate place by the local legend.
Athena appears in the first and last and in one other at each end; Hermes with her in the first and without her in the Cerberus, where his presence is  necessary as the hero's guide to the Underworld.
Building and sculptures certainly underwent repairs in antiquity; but a theory that the present order of the metopes is due to a rearrangement before Pausanias's time, the six Peloponnesian labours having been originally together on the west, the others on the east, seems to me unnecessary; indeed certainly wrong, since I find a stylistic distinction between the two ends as they are which cuts across the geographical division.
Consider two beautiful compositions with Athena: the Augean stables from the east (fig. 121), the Stymphalian birds from the west (fig. 122), both stories with a Peloponnesian setting.
In the first Athena stands frontal on the right, her left arm and the shield in profile at her side making a vertical parallel to the fluted skirt-folds broken by the right knee.
She looks towards Herakles, right hand out, originally with a spear to direct him and perhaps lend him divine power as he thrusts with a crowbar to open a way for the Alpheus to flood the stables.
The movement is straight across the field, in a plane parallel to the flat background against which the figures are simply set.
In fig. 122 Herakles stands three-quartered, offering the birds' bodies (lost; we know the subject from Pausanias) to Athena, who sits up on a rock on which her left hand rests, legs three-quartered away from Herakles, but she turns back towards him.
It is a much more complex conception and much more pictorial; indeed it resembles the Apollo and Muse on the little  cup (fig. 112), though that is simpler.
There is a similar contrast between two representations of struggle with an animal, both outside the Peloponnese: the Cretan bull (fig. 123) from the west, Cerberus from the east.
In the last a frontal foot shows that Hermes stood on the right above the head of the emerging monster, like Athena in fig. 121; and the placing of the hero is very similar though the movement (straight across the field as in the other) is pulling instead of pushing.
In fig. 123 the violent diagonal of the hero's body, twisting back as he throws himself across, lies over the counter-diagonal of the bull, carved in low relief on the background but it too turning its head out and back.
The complex movement and the subtle merging of the planes of relief are analogous to the treatment in fig. 122, very different from the sculptural simplicity of the Cerberus and the stables (fig. 121).
This composition — two figures moving across one another and turning back as they do becomes a regular ‘strife-motive’ in classical art; the west pediment of the Parthenon (fig. 132) is a major example.
The metope is the earliest I know in monumental art, but the splendid little cup with Theseus and Sinis (fig. 99) anticipates it.
Most of the other metopes are fragmentary, and it is hard to say if they carry out this distinction, though the little that remains of the lion suggests that it went well with the other western ones.
The best preserved of all, beautiful and often illustrated, shows Herakles supporting the sky while Atlas brings him the golden apples and Athena prepares to help them exchange roles.93 This comes from the east end and conforms strictly to pattern: figures ranged against the flat ground, in simple postures, frontal or profile.
The significance of this difference in approach to relief-composition among works which share a style that is in other respects as consistent as it is distinctive, will best be discussed after we have looked at the pediments.
The metopes are about five feet wide and only a little higher, so the relief-figures are under life-size.
The gods under the apex of each gable are some ten feet high, and all the figures well over life-size.
None is completely lost, and many are quite well preserved; and we can get a good idea of the overall composition of each pediment.
That on the principal front, the east, represented a local story (fig. 124).
Oenomaus, king of Pisa, had a beautiful daughter Hippodameia whom he wished to keep unmarried because he was himself her lover.
All suitors he challenged to a race: the young man set out in a chariot with the girl, while the father sacrificed a ram on the altar of Zeus in the Altis.
If he caught them before they reached the Isthmus of Corinth he killed the suitor; and he always did, because he had divine horses given him by his father Ares.
When Pelops came from Asia Minor he found thirteen heads nailed on the palace front; but he bribed Oenomaus's groom Myrtilos (with the promise of Hippodameia's favours) to take the lynch-pin from one of his master's chariot-wheels and substitute one of wax.
This broke at speed, Oenomaus was thrown and killed, and Pelops got the princess and the kingdom, and gave his name to the Peloponnese.
To avoid paying his debt he drowned Myrtilos, whose dying curse rested on the family: the sons of Pelops and Hippodameia were Atreus and Thyestes.
This is in essence a fairy-story, with all the brutality fairy-stories commonly have.
We possess, however, a refined version, in an ode written by Pindar for a victory in the games here at Olympia in 476, not many years before this pediment was designed.
Nothing is here said of lust, treachery and blood-guilt.
Pelops wins because he is given even swifter horses by his lover Poseidon; Oenomaus's death is barely alluded to; Myrtilos not at all.
Such treatment of an old myth is typical not only of Pindar but of his time.
The nature of his art hardly allows the sculptor to reject the baser elements so explicitly, but I think we shall see that he makes it clear in his own way that he does so.
The west gable shows a stormy struggle, but the east is the quietest, the most inactive, of all pediment-compositions.
Such a contrast between east and west is sometimes considered a principle of temple-decoration, the Parthenon being cited as another example.
The Birth of Athena there is certainly a peaceful subject, opposed to the strife of two deities in the west, but it is a scene of activity and there is much movement in the treatment.
A truer parallel is the archaic temple of Apollo at Delphi, with its battle in the west and on the east the frontal chariot flanked by kouroi and korai, a very still composition, the only action being in the animal-groups at the corners.
It seems, however, to have shown an epiphany of the god, the theme represented by its climactic moment.
The designer at Olympia chose to represent the race by the moment before it started, as Polygnotos showed the sack of Troy in its aftermath.
This is the supreme surviving example of the early classical taste for stillness and indirect narrative.
The chariot-teams stand quiet, attendants sitting or crouching around, and between them stand the principals: Oenomaus with his wife Sterope, Pelops with Hippodameia.
This is the moment when the contestants take the solemn oath at the altar of Zeus to abide by the result of the race; only the altar is not shown — in its place stands the god himself.
These five columnar figures, facing us, standing still, might each be an independent statue in the style of the time, like the Choiseul-Gouffier Apollo or the Hestia (figs. 76–7).
The composition is saved from monotony by the subtle characterisation of these figures, and united by the concentration on them effected by the inward-facing chariot-teams and the looks of some of the seated figures and of the two reclining in the angles who frame the design.
These two are called by Pausanias Alpheus and Cladeus, rivers of Olympia.
The identification is often questioned, but so far as I can see on no adequate grounds.
It is said that the reclining river-god is a Hellenistic invention.
Certainly it was popular in Hellenistic and Roman times, and as a free-standing statue was no doubt a late idea; but the idea could very well have been suggested by such fifth-century pediment-statues as these.
Scamander in Homer takes  human form to fight Achilles, and there is nothing in the least improbable in the personification of rivers in fifth-century art; indeed there are almost certain examples on coins.
Here, immortal spectators, detached from the actions and passions involved, they frame the scene and also set it geographically.
Pausanias starts his account with the figure of Zeus, then speaks of others to left and right of him, but omits to say whether he means Zeus's proper right and left or the spectator's; and there is no general agreement about the correct disposition of the figures.
In face and figure young Pelops is clearly distinguished from the foursquare sturdy elder Oenomaus.
Zeus's head is lost, but seems to have been turned to his proper right, and on this, the side of good omen, one would expect Pelops to stand, as he does in fig. 124.
Pausanias says he is on the god's left, and I conclude that he is using the words from the spectator's point of view, as I believe he does in his account of Polygnotos's paintings at Delphi.
I find confirmation of this in the fact that in describing Pelops's wing of the gable he ends with Alpheus.
Standing looking up at the east front, he knew that the Alpheus lay to the south, on his left, and the Cladeus flowed into it from his right.
He must surely have supposed that Alpheus was shown in the southern gable-corner, Cladeus in the north; and if the designer intended these figures for the rivers he would naturally have set them so.
Identity and positioning of the two women is doubtful.
Find-spots rather favour the arrangement in fig. 124, but the characterisation seems to fit better if they are made partners of the other men.
Pausanias took all the seated and kneeling figures for grooms.
This is probably wrong, as we shall see, in the case of two elders, and certainly in the case of one of the younger ones who is a girl.
She is probably rightly placed in fig. 124, adjusting the sandal of one of the women, an action represented in very much this way on later vases and tombstones.
It fits well with the way the figure placed next her in fig 124 is lifting the mantle on her shoulders; and this is against the suggested transfer.
On the other hand these actions of preparation would better suit Hippodameia, who was to travel in the chariot; and the other is perhaps characterised as older.
I suppose it is just possible that Hippodameia was set next her father, Sterope on the other side (cross-linking the wings, like the archers in the east pediment at Aegina, above, p. 45), and Pausanias was wrong in this point too.
The two older seated men can only be fitted in as they are in fig. 124: behind the chariot on our right; and next the figure in the other angle.
They have been thought, surely rightly, seers attached to the two heroes.
The ruined figure on our left has a curious head-dress, perhaps oriental, which would fit with Pelops's eastern origin.
The other (fig. 125) has a  hand to his chin, a gesture of disturbance or foreboding.
Both look up to the centre.
Zeus, I imagine, is thought of as invisible to the others, seen by the soothsayers, who mark the turn of his head to Pelops and know the outcome.
The wonderful figure in fig. 125 may be Iamos, legendary ancestor of the Iamids, prophets at Olympia in historical times.
There is no room between him and the chariot for a groom corresponding to the one holding the reins in the opposite wing; nor, if the girl is rightly placed, was there one at the horses' heads.
The team is unattended, and this worries some, who wish to exchange the girl with one of the youths.
Pausanias thought Myrtilos was under the heads of Oenomaus's horses, but since he certainly took the girl for male he may have meant her.
I suspect that the unattended team is deliberate: a calculated suppression of Myrtilos.
With the god's gesture and the seers' reaction to it, this emphasises the designer's Pindaric approach to the story.
The west pediment (fig. 126) shows the fight of Greeks and Centaurs at the wedding of Peirithous.
Peirithous, king of the Lapiths in Thessaly, invited to his wedding the Centaurs, wild man-horses of the mountains who were both neighbour and kin to him.
They got drunk and tried to carry off the women, and were fought off by the bridegroom with his Lapiths and his bosom-friend, the Athenian Theseus.
Like the east, this gable is symmetrically composed round a central still figure, but the construction is otherwise extremely different.
In the quiet scene every figure, with the exception of the chariot-horses, is designed and carved as a separate statue.
On the west, between the still central figure and those reclining in the angles, the strugglers are divided into three groups in each wing: two groups of three figures each separated by a short one of two.
These groups are wholes, within which most figures cannot be detached either in execution or design from the others.
Exceptions are the two heroes in the groups nearest the centre.
Pausanias, who describes this pediment more briefly than the others, calls the young figure in the centre Peirithous, but few modern scholars can accept this.
In scale and attitude he stands apart, must be a god, balancing Zeus in the east, no doubt Apollo.
Pausanias calls the heroes to either side of him (he does not specify right and left here) the Lapith Kaineus and Theseus with an axe.
Theseus is no doubt right (the double axe is his distinguishing weapon), but the other must be Peirithous.
Fig. 126 shows the pediment as it was set up in the old museum, an arrangement that is certainly wrong.
The groups flanking the god should be transposed so that the Centaurs carry their victims outwards and the heroes strike at them from next to the protecting god.
The two short groups, Lapith and Centaur, Centaur carrying off boy, also fit better if transposed.
Of one of the central heroes only fragments survive, including the head (shown on the ground in fig. 126).
Of the other we have the head with the shoulders hunched by upraised arms, and the legs with the heavy cloak slipping down round them; and we can reconstruct the figure almost exactly from the axe-man in the Centauromachy on the vase fig. 109.
This then is Theseus; the other, under the god's right arm, the bridegroom.
The other two three-figure groups are fixed each in its own wing by its adjustment to the slope of the cornice.
On the spectator's left (fig. 127) a Lapith drags down a Centaur who with right hand against the ground resists the pressure while his left is still buried in a woman's hair and drags her down with him as she claws at his beard with back-stretched hand.
In the other the Lapith's left hand must have been gripping the Centaur's head (lost) while with his right he thrusts a weapon into the breast of the creature, who yet will not let go of his prize with either hand though with both hers she tugs at one.
The angle-figures present special problems.
At each  end are two women: young one, lying on front and side, half-wrapped in her mantle as a blanket and beginning to pull it up on her shoulder as a dress while she lifts herself to look towards the centre; and an old one with cropped hair, a slave, fully dressed, beginning to get to her knees.
These, framing the scene, are surely thought of as asleep in another part of the palace, roused by the tumult in the hall, as Penelope and her women listen to the fight with the Suitors.
The old slaves are raised on slightly sloping platforms, that on the spectator's right (and once probably the other too) carved at the front as a cushion.
This cushion, and the now headless figure of the young woman in the same corner, are carved, except for her right arm, of Parian marble, like the rest of the sculptures.
The arm, the rest of the sloping platform, and the whole of the other three figures are in Pentelic, and the treatment of the eyes shows that they are certainly of later date.
They must be replacements after damage, but the style is faithfully modelled on the originals.
The cushion seems to be cut from the fragment of a statue.
It has been suggested that the disposition of the slaves, raised, and overlapped by the others, is not of fifth-century character; that originally there was one figure in each angle, the doubling and raising due to changed taste at the time of restoration.
This may be so, but I see no compelling reason to believe it.
The realism of the old heads seems to me strictly in early classical taste, and the raising and overlapping exactly in the spirit of contemporary developments in wall-painting; and there can be no doubt at all that the design of this gable is directly and powerfully influenced by those developments.
Most striking is the way, in the two short groups, the back half of the Centaur was never carved, but deemed to disappear behind a neighbouring group.
This purely pictorial device is something we should never have imagined possible in fifth-century sculpture if we did not have it before us.
Then there is the linking of several figures within a single contour, especially in the lovely arabesques, fig. 127 and the corresponding trio, sometimes to the distortion of the individual figure: try thinking apart the Centaur and woman at the right of fig. 126.
We can indeed speak of the influence not simply of painting but of one particular painting.
We noticed the correspondence of Theseus to the Theseus on the neck of the vase fig. 109; and there are other close parallels, if none so exact, in vase-painting.
In archaic art Lapiths and Centaurs are shown after the chasing from the feast, fighting a pitched battle outside, women not present, Greeks armoured, Centaurs brandishing rocks and trees; and a recurrent motive is their using these to beat into the ground the invulnerable Kaineus.
The first phase, the brawl at the feast, where weapons are bare hands and teeth, spits and pots, the odd sword or axe snatched up, where the raped women are prominent and Kaineus's death not shown, appears suddenly on early classical vases and here.
We have seen reason to connect the vases with the wall-painting in the Theseion at Athens in the late 470s; and that was surely also a direct inspiration to the designer of the gable.
It may well have been in that picture that the new type was created.
Pausanias says that the east pediment at Olympia was by Paionios, the west by Alkamenes.
From half a  lifetime later we have two fine marble statues, one (fig. 171) certainly the work of Paionios, the other (fig. 161) probably of Alkamenes.
These will be discussed in the next chapter (below, pp. 118ff., 126ff.).
It is impossible to make any convincing stylistic connection between either of these and the Olympia sculptures.
Given the time-lag, this does not rule out that one or both of these sculptors worked on this temple in their youth; but in the case of Alkamenes (about whose career we hear a good deal) it is a difficult supposition, and not very easy for Paionios.
More interesting is the question whether on stylistic grounds one would postulate one designer or two at Olympia, but that too admits of no easy answer.
Pausanias does not consider the authorship of the metopes, but the difference of approach we noticed between the two groups corresponds so exactly to the difference between the gables that we can safely postulate one designer for the sculptures at each end of the building; but can it be one man who designed both?
The character of free-standing sculpture, so noticeable in the figures of the east, is abandoned in the chariot-teams, where the near horse alone is carved in full, heads and necks of the others being attached to it in a kind of receding relief; but this was a special problem which required a special solution.
Still, the application of different principles of design at the two ends could be accounted for in one man's work: either by supposing that he saw and was overwhelmed by the Theseion mural between designing the east and designing the west; or, perhaps more convincingly, that he felt a traditional, sculptural style proper to the entrance-front while allowing himself at the back to experiment with a new pictorial interest.
Certainly there is a powerful overall ‘Olympia style’; and likenesses and differences in details of carving cut across east and west.
The sharp carving of the seer's locks (fig. 125) archaic in tradition, is precisely paralleled in the Apollo (whose beautiful head is not, as I have carelessly asserted, cut from a separate piece of marble but is one with the body); while the marvellous smoothness of the Cladeus (fig. 128) is found on the west in the heads of Theseus and particularly of the bride, and in heads of Herakles from metopes at both ends.
The distinctive horizontal bar of the pubic hair is seen in metopes and gables, east and west (figs. 122–3, 127–8), as is a particular pattern of folds where drapery lies on the ground.
The old body of the seer, one of the great examples of early classical realism, finds no parallel on the west, but the furrow on his brow recurs in the western gable and a metope too.
The soft, smooth bodies of young boys are rendered in both pediments.
If there were two designers they must have worked closely together and shared the same highly trained team of executants.
Some work was probably done in the quarries on Paros, and it is likely that among the executants were islanders, used to carving marble; there is next to no marble sculpture from Olympia before this.
The question of the origin of the designer or designers is much canvassed but does not seem to me, in the present state of our knowledge, susceptible of even provisional or doubtful answers.
Why did the designer of the west pediment choose for subject the Thessalian Centauromachy in its new Athenian guise?
Or rather, why was it chosen?— for we know nothing of how such a choice was made in Greece.
Raphael planned his frescoes in the Stanze to a programme provided by a humanist at the papal court, and the inclusion of almost every detail in Enguerrand Quarton's marvellously constructed Coronation of the Virgin is laid down in the documents commissioning it.
Probably it was not the artists who chose the subject-matter for the decoration of a Greek temple, but the priests or some other religious or civic authority.
The choice at Olympia whosever it was, is interesting.
In the metopes Herakles, mortal son of Zeus, to be raised after death to Olympus, hero of all Greece but in particular of the Dorians and traditional founder of the Olympic games, clears trouble from the earth with the help of his divine siblings, Hermes and especially Athena, goddess of wisdom and courage as well as of Athens.
In the western gable north Greek and Athenian heroes are guided in the fight against barbarism by another child of Zeus, god of light and healing and lord of the two other greatest inter-state sanctuaries, Delphi north of the gulf and the Ionian island Delos; while on the east front Zeus himself supports the fortunes of Pelops who came from beyond the Aegean to give his name to the Peloponnese.
The Persians had been driven from Greece not many years before the temple was begun, and the fight to free Greeks from them was still going on in the east.
This struggle, and the Greek unity half achieved in the course of it, must have been in the programmatist's mind; but the project was paid for out of spoils from the conquest of one Greek city by another, and the golden shield proudly crowning the newly finished temple was set there to celebrate an early clash in the fatal hostility of Athens and Sparta which was to culminate in the Peloponnesian war and the ruin of Greece.