

The Present Situation — The Evidence Received by the Commission
MUSIC IN CATHEDRALS
At the heart of what is commonly called the Anglican tradition of church music are the cathedrals, collegiate and choral foundations and Royal Peculiars of the Church of England.
They represent a continuity of worship and music stretching back to a period well before the Reformation.
They have had an enormous influence on the music of this country, both sacred and secular, and this is now perhaps wider than ever, thanks to modern communications.
The distinctive contribution which our cathedrals make to Western culture is the more significant because of a world-wide recognition that they represent something unique.
This contribution is particularly admired in continental Europe.
In spite of the turmoil of the late twentieth century, cathedrals have shown both resilience and consistency.
They have had to face the demands of liturgical change, increasing pressures from tourism, media attention, financial constraints and the expensive upkeep of large and ancient buildings.
But they have survived with equanimity and, indeed, with enhanced prestige.
Such a picture has emerged from correspondents and from evidence sought by the Commission.
This came from Deans and Provosts, Precentors and other cathedral staff (see Appendix 2.6).
Information was also given by the Friends of Cathedral Music, the Cathedral Organists' Association, the Choir Schools' Association and the National Federation of Cathedral Old Choristers' Associations.
In addition, the Commission was able to draw on the experience of its membership, which included a current Director of cathedral music, three former cathedral organists and the Head Master of a choir school.
CATHEDRAL AND PARISH
For much of their history and until comparatively recently, cathedrals operated in isolation.
There was little relationship between  them and the parishes.
Yet a link was sometimes provided by music, where the cathedral organist was involved with diocesan music festivals and other events.
Today that link is stronger, as part of a growing recognition that cathedral, parish and diocese all belong together.
Consequently many cathedral organists find themselves occupied increasingly with diocesan work.
A combination of history, tradition and resources makes it possible for the cathedral to set high standards, musically as well as liturgically.
The best of our cathedral choirs offer excellence of the highest order.
Such excellence sometimes has the effect of creating an ‘us’ and ‘them’attitude in parishes, where their parish musicians feel unable or unwilling to settle for more than a mediocre level of performance.
At the same time there are local choirs which strive to follow slavishly the cathedral model, even where this is either unsuccessful in terms of quality or inappropriate for their congregation.
Diocesan or regional music festivals are valuable in helping churches find the right musical level and in providing opportunities for cathedral and parochial musicians to work together.
The wide variety of music used in these helps churches to maintain and improve standards.
In addition, new material is explored which may be suitable for use in the parish and stimulates its musicians to widen their repertoire.
In spite of the quality of their music, however, not all musical activity is from the cathedrals outwards.
Many of them welcome parish or other choirs to sing their services.
An invitation to sing in the cathedral encourages parishes to see it not only as providing expertise but also as receiving what other musicians can provide.
It demands high standards.
On the whole invitations are limited as yet to churches with a traditional musical repertoire, using the organ for accompaniment.
REPERTOIRE AND LITURGY
The traditional core of church music is increasingly coming under critical scrutiny by the cathedrals themselves.
A broader view than formerly is being taken of music from outside the rich Anglican and English traditions.
Editing methods and the standardisation of printing have opened up an immense field of choral music, dating from before the seventeenth century.
Thus the selection from which a  modern cathedral can draw its music is considerable.
Cathedrals are also, to a small extent, helping to revive the tradition of patronage which produced such riches in the past.
There is some evidence that contemporary composers are showing a renewed interest in the Church as a patron of the arts.
One reason why the range of music employed in cathedrals is often fairly narrow is the almost daily singing of Evensong as the choir s main musical offering.
This is an important part of the rhythm of a cathedral's worship and it remains enormously popular.
Its artistic value was underlined by the support of the country at large when its regular broadcast on BBC Radio 3 came under threat.
Liturgically, its significance is shown by the increasing numbers of people who attend as pilgrims and depend upon its availability all over the land for their prayerful refreshment.
For many the particular experience of having the Psalms sung ‘in course’ is the most precious aspect of the service.
Some cathedrals now follow a lectionary which provides for shorter excerpts from the Psalter and have been affected by the liturgical changes of the recent past.
After an uncertain start they have responded in different ways to demands for a more active vocal part for the congregation.
In many places the schedule includes parish Eucharists or family services, in addition to the regular daily services, which may include a hymn for all to sing.
Liturgical Exploration
Implementing change has been easier for parish church cathedrals, for obvious reasons.
Some have wholeheartedly entered into liturgical experiments which have included the re-ordering of space and furniture, new services and music, and the use of musical instruments other than the organ.
In the worship of some of these cathedrals there are signs of a growing understanding of how to meet the fragmented culture of our age.
Others give evidence of thought, but not many practical results so far.
Their musicians, in common with everyone else, face undoubted difficulties but also some exciting possibilities.
CHOIR SCHOOLS
The characteristic cathedral sound stems largely from the employment-of boys' voices, and one of the most important components in the English cathedral tradition remains the choir school.
Its origins are  at least as old as the appointment by St. Paulinus in 627 of James the Deacon to educate the singing boys in York.
In other places, such as Gloucester, boys were part of the monastic communities which preceded Deans and Chapters.
For many centuries it was primarily through cathedral and church choirs that formal education was available to boys.
Today there are forty-one schools attached to our cathedrals, churches and collegiate foundations.
Between them they educate more than 800 choristers, as well as 12,000 other boys and girls.
Must are preparatory schools, but some keep children to A-level standard.
All are independent, except two which are maintained voluntary-aided schools.
Three of the schools are Roman Catholic foundations, but most of the others are linked with the Church of England.
Almost all of them belong to the Choir Schools' Association, which also has members in Australia, Canada, the Irish Republic, New Zealand and the USA.
In England more than £2 million of annual funding for choristers comes from cathedrals or other bodies, given in the form of scholarships awarded to children at the age of seven or eight.
Depending upon the size of these scholarships, some parents pay no school fees at all.
Those who do, pay on average less than half fees.
Not all cathedrals have their own choir schools.
A number depend upon special arrangements with one or more local schools, in either the state or the independent sector.
Generally this works satisfactorily.
The organist's life is probably easier, however, where there is either a choir school or an arrangement with just one school from which choristers are recruited.
Girls and Boys
Until recently the all-male tradition of cathedral choirs has continued unaltered, with the exception of St. Mary's Cathedral in Edinburgh, which has had both girls and boys in its choir.
However, with changing attitudes in society, questions are being raised about the morality of denying girls the opportunity to sing in a cathedral choir.
In being excluded, they are denied the experience of liturgical participation in services as well as a unique form of music education.
Opinion is sharply divided on this issue, but it is at present under consideration by some Deans and Chapters, the Choir Schools'  Association and the Cathedral Organists' Association.
Meanwhile, Salisbury Cathedral has recently recruited girls as choristers.
They will not normally sing with the boys, but are to sing services by themselves on Wednesdays and with the lay vicars both on Mondays and for one of the four services over weekends, by rotation.
The boys are to sing with the lay vicars for the other three weekend services and also on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.
The boys-only choir will ensure the continuity of a traditional male choir at a time when the authenticity of musical performance still receives widespread emphasis.
Demands on Children
Because of the demands of the Church's calendar, especially at Christmas and Easter, cathedral choir school holidays tend to be shorter than the norm.
Six weeks in the summer and two other holidays of three weeks are probably the average.
In the past, longer terms do not seem to have affected applications for places.
Choristers sing Evensong generally five or six times a week, as well as services twice or three times on Sundays.
In addition there are rehearsals, which account for most of the time spent on music.
It is these which, above all, give the children their ability to cope with a large repertoire.
Their skill in sight-reading is often astoundingly good.
In spite of so much time being given to singing, many children also learn at least one musical instrument and all of them play their full part in the varied life of the school.
Most of them do well, academically and in other ways, amid the heavy demands of the curriculum and the high expectations of parents.
This is not only to their credit, but to the credit also of the staff of the choir schools, whose dedication ensures that such schools will surely continue to have a special place in our educational system.
Former Choristers
In reply to an enquiry by the Commission, the Federation of Cathedral Old Choristers' Associations sent a questionnaire to its member associations, in order to gauge the involvement of former cathedral choristers in the life of the Church.
From thirty-four returns it would seem that some 5% of cathedral choristers become professional church musicians.
By this is meant that they derive an important part of their remuneration from singing, playing or directing in cathedrals and major parish churches.
A much greater proportion contribute to worship in churches of all kinds, as organists, singers, servers and  stewards; it was suggested that this could be as high as 80 or even 90%.
In reply to a question as to how many cathedral choristers become clergy, the response of 2.5% was consistent across the country.
LAY CLERKS AND ORGANISTS
Many lay clerks are themselves former choristers, and the case is often made for retaining boys' voices in order to ensure a future supply of altos, tenors and basses.
Rising musical standards have placed a heavy responsibility upon these singers.
Their quality varies from place to place, but the demand is for a comparatively small body of men.
Some choirs function with as few as six.
Where cathedrals are in or near large centres of population, perhaps with a significant student presence, their ability to pay realistic salaries is an obvious advantage.
However, success in recruiting and using lay clerks to best effect depends largely upon the energy and personality of the cathedral organist.
Some cathedrals are able to offer bursaries to lay clerks or choral scholarships within a university setting.
An increasing number provide for an organ scholar in addition to a salaried assistant organist.
This allows the cathedral organist to devote most of his time to directing the choir, whilst the assistant or scholar provides the organ accompaniment.
In terms of skill with the instrument, this arrangement benefits those who play regularly.
In creating specialist organists or choir trainers it contributes to the achievement of the highest musical standards, but does not generally offer all-round experience.
It should be noted that the remuneration of assistant organists is generally low.
Remuneration
The payment of most cathedral organists is also low, although recent years have seen an improvement.
A consequence is that the salary often needs to be supplemented by other work, usually teaching.
This brings some benefits through musical cross-fertilisation between the cathedral and the wider community, but the cathedral does not always get the full benefit of one who is employed to do what is commonly regarded as a full-time job, and this at a time when the Church needs from its organists not only the highest musical expertise but also liturgical knowledge and a readiness to take some part in the running of the cathedral.
Some cathedral organists have developed considerable liturgical flair and some have a good grasp of theology.
Some regularly compose new music for their choirs.
All of them  continue to enhance the role of the church musician by their devotion and perseverance.
Their job does not always receive the recognition which it deserves.
Conclusion
Success brings its problems.
In the case of cathedrals, it makes increasing demands upon their resources, and the cost of their music is very high.
It is good to note, therefore, the continuing commitment to their musical foundations of Deans, Provosts and Chapters.
The introduction of girls into cathedral choirs and the continuing vitality of choir schools are also hopeful signs for the future.
Together with the evident popularity of cathedral music, these are a cause of encouragement for church music in this country.
MUSIC IN OTHER CHRISTIAN TRADITIONS
Growing ecumenical co-operation and an increasingly common repertoire demand that any survey of church music today should include some reference to the music used in the worship of traditions other than that of the Church of England.
The picture which is offered in this and the next chapter is not fully comprehensive and depends partly upon the knowledge of some of the Commission's members, and partly upon the submissions and correspondence which were received.
Help was also given by a number of people whom the Commission consulted.
Their names are listed in Appendix 2.8, and the Commission expresses its thanks to all of them, together with an apology for any inaccuracy or misrepresentation of the evidence it has been offered.
THE EASTERN ORTHODOX CHURCH
This heading embraces not only the Greek and Russian Orthodox churches, which are the most numerous, but also Armenian, Bulgarian, Coptic, Ethiopian, Romanian and Ukrainian churches.
In Britain there are 172 congregations, to be found in London, Manchester, Liverpool, Bradford and other large towns, with a total in 1987 of 231,000 members.
This represents a significant growth in numbers from 193,430 in 1980, although the present membership comes from a community which is probably twice as large.
Recently a small choir school has been founded by a Greek Orthodox church in London in order to provide trained singers for churches without them.
Of all Christians, those of the Orthodox family have remained the most conservative, Their cultural roots go back to the Byzantine Empire and there has been no event for them comparable to the Reformation or Vatican II.
All the churches have a strong regard for the preservation of tradition and they are still little affected by what happens in other churches.
Thus the services and their music have changed hardly at all for hundreds of years.
The Sunday Liturgy is never celebrated without music and large parts of it are sung by the celebrant, the deacon and the people.
Traditionally, the people's singing has been delegated to a choir which is generally paid a nominal fee.
In some places, and increasingly in these times, the whole assembly is taking a larger musical part.
As in the early Christian Church, no musical instruments are used.
The singing is flexible and responsorial and all the music is for the words of the Liturgy itself.
The repertoire includes traditional chants and much four-part harmony, written by composers within the Orthodox tradition.
In no other tradition of worship is the music so wholly integral to the Liturgy, in the character and style of its performance and in its marriage to actions and words.
A comparable example in the West is the Latin liturgy set to plainchant.
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN ENGLAND
There is little to be said about music in the Roman Catholic Church in this country until the 1960s and the Second Vatican Council.
In England for three hundred years after the Reformation there was no official public worship, and even after the Catholic Emancipation Act of 1829 it was some time before the use of music was actively encouraged by the Church.
However, the publication in 1903 of a Motu Proprio by Pope Pius X provided official recognition of its importance.
Gregorian chant and classical polyphony were held up as models for liturgical music, whilst music which was regarded as operatic or theatrical was discouraged.
The revival of Gregorian Chant was greatly helped by the Society of St. Gregory, a small but influential organisation founded in 1929 by Dom Bernard McElligot.
Meanwhile, Sir Richard Terry, first at Downside Abbey and then at the newly-built Westminster Cathedral, did important work.
In addition to training choirs and editing editions of Tudor polyphony, he persuaded Vaughan Williams and the young Howells, among others, to write for his choir.
Another leading contributor from the 1930s was Henry Washington at Brompton Oratory.
In parish churches, however, there was a long period of stagnation, although there were improvements in standards and taste, and until the time of Vatican II there had been few developments in the  Liturgy and its music.
There was little vocal participation by the people in the Mass, and such music as they used was generally in the context of other services or ‘devotions’.
Here they were allowed to sing hymns, mostly from the official New Westminster Hymnal , published in 1939 and containing few texts or translations by non-Roman Catholic writers.
Any tunes borrowed from other denominations were generally reharmonised.
Vatican II
The Second Vatican Council was an event of huge significance for Roman Catholicism and, indeed, for all the churches.
The first of the major considerations by the Council Fathers was given to the Liturgy and its music, as well as sacred art.
In the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy there are statements such as: ‘In the musical tradition of the Universal Church is contained a treasure of inestimable value.
It occupies a place higher than that of other art forms…’,
‘The treasury of music will be maintained and cherished with the greatest care.
Choirs will be diligently fostered in their efforts…’ and ‘Bishops…will take good care to see that in all sung services the whole congregation may he able to take therein the active part that is theirs…’
The Constitution 's main concern appeared to be that of conservation.
Choirs, pipe organs and the teaching of music in seminaries were all encouraged.
In addition to the emphasis on vocal participation by congregations, there was the recognition for the first time of indigenous musical traditions.
This led to developments in both music and the Liturgy which were probably more far-reaching than the Council Fathers anticipated.
Revision of the Eucharist and its Lectionary was followed by that of the Divine office and of all sacramental rites, and the process continues.
There has been unhappiness in some quarters, occasional misunderstandings and ignorance, and a certain amount of unfortunate iconoclasm.
With a new emphasis on the importance of the Word, the trend has been away from hymns, anthems and settings.
The restoration of musical priorities means that the Kyrie and the Gloria , which were key movements in settings of the Mass, have now returned to their former place simply as part of the Introductory Rite.
Consequently composers have revived ancient liturgical-musical forms such as responsorial music, acclamations, litanies and processional songs.
These call for an increased use of soloists as cantors and for some direction of the congregation, often by means of an animateur .
Hymnody
Hymns, nevertheless, retain both significance and popularity.
As in other churches, there has been regular production of new hymnals in the Roman Catholic Church in recent years.
The collection most used is almost certainly Hymns Old and New Revised (Mayhew, 1986), although its presentation, harmonisation and indexes are of the most basic kind and the tunes are not even named.
A new standard hymnal might not be welcomed by Roman Catholics.
But there is no doubt of the acceptability of new resource books containing eucharistic acclamations, psalm-settings, songs for entrance and communion processions, and music for wedding and funeral rites.
A typical compilation of this kind of material is to be found in New Songs of Celebration which is the latest volume of the Celebration Hymnal (Mayhew-McCrimmon, 1978).
For many churches there is a problem of expense.
Books like these contain much music which is transitory but include insufficient hymnody from the traditional repertoire.
The maintenance of this repertoire is made more difficult, in that the majority of children in Roman Catholic schools seem to be taught contemporary hymns and other religious music by religious education teachers, rather than by the music staff.
Composition and Publishing
When the use of the vernacular was introduced a good deal of new music was demanded.
Much of it was needed for texts from the International Commission on English in the Liturgy (ICEL), many of which were provisional and required frequent revision.
This is one of the reasons for the reluctance of many ‘serious’ Roman Catholic composers to write for the new Liturgy, thus leaving it to others, especially those in the folk tradition.
Consequently, when the definitive form of the Revised Order of Mass was published in 1970, the larger publishing houses had invested fully in the popular and flourishing field of folk music.
Some composers, therefore, set up their own publishing enterprises which did well for some years, especially during the visit of Pope John Paul II to Britain in 1982.
The largest of them, Magnificat Music (under the auspices of the Westminster Diocesan Liturgy Centre), has become the most important publisher of music for the reformed Roman Catholic rites.
Left to themselves, folk musicians did what they could without  the guidance which might have come from experienced musicians.
The result was not always music of good quality, but many worshippers were attracted by it and folk music made much headway, particularly in those parishes which had no working church musicians to compose for their own communities and resources.
Religious congregations of monks and nuns also used home-written music for the Office, and the Panel of Monastic Musicians was founded so that they could share their efforts and talents.
Perhaps the most satisfactory music in recent years has come from writers involved in the liturgy of a particular community, effectively as composers-in-residence, Among those in Britain writing for the Roman Catholic Church may be mentioned Stephen Dean, Philip Duffy, Bernadette Farrell, Paul Inwood, Alan Rees, Bill Tamblyn and Christopher Walker.
Most of these composers have participated in the annual meetings of Universa Laus, a group of mainly European liturgists and musicians formed in 1969.
Its purpose is to consider the more philosophical aspects of the new liturgical provisions, with an input from disciplines such as linguistics, psychology, anthropology, and the social sciences.
So far, discussion at Conferences has ranged around questions such as the form and function of music and rite; what distinguishes liturgical music in respect of its use, function and significance; and music as the servant of the Word, the liturgical action and the congregation.
Organisations and Structures
In spite of such conferences and the dedication of a number of musicians, little or no provision is made for the liturgical and musical formation of Roman Catholic musicians and clergy.
Many of the cathedrals are former parish churches and they retain an attitude to music which is more appropriate to a parish than to a cathedral.
There are only three Roman Catholic choir schools in England and one in Wales.
Music is generally accorded a low priority and is underfunded, and standards of performance are unsatisfactory in many places.
In order to help Roman Catholic musicians, there are organisations such as the Society of St. Gregory, the Schola Gregoriana of Cambridge and the Spode Music Weeks.
There is also a national advisory body, without executive powers, the Bishops' Committee on Church Music.
This is one of three sister committees, the other two  being for Pastoral Rites and for Art and Architecture.
In many dioceses there are comparable structures and some of the diocesan music commissions have been very active.
Those with a professional approach have provided structured courses for church musicians lasting a year or more.
A Hopeful Future
Some dioceses have appointed Parish Music Advisers.
This is a positive step which promises to improve standards and taste, and gives cause for some optimism.
Experimentation has begun to yield results, instrumental groups flourish in some churches, and the standards of playing and performance are certainly higher than they were even five years ago.
There is also a heightened awareness of music's proper place in the liturgy.
In addition, there have been tremendous advances in ecumenical co-operation, locally and nationally, in the music that is used and in the church music organisations.
THE LUTHERAN CHURCH
The Lutheran family of churches constitutes the largest Protestant denomination in the world, with some 60 million members.
In Britain, its 20,000 people belong to small local congregations, whose services are generally simple and rely for their music chiefly upon hymns and chorales.
Its most prominent church is in London, with a fine musical tradition.
In addition to an extensive use of music from the baroque period, chorale preludes are often played or extemporised to precede the hymns.
The worship is led by a voluntary choir under the direction of the organist, except on one Sunday evening a month when the service incorporates a Bach cantata sung by a professional choir.
Services are held regularly in English, German, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Finnish, Icelandic, Latvian, Estonian, Polish, Hungarian, Chinese and Swahili.
METHODIST AND UNITED REFORMED CHURCHES
Contrary to the popular myth of largely extempore worship, there is a more or less set liturgical pattern for most of the services of the former Congregationalists and Presbyterians, who, together with the Churches of Christ, form the United Reformed Church.
The pattern derives, through A Directory for the Public Worship of God (1644), from the order of service used by the Protestant exiles in Geneva approved by ‘that famous and godly learned man’, John Calvin.
Although Methodists later developed a freer Nonconformist style, their services originated in the Book of Common Prayer.
The Priority of Scripture
The most important element in Free Church worship has traditionally been the reading of long passages of Holy Scripture and their exposition by a learned minister.
Closely associated with the proclamation and preaching of the Word was scriptural hymnody, in the form of metrical psalms.
Today's worship contains the same basic ingredients in most Nonconformist churches, although there are usually some modifications to the accepted pattern.
Heart-religion, too, has always been highly prized, with its emphasis on individual commitment and inspiration; everyone with faith becomes a temple of the Holy Spirit and a vessel for the expression of God's power and love.
A firm belief in the priesthood of all believers means that singing belongs to the whole congregation as well as to the choir.
The Ecumenical Influence
In recent years, the separation of church and chapel has lessened considerably.
The ecumenical movement has reversed three centuries of division which began with the failure of the Savoy Conference in 1661 and the imposition of the Act of Uniformity, Today, Holy Communion is celebrated more frequently and with a set liturgy, often in an ‘Anglican’ way; set prayers are common and sometimes take a responsory form; the increasing use of a lectionary means that the choice of readings depends less upon the whim of the preacher and more upon an ordered scheme.
Many of the Free Churches now mark the seasons of the year and the major feasts in the Church's calendar, in addition to the observance of their traditional days such as a Church Anniversary and the annual Covenant Service.
There is generally a much greater liturgical awareness and a willingness to experiment.
These are encouraged, perhaps, both by the experience of united services and by worship televised from churches of differing traditions.
Psalms and Hymns
The musical tradition of Free Churches originated in the singing of metrical psalms by the whole congregation, and psalm-singing still plays an important part in their worship.
The Church of Scotland sets great store by metrical psalms, whilst the Free Church of Scotland  sings its psalms unaccompanied by instruments.
In some parts of that country there is a remarkable tradition of Gaelic Psalmody, with elaborate variations on a melodic line.
The new URC hymn book,Rejoice and Sing (Oxford University Press, 1991), has a substantial section of psalms and canticles in various styles.
These include metrical psalms, those pointed for Anglican chant or Psalm Tones (involving fewer note-changes to the line) and Gelineau or Gregory Murray settings of prose psalms.
Suggestions are also made for antiphonal singing.
The Methodist Hymns and Psalms (Methodist Publishing House, 1983) also includes a good number of psalms, pointed for Anglican chant, and a few metrical psalms are included in the body of the book.
In both books mentioned, however, the principal emphasis is upon hymns.
To the works of major Nonconformist writers like Isaac Watts, Charles Wesley and James Montgomery have been added hymns from many other traditions.
These include the Church of England and the Roman Catholic Church, the Churches of Christ, the Wild Goose Songs of the Iona Community and the ‘charismatic’ hymns and songs to be found in all denominations.
The Free Churches have made much use of the explosion of hymn writing which has occurred during the last thirty years and which crosses the boundaries of all denominations.
The Musicians
Many churches have choirs, and a place is given in most services to an anthem or other piece sung by the choir alone.
Settings of the Holy Communion and of canticles are rarely used, however, and the emphasis remains firmly congregational.
Nevertheless, the organ has an important place and this is indicated by its prominent position in most buildings, often behind the central pulpit.
In addition to its use for accompaniment and for playing before and after a service, it is commonly used as a solo instrument during the course of worship.
For example, there may be a voluntary during the taking up of the collection.
In less conservative congregations, and where they are available, other instruments have their place on occasions.
Worship songs are also beginning to find widespread acceptance.
BAPTIST CHURCHES
In the very early days of the Baptist churches a typical service consisted of prayer, the reading of one or two chapters from the Bible, a  series of expositions on the readings and a collection for the poor.
In some places metrical psalms were also included, and in the 1670s Benjamin Keach introduced some congregational hymn-singing into his services in Hackney.
This met with some opposition, for there were those who regarded music with suspicion because of its ‘human’ origins and its consequent unworthiness for the offering of pure worship, Nevertheless, hymns grew in favour in succeeding years and especially in the first part of the eighteenth century.
John Bunyan portrayed his pilgrims as singing, and Joseph Stennett was a fine hymn-writer in the early Baptist tradition.
Hymnody
Metrical psalms are still occasionally used in Baptist churches, but hymns are the main musical items in their services.
A new hymn book,Baptist Praise and Worship (Oxford University Press) was published in 1991, including many newer hymns, together with a good number of worship songs which are becoming increasingly popular.
Instruments
The organ is at the heart of the musical life of most churches, although other instruments, including the piano and electric keyboards, are increasingly being used.
Much thinking has been given in recent years to the use of instruments as well as voices in worship.
The formation of the Baptist Music Society in 1962 was an indication of the mounting importance attached to the place of music in church services.
There are basic elements common to the services of all Baptist churches, but there is a great variety in the styles of worship and of music.
No two churches are the same and there is no centralised authority.
Congregations may belong to a Union of Baptist Churches, but each has considerable autonomy.
In recent years much has been drawn from other denominations and a much wider choice of hymns and music is one of the fruits of ecumenism.
THE SALVATION ARMY
To many people the Salvation Army is best known for its band and this certainly holds an important place in its life and worship.
The band is used not only for worship in the citadel, but also for evangelism in public places.
A typical service includes an item by the band, as well as a choir item and several hymns and choruses sung by all.
Many of these are chosen from the common repertoire, but there is also much  music written by Army members.
Music is frequently commissioned from professional composers.
The training of musicians, both instrumental and vocal, is organised systematically through local and residential courses.
These are designed particularly for the young and contain a strong spiritual element in them.
All musicians have to be committed members of the Army, and their dedication and discipline, as well as the investment of their time and money, are impressive.
They are normally responsible for purchasing their own uniform and music, and often their own instrument too.
Publishing
There is a highly organised publishing enterprise which exercises control over the music used by bands and choirs.
Only that which has been officially authorised is permitted for use in services.
A new edition of The Song Book of the Salvation Army 1986 (Salvationist Publishing and Supplies, 1986) contains words alone, but is supplemented by The Tune Book which is published both as a set of band parts and for keyboard.
The repertoire is extended by the publication of new music each quarter.
CONCLUSION
It is encouraging to note both the variety of musical resources and practice within the Christian denominations in England, and also an increasing convergence.
This augurs well for the future and underlines the truth that music as a universal language is an important resource for ecumenism.
MUSIC IN SOME ECUMENICAL CONGREGATIONS IN ENGLAND
In addition to those churches which are organised along denominational lines there are many congregations in England which are best described as ecumenical, for they generally contain members from a variety of churches, or from none.
This chapter does not include Local Ecumenical Projects (LEPs), which normally reflect a combination of the worship and music of their constituent denominations.
It does, however, deal with those congregations which are loosely termed chaplaincies, where worship is provided chiefly for members of an institution or organisation of some kind.
The Commission has not given particular consideration to the use of music in the services of schools, colleges, hospitals or to every kind of institution.
Its gratitude to a number of people for their advice is recorded in Appendix 2.8.
HOUSE CHURCHES
The term ‘house churches’ is applied to a variety of congregations, Some of them belong to organised groupings, but all are characterised by a common emphasis on the dynamic activity of the Holy Spirit in the lives of their members.
A typical house church is marked by the exercise of some or all of the gifts of the Spirit listed in 1 Corinthians 12 and by a belief that scriptural prophecy is being fulfilled today.
Often there is a strong sense of warfare being waged against Satan, in which God's people participate through prayer, healings and exorcisms.
A house church congregation may gather for worship in the home of one of its members, but commonly it assembles in a hall or other large meeting-place.
Variety
A range of styles of worship is to be found in house churches.
A very relaxed and spontaneous service stresses the individual's intimacy with God, whilst fairly formal liturgical worship, led by an elder, emphasises the corporate responsibility of the congregation to witness  to Christ.
There may be a gathering of two or three people to wait in quiet expectancy on the Holy Spirit, or an organised ‘Praise March’ through the streets.
Whatever the style, congregations show few inhibitions in facial expression and in their use of the body to express devotion.
The raising of arms and hands in the air conveys praise and thanksgiving, whilst prostration on the floor speaks of repentance and openness to God.
There is much vocal participation by all who are present, in singing and in giving testimonies or prophecies, as well as in speaking or singing in tongues.
Musicians, Instruments and Repertoire
The pipe organ is almost unknown in the worship of house churches, not least because they seldom use church buildings.
Rarely is there a choir as such.
Instead the music is usually led by a music group or band which may consist of almost any combination of instruments, together with a piano or other kind of keyboard and one or more singers.
It is common for the music group, through its leader or one of its members, to take responsibility for leading a substantial part of the service.
This usually consists of worship and praise and comprises the singing of a number of songs, with a good deal of repetition in which one song succeeds another without a break.
There may follow a period of spontaneous singing in tongues by the congregation, after which the whole assembly might lapse into a profound corporate silence and a still waiting upon God.
Much of the set-piece music used by house churches has a common feel to it, although the styles differ considerably from congregation to congregation.
So one may experience variously what may be called ‘Radio 2–1970s-disco-feel’ music, or heavy rock, or traditional hymnody, or 1960s jazz-band music.
Within a chosen style it is possible to create a full range of moods.
For example, slow and meditative songs convey the depth of God's love for the individual; majestic ones centre on the exalted Christ; and those which are up-tempo express the joy of being a Christian.
Where there is traditional hymnody, it is often used selectively with perhaps only one or two verses of a well-known hymn being repeated several times.
Wider Influence
The influence of the house church movement on the life and worship of the established denominations has been considerable, not least in the field of music.
For some ten years now, house church  musicians have arranged training opportunities, with seminars and annual gatherings such as those at Spring Harvest and Greenbelt propagating new music, and with the regular publication of self-help music books and song material.
In developing styles of music to make worship accessible to as many people as possible, the primary aim of music in the house church movement is understood to be to glorify God.
‘ETHNIC’ CONGREGATIONS
There is an obvious problem of terminology here.
Many of those who worship in Orthodox, Catholic, Lutheran, Free Church or Anglican churches belong to ‘ethnic minorities’.
They include those who are visiting this land for a week or two, or students and professionals from other parts of the world, temporarily resident in this country.
For most of these the use of English presents no problem and the Church does not assume the cultural importance that it has for some of those from ethnic minority cultures who live permanently in Britain.
Cultural Roots
Many from ethnic minorities belong to the main-line churches, but there are many others who are unfamiliar with the English language and culture and may find that Western ways of worship do not meet their needs.
So there is a steady blossoming of congregations (such as the Chinese Christian Churches in London, Birmingham and Oxford) initiated by and for a particular ethnic minority group.
Their emphasis is usually ‘Christian’ rather than‘denominational’and they are to be found almost wholly in large conurbations.
In addition to being a gathering of worshippers, such congregations may be at the centre of the life of a community in ‘alien’ surroundings.
To them the maintenance of cultural roots, folk festivals and the ways of the Church ‘back home’ are important.
If a church is large enough it may support artistic performing groups and there is often a sense of responsibility for the education of that community's children in language, traditional customs, crafts, music and dance.
This is not to suggest that no efforts are being made by the main-line churches in this country to care for and accommodate the traditions of those in their congregations who have come from overseas.
There are in London, for example, Cantonese, Ethiopian, Portuguese and Spanish congregations which have come into being through church planting by a strong congregation from one of the  denominations.
In the Roman Catholic Church priests are sometimes appointed to look after the needs of a particular ethnic group.
Special celebratory services with ethnic bands and music are arranged, and in some areas parts of the Mass are celebrated in languages other than English.
A Black Catholic conference is planned for the future, in order to look at ways of making white middle-class worship relevant to those from another culture.
Joint Ventures and Training
In other denominations, as well as seeking to meet the social needs of those who are disadvantaged, there have been experiments with weekly joint services with the Asian community.
These have contained a mixture of languages and music, and have often employed an interpreter.
Because of problems with disparate styles of music, however, an occasional Sunday afternoon service is held at a time when white people who are committed to this kind of outreach are free to attend.
In this and other ways some attempts have been made to integrate the differing traditions of music and worship.
A ‘Worship in Harmony’ think-tank was initiated in 1989 in order to bring black and white musical styles together.
Other requirements are more mundane, and include money in order to provide hymn and song books, instruments and music stands for churches in which such necessities are not taken for granted.
There is a need, too, for the training of musicians.
Several Asian churches have found difficulties in finding instrumental tuition for their youngsters.
In the West Midlands one Local Education Authority provides a class on Saturday mornings for young Asian musicians to learn traditional instruments, whilst in Islington and Southall two Asian churches organise an annual festival for soloists, choirs and instrumentalists from a wide area.
Asian and Afro-Caribbean Repertoire
Many older Asian Christians still enjoy long traditional hymns with tenuous melodies, accompanied by harmonium and tabla, not least because of the limitations of language (Gujurati, Hindi, Punjabi or Urdu).
For most Afro-Caribbean people English is a lingua franca .
Even if it is not their native tongue, Western songs, choruses and hymns are readily accessible to them and they relate fairly easily to the established churches in England.
Many of them contribute much to the musical life of those congregations whose members enjoy singing to  the accompaniment of steel bands and a variety of other musical instruments, with their distinctive rhythms and harmonies.
As one Anglican incumbent noted, the liturgy ‘came to life in a new way’ with such music and the recent publication of Gospel Praise reflects the growing interest in it.
In some places the Afro-Caribbean community has composed Mass settings and produced its own hymn books.
There has also been a significant growth in the number and size of black-led Pentecostal churches during the last two or three decades.
These are marked by lusty singing and strong rhythms and reflect very much the extrovert nature of the worshippers.
The enthusiasm, the energy and the sheer endurance of many ethnic congregations are in strong contrast to the more restrained worship to which the average British Christian is accustomed.
The exuberance of their music and sincerity of their worship readily compensate for flaws in performance or thin theological content.
From this tradition have emerged a number of notable black Gospel choirs, some of them performing to a very high standard.
Not surprisingly, the range of musical styles among ethnic minority cultures is considerable.
HER MAJESTY'S FORCES
In the British Forces there are more than ninety Royal Marine, Regimental and Royal Air Force bands, and the investment in music by the Ministry of Defence exceeds the public subsidy of the arts generally in Great Britain.
An important, if small, part of this investment relates to parade services, such as Remembrance Day and Regimental Sunday, and other ceremonial occasions which include an act of worship.
But the musical resources available for the weekly services in the churches and chapels of the Armed Forces are slender indeed.
Organists and Choirs
Some of the RAF churches have competent and well-trained organists, but these are generally difficult to come by and, as in many parishes, it is a pianist who is pressed into service.
All three Services depend a good deal upon civilian help, and naval chaplains, who are appointed for two-year terms of duty, are inclined to leave the running of church music ashore to those whose ties with a church are more permanent.
The Ministry of Defence pays £12 per service to an organist who is not a serving member of the Forces.
The frequent changes resulting from postings and the demands of the duty roster make it difficult to ensure the continuity not only of a ‘uniformed’ organist, but also of a choir.
Nevertheless, three-quarters of RAF churches have robed choirs, half of them made up entirely of adults and averaging eight to ten members.
Most of their churches in Germany are affiliated to the RSCM, and some use its Choristers' Training Scheme.
Such choirs as the Navy has in its on-shore establishments consist largely of former naval personnel who have rather more conservative musical tastes than those still serving, eighteen being the average age of those at sea.
Of the dozen or so choirs in the Navy, including two in Gibraltar and Hong Kong, the one in Greenwich has sufficient expertise to record hymns for use in ships at sea.
Many Army garrisons have no choir and rely a good deal on local resources, especially overseas.
Army schools in Germany provide a useful source of singers.
Instruments
Where there is no pipe organ, the churches, chapels and ships of the Forces are equipped with a small electric keyboard.
This has replaced the old portable harmonium so familiar to former generations of service personnel.
In addition, there is the growing use of other instruments, either singly or in groups.
Over half the RAF churches consulted use either a piano or a guitar, or both, to accompany worship songs, especially at family services.
In ships at sea chaplains or commanding officers have pre-recorded tapes containing organ accompaniments and a compilation of hymns.
At present this comprises twenty favourites, but is shortly to be enlarged by another twenty.
Repertoire and Services
Almost all of the music used in the Forces consists of hymns, generally drawn from Hymns Ancient and Modern New Standard .
With fewer of those serving having been to Sunday school and with the small number of hymns learnt at school, the repertoire is very limited.
The use of Anglican chant for psalms and canticles has almost entirely ceased, but in the Eucharist the better known settings by Appleford, Rutter and Shephard are used.
Where there is an adult choir, an anthem may be sung.
For Anglicans most of the main services take the form of a Eucharist and the ASB Rite A is almost universal.
Matins has almost wholly disappeared and its substitute in Anglican worship is often some  kind of family service, common also in the Free Churches, and generally of the ‘hymn-sandwich’ variety.
Except in large garrisons or establishments, there is usually only one church and the situation in the Armed Forces obviously encourages partnership between the Churches.
There is a good deal of ecumenical co-operation, particularly between Methodists and Anglicans in the Army.
Service congregations are familiar with joint services.
Training
The RAF holds an annual five-day course for church musicians at Andover, led in recent years by the organist of Coventry Cathedral.
However, little seems to be done in the Navy and the Army to provide musical training for either chaplains or musicians.
HER MAJESTY'S PRISONS
In prison chapels the abandonment in the early 1960s of compulsory worship for all prisoners has meant the demise of Matins and its lusty singing.
In its place there are more flexible forms of worship and much smaller attendances.
Nevertheless in some of the larger prisons such as those at Liverpool, Durham and Leeds, congregations remain large.
Strangeways in Manchester, before recent riots, had between three and four hundred people present at the Church of England service, some two hundred at the Roman Catholic Mass and a good number of others at the Methodist service.
In such establishments the emphasis is usually strongly evangelistic, with worship songs, visiting choirs, pop groups and challenging preaching.
By contrast, Parkhurst, with long-term high-security prisoners, a badly-sited chapel and a long tradition of low attendance, has between ten and twenty men at the Eucharist.
Even so, a simple musical setting is used.
There are not many prison choirs, and the organs provided are usually electronic instruments.
Many organists are recruited from outside, some of them playing for all the denominations which use the one chapel.
Although the fees they receive are small, most of them are faithful and often long-serving.
They do not, perhaps, receive the recognition which they deserve.
Generally speaking, the present scene is a varied one and a number of factors contribute to the way in which a missionary situation  is tackled by the Church.
These include the size of the prison, the nature of its population, the availability and attitudes of the staff, the number of competing activities, the effectiveness of the chaplain and the tradition of the place.
CONCLUSION
There are clearly immense riches in the different musical traditions of Christian congregations, and great benefit could result from their being even more widely shared.
The more traditional churches could often do with some of the energy and spontaneity of the newer fellowships.
These in their turn might derive something from the order and timelessness of the mainstream tradition.
MUSIC IN THE WORLD-WIDE CHURCH
Little more than a general impression can be given of the state of music in the churches outside Great Britain.
Most of the following information was obtained from replies to a letter from the Chairman to more than fifty correspondents in various parts of the world (see Appendix 2.9).
Although there are some gaps, there is no reason to think that the overall picture would have been significantly different with contributions from all parts of the globe.
Most of those consulted by the Commission are Anglican and they were asked to give their views on ten specific points.
It was recognised that these would be subjective and impressionistic, to some extent at least, and this chapter quotes verbatim from many of the letters it has received.
The Past Twenty-five Years
The introduction of new services has occurred everywhere, and the Parish Communion has almost universally become the main Sunday service, with the consequent disappearance of Matins and Evensong and their choral opportunities.
The growth in vocal participation by congregations has lessened the significance of the choir, and it is even viewed in some places as élitist.
Often this has resulted either in a loss of heart by both choirs and organists, leading to the demise of choral singing and organ-playing, or in these services being no longer required.
A South African correspondent noted that the choir is not now seen as ‘a binding organisation within the structure of the church’.
In Zimbabwe there are now eight ‘traditional’ choirs, all in Harare, as compared with twenty a few years ago.
As against that, some of the American churches have evidently continued to value their musical personnel.
The ‘Crystal Cathedral’ in California, for instance, has 700 people involved in its music.
It is but one of several dozen churches in that country promoting impressive  musical programmes.
Although these are mostly non-Anglican in a land where only 2.5% of Christians are Episcopalian, they are highly significant.
Much emphasis is laid by very many churches on high musical standards in selection and presentation.
The Director (or ‘Minister’) of Music is an important member of the church s management team.
A lowering of standards is generally noted, however, in the last quarter century.
In Australia, the growth of Pentecostal-type churches with their highly-charged musical professionalism makes the average choir seem very inadequate.
The use of music in worship in New Zealand has grown in quantity as a result of greater congregational singing, but its quality is said by a correspondent to have declined greatly.
Many note that the ‘traditional’ has been largely replaced by ‘informal’music which plays on the emotions, with ‘joy’being given great prominence.
Recruitment of Church Musicians
People seem to prefer that which is informal, spontaneous and unrehearsed, and the lack of stimulus presented by much of the ‘new look’ music makes it difficult to persuade musicians to be committed on a regular basis.
From Canada comes the comment that ‘because musical demands are now far less challenging, it is difficult to recruit serious musicians’.
In Australia ‘recruitment is at a very low ebb’, not least because few parishes actively encourage the training of organists.
A contributory factor in Canada, in common with other places, is the sometimes problematic relationship between organists and clergy.
Robed choirs are in decline in New Zealand, although smartly dressed secular choirs are to be seen on television.
In Hong Kong, as in many African countries and Europe as well, the disappearance of the more settled residents of a generation ago makes it difficult to recruit for the church choir.
(Choirs have always thrived best in well-rooted provincial communities.)
Today's mobility, the five-day week, the range of leisure pursuits, sport and predictable weather all militate against recruitment, especially of the young.
Nevertheless, in America considerable use is made of junior choirs in addition to those consisting of adults.
One response to a difficult situation, which is not without its merits, is the growth of ad hoc choirs and groups, singing on special occasions.
These may consist of able musicians who are unwilling or  unable to commit themselves on a regular basis.
Another response is the formation of music groups which sometimes include all who want to play or sing in them, regardless of their ability.
Because they are heavily dependent upon the quality of their leadership special music groups tend to come and go.
Encouragement, Training and Employment of Church Musicians
On the whole, correspondents did not believe that church musicians receive as much encouragement as they deserve.
There may be grounds for dissatisfaction with some church musicians, but many have suffered from high-handed treatment, sometimes leading to dismissal.
‘Lukewarm toleration’ is the description given by some New Zealand correspondents who believe that clergy sometimes feel that ‘traditions are inhibiting parish development’.
It is clear that few theological colleges anywhere do much to instruct and encourage ordinands in matters musical.
In spite of some clergy who are ‘not appreciative of art or excellence’, the Church in the United States still sees the need to train musicians as a pastoral priority.
Elsewhere, as in Australia, ‘the half-trained pianist is often accepted as sufficient for the task’.
Artistic and musical skills are not always highly prized, and those who are qualified musically may find themselves at a disadvantage because they ‘have not been trained to serve the Church’, and so do not ‘speak the language of theology’.
Moreover, some of the best qualified people in South Africa, Australia and elsewhere have sought openings for training in Europe or America because of lack of opportunities or resources at home.
Consequently there are few new musicians in many areas who might have been able to train others to follow them.
There are many more unpaid Church musicians overseas than in Britain and the ‘reluctant organist’ is in great demand.
A recent survey in Sydney showed that only 3% of the organists in that city are remunerated at a realistic level for the hours and work involved.
in New Zealand the Church generally pays only its cathedral musicians.
By contrast, the salaries paid to church musicians in North America are generally high.
There are some instances where ‘extravagant wages’ are paid, and some musicians are also ‘parish managers with the duties of an office administrator’.
Even so, the American Guild of Organists is seeking a rise in salary scales, for many a highly qualified Church musician is ‘paid at a level far below what his or her competence and training should expect’.
Relationships
Mention has been made already of difficulties in the area of relationships, and it would seem that this is a widespread problem.
Lack of communication and the inability to see a differing point of view are cited as being the main causes.
The result is that the key leaders of worship fail to relate properly and their dealings with one another are inhibited by suspicion and threat.
One American correspondent suggested that ‘the music department is the war department of the church’.
Other factors which create or add to problems in relationships are quoted as: interference rather than encouragement by musical clergy; jealousy; vagueness about who chooses what; last-minute alterations; incompetence of the organist; insufficient musical knowledge in the clergy and insufficient liturgical and theological knowledge in the musician, so that neither fully understands what the other is about; and suspicion by the clergy or musical professionalism.
Because both the congregation and the worship suffer when clergy and musicians are at loggerheads, an Australian correspondent recommends more overall planning meetings.
These are especially important where there is ‘the potential for discord when anything beyond the conventional or ordinary begins to surface.
In New Zealand, music groups seem to get on better with the incumbent than many an organist.
But, as a consequence, musical decisions may be made by people with little or no real musical knowledge, sometimes without proper consultation.
Instruments
There is a growing use of instrumental groups, but the organ holds its own in ‘traditional’ situations.
Where a new instrument is required, it is now common to install a small tracker-action pipe organ rather than an over-large romantic one which is costly to maintain.
There is surprisingly little use in African countries of indigenous instruments in the worship of indigenous people.
In many situations it is felt to be inappropriate to worship God without an organ.
The majority of African congregations, however, still sing lustily without any accompaniment.
For this reason there is an exciting variety of improvised harmonies in their worship.
New Music
The new liturgical texts of recent years have generally lacked music to accompany them.
But now composers are writing ‘Alleluia’ refrains and music for Holy Communion, as well as psalm settings.
In America The Hymnal 1980 contains no fewer than 288 examples of service music and it is permissible to reproduce some of it for congregational use.
The use of today's worship songs is much in evidence and they are described in the United States as ‘songs important to pilgrim people’.
One correspondent notes that, having gone through a period of using much folk music and guitar accompaniment, ‘this phase seems to be declining in some places’.
Hymn Books
In former British colonies,Hymns Ancient and Modern and The English Hymnal are still widely used.
But the boom in hymn publishing has made available a great variety of material, from Roman Catholic, Free Church and Lutheran sources amongst many others.
In New Zealand five new hymn books were published in 1989.
In South Africa, Zimbabwe and some other places the high cost of foreign imports, local taxes and unfavourable exchange rates militate against the use of new books from abroad.
Steps are therefore being taken to permit some legitimate reproduction of copyright material.
An interesting development has been the emergence of national hymnals, such as The Australian Hymn Book in 1977 (subsequently published elsewhere as With One Voice ).
This includes some ‘interesting examples of truly indigenous music of the Australian aborigines and of Papua New Guinea’.
It is also the result of ecumenical co-operation between the major denominations.
A less formal supplement,Sing Alleluia , followed in 1988 and contains a number of psalm settings.
In the Episcopal Church of the United States,The Hymnal 1980 is used virtually everywhere.
Its publication was preceded by years of painstaking preparation, with nation-wide workshops and promotional material.
These were evidently very successful.
Hope
Correspondents were asked to identify that which is positive in their situations.
Many of them expressed appreciation of local cathedral organists and parish musicians who provide a lead and incentive to  others.
They also mentioned the value of the RSCM, particularly in respect of its teaching role in annual summer schools.
These are regularly held in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and the United States.
In Canada the work of the Royal Canadian College of Organists was commended, especially for its work with theological colleges.
Joint programmes are arranged for learning in theology, liturgy and music.
In Australia there is now more variety generally in church music.
More people are involved in its selection and performance, even if levels of skill, experience and interest vary widely.
Although the average age of choirs is high, younger people are being attracted to music groups and some simple music of good quality is emerging.
‘The trite music of the 1970s’ is being replaced in New Zealand by ‘more musical’songs, as the Church learns to accommodate divergent tastes.
There is still an element of polarisation, however, which proclaims ‘belief in the old and distrust in the new’.
The music of the Roman Catholic Church in New Zealand is very strong, and generally in that country there is great awareness of what is happening world-wide.
Both Australia and New Zealand suggest the need for a cross-fertilisation of resources and for a measure of compromise between those of differing views.
Anxiety
The fact that music is allowed to become divisive is a particular concern in New Zealand.
Polarisation is encouraged by bickering between ‘charismatic’ and traditional churches and hardened attitudes.
But by far the most common complaint the world over is of low standards and lack of training.
Although the new forms of service are not necessarily responsible, it is felt that the whole ethos of worship has changed.
According to some, it has reached ‘an all-time low’.
Spontaneous and unrehearsed music seems to be acceptable to clergy who do not know about music.
They evidently ‘enjoy the inartistic, unbeautiful, and the superficial emotional appeal of much that they foster’.
Much money in Australia is being expended on Christian rock music, with the suggestion that anything traditional is passé .
In the same country there is some regret at the abandonment of Latin masses, psalmody and Evensong.
But there is suspicion of ‘the domination of one person (usually the organist) standing in the way of developing other considerable talent reserves’.
Although correspondents from the United States are optimistic, the musical resources of the average Episcopalian church are somewhat  slender.
In addition to people with musical qualifications, there is ‘a big need for persons with pastoral and teaching gifts.
By and large, this broader concept of training persons as pastoral musicians is missing, and surely needed’.
In South Africa children are no longer being taught the traditional hymns in schools.
There, as elsewhere, ‘perhaps the most depressing thing is the lack of interest shown by so many towards the beauty and power of the arts in enriching worship’.
Much quality music is being lost and many people are being alienated as a result.
The Future
The most positive view comes from the United States: ‘The fact that much is being done, and that there are few areas of stagnation, makes one believe that better and more fruitful days are ahead’.
In spite of the ‘failure of the seminaries and theological colleges to give the clergy the background to be in full charge of the music in the parish…people are thinking and talking about liturgy and music in new ways, and reassessing everything’.
By contrast, Zimbabwe is pessimistic because there are fewer people available to train choirs and play the organ.
Secular university choirs are said to be much better than church groups.
New Zealand notes that because many of its young professionals are disenchanted and disillusioned, there is a gradual disappearance of ‘traditional choirs’.
On the other hand, it is in the ‘Renewal’ churches that there is growth.
That is said to be no longer true in South Africa where a general feeling of ‘tiredness’ in the Church is alleged.
Many had pinned their hopes on the Renewal Movement and found it wanting.
More positively, from South Africa comes the observation that music's power to unite must give it a role in a country where at least twelve languages are spoken.
Although Africans generally read tonic sol-fa and Europeans use staff notation, RSCM committees consist of Blacks, ‘Coloureds’ and Whites together.
It is clear that in both Australia and New Zealand there is a continuing ferment arising from conflicting support for the old or the new.
Both sides, however, agree that ‘while poor standards prevail, competent musicians will not be interested in working for the Church, and standards will consequently continue to remain low,.
In Canada, although there are few opportunities for training outside the big city, high standards of worship and music are still to be found in places.
A positive response comes from North-West Europe where relationships between clergy and organists seem to present few problems, and where there is a general improvement and growth in matters musical.
Conclusion
In spite of widely different histories and circumstances, many of the joys and sorrows of church music all over the world are familiar to us in this country.
There is a sad tally of declining standards; the divide between traditional and modern; the lack of encouragement and training of church musicians; low pay and low levels of commitment; and unhappy human and professional relationships.
These and other problems seem to be common everywhere.
Solutions in one place may not be successful in other contexts, but the Church everywhere also offers some positive signs of hope.
Among them are the burgeoning of musical writing; the involvement of an increasing number of people in making music; in some places the improvement of quality, and the dedication of many choirs, organists, directors, instrumentalists, composers and clergy to the cause of music in worship.
MUSIC IN RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES
No survey of the current state of church music would be complete without some consideration of the music of religious communities, with which plainsong is particularly associated.
In a report such as this it is possible to attempt only a limited review, and the concern of the present chapter is chiefly with communities in the Anglican tradition.
It will be evident that these are greatly influenced by Roman Catholic religious congregations, and some of what is said here applies to monks and nuns of both Communions.
The Commission is grateful for information and evidence from many communities and from a number of people whose names are listed in Appendix 2. 10.
Anglican Religious Communities and their Worship
It is not commonly known that within the Church of England there are some fifty recognised communities of monks or nuns.
These embrace the Benedictine, Augustinian, Franciscan and other main traditions of the religious life.
Some communities have a number of branch houses, containing perhaps only three or four members, and some are reduced to a handful of elderly professed members.
in all there are between six and seven hundred men and women living communally under vows.
The sum total of their daily offering of music in worship far exceeds that of the cathedrals.
In addition to the (usually) daily celebration of the Eucharist there is the rhythm of the Divine Office.
This comprises chiefly the recitation of the Psalter, traditionally to chant, and takes place in some communities seven times a day, from Vigils or Lauds in the early morning to Compline at night.
In others there are three or four offices consisting of Morning and Evening Prayer (often from the ASB), with prayers at midday and/or Compline.
: However, not all communities sing the Office.
Those which say all or part of it, with perhaps the addition of a hymn, do so either because their numbers are small and their voices ageing, or as a result of a deliberate choice.
This may be out of a desire for absolute  simplicity and ready accessibility for visitors, or because other commitments do not allow time and people to be available for the preparation and practice of music.
Or it may he because ‘more and more we find we have people who say they ‘can't sing’.
Nevertheless, in spite of a much less universal use of music than formerly, the monastic musical tradition remains a vital one.
It increasingly interacts with the music of the wider Church.
The Recovery and Adaptation of Plainsong
The re-establishment of religious communities within Anglicanism has taken place only since the middle of the last century, and the tradition upon which their founders drew was mainly that of the Roman Catholic Church.
Latin was adopted by some communities.
Although a few continued with it until recently, it is used today only occasionally.
From the beginning Gregorian chant was used by almost all communities, usually adapted for English texts.
This followed the rediscovery of the Sarum Use, which had been a local medieval modification of the Roman rite, used in nearly every place in Britain by the end of the fifteenth century.
In addition to the influence of Solesmes Abbey, there was the scholarship of men such as Briggs, Frere, Palmer and Arnold, reflected in the publications of the Community of St. Mary the Virgin at Wantage which made possible the recovery of plainsong for English congregations, parochial as well as religious.
Today Dr. Mary Berry, as champion of the English tradition, continues the tradition of scholarship in the promotion of Gregorian chant, and Dr. Nick Sandon has done invaluable work on the musical text of the Sarum Use.
Modern Reforms
There have been immense changes in recent times.
These have come partly through the influence of Vatican II, but also because of the availability and use of a wide variety of biblical and liturgical texts in modern English.
Unlike Roman Catholics, who had to come to terms with the use of the vernacular, Anglicans had used English for four hundred years.
For them the difficulty was not to change from Latin but to move from the language of the Prayer Book to that of the ASB.
One correspondent, however, sees little evidence today of an agreed understanding of what constitutes monastic music or even that the music of the monastic tradition is above all the vehicle for its prayer.
He acknowledges that liturgy is not a museum piece but needs  to evolve as part of a living tradition.
Nevertheless, he says that it has been difficult to avoid the wholesale abandonment of a fascinating liturgical and musical tradition which had sound scholarly foundations.
‘A flurry of well-meant, but largely insubstantial, activity’ has been scornful of scholarship, discipline and a proper kind of sacramentalism.
It has resulted in some cases in ‘banality rather than simplicity’.
It should be noted, though, that as yet there has not been a long enough period for what is banal and insubstantial to be dropped in favour of what is an enduring renewal of the tradition.
Some form of chant continues to be used in most communities at some time, not only because of historic associations, but also because of its fundamental simplicity.
It enables all to partake in vocal recitation and yet demands sufficient practice and attention to ensure the full involvement of those using it.
There is obvious importance in having music, as well as words, in order to create and express the unity of those who offer regularly and frequently the dally common prayer of an ecclesial community.
Chanting can be made immensely complex, with syllables expanded in long neums and a substantial ‘jubilus’ element.
It can also be as elementary as the monotone with either few or no inflections.
This is the way in which, it seems, an increasing number of communities are using it.
For some it is all the singing they do, other than the occasional hymn or Mass setting.
Others introduce Gregorian or modal material on high days and special occasions.
Many sing Psalms on a monotone for one or more of their daily Offices and employ a more elaborate chant for Morning and Evening Prayer.
Invitatories, responses and responsories, as well as antiphons, are still commonly chanted.
Office Books and the Psalter
Few communities now use the Coverdale or old English plainsong Psalters.
They have been largely replaced by the American Psalter, the Grail Psalms and the Frost/MacIntosh Psalter of the ASB.
Antiphons are still widely used and are frequently written by one or more members of the community, using modal formulae.
Both in music and in text, the variety of offices and office books is considerable.
As one sister put it, ‘our office needed to be an expression of who we were’.
Some communities have successfully completed revisions and some are still in the process of doing so.
The Society of St. Francis is engaged in revising its very successful office book published in 1980.
Those undertaking revisions have been helped by the publication in 1980 by the Anglican Communities Consultative Council of the Anglican Office Book .
Few communities adopted it in toto , but it provided a useful source of material, even if those responsible for it fell into the common trap of producing texts which were not necessarily Appropriate for musical setting.
The Eucharist and Hymn Books
If there is a wide range of office books in use by religious in the Church of England, almost all of them now use the ASB rite for the Eucharist.
This is sung at least sometimes by most communities and simple settings composed by their members are often used.
Some are common to more than one community.
Also used are settings familiar to parishes, such as those by Patrick Appleford, Gregory Murray and Richard Shephard.
A few communities use vernacular plainchant settings, usually with one of the older rites.
A large collection of modern texts set to traditional chants is to be found in the recent An English Kyriale .
This ecumenical publication has its origins in the experimental work of the Community of St. John the Baptist at Clewer.
For hymnody the main source of those with a traditional approach to the office hymn is The English Hymnal (or The New English Hymnal ).
However, all the standard books are used, from Hymns Ancient and Modern Revised , and its supplements, to Mission Praise (Marshall Pickering, 1986) and Sound of Living Waters (Hodder & Stoughton, 1974).
One sister reports that her community uses four or five books.
Others, such as West Malling and the SSF, have compiled their own collection of hymns.
Most modern hymn books contain few office hymns.
There is also the difficulty of obtaining good modern translations of hymns appropriate for use in monastic worship, which avoid the use of exclusive language which is particularly difficult for women's communities.
Hopes are therefore being pinned upon the forthcoming production of a new monastic hymnal under the auspices of the Panel of Monastic Musicians.
Meetings and Resources
The Panel of Monastic Musicians was formed in 1971, following the reforms of Vatican II.
It seeks to provide a forum in which ideas, principles and the understanding of monastic worship can be shared particularly by those responsible for the music of a community.
Its concerns are primarily those of the Roman Catholic Church, but  Anglicans also belong to it and there have been some useful ecumenical conferences over the years.
In addition to‘monitoring’ new music, the Panel remains committed to promoting the study and use of Gregorian chant.
It has been helpful for many in showing that complex medieval Latin plainchant can be simplified and adapted to modern English texts, whilst retaining the basic musical principles of the eight Gregorian modes.
There have also been gatherings in recent years of Anglican monastic musicians.
These have taken place so far at Ditchingham, Mirfield and Whitby.
While considering help and resources for Church of England communities, mention must be made of Stanbrook, a Roman Catholic abbey whose Dame Laurentia McLachlan and Dame Hildelith Cumming were amongst the pioneers of the modern use of plainchant.
Hymns and modal chants are still regularly published by this community and are very widely used by Anglicans.
St. Mary's Abbey, West Malling, has also been influential in helping other Anglican communities to attempt new musical expression whilst remaining within a monastic ethos.
The St. Thomas More Centre in London has been a much-appreciated source of experimental music of an ‘occasional, nature.
Musicians and Instruments within Communities
Many convents and monasteries use music composed by their own members, partly because of the understandable wish to use what is tailor-made for a community and partly out of necessity.
The quality of the music obviously varies, but many communities have had (and a few still have) distinguished musicians and liturgists among their number.
The overall picture today, however, is of a decreasing number of musically-skilled people.
There is sometimes a pull to a ‘lowest common denominator’ approach, lest any feel excluded.
This is in part a reaction against a past striving for excellence in the plainsong tradition and, in some places, against the hierarchical division between ‘choir’ and ‘lay’members.
Today, however, the amount and quality of monastic music depends chiefly upon commitment and the personnel and time available to practise.
In some monastic traditions the Office is only one of a number of priorities.
Time and resources spent on music, therefore, may be considered to be disproportionate to its importance in the life of the community.
Most chanting is unaccompanied, often because no one is available with the required skill, especially to accompany plainsong.
Increasing use is being made of guitars, flutes and other instruments, as well as of electric keyboards, for hymns and eucharistic settings.
Not surprisingly there is a greater readiness to experiment where there are more, and perhaps younger, people than where the few elderly remaining members of an order cling to what is familiar.
Value to Parishes
The maintenance of the plainsong tradition and the commitment of religious communities to the rhythm of worship is valuable to the wider Church.
Parishes can learn much from the qualities of discipline and prayerfulness and a proper other-worldliness which mark the dally recitation of the Office, often in unaccompanied singing.
There is, too, a sense of timelessness, stillness and silence which leaves a deep impression on visitors.
This quality could bring great benefit to the clatter and chatter of much parochial worship.
Communities at Taizé and Iona
Although it is neither in England nor Anglican, the ecumenical community at Taizé in France has become well known in recent years as a place of pilgrimage, especially by young people, and its music has a profound and growing influence in our churches.
The chants of Jacques Berthier and others from Taizé are occasionally used in Anglican religious communities, and are becoming an increasingly common ingredient of parish worship.
These chants combine the traditions of West and East.
The simplicity of their melodic lines invoke the melismas of plainchant, whilst the harmonies which accompany the melody suggest the depths of Orthodox chanting.
Consequently the chants seldom seem banal or trivial, in spite of being repeated over and over again.
There is a mantra-like quality about them which creates an atmosphere of stillness and contemplation, and even those who are not used to prayer or formal liturgy are readily moved by them to devotion.
Because the music is simple, repetitive and easily accessible to all, no great musical ability and no books are required.
Thus much of the ‘business’ is taken out of worship, without numbers to be announced, places to be found, rustling of papers and shutting of books when the music is finished.
Instead, the chant often returns to the profound silence from which it began, even with two or three thousand people in the congregation.
Most of the chants are set to simple Latin texts, which perhaps heightens the sense of their ‘traditional’ feel.
The reason for this is the pragmatic one that the Taizé community comprises people from many Christian traditions living together under vows.
Very many different languages are spoken, both by the community and by their visitors who come from all over the world, and Latin provides a lingua franca .
Most ‘living’ languages are also used in worship.
In spite of its simplicity, the music at Taizé is always rehearsed before each of the three daily liturgies.
Usually a volunteer choir of singers and instrumentalists from young visitors is formed.
Their role is not so much to perform on their own as to lead and embellish the chants.
Indeed, much musical interest is provided by the descants by instruments and, sometimes, voices as well.
The music of Taizé has grown out of a particular context, culture and spirituality and it effectively serves the need of the ecumenical community for which it is composed.
Taizé has become the focus of religious renewal for thousands of people and its music is their chief way of entering into the Community's worship.
It has therefore been brought out of its original setting and is used widely in the churches to which the pilgrims return.
Some concern has been expressed that in its transposition the idiom of Taizé may seem musically and liturgically slight, because it has been separated from the particular spirituality of which it is part.
Certainly too much of it in a service (and there are Mass settings, songs and hymns as well as chants) can wear thin.
But English congregations generally find its simplicity, accessibility and memorability a valuable aid to worship.
Another non-English and non-Anglican community is that founded by Dr. George Macleod before World War II at Iona.
It, too, is an important place of pilgrimage and its music is increasingly finding its way into parishes.
More like folksong than chant, it reflects the Community's concern to relate worship and prayer to social issues.
It generally uses English words, but has a Celtic feel to it and reminds British churches of an important element in their tradition.
In Celtic spirituality the Holy Spirit is represented by a wild goose and this symbol gives the songs from the Iona Community their name.
Conclusion
One monk noted in reply to the Commission's enquiries that religious communities probably owe to music more of their spirituality  than they will ever know.
We might go on to say that not only in the medieval period with its plainsong, but also today, the Church owes more to the prayer and music of the religious orders than it will ever appreciate.
The Training of Musicians
An examination of the training received by, and available to, those chiefly responsible for music in church presents a varied picture.
In compiling this chapter, the Commission has drawn both on submissions made by music colleges and organisations, in particular a very full and helpful one from the Royal Academy of Music, and on the evidence received from individuals and derived from parish questionnaires (see Appendices 2.2 — 2.5).
The picture includes the provision made for amateur and professional, part-time and full-time church musicians.
Professionals and Amateurs
About one-fifth of parochial directors of music earn their livelihood through music.
By a process of extrapolation and arithmetic, it can be estimated that there are about 3,500 professionals and 13,000 amateurs who take a leading role in church music in the parishes.
In addition, there are perhaps another 200 professional musicians who work for a substantial part of their time in cathedrals, collegiate and choral foundations, and Royal Peculiars.
These figures suggest that slightly fewer than a quarter of our most influential church musicians are professionals, in the sense that they derive the major part of their income from music.
This is significant for any analysis of the training of church musicians.
More than three-quarters of those who are currently in post, even where they receive some remuneration, are amateurs in status, and in many cases in training as well, The extent and quality of their musical education is therefore extremely varied.
Many amateur musicians will have been influenced by the training undertaken by the professionals by whom they were, or are, themselves taught.
Learning on the Job
The most long-standing method of training church musicians has been through apprenticeship.
Many have learnt musical skills and  earned an income by singing in a church choir, Like J. S. Bach, the choirmaster or cantor of the past usually taught his choristers and pupils harmony and counterpoint, as well as instrumental skills.
In this way they could continue their musical careers after their voices had changed.
This system was confined mainly to boys, although a few orphaned girls had limited opportunities in such institutions as the Conservatorio della Pietà in the Venice of Vivaldi.
Purcell, Haydn and Schubert were among the many who derived most of their basic musical training from being apprenticed as choristers.
Originating in Renaissance times, this pattern of training persisted in this country almost to the present day.
Within living memory there have been cathedral organists who have taught their skills to articled pupils.
By first observing, then imitating their teacher, and then gaining direct experience of their craft under expert supervision these pupils learnt in the most practical of all ways.
During the last fifty years the church musician as a kind of freelance ‘general practitioner’ has been increasingly replaced by those who derive their livelihood more as school music teachers than from their appointment as parish organists.
Many organists nevertheless continue to fulfil the additional and varied roles of performing or conducting, and of private teaching.
Qualifications
School musicians are likely to have taken either a graduate course at university or music college, or a specialist music course during their teacher training.
During or after such courses they may have acquired some additional external diplomas in organ-playing conducting, harmony and counterpoint.
Their teaching qualifications are of obvious benefit to the church; the ability of a musical director to teach is as important as his or her mastery of musical skills.
Until a generation ago it was not uncommon for a successful parish church organist to be appointed to a cathedral post.
Today, however, the cathedral organist is more likely to be one who has been successively an organ scholar, a university graduate and a sub-organist at a cathedral.
The system of organ scholarships provides young musicians with opportunities to learn on the job as an apprentice, but a degree in music is also increasingly required.
Universities and Colleges
Academic studies in university music faculties often pay considerable attention to sacred music from the Early and Renaissance  periods.
In the older universities, especially, there are likely to be opportunities of hearing or performing such music.
However, the growing number of students with instrumental proficiency in recent years has meant an increasing concentration on orchestral work.
Consequently, there is a trend towards a wider and rather more secular choice of repertoire.
Several polytechnics and colleges of higher education offer degree courses with a substantial practical element.
In these institutions the budding church musician has the opportunity to develop skills in conducting, performing and composing.
The Colchester Institute offers a two-year course in church music, as does Hull University.
Goldsmiths' College has a special second year option on ‘Music and Religion’.
A particularly interesting new development is a project for the training of musicians, chiefly for parishes, which is being set up jointly by Anglia Polytechnic and Chelmsford Cathedral.
In spite of a long-standing tradition of appointing former cathedral and university musicians as principals of music colleges, the amount of time given in these institutions to the study of church music is limited.
Trinity College of Music, for example, was founded in 1872 as a ‘School for the Study and Practice of Music for the Church’.
Whilst some small provision is still made for such study, the College's aim today is ‘to train young musicians for careers as performers and teachers of music’(Gowrie:Review of the London Music Conservatories , 1980).
The Royal Academy of Music inaugurated a Church Music Studies programme in 1987.
In spite of promising prospects for the future, it has so far been a complementary course, to be undertaken in addition to the main course of study.
Keyboard studies remain paramount for about a third of music college undergraduates although opportunities are provided for the learning of a second instrument or singing.
This emphasis is true also of most of their graduate diploma courses.
In all the music colleges, particular stress is placed upon the acquisition of high standards of general musicianship.
In 1980 the Royal Academy of Music, the Royal College of Music, Trinity College of Music, the Royal Northern College of Music and the Birmingham School of Music between them had a total of 1688 students.
Of these sixty-nine (4. 1%) took the organ as their first study.
However, specialisation in the organ is no indication of a student's intention to work in the field of church music, for in recent years the organ has become increasingly recognised as a solo instrument in its own right.
It is therefore possible that in 1980 no more than 2% of students at five major colleges intended to make a significant career in church music.
Twelve years later, there are no signs that the situation has changed.
Organisations for Church Musicians
The Royal College of Organists was founded in 1864, in order to represent and promote the organist's profession.
It is mainly an examining body and awards the prestigious diplomas of ARCO, FRCO, CHM and (jointly with the Royal School of Church Music) ADCM.
Most of its 3,000 members are Anglicans and many of them work in the field of church music.
Another body concerned with qualifications in church music is the Guild of Church Musicians.
Since 1961 it has offered preparatory courses and annual examinations for a Certificate in Church Music.
Until 1988 it was known as the Archbishop of Canterbury's Certificate, but as it is now open to Roman Catholics has been renamed the Archbishops' Certificate (ACertCM).
The Guild also awards a Fellowship Diploma (FGC M) in conjunction with a four-year full-time course in church music at Goldsmiths' College, London.
The School of Church Music was founded in 1927 in order to improve the standards of church choirs, and to establish a college for the study of church music and the training of church musicians.
In 1945 it was given the royal accolade and since 1954 it has had its headquarters in Croydon, although the College of St. Nicolas (latterly at Addington Palace) closed in 1974.
Both before and since that closure residential and non-residential courses have been held, both at Addington and throughout this country and overseas.
Affiliated choirs are spread throughout Britain and the English-speaking world, and since 1967 it has been fully ecumenical.
The Director and Commissioners regularly visit parishes and arrange choir festivals, so that help is given ‘in the field’.
A significant part of its work is its extensive publishing operation.
Although the RSCM is not primarily concerned with examinations and awards, it administers (with the RCO) the ADCM.
Provision for Amateurs
All three of these organisations make provision for non-professional as well as professional church musicians.
The use that is made of it, however, depends more upon the decision of the individual than upon the expectations of the Church.
Equally, local training events for church musicians or workshops in the use of ‘renewal music’ are likely to receive their support from people who have an interest in them, rather than as part of a co-ordinated pattern of training for parish organists or directors of music.
These are often described as amateur, but certainly in no derogatory sense.
For, as in other spheres, the contribution of amateurs is often at least as significant and valuable as that of professionals.
At one end of the scale are those competent enthusiasts who could probably have qualified as professionals had their careers taken a different course.
Some have, indeed, achieved standards of excellence in performance and direction as high as those reached by some professionals.
These musicians take pride in keeping abreast of new developments by attending courses and obtaining certificates or external diplomas from musical institutions.
They continue to learn and to work at their skills.
By contrast, there are those who are commonly called ‘reluctant organists’.
These are usually pianists of modest ability who have been persuaded to help out where there is no organist.
It would seem that some 38% of the parishes surveyed by the Commission depend upon the goodwill of such people, and there are fewer of them in rural than in urban areas.
Such ability as they may acquire depends more upon the situation in their parish than upon any systematic education or training.
However, not all blame for an unsatisfactory situation should be attributed to the musicians and their training.
A number of those giving evidence to the Commission discern a lack of clear diocesan initiatives and guidance in the field of church music.
One correspondent suggests that there has been ‘a progressive debasement…of the quality of worship as well as a diminution in the prestige and credit-worthiness of those responsible for directing it’.
Some of those offering evidence point to the lack of a satisfactory career structure, inadequate remuneration and the absence of proper conditions of service for parish church musicians.
One correspondent asserts that whilst there is no shortage of organists, there is a dearth of those who  are prepared to take on the regular commitment of parish church music.
Sacred and Secular
From numerous comments made to the Commission it is evident that the limitations of the training offered to, and undertaken by, many church musicians is a cause for considerable concern.
A major anxiety is the apparent dichotomy (as expressed in the submission by the Royal Academy of Music) between giving church musicians ‘essential musical skills’ and training them ‘specifically in Church music’.
Furthermore, preparation of students to work as church musicians without regard to their religious convictions can lead to confusion or insincerity.
The Panel of Monastic Musicians, for example, believes that the church musician ‘must be a deeply committed worshipper’.
Otherwise the result can be as described by the Head of BBC religious broadcasting; in summarising the impressions gained by his producers of broadcast services, he quotes examples of choirs and music directors ‘for whom worship was an excuse to parade their skills’.
He suggests the need to recapture ‘the nature of true worship’.
That many of today's church musicians seem to be unfamiliar with developments in hymnody over the last thirty years is noted as significant by the Hymn Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Conclusion
Most of the institutions involved in the training of future church musicians seem to be largely unaware of the changing character of worship today.
They would appear also to overlook the widening gap between the more traditional ‘cathedral’ ethos and the comparative informality of many parish church services.
This is understandable, for the paucity of full-time, or nearly full-time, church music posts for professional musicians (as compared with those available for teachers and performers) is likely to dissuade any college from making radical changes to the content of its courses.
There are, nevertheless, a small number of organisations, as well as music colleges, universities and institutions of higher education, who are doing what they can to improve the situation.
In seeking to equip and help both amateurs and professionals in their work as church musicians, they offer a ray of hope in what is, overall, a fairly sombre picture.
MUSIC AT SCHOOL
The training of church musicians begins with their basic music education.
For most of them all else, whether it be playing the organ or other instruments, or singing in the choir, is laid upon the foundation of what is learnt at school.
The Commission therefore believes it is important to assess the place of music in the primary and secondary education offered to children in this country, chiefly in the public sector.
For this purpose it has drawn on the knowledge and experience of its Secretary, a former HM Staff Inspector for Music.
Individualism and Instruments
In the past four decades teaching has become increasingly child-centred.
No longer passive recipients of instruction, pupils are encouraged to be active collaborators in the learning process.
The most effective lessons are those where the child is given the opportunity, either as an individual or as a member of a small group, to explore and to create something original.
The skilful teacher sets up a training situation in which pupils can solve their own problems and draw their own conclusions.
In music, as with other subjects, the trend has been away from regimentation towards an individual approach and small group work.
As an ‘emblem of belonging’, therefore, massed singing has become less popular in schools, especially amongst pupils of secondary age.
Another significant factor has been the instrumental ‘explosion’ which has affected all schools during the last forty years.
The possession and mastery of one's own instrument, and the opportunity to contribute to an ensemble have given an exciting new dimension to music-making.
The more accomplished players gain additional encouragement from their membership of, and loyalty to, one of the many music centres which have sprung up in every part of the country.
The ablest of these young instrumentalists go on to become members of an area, borough, county or even national youth orchestra or band.
Consequently, many young people now see choral singing as less glamorous and challenging than playing in an ensemble.
There are nevertheless still some school, borough and county choirs which flourish and some music centres which also promote choral singing.
Composition and Experiment
The final report of the working party considering the content of music courses in the National Curriculum strongly affirms the centrality of performing, composing and listening in the new syllabus.
Thus, performing remains part of every music course and is duly acknowledged in the National Criteria of the GCSE.
Composing and arranging are already recognised as appropriate pupil activities.
Closely allied to these are the opportunities given for pupils to appreciate the actual sound that music makes and to appraise its character, its dynamics, its associations and its wider emotional significance.
The approach to listening to music has changed, with less emphasis upon analysis and the acquisition of facts about composers' lives.
Not surprisingly, electronics are almost as common in the classroom as they are in the high street.
The advent of electric keyboards, synthesisers, sequencers, samplers, amplifiers and multi-track recording facilities has opened up an exciting new world of sound for young people, at the touch of a key.
Whether it be in listening, composing or performing, the range of music has widened dramatically.
Familiarity with many different styles and genres is now encouraged.
Jazz, Rock, Folk and Ethnic Music rub shoulders with Early, Baroque, Rococo, Romantic and Avant Garde pieces.
If a high proportion of compositions submitted for GCSE employ the language of ‘popular’ rather than‘classical’music, this does not imply that creative standards are being compromised.
For many young people now are confidently writing real music, using the idioms that come most naturally to them.
The tapes and scores which they produce come across with real sincerity, and display surprisingly high levels of competence.
The Eclipse of Singing
All these developments have given fresh stimulus and increased scope to music in schools, notwithstanding the current limitations in staff and resources.
However, one area which has inevitably suffered in the process is that of choral singing.
Not only do few children enter  school with a wide repertoire of nursery or religious songs learnt at their parents' knees, but many primary schools lack a full-time music specialist.
Some class teachers are reluctant to become involved with this subject.
Schools are often obliged, therefore, to amalgamate two or more classes for massed singing, or to rely heavily upon BBC Schools' broadcasts.
These are excellent, but their exclusive use robs the subject of a personal and local dimension and inevitably leads to a measure of stereotyping.
Even when school assemblies provide opportunities for singing, the quality of hymns and songs is variable, in both religious and musical content.
Many schools are unlikely, therefore, to be able to offer their pupils as rich an experience of choral singing or as wide a repertoire of religious vocal music, as once they did.
Singing, the most natural way in which young children acquire a first-hand experience of music and an important means of expression for them, is being seriously curtailed.
Many teenagers feel embarrassed when asked to sing, and few adults are heard singing around the house or whistling on street corners.
Other than at football matches or on coach journeys, people sing less spontaneously than in previous generations.
Even the great tradition of Welsh male-voice singing has declined, with fewer choirs and ageing membership.
In part this has been caused by the closures of collieries and factories, but the sharp drop in chapel or church attendance also means that fewer people are singing.
What is true of schools in the public sector is true also, to a lesser extent, of independent schools.
Some of them, however, maintain the fine choral tradition which has produced many church musicians and the recent admission of girls into those which were formerly all-male establishments could well encourage the development of careers for women in church music.
Conclusion
It would be most unwise for the Church to ignore or discount the far-reaching changes which have taken place in school music since World War II.
The implications of the present situation are serious and present a threat to the future of a great British choral tradition.
All the evidence suggests that early involvement in choral singing can awaken an interest which lasts for a lifetime, and church musicians have always seen school singing as a natural preliminary to the distinctive tradition  of Anglican music.
However, some encouragement may be derived from the enormous instrumental potential among the younger members of the Church's congregations.
As yet, this is largely untapped by the Church.
TRAINING FOR ORDAINED MINISTRY
In correspondence and submissions to the Commission repeated reference is made to the training received by clergy before ordination, and to the place of music in that training.
A simple questionnaire was therefore addressed to theological colleges and ministerial training courses in England, Scotland and Wales (see Appendix 2.11).
Its purpose was to survey the quantity and quality of training in church music currently being given to ordinands in Britain.
The response to that questionnaire, together with other correspondence and submissions, forms the basis of what follows.
A common strand in comments coming to the Commission from many quarters emphasises the vital role played by the clergy in the leading of worship, and the need for them to receive proper training in the selection and use of music in church.
Where that is lacking, the result may be the exercise of power without sensitivity, poor relationships with church musicians, little sense of occasion in worship, and frustrated worshippers.
Length and Content of Training
All who are prepared for the ordained ministry are trained under considerable pressure of time and with an overcrowded curriculum.
Those who are under thirty normally complete thirty-three months in residential training.
Those who are over thirty, and not fifty or over (for whom nine months is the norm), or who have a theology degree, undertake twenty-one months.
For those on non-residential courses three years' part-time training is normally demanded.
For all alike the training has to include studies in the traditional fields of theology and biblical studies, pastoral studies and practical placements.
Continuing demands by the Church of the colleges and courses for ever more subjects, without any increase in the time of training, means that priorities have to be set.
In most cases music comes low on the list.
The first responsibility of colleges and courses is commonly understood to be that of educating their students to think theologically, and nurturing their personal and spiritual formation.
Training in practical and particular ministerial skills is a secondary task.
In any case, ministerial training continues on a less formal and standardised basis for at least the first three years after ordination, in the context of one or more curacies.
The assumption is commonly made that instruction in the use of music in church is given (and many would say best given) during this period.
It has the advantage of being in the context of a ‘normal’ worshipping congregation, where it is possible to develop and maintain the vital art of good relationships between clergy, organist and choir.
Teaching about Music
All colleges and courses offer at least some training in the use of music in worship.
But the quality, quantity and content of that training differ very considerably.
Provision consists variously of regular seminars and lectures, occasional workshops, visiting speakers, parish placements, and student involvement in the planning, leading and reviewing of worship.
Where there are ordinands or members of staff with professional musical skills, they are used for teaching.
One college involves the local cathedral organist on a regular basis.
Another college calls on local parish organists and music group leaders to help with occasional workshops.
Many colleges and courses invite a representative of the RSCM to speak to students on an annual or biennial basis.
The overall picture, however, is of a lack of systematic training in church music for ordinands.
In particular, there appears to be a paucity of effective teaching on the theology of music and its significance in worship.
An exception is in those curricula where it is an integral part of a course of liturgical studies.
Then it takes its place over a period of time within the wider teaching of the principles, planning and practice of worship, enabling the ordinand to explore the theological and practical importance of music in an appropriate context.
The one-off session on ‘Music in Worship’, offered by several colleges and courses, can hardly provide the same opportunity.
Music in the Worship of the Community
An important element in the educational process is the participation by students in the corporate worship of college courses.
In all the colleges there are regular services in which ordinands and staff  alike are worshippers.
Experience of being in the pew naturally plays an important part in forming perceptions of how to plan and conduct worship, and the place of music within it.
At the level of practical skills and of selecting music, all colleges and courses give students at least some training.
Its intensity, however, is directly related to the degree of active student involvement in the planning and leading of acts of worship.
In many places of full-time residential training the organisation of worship is largely a student responsibility and some supervision and guidance in the choice of music appears to be given.
Those who are studying on a part-time basis as members of a regional course do so as non-residential students, with regular residential weekends and summer schools.
For them there are fewer opportunities for planning and leading worship, and they receive correspondingly less guidance.
Use of the Voice
Among the practical skills offered by all colleges and courses is voice training.
There is some variation between its being compulsory for all students and its being only for those who need help in reading or preaching in public.
Sessions with professional speech therapists or voice specialists are common and video or tape recordings are sometimes used.
Training in singing appears to be less systematised than training in voice production.
Two respondents indicated that all ordinands in their college have their singing voices assessed during their training, and then receive instruction as necessary, Others offer training in singing only at the request of the ordinand, or the tutor or parish placement supervisor.
The lack of priority given to teaching singing to ordinands is explained by one respondent who wrote, ‘Part of the problem with the teaching of singing has to do with the relative infrequency with which the Sunday Offices are now sung…
Few placement churches have anything like a regular sung Book of Common Prayer or Alternative Service Book Evensong; and many of the churches [from which ordinands come and]to which ordinands go as curates follow a similar pattern.
Under these circumstances,[the college]can aim to do little more than build some confidence in a student…
More effort…needs to be put into in-service clergy training in this area — with refresher courses for those appointed to parishes where the Offices are  sung regularly’.
This observation is borne out by the Commission s statistical Parish Survey in which it appears that only 43% of Anglican churches have one or more Evensongs with a choir each month (see Appendix 2.5).
Away from College or Course
An important element in training for ordination is provided by one or more parish placements.
These vary widely in their duration and organisation.
There may be a four-week residential block in a parish during a summer vacation or a four-week block followed by Sunday and two days each week for two and a half terms.
The former provides an involvement in the parish almost wholly at the level of observation, normally in the company of the incumbent.
The latter is likely to provide some scope for active involvement in the worshipping and musical life of the parish.
Placements in parishes are complemented by one or two three-week residential community placements in which life in a non-church institution, like a hospital, is observed.
This is unlikely to provide much in the way of musical experience or opportunity, but its requirement demands an investment of previous time.
After Ordination
Colleges and courses can offer relatively limited training for the ordained ministry.
All, therefore, look to post-ordination training (POT), the training incumbent, and in-service clergy training (or CME), to build on what has already been learnt.
The RSCM has found involvement in POT and CME to be valuable.
It has generally been much more effective in forming the musical sensibilities of clergy than hit-and-run visits to theological colleges.
Conclusion
The training of ordinands and others in the use of music in worship is recognised as important by colleges and courses alike.
But, as has been seen, time is precious.
Relatively little thought appears to have been given to developing systematic forms of training in the area of music in worship, and little assessment of the quality of training seems to take place.
Its effectiveness is revealed only after the ordinand has been ordained.
Let one such ordinand have the last word: ‘If a student leaves college as a musical novice (both in terms of their own singing ability and their ability to select music for worship) then the worship of the churches in which they serve is going to be severely  disadvantaged…
The more that can be done to help students to develop their own musical abilities and understanding, and thus see the immense potential of music in worship, the better’.
RESOURCES
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND EQUIPMENT
The most important and most frequently used musical instrument in worship is the human voice.
Monastic communities often sing unaccompanied, and churches in Africa and the Third World commonly rely upon the congregation's ability and enthusiasm in singing even polyphonic music without instrumental help.
Many churches in the West, however, have come to depend upon an organ or other instrument to lead, support, or even dominate, the use of voices.
This reliance can be an inducement to laziness of vocal effort, and people are often more capable of good unaccompanied singing than they realise.
The provision of musical instruments in church should not be seen as solely for the accompaniment and embellishment of singing, but also for solo and ensemble playing before, during or after a service.
For the material in this chapter the Commission is grateful to one of its members with wide experience of writing for, and using, various instruments in worship.
It also acknowledges its debt in what is said about electronic instruments to Repair or Replace ?
(Council for the Care of Churches, 1990); to Organs in Churches ,(an unpublished paper for the Department of Art and Architecture in the Archdiocese of Liverpool) by Mr. Terence Duffy; and to a memorandum from Dr. John Webb.
PIPE ORGANS
A long tradition associates the organ with Christian worship and it is commonly assumed that every church has one.
This expectation is so strong that most congregations are prepared to spend huge sums for the provision and maintenance of an instrument which is, in many cases, the single most valuable asset in the building.
The organ is described by its devotees as the King of Instruments, and it is certainly very versatile when properly designed.
For the accompaniment of a large congregation there is no substitute, and the sustained and undergirding tone of the organ's pedal department makes it  particularly suitable for bold, harmonic music such as stately hymn tunes or processional marches.
Depending upon its design, the organ has a wide variety of tone, from pungent reeds to mellow flutes, and a great range of volume, from pianissimo to fortissimo .
This makes it a most useful instrument not only for solo pieces but also for the support of voices.
For example, the imaginative use of stop changes can greatly enrich the singing of the Psalms.
Where there is compatibility of pitch, the organ can be used very effectively with melodic solo instruments, or as part of an ensemble, or as a continuo instrument to fill in harmonic gaps and add weight of tone and sustaining power.
With the solo use of its stops, it can also offer light-weight, high delicate playing of running scales or arpeggios in a detached style, with other instruments providing sustained harmony.
Sadly, many an organist falls prey to the ponderous and unrhythmic playing which is invited by the instrument's ability to sustain a note for as long as the key is depressed, with results which may be sentimental or lugubrious.
Under the hands and feet of an expert the organ can sound more rhythmical than many people imagine, although it does not usually match the rhythmic or percussive elements of a piano or modern keyboard.
These are demanded particularly by contemporary rock and folk styles of music.
ELECTRONIC ORGANS
The term ‘electronic organ’ covers a wide range of instruments, some of which are clearly inappropriate for music in church.
The earliest instruments were the electro-mechanical organs of the Hammond and Compton ‘electrone’ type.
These used rotating discs to initiate a quasi-musical sound which was then filtered, processed and reproduced at different pitches.
Although long-lasting and generally reliable, their musical shortcomings were obvious and none have been manufactured since 1980, although they are still in use in a few churches.
The ‘analogue’ organs which followed came closer to an imitation of true organ sound by using valves, but these displayed increasing unreliability.
The use of transistors has brought an improvement in this respect, but the quality of sound remains poor, especially in the cheaper instruments which some would deem to be more appropriate for the cocktail bar than for playing in church.
Present-day computer or digital organs incorporate new and complex technology, and this has led to some impressive developments.
Single stops are either synthesised by the manufacturer, or sampled from actual organ pipes.
The final sound is determined by the skill of the manufacturer, the time given to programming the computer and the extent of its memory.
These instruments offer a wide range and large numbers of stops, and some provide an extra selection by means of computer cards which are fed into a slot.
They often include a coupler which simulates the use of the pedals by isolating the lowest note being played on the manual and doubling it to the pedal register, using whichever pedal stops have been selected.
They may also incorporate a transposition device.
Thus they are less daunting than a large pipe organ to the ‘reluctant organist’.
An electronic memory can be fitted, so that a performance can he recorded and later played back.
This facility is available on some modern pipe organs and can be used as a tool for students, and for the recording of pieces or hymn accompaniments by a competent organist, to be reproduced later when the player cannot be present.
Electronic organs can also be fine-tuned to match other instruments, and because they always remain in tune there are no tuning costs to be incurred.
Moreover, there are continuous advances in tonal and technical design and production.
At present, however, even with the ‘top resistance’ touch fitted to some electronic instruments, they cannot match the ability of a good pipe organ to exercise effective control of rhythm and phrasing.
This in turn may influence the singing of a congregation, and make it flabby and dull.
Lifelessness can also result from the less than satisfactory effect of the full ensemble of most electronic instruments.
This is caused largely because their sound is synthetic.
In a pipe organ of quality each pipe is a carefully-designed and individually-voiced musical instrument which produces only one frequency of sound.
Tone generators and loudspeakers, however, have to cope with a multitude of frequencies and cannot hope to move the same amount of air as the equivalent number of pipes.
Nevertheless, for softer tones and individual colours an electronic instrument can be most effective, particularly in a large building with good resonance.
Until recently loudspeakers had to he large to be effective.
Today, however, the size of a speaker does not dictate its efficiency and it is possible to use relatively small output units to good effect.
A  disused pipe organ case is sometimes employed as a screen and certainly a more accurate impression of a pipe organ is gained if the speakers are positioned in one place, rather than dispersed around the building.
They should not be too far from the console if the organist is to avoid playing too loudly for those people seated near them.
There is no reason why they should not be visible, provided their design is in keeping with their surroundings.
Architectural considerations apply also to the design and placing of the console.
One of the advantages of an electronic instrument is that there is considerable flexibility for its positioning.
Financial Considerations
Cost is one of the major factors for churches in deciding between an electronic and a pipe instrument.
If there is an existing pipe organ and it is of good quality, it may prove to be more economical in the long run to restore rather than replace it.
For new instruments, both electronic and pipe, it is possible to give here only very rough figures, relating to the situation in the latter half of 1991.
A small, middle-of-the-range electronic organ would cost about £7,000 and churches would be unwise to consider anything less than this.
A more versatile one could be obtained for about £10,000 and one with a comprehensive specification for about £20,000.
A ‘cathedral-size’ model would cost at least £30,000.
Extra speaker units, which are necessary for all but the smallest instruments, cost about £700 each.
It is usual to buy electronic organs ‘off the shelf’, but larger instruments are designed to a customer's specification and to suit particular buildings.
Pipe organs are usually individually designed, but it is quite common to purchase at lesser cost one of the standard models offered by many organ builders.
A very basic instrument consisting of five ranks of pipes on one manual and pedals would cost about £15,000.
A comprehensive instrument with two manuals and pedals, and between eighteen and twenty ranks of pipes would cost upwards of £70,000.
For an organ larger than this, there is no limit except that imposed by the customer's ability to pay.
Second-hand pipe organs are sometimes worth considering when they are fine instruments and when the total cost of their purchase, removal and rebuilding in a place suitable for them makes economic sense.
Those making a decision need also to have in mind that, whilst an electronic instrument requires no tuning and very little  maintenance, its life expectancy is at present shorter than that of a pipe organ.
Modern electronic organs may last for between twenty and fifty years, but there is a question as to whether spare parts will be available for that long.
A pipe organ may be expected to last for between fifty and one hundred years, but at least one major overhaul will lie necessary during this period.
It also needs regular maintenance and tuning.
It has the advantage, however, that new parts can be made for it as required, because it is not mass-produced.
With regard to second-hand values, a good pipe organ is a better investment than an electronic instrument.
OTHER KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS
The Piano, Acoustic and Electric
A piano can be used to good effect with the organ, provided its pitch is compatible.
Its special force of percussive tone helps to define musical entries and mark changes of tempo.
By means of added rhythmic patterns in chords and arpeggios it can fill out the music to enhance the singing of a congregation.
It is not, however, a wholly satisfactory substitute for an organ, because of its lack both of volume and of sustaining power.
It may nevertheless be better than even a reasonable harmonium or American organ.
Moreover, it has the advantage of familiarity for pianists who may lie nervous of an organ, and pianists are more numerous than organists in our congregations.
However, many of the pianos to be found in our churches have seen much better days.
If they cannot be replaced by more adequate instruments, an electric keyboard can lie appropriate.
This instrument offers a variety of sounds, including that of the classical piano, the pop-based electric piano which is useful for effects and atmosphere and for accompanying solo singing, and the harpsichord or clavichord for older music.
Even fairly inexpensive keyboards make pleasing sounds.
They can be fine-tuned to match other instruments and have the advantage of remaining in tune once they are set.
They are little affected by changes in temperature and humidity and are easily portable.
However, unless they include well-amplified organ tones, they are a useful addition to the organ rather than a substitute for it.
The Synthesiser
The synthesiser can be used either as a melodic or as a chorus instrument.
Melodic lines may vary from synthesised or sampled sounds which reproduce classical instruments, to more obviously  electronic tones.
Melodies can be reproduced as counter-subjects or descants in the treble, or as horn or cello sounds in the tenor, or as bass guitar or organ pedal in the bass.
When used for playing full chordal accompaniments they can reproduce the sound of a full pipe organ, or of the string, brass or percussion section of an orchestra.
They have much in common with the best of today's electronic organs.
OTHER POLYTONAL OR HARMONIC INSTRUMENTS
The Harp
The harp is an instrument of considerable versatility which is not commonly associated with use in church services.
It can, however, be employed for simple piano parts, or its occasional rolled chords are an effective accompaniment to choral work.
Its possibilities are best exploited in partnership with a single instrument, such as the flute or oboe, using rippling arpeggios, tremolos, cascades and glissando effects, or with the human voice.
It can be particularly effective in providing an instrumental background to the spoken word, in drama, readings or prayers.
The harp is, however, susceptible to fluctuations of heat and humidity, and keeping it in tune may require its re-tuning even during a service.
The Harpsichord
The tuning problems mentioned above may also apply to the harpsichord.
This is sometimes used as a complement to the organ in accompanying Early, Renaissance, Tudor and Baroque music.
It is also useful for some contemporary music where a light, jazz-style accompaniment is required.
The Guitar, Acoustic and Electric
Much contemporary music, in its dance-style, ballad, folk and gentle rock forms, relies on the strumming rhythm of the guitar.
Both acoustic and electric instruments can be forceful and strident.
They can also convey an intimacy in providing gentle, ‘finger-picking’ backing for soft or solo singing and playing, inducing a mood of vulnerability or timelessness.
In anything other than in a small space, the acoustic guitar needs electric amplification to be heard.
Although a number together may overcome this, there can be problems of intonation and ensemble.
The electric guitar demands particular sensitivity on the part of those who play it since, by its very nature, its sound is somewhat aggressive.
Because it has no sound box of its own, what comes through a loudspeaker can be varied enormously.
It is commonly associated  with ‘heavy-rock’ sounds which include ringing, ‘buzzy’chords, obtrusive rhythmic bite and a harsh, penetrating solo melody line.
A common fault is over-amplification of the instrument.
SINGLE NOTE OR MELODIC INSTRUMENTS
All of the instruments so far mentioned can be used to play a melody as well as chords.
The other instruments in this chapter are confined to the playing of one note at a time, other than the stringed instruments where it is possible to employ double, triple or quadruple stopping effects.
Recorders and Flutes
Of the woodwind family the recorder, often made of plastic, is the easiest instrument to play.
But it is not by any means just for children and can be used as a solo instrument or in bands.
The cheapest and most generally in use is the descant recorder, although the other members of the family are equally useful, if harder to play.
The sopranino has a pure, bright tone, whilst the treble gives a mellow sound in the mezzo-soprano range.
Recorders are most comfortable in sharp keys and simple key signatures like G or D major.
The flute can be very useful in public worship, and is relatively easy to learn, although the piccolo is more of a specialist instrument.
Equally at home with Bach or jazz, the flute is capable of rapid notes and exciting dashes in busy upper register counter-subjects.
It provides an effective descant over voices, and can sound languid and restful, especially when unaccompanied in its bottom octave, rising from middle C. In its middle register it is useful for teaching new tunes or doubling the melody line.
Oboes, Clarinets and Bassoons
The oboe is much harder to play, but gives a clear, incisive lead and offers a range of effects from the Oriental and haunting to the gently pastoral.
Its lowest note is the B b below middle c, and from the G above that it begins to rise and soar expressively.
Effective use can be made of two oboes playing in thirds.
Clarinets also blend well together and they have a wide range, both of dynamic and of pitch, The B b instrument encompasses the tenor, alto and soprano ranges, with a rich sound at the bottom.
There is a trumpet-like incisiveness in the middle and upper registers and a positively ringing sound at the top.
Its speciality is rapid and repeated upward scales or arpeggios.
Like the B b trumpet, for which it is sometimes substituted, the B b clarinet's part  is written one tone higher than the pitch required.
The bassoon is less common.
Its range extends from bass to alto but it is most happy in the tenor register, where it is effective in sustaining or filling in the harmony.
It is tiring for the player constantly to double a bass line.
Brass Instruments
Brass instruments generally are best used occasionally and sparingly, being saved for climaxes or dramatic moments.
Open B b trumpets, soaring high and doubling melodies or playing descants, can produce the most sublime and majestic sound.
When muted and playing close intervals, they produce an effect which is jazzy, or even sinister.
For reproducing or doubling alto and tenor lines the French horn is splendid in its ability to sustain a velvet tone.
Its part is written a perfect fifth higher than it plays and as long as its notes are on the stave it sounds well.
However, the player needs to rest periodically.
Where available, trombones and a tuba complete the brass ensemble.
String Instruments
A solo violin and solo cello can be a most useful addition to a small ensemble.
Even very simple parts, consisting of a few long notes, are effective.
Violins may double a significant melody, or play rapid semiquaver counter-melodies in fine eighteenth-century style, to add brilliance and excitement to a piece.
The violin covers both the alto and soprano ranges, the viola those of the tenor and alto, and the cello all four vocal parts.
The cello has a rich, penetrating sound throughout its range and is the most versatile of the stringed instruments.
The double bass, too, is more versatile than is commonly recognised (as is the bass guitar).
Pizzicato playing injects rhythmic lightness and clarity and this is useful especially for music in a modern dance-like or folk idiom.
Bowed long notes make good additions to organ pedal parts or timpani rolls.
All strings should be especially carefully tuned to the rest of the musical ensemble.
Percussion
Like brass instruments, percussion is best used sparingly and occasionally.
All percussion has a pervasive sound and even when played quietly the effect of one instrument does not go unnoticed.
A relentless beat can be extremely tedious, but powerful dramatic or martial effects can be gained by the careful use of side-drums and cymbals, especially in conjunction with brass instruments.
Tambourines add sparkle and rhythmic life to cheerful, dance-like pieces  and glockenspiels, playing single or double notes, can highlight portions of a melody with good effect.
The combination of timpani and organ greatly enhances spacious, majestic music.
In contemporary music with a jazz, rock or ‘ethnic’ feel, drum kits and other collections like bongos and tom-toms reinforce the beat and articulate rhythmic patterns.
The ‘kick’ drum, the ‘ride’cymbal and the ‘high-hat’implied in Psalm 150 usually need some dampening or restraining when used in church.
Handbells
Handbells, although very common in the United States, are to be found in few churches in this country, except where they are used by bellringers in connection with change-ringing.
They are popularly associated with Christmas, but have great value for musicians in all kinds of music.
They have a range of many octaves and their richness of tone allows them to be used as an ensemble.
Their percussiveness makes them suitable as an accompaniment to congregational singing.
Handbell ringing has potential as a social as well as a musical activity in church.
It also fits well into any situation from the shopping mall to the living room.
As one correspondent notes, handbells provide ‘as good a practical and possible evangelistic tool as a church can have’.
Co-ordination of an Ensemble
Where an instrumental ensemble is employed, with or without singers, it is necessary that there be at least a leader, if not a conductor.
If that person has the ability to make instrumental arrangements, then that is an additional bonus.
Orchestration does, however, demand some skill and a great deal of time.
There are few arrangements for instruments on the commercial market, not least because different churches have different combinations of players available to them.
The physical disposition of the musicians can be problematic in many church buildings, especially where the organist is hidden away.
Happily, the advent of closed-circuit television has largely overcome the difficulty of an invisible console, even if the pipes themselves are still in an inconvenient place in relation to other instruments.
In simpler situations the system of mirrors still works well, and is, of course, much cheaper than a television camera and monitor.
SOUND SYSTEMS
Modern technology is also valuable for the reinforcement of instruments and voices.
Amplification is not necessarily a bad or inartistic phenomenon.
It is often necessary where a distinctive and valuable sound made by an instrument or small group of voices cannot be heard over the singing of a congregation.
Not all such performances are inspiring, however, and a plenitude of decibels does not compensate for lack of quality.
Those operating an amplification system need to ensure that there is a proper balance between the sound of the musicians using it and those who speak on the church's public address system, where there is one.
All electric instruments depend upon good amplifiers and speakers.
Some have their own built into them, although in large buildings further amplification and speakers may be required.
But the use of microphones, amplifiers and speakers can entail unsightly ironmongery, technical clutter and hazardous cables which can provide visual distraction and even physical danger in church.
A direct injection (DI) box can sometimes feed the sound from electric keyboards and guitars straight into the PA system.
In this case, some kind of monitor or ‘fold-back’ speaker may be necessary for the musicians to hear the results of their playing.
It should always be remembered that amplification is there to serve, not to dominate the congregation, and to enhance and not simply to magnify the artistry of musicians.
CONCLUSION
The use of instruments of various kinds, in addition to the organ, is not widespread in our churches.
Yet it is clear that there are enormous possibilities for offering a rich mixture of sounds and players which can only enhance public worship.
RADIO, TELEVISION AND RECORDINGS
The electronic media make a significant contribution to the popular perception of religious music.
Television and radio in particular have an influence upon the attitudes and preferences of worshippers and their power is not to be ignored.
So the Commission has thought it appropriate to include some consideration of these forms of communication in its Report.
In doing so it has had the benefit of conversations with the Revd.
Roger Hutchings, a BBC producer, and with Mr. Graham Kendrick, who is an experienced recording artist.
It has also drawn upon the experience of two of its members in broadcasting and recording.
In addition, the Commission conducted an informal survey of the Christian music used on broadcasting outlets, consulted producers about their editorial policy, and made use of written submissions and correspondence.
National Radio
As might be expected, the greatest spread of Christian music comes from the BBC's national networks.
Their policy is ‘to reflect the best religious music that is around.
Traditional music/hymns will dominate, though we aim to introduce listeners to new compositions and stimulate new music and music-makers, e.g. through the Choirboy and Choirgirl of the Year Competition and the Festivals of Gospel Music.’
A considerable amount of varied religious music of the more traditional kind is offered by BBC Radio 3.
This appeals to a faithful minority of listeners.
Their loyalty was powerfully demonstrated recently in the storm of protest which greeted, and reversed, the decision of the BBC to take the weekly broadcast of Choral Evensong off the air.
It remains one of the few ‘constants’ in the changing world of broadcasting.
So, too, does the ‘Daily Service’ on BBC Radio 4.
Until recently this offered traditional hymns and Anglican psalmody sung by the BBC Singers.
Now the Singers contribute once a week, alternating with other musicians, and there is a much wider selection of music.
The daily broadcast has a uniform structure except on one day a week when it is described as ‘an act of worship’.
On this day the presenter is asked to create a special format, with music employed to amplify or illustrate the theme of the service.
The changes of recent years have brought a small but measurable increase in the size of the audience, now at just under half a million listeners, in spite of its transmission being confined to AM at an off-peak time.
Many evidently value a ‘still window’ each day.
A much greater number of the public listen on Sunday, both to BBC Radio 4's ‘Sunday’ programme which presents occasional music features, and to ‘Good Morning Sunday’on Radio 2 which is music-based.
On an average Sunday, more people hear these two programmes than go to church in the whole of Britain.
More popular than either of them is Radio 2's ‘Sunday Half Hour’ which has presented well-loved hymns for fifty years.
In addition, there are very significant audiences for the more than one hundred Independent Local Radio and BBC local stations, and new independent network, community radio and satellite services.
Local Radio
The sharpest judgments by listeners are made about local radio, perhaps because the audience identifies easily with a nearby station.
Its religious music is likely to fit that particular station's music policy in aiming at its target age-range.
In most areas this consists of people roughly between ten and forty-five years old.
Contemporary Christian music holds an audience of this kind, although it may be necessary to mix it with chart music to make it generally acceptable.
Traditional music and hymnody are seen to be for an older audience.
Hymnody might be used more if the production of most recordings were better and the words could be heard more clearly.
The variable quality of both production and music in outside broadcasts from churches, together with budgetary limitations, means that they are almost wholly precluded.
Those in local radio believe that the Church should put more resources into encouraging and developing modern music and  musicians.
They suggest that ‘contemporary music is a means that God uses today to reach out to people who otherwise would not consider the truths of Christianity for themselves’.
Although ‘in our age music is…an important way of imparting an important message…the standard of contemporary religious music is not very high in the UK’.
Producers do not want ‘third-rate numbers that are instantly forgettable, all sounding the same’.
Television
There is much less scope for religious music on television, but the BBC's ‘Songs of Praise’ and ITV's ‘Highway’are popular programmes with a wide influence on church and non-church people alike.
On a high-rating Sunday, they will draw up to a third of the population of Britain.
In ‘Songs of Praise’ Christian music is used increasingly to reinforce a powerful testimony or trenchant editorial comment.
There are also the regular live television relays of church services.
The survey Godwatching (IBA and John Libbey, 1988) showed that 62% of adults sometimes watch religious programmes.
This challenges the assumption that such programmes are of interest only to a specialist few:
What is particularly noteworthy is the fact that, despite the relative paucity of religious output compared to, say, news or drama, many people do choose to encounter religious programming.
It is unlikely, judging from this analysis, that very many viewers are loyal or watch particularly frequently, rather that a large number of people dip in on a relatively occasional basis.
This is clear evidence that religious output, despite some criticisms of its style and approach, is by no means the anathema for viewers that it is supposed from the purely commercial viewpoint of some broadcasters.
It remains to be seen what effect the Government's deregulation will have on the dissemination of Christian music through radio and television.
At present, a very large number of people are exposed to it in one way or another.
The Church is perhaps largely unaware of its influence and its potential.
The Recording Industry
For some years the recordings of well-known choirs, such as King's College, Cambridge, have had a steady and growing market.
Sales of traditional church music records are boosted annually before Christmas, with a wide variety of recordings of carols.
Many cathedral and other choirs spend a good deal of time on making recordings, and derive from them a modest but useful income.
Much more money is to be made, however, from the sale of recordings produced by Contemporary Christian Music (CCM).
In the United States, for example they account for 7% of all record sales (compared with 1% in 1975), thus exceeding sales of jazz and classical music.
CCM has its roots in Negro culture, but the genesis of much of what we have now lies in the Jesus Movement.
In Britain it came to the fore in the 1970s through Buzz magazine and the Greenbelt festival.
Consequently, the idea began to spread that it was perfectly proper for Christians to be involved with pop and rock music.
Although the charge could be laid that CCM depends upon the imitation of other forms, so great is its variety and so gifted its musicians that it can hardly be accused of lacking originality.
In Britain CCM is not much more than a cottage industry, largely because of lack of radio exposure.
Excluding the Cliff Richard phenomenon, sales of twenty or thirty thousand are regarded as a ‘hit, in this country.
Put beside ‘gold’ and ‘platinum’standards such sales are minute, but not insignificant.
They are, in fact, comparable to those of traditional jazz recordings.
In Britain a large share of the market is held by Word (UK) Ltd., which usually sells directly to the customer.
Christian bookshops are also an important outlet.
The market is a distinctively evangelical one and the lyrics are addressed to Christians, particularly those who are commonly described as ‘charismatic’.
There are signs in the USA of more aggressive, sharper music which is directed to the listener rather than to the worshipper.
This suggests that the situation may change, and CCM in this country is in a state of flux.
If the new forms of ‘Christian’ music can find financial backing, substantial inroads could be made into the music industry in Europe.
Conclusion
The potential of radio, television and recordings is plainly enormous, both for business and for the Church.
The accessibility of audio-visual media, and their pervasiveness, means that very few people are unaffected by them.
They play a large part in moulding the musical tastes of all members of society, including those who go to church.
This presents an important challenge to composers and performers, and church musicians dare not disregard or dismiss so potent an influence for evangelism.
COMPOSING, PUBLISHING, COPYRIGHT AND INSURANCE
The provision of music and other books in church is often taken for granted.
But before anything can be put into the hands of the worshipper, many people are involved in its production.
The composer and the writer of the text (where one is used) mediate and transcribe the words and music which are their particular inspiration from God.
The printer and publisher are responsible for making the printed piece available to all who will perform it.
Those who make and operate the laws of copyright seek both to safeguard the integrity of a work and to ensure an income for its writer.
The Commission is indebted to Heather Rosenblatt (formerly a Senior Administrator for the Incorporated Society of Musicians) for a summary of the provisions relating to copyright, and to Bernard Braley of the Pratt Green Trust for some helpful information.
Also included in this chapter is a description of those areas of insurance which apply to church musicians and their instruments.
COMPOSERS
A large proportion of the music used in church is an inheritance from the past, containing contributions from almost all major composers.
Although the Christian faith is no longer at the heart of the culture of this land, and the Church is peripheral to the lives of many people, mid-twentieth-century British composers such as Vaughan Williams, Walton, Britten, Berkeley, Mathias and Leighton have all contributed to the choral repertoire.
They have done so as part of a widely comprehensive output, ranging from chamber music to symphonies and opera.
This indicates not only their wealth of invention but also the artistry and professionalism of their approach.
Commissions
Much newly-composed music is commissioned for festivals, royal occasions or events of local significance, such as choir festivals and church anniversaries.
Composers are also commissioned to write anthems and settings of the Eucharist for the regular round of worship.
Some of our cathedrals regularly add to their repertoire in this way.
Patronage by the Church has been part of the musical world for centuries, and in the past many of the greatest composers have depended upon it for their livelihood.
It is on a much-reduced scale today, as the Church can no longer afford to be the foremost encourager of the arts.
There is a need for sensitivity on the part of those from whom music is commissioned.
Performers and listeners do not generally warm to music which is written in discordant or arid style.
Nevertheless, sponsors of commissioned works are committed to accepting the finished product, even if the composer fails to produce exactly what was envisaged or specified.
Consequently, some first performances also prove to be the last.
New Music for New Texts
There are still reputable composers who are reluctant to write music for new liturgical texts, as they find the quality of their language unacceptable.
However, recent publications such as Lent, Holy Week and Easter, Patterns for Worship and The Promise of His Glory (all Church House Publishing) offer many new resources for today's musicians.
A recognition of the prominence being given to psalmody outside Morning and Evening Prayer has led to the provision of simpler substitutes for Anglican chant.
Both responsorial psalms of various kinds and Taizé refrains have become widespread.
Settings for the Eucharist
Some composers have written eucharistic settings in traditional vein providing for the needs of choirs with limited resources and expertise.
Among them, Peter Aston, Martin How, John Rutter and Richard Shephard may be mentioned.
Their music is simple enough to be within the competence of an average choir, yet has the melodic, harmonic and rhythmic interest which gives satisfaction and enjoyment both to singers and to congregations.
Alternatives to the traditional writing for four parts (SATB) are increasingly being produced.
These take account of the limitations of depleted choirs, in two-part writing for high and low voices or three-part music for sopranos, altos and men's voices.
New music being written for the ASB Holy Communion has the needs of the congregation very much in mind.
But more complex writing is also available to meet the requirements of skilled choirs.
Every type of situation, from village church to cathedral, is embraced in a wide range of settings and styles.
Relatively few cathedral organists today are also composers.
Among those who are, there are those who follow in the fine tradition of writers such as Bairstow, Bullock, Darke, Harris, Stanford, Sumsion and Charles Wood.
More Popular Writing
There is a significant burgeoning in the composition of music in a more popular genre.
This is used mainly in churches where informality marks much of the worship.
In the 1950s Patrick Appleford, Geoffrey Beaumont and the Twentieth Century Church Light Music Group laid the foundation for composers today.
Their writing has wide appeal and provides material for many publications.
Only a small proportion of this music demands more than one voice part, making it highly suitable for congregational singing, and it is easily accompanied by instruments other than the organ.
The guitar and the piano are perhaps the most common alternatives, but instruments of all kinds can be used and this gives encouragement to the formation of music groups.
Locally Composed Music
Encouraged by the acceptability of more popular styles of composition, willing but inexperienced composers are turning their hand to the production of ‘home-grown’ music.
Many a parish is proud to have a setting of the Eucharist by its own organist.
Some writing is of undoubtedly high quality and may well find a place in the permanent repertoire of a wider public.
However, many pieces are unworthy and ungrammatical, and are likely to join the dusty piles of discarded music in vestry cupboards, produced in great quantities in the nineteenth century because of the relative ease of finding publishers.
The photocopier has made reliance on a publisher less necessary than it was, but the future of the material coming from parish musicians will nevertheless be determined by the passage of time and the growing musical literacy of the public.
There are undoubtedly ‘amateur’ composers with real potential, and the availability of teachers with experience could do much to encourage and help them.
PUBLICATION
Publishing has been revolutionised by new technology.
The photocopier, for example, not only reduces pressure and demand upon publishing houses, but also allows newly-composed music to be tried out in manuscript before seeking the permanency which publishing provides.
Improvements can be made in the light of performance and composers may discard or destroy compositions which are found wanting.
Those who do this follow a precedent set by all great composers.
Resort to the photocopier is often determined by economic factors.
These also dictate the systematic deletion from publishers' catalogues of slow-selling items.
However, major publishers will usually supply photocopies of items which are out of print.
Some publishing houses are also beginning to recognise the need for cheap, expendable publications.
Today there are far fewer music publishers than previously in Britain.
Their catalogues contain fewer items, but the range of publications is wider than at the turn of the century.
Rather than imitate the blanket policy operated by other publishing houses, a few publishers cater for more specialised needs, such as Taizé chants or responsorial psalmody.
The Royal School of Church Music concentrates to a great extent on essentially simple music for small choirs with restricted resources.
Hymns and Songs
The provision of hymns and worship songs today makes the most work and revenue for publishers.
The production of hymn books, supplements and small collections is so prolific that it is almost impossible to keep abreast of all that is in circulation, whether in traditional or in more popular vein.
In recent years this ‘hymn explosion’ has been detonated more by new words than by new music.
In good, relevant poetry, writers such as Timothy Dudley-Smith, Fred Kaan, Fred Pratt Green and Brian Wren have filled the gaps left by more established hymnals.
The valuable musical contribution of Betty Pulkingham, Graham Kendrick and others in this field should not be overlooked.
During the past twenty years, many hymns and songs have had their first circulation in large annual gatherings for events like Spring  Harvest.
Pieces which have proved to be of enduring worth have passed from special conference song books into collections with a wider circulation.
Given the variety of published material, both ‘good’ and ‘bad’, a church musician may find it difficult to choose music which is appropriate for a particular choir and congregation and which possesses style, invention and staying power.
Out of necessity, publishers have an eye to their profits and neither a work's inclusion in a catalogue or collection, nor instant popularity, guarantees its suitability.
COPYRIGHT
The purpose of the provisions relating to copyright is to ensure that both composer and publisher receive the reward which is due to them for their work.
Put another way, ‘The protection given by the law of copyright is against copying, the basis of the protection being that one man must not be permitted to appropriate the result of another's labour’(LB [Plastics]v. Swish).
It is only at the end of the term of copyright that what has been protected passes into the public domain.
At this point, it is not necessary to seek permission for the reproduction, performance or recording of pieces.
In the case of choral works both words and music must be out of copyright.
Copyright in a work lasts for fifty years from the end of the calendar year in which its author or composer dies.
Typographical copyright continues until the end of the calendar year twenty-five years after the date of the first publication of a particular edition.
Reprints of that edition do not extend this period.
In sound recordings copyright exists until fifty years from the end of the calendar year in which the recording was made.
Printed Works
It is an infringement of copyright to reproduce a work by photocopying it, other than for the purposes of research and private study.
Whilst the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 contains many fair-dealing provisions, no exceptions are made for copying music for use in church services.
The production of multiple copies of the same material, such as parts for a church choir, is specifically banned by the Act.
However, permission may be given by the publisher for the reproduction of part of a work or the whole of one  from a collected edition, such as an anthology of carols.
A fee may be demanded.
The Music Publishers' Association has produced a Code of Fair Practice which offers helpful advice as to when church musicians may be permitted to copy without application to the publisher.
For example, a single page may be reproduced where there is a difficult page turn for an organist.
The whole movement of a work may not.
If a work is out of print, reference needs to be made to the publisher.
If it is not possible to supply the work, its reproduction may be allowed on payment of a fee, in order that the composer should receive the appropriate royalty.
If permission for copying is refused by the publisher, it may be that the work has been withdrawn at the request of its composer.
Whatever the reason for a refusal, the church musician has to abide by the publisher's decision.
Publishers are often willing to grant permission for the reproduction of music upon written application, or even by a telephone call, supported by a subsequent letter.
Time can be saved by using a standard letter of application.
Church Music Copyright Ltd. (formerly the Christian Music Association) sponsors a licence to allow the reproduction of the words, but not the music, of worship songs published by its members.
This covers a wide range of worship songs, but only a small amount of hymnody.
Attempts to establish a comprehensive scheme to include more hymns and to cover all publishers have so far been unsuccessful.
The Pratt Green Trust seeks to represent the interests of the churches in this area, but needs wider support from the Church if it is to make much progress.
In the meantime, the Trust has compiled a directory, to be published in 1992, containing information about the copyright of texts included in some two hundred collections of hymns and songs.
The Trust also operates an information service in reply to written enquiries about copyright.
Performance and Recording
In return for the licensing of a venue for public performance of copyright works, the Performing Right Society is entitled to charge a fee.
This is in order that copyright holders may receive proper benefit from the performance of their material.
Divine service is legally a public performance, and the singing and playing of music in church  constitute a ‘qualifying performance’.
They therefore come under the protection of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act.
However, the Performing Right Society waives its right to a fee for ‘performances, during services in churches or other places of worship.
Permission for the use of copyright musical works in worship is not therefore required.
This provision does not extend to concerts or other non-liturgical performances in a church building.
If part or the whole of a service, for example a marriage, is to be recorded in sound or video, care needs to be taken not to infringe a performer's rights.
This may happen where someone makes a recording for anything other than private and domestic use without consent.
But in addition to gaining the permission of the participants where necessary, the person responsible for making the recording must also obtain the licence of the copyright holder or the appropriate body.
In this case, it would be the Mechanical Copyright Protection Society.
It is in the interest of church musicians to ensure that the necessary licence is obtained, or their playing or singing of copyright music in such circumstances could constitute an infringement of copyright through being an unauthorised ‘performance’.
To a small parish church with few resources, the laws of copyright may seem somewhat overbearing.
It is important, however, that the interests of those copyright owners whose publications are sold be protected, and that the composers to whom the Church owes so much can be remunerated.
Without them, and without record companies and publishers to disseminate their work, Britain's rich heritage of church music would be considerably diminished.
INSURANCE
Proper stewardship of resources demands that churches and their contents be insured against damage.
Most churches have policies issued by the Ecclesiastical Insurance Group (EIG) which normally cover buildings, contents, liabilities, money and personal accident.
Advice is available without cost from regional surveyors of the EIG, and a useful guide has been published (It Won't Happen To Us , CIO, now Church House Publishing, 1981).
Church musicians are well advised to ensure that church policies, whether with EIG or another company, are adequate to cover both their own needs and the instruments and equipment which they use.
Instruments
Organs are usually insured for their full replacement value against the risks of fire and special perils.
There is often a ‘first loss amount’ of up to £10,000 to cover accidental damage and theft.
Portable instruments are generally insured automatically as part of the contents of a building.
It may be prudent to have them specified, particularly with regard to theft and accidental damage, and certainly if they are to be covered for use in other places.
Insurance companies understandably expect proper precautions to be taken for the security and safe storage of musical instruments.
An organ, for example, should be locked and the power turned off when not in use.
It is important that only competent and recognised organ-builders or their staff undertake tuning and other work on the instrument, and no unauthorised person should be given access to it.
Few insurers place any restrictions on young people using an organ.
Reasonable competence is expected of players of any age.
It is for the organist, or some other responsible person, to exercise control over the use of the organ by other people, and to specify any conditions attached.
Personnel
Parochial clergy are normally covered comprehensively against personal accidents, but other church employees are usually covered only whilst actually working for the Church.
In the case of voluntary workers, such as choristers and members of music groups, insurance against personal accident is provided whilst they are on duty on church premises.
It is possible for a standard church insurance policy to be extended to cover them and their equipment for other locations and for travel.
In certain circumstances, and especially where foreign travel is entailed, it is sensible to obtain separate travel insurance for church personnel.
Provision should be made for medical treatment to be included in the cover.
Day and residential courses attended by choirs are usually insured by the RSCM or other organisations responsible for organising them.
CONCLUSION
The cost of a policy premium is a small price to pay for peace of mind.
Although there is a temptation to save scarce money by cutting down on insurance, the Church's human and material resources are too important to be exposed to needless risk or loss.
Equally, money has to  be found not only for the payment of church musicians, but also for the composers and publishers upon whom church musicians depend.
Such expenditure is a necessary investment, but it is one which yields high dividends.
Unlike many other organisations, the Church usually gets much more than it pays for, thanks to the generosity of those who provide for its music.
INTO THE FUTURE
Reflections and Comments by the Commission
MUSIC IN THE CHURCH'S WORSHIP AND MISSION
The preceding chapters of this Report suggest that the outlook for music in the Church of England is an uncertain and, in many ways, disturbing one.
Although there is much that is positive and encouraging, a sad picture emerges of a dwindling supply of musicians, a reduced use of other than congregational music, a considerable lowering of standards, and a lack of both resources and expectations.
The overall impression gained by the Commission is that the Church in general either takes for granted the contribution of music to its worship, or places little value upon it.
The Commission does not seek to deny the validity and value of services without music, such as those held early in the morning or on a weekday.
But these should occur as a result of tradition or of conscious choice rather than of necessity.
Music has always had a vital role in Christian worship, and the main services on a Sunday naturally and necessarily include it.
If they do not, they risk being seriously deficient, with congregations deprived of an important element in their worship.
Music as Revelation and Communication
Music's place in our services may be seen as a gift of God which he uses to reveal something of himself to us.
It can communicate with unsurpassed effect the majesty of the Almighty, the gentleness of his love or the challenge of his righteousness.
This power to ‘speak’ to the worshipper at a deep level is sufficient to justify its use alongside the reading of Scripture and the preaching of the Word of God.
An equally important reason for God's giving music to us is that it forms part of our response to him.
In the praise, penitence and prayer we address to God, music underlines and complements our speech.
It enables us to express what we feel but cannot fully articulate in words alone.
One of the most powerful, though imprecise, ways in which music communicates is by its setting and sustaining a mood.
With or without words, it has the ability to create an atmosphere, to evoke memories, and to enable worshippers to receive from God and to respond to him.
The Commission affirms, therefore, that music in worship is not an extravagance but a necessity if people are to receive the special blessings which God gives through it, and if they are to offer to him their best and their most.
Where they are denied this opportunity, their worship is likely to be uninspired and lacking in energy.
Consequently, the life and vigour of the Church in that place will be attenuated and its efforts in mission enfeebled.
The Commission believes that effective mission depends upon inspired worship, and that inspired worship usually demands the contribution of good music.
But services often become sheer routine, with the result that not much effort is put into preparation, either by congregations or by their leaders.
Members of the congregation need the foundation of a solid personal spirituality of which public worship is but an ingredient.
Clergy and musicians need to use their imagination as well as their professional skills.
Each service should be approached as a fresh encounter, with the eager expectation of glimpsing the glory of God.
For this, the preparation of prayer is essential.
Worship and Mission
The Commission believes that the life and witness of the Church depend first and last upon the quality and vitality of its worship, and is convinced of its importance for the future.
A recognition of this truth doubtless underlies much of the attention given in recent years to matters liturgical.
However, consideration of music's place in worship has often been left until other decisions have been made.
Church buildings have been re-ordered, dress and ritual have been simplified, leadership in worship has been widely shared, liturgies have been restructured and texts have been rewritten.
In all these, especially in the production of new words, reform has often taken place without a recognition of the implications for music in worship.
Nor has the potential and positive contribution of musicians been widely acknowledged in the process of reform.
The Church should now recognise the priority which needs to be given to music if the impoverishment of services is not going to  continue.
The Commission states this emphatically not only because the offering of music should be itself an act of worship, but because there are other important benefits arising from its use which have particular relevance today.
Unity and Ecumenism
It has already been argued in this Report that music is not appropriately used in worship primarily in order to instil or increase fellowship.
Nevertheless, this is one of its important functions.
Fellowship is not to be confined to congregations, but is essential within and between denominations, and in a time of growing ecumenical co-operation we rejoice that churches are beginning to share their liturgical and musical riches with each other.
Local Ecumenical Projects (LEPs) naturally produce their own kind of mix, but in the looser association of different churches and denominations there is the continuing need to share, as well as to preserve, our treasures.
There has always been a sharing of hymnody across the denominations, and anthems and songs are increasingly being regarded as part of our common musical currency.
Whilst the Church of England has become less rigid in its liturgy, some Free Churches have come to recognise the value of formal worship patterns.
In parts of the Roman Catholic Church there is a wide-ranging exploration of new forms of worship and liturgical expression.
In all this, music has a significant role to play in enabling and fostering closer relationships between the denominations.
Church and Society
Music may also provide a common bond and language between the Church and the wider world.
As this Report has noted, people of other faiths or of no faith, as well as Christians, are used by God to mediate his gift of music, and those who are not believers are as capable as those who are of responding to the power of religious music.
In continuing to provide good and appropriate music in different styles the Church has something important to offer to the world, and as part of its mission it has the responsibility to do so.
This responsibility is fulfilled not only in the context of services but also in the use of church buildings for musical events.
Local schools, for example, might be involved in more than an annual carol service.
The building itself and its atmosphere as a place of worship can  speak powerfully to those who do not normally use it, and brings them into contact with the church community.
The Church's music can also be taken into the street and market-place, as the Salvation Army has been doing successfully for years.
Sensitive planning and careful organisation are required, but marches and processions, perhaps with dance and drama, can contribute to a powerful musical witness to the faith of the Church.
Evangelism
Music can also be used as an effective aid to evangelism.
Again, this should not be the prime reason for having it in our services.
However, the Commission believes strongly that music has a significant contribution to make to the Decade of Evangelism.
Where it is good, it has a great ability to draw people into church.
Even if some of them come for what others hold to be a wrong reason, they should not be discouraged or their motives despised.
The Commission affirms the value of music for attracting potential believers to acts of worship and to the Church's fellowship.
Music itself possesses the power (under God) to convert.
Conversely, music that is ill-chosen or ill-performed can actually be a hindrance to commitment, as can a service or preaching which is poor.
Together with holiness in the individual and various forms of testimony to Christ, the Church's worship can be powerfully effective in evangelism.
The Commission therefore reiterates the absolute priority which needs to be given by the Church to its worship, and to the place of music within it.
Public Relations and the Media
Good opportunities for the dissemination of the Church's worship are afforded by the electronic media, both in the conversational setting of the radio and through the more proclamatory medium of television.
The transmission of religious services, in addition to being a blessing to those who cannot go to church and a substitute for those who choose not to, offers considerable potential for evangelism through worship.
Usually a broadcast is an ‘eavesdropping’ on a normal service by the listener or viewer.
For the congregation, musicians and clergy involved, it provides an incentive to their best efforts which may not be so marked at other times.
Only the highest standards in church broadcasts are acceptable, and they require much careful planning and rehearsal.
What we are prepared to do when thousands of people are watching or listening we ought to strive to do for God week by week.
In addition to broadcasts of services there may be other musical events in which to involve the local or regional media.
Full advantage should be taken of the interest and availability of the press, as well as of radio and television.
Whether for special occasions, concerts or visits by distinguished people, there may be the chance for the Church's music to reach and influence a wider public.
When it comes to advertising, more use could be made of diocesan newspapers in addition to parish magazines and the local press.
Pleasure and Creativity
Any consideration of music's place in the life of the Church must not ignore the fact that for most people music is a source of pleasure.
Very few are so unmusical as to have no music at all within them, and all of us are surrounded by it for much of the time.
Since it is one of the most natural of all pleasures, the Church should not be afraid to provide opportunities for enjoyment of it in worship.
We should be doing all that we can to promote the revival of singing, and we should encourage rather than stifle the musical creativity of those who write and perform.
Since God is the source of our ability to make and enjoy music, we risk ingratitude if we spurn so rich a blessing.
Healing or Harmful?
Music has the power to help and to heal.
The Commission has noted its use by therapists and believes that this is an area which should be explored further by the Church.
It is obviously relevant to those engaged in pastoral care and counselling, and music could be a valuable resource in the Church's ministry of healing.
But it's power also of concern to those who are responsible for the planning and leading of worship.
They need to be aware of the effect which music has upon people, for good and for ill.
The hurtful effects of a piece of music do not necessarily stem from anything intrinsically harmful within itself, or even from its being used for manipulation.
They can be produced as a result of the mood of the performer, or the manner of performance, or of the mood or personality of the listener.
As has been mentioned in this Report, recent research on the relationship of psychology and spirituality has shown how different personality types have different needs and preferences.
This is another area largely unexplored by the Church, and the Commission believes that more work needs to be done here, for the implication of the research completed so far is that the average  parish congregation demands a variety of musical styles if the needs of all its members are to be met.
We can no longer assume that the only proper music in church is that which is commonly called ‘traditional’.
Nor is it appropriate to exclude all that is so described.
Even if it is almost impossible in worship to accept that which we dislike, we should not be dismissive of those who do not share our preferences.
Most of our congregations contain a multiplicity of people who react differently to different kinds of musical expression.
This demands a rich diversity of repertoire and great versatility on the part of our musicians.
It also demands the Christian virtue of tolerance.
Differing Styles
Different doctrinal and liturgical emphases have their influence upon the kind of music used in churches of different traditions.
There are also occasions when it is fitting for everything in a service to be either purist and ‘traditional’ or ‘modern’.
But the Commission believes that in the average parish church on an average Sunday, especially where no other is within easy reach of parishioners, a blend of different styles of worship and music is desirable.
For the Church of England is essentially a national church.
It has the responsibility of offering regular worship which is accessible to everyone in the land, in addition to providing for great local and national occasions, which it generally does well.
For this reason the Eucharist and Morning Prayer are being complemented, or replaced in some places, by the family service.
This is growing in popularity and provides an opportunity for sensitive and careful experimentation in order to embrace a wide range of local people, of all ages and with different musical preferences.
However, it requires some skill to devise a service which is relevant to a varied congregation and yet remains first and foremost an act of worship.
Those who seek to do so need to be guided by sound liturgical principles, such as those found in the Liturgical Commission's Patterns for Worship (Church House Publishing, 1989).
Non-Vocal Participation
‘Relevant worship’ does not necessarily require all present to participate vocally all the time.
The popular misconception which holds that unless one is able to sing one is not able to take part in a  musical item needs to be dispelled once and for all.
The Commission strongly affirms the value of silent as well as vocal participation, and it believes that worshippers need to be taught how to listen to music no less attentively than they do to the reading of Scripture, or to preaching, or to the recitation of prayers.
The acceptance of this principle would do much to dispel the ‘us’ and ‘them’attitude sometimes found where there are choirs, and it would counter the idea that an offering by skilled singers and players is merely a performance and an exercise in self-advertisement, unless by their attitude musicians invite such criticism.
Listening to others in worship should not be seen as passive.
Indeed, it requires some effort to keep the attention focused on the music and its words and on God.
Most of us find it easier to use our mouths without our minds, than our minds without our mouths.
There is no guarantee that by singing the words of a hymn we have participated any more fully than by giving silent attention to someone else doing so.
Silence
The use of silence by the whole body of worshippers during a service does not imply that they are not participating.
The value of corporate silence is considerable, both for its own sake and as a foil to the busyness which marks most of our worship.
Some parts of the Church are coming to recognise this.
But the Commission would nevertheless urge that greater place be given to silence in our services, so that all present can be still before God in silent reflection and prayer.
Our silence offers God an opportunity to speak to the soul and it can provide blessed relief from over-activity and the torrent of speech and song with which we assail both his ears and our own.
Said and Sung
Words are generally as much over-used within worship as they are outside it.
Because they are a more common form of communication than music, they usually play the major part in our services, with music in a supporting role.
This Report has argued that music can have a life of its own and an ability to communicate without the support of words.
However, it is the combination of words and music which constitutes what most people understand as church music.
This is particularly true of hymnody where words and music should be related  and where the text is enriched by song.
Nevertheless, the words of a hymn are generally the determining factor for its inclusion in a service.
There is also a need to recognise the importance of the spoken word and its relationship to the musical parts of the service.
The ideal is a combination of the said and the sung.
The one sets off and contrasts with the other, and a choir should give a lead as much to the spoken as to the sung parts.
At all times the language of worship needs to be clear, but not banal.
It should speak to the condition of the worshipper.
The reading of Scripture, preaching and prayers can take place in a variety of idioms, depending upon the circumstances.
For some congregations and occasions an informal, relaxed language is appropriate, whilst others will require one which has more formality and dignity.
What is true of speech is true also of music.
In seeking to make the Church's worship widely accessible, however, people's capacity should not be underrated.
Most will respond to good language or to good music of whatever style.
A congregation must not be baffled by obscurity, but it must not be patronised by too much informality either.
It takes both sensitivity and experience to strike the right balance, especially for special occasions when the right language and music for a particular situation or mood are crucial.
Conclusion
The musical needs of parishes and congregations differ from place to place, and the way in which they are met is determined largely by the resources available.
What is possible for a large suburban congregation is out of the question for a tiny congregation in a rural situation.
Where there is a skilled director with commitment and an attractive personality in an inner-city parish, it may be possible to produce excellent musical results.
The village church without either organist or choir may limp along with three half-hearted hymns and two fingers on a harmonium.
In a situation such as this much of what this Report contains may seem to be irrelevant.
However, the Commission hopes that at least some of its reflections and recommendations may bring hope, encouragement and new ideas to those who are struggling.
Whilst recognising that the worship of a small, dispirited congregation is of importance to God, it  does not believe that we can acquiesce in despair or even discouragement.
Above all the Commission hopes that the Church of England as a whole will take a fresh look at, and a renewed interest in, the music of worship which is an essential part of its rich inheritance.
A greater commitment to this music will ensure its continuing to enrich the worship of the people of God.
RECOMMENDATIONS
That clergy, musicians and congregations alike give fresh consideration to the place and value of music in the services of the Church (494 — 499,
–502, 511).
That those responsible for planning and leading worship make as thorough a preparation for each service as is possible, including the preparation of prayer (500).
That the potential of music for fostering ecumenical relationships be utilised to the full by the Church at all levels (503–504).
That clergy and musicians recognise the value of music as an ingredient in evangelism, both in worship and outside it, and take opportunities afforded by the media (505–510).
That the therapeutic use of music in the Church's ministry of healing be further investigated, perhaps under the auspices of the Churches' Council for Health and Healing (512–513).
That clergy and musicians be prepared to plan and lead worship imaginatively, to blend different styles, and to allow themselves to be guided both by the needs of the congregation and by sound liturgical principles in devising church services (514 — 516, 522–523).
That congregations be taught to use opportunities of silence and the value of listening, and that those responsible for planning services ensure a proper balance between the spoken and the sung (517–521).
THE REPERTOIRE
Where there is musical apathy, quality of performance suffers, and the range of music used can become limited.
Without stimulation and vision, church musicians, clergy and congregations easily settle into the rut of the familiar.
Hymn lists differ little from year to year and music programmes remain unadventurous.
If the previous chapter of this Report is taken seriously, however, there is a challenge which faces us all.
The Commission does not advocate change for its own sake.
But it does urge all who are responsible for ordering the worship of parish churches to be sensitive to the variety of people who constitute our congregations.
Responsibility for the musical repertoire is shared between the musicians and the clergy, together with the worship group if there is one.
All who have that responsibility need to be aware of their own musical and liturgical preferences.
Within a congregation there will be different preferences, based upon age and temperament, and upon the varying stages reached by individuals in their spiritual pilgrimage.
It is usually impossible to meet the needs of every person at every service, but some congregational input into the choice of music is nevertheless valuable, for the people provide the best indication of what is appropriate and they have an important part in creating and maintaining the tradition of their church.
The Familiar and the New
Much of the tradition of Anglican church music has been built up in cathedrals and in the cathedral-style worship of some parish churches.
But the Commission considers that the role played by music in the worship of parish and cathedral ought not to be confused.
It affirms strongly its belief in the importance of congregational music in the average parish.
It also believes that the repertoire of music should be a varied one, but with a familiar core of material in order to provide stability for the worshippers.
From a secure base parish musicians can  be adventurous in exploring new music and in experimenting with differing styles.
This initiative is perhaps most needed in those very small congregations where there are few musical resources, and where the inability to maintain the ‘traditional’ style of music has led to near-despair.
Unaccompanied congregational singing can be beautiful and satisfying.
It requires only a little training and someone to lead it.
It should also find a place in the repertoire of those churches with good musical resources.
There is a simplicity in plainsong or Taizé chants, for example, which is well suited to certain seasons of the year and to some parts of a service.
It provides a good contrast to more elaborate music.
Equally, strong unison singing to an accompaniment is always effective and is to be encouraged.
Hymnody
The selection of hymns is the most important choice that has to be made by those responsible for worship.
This is not only because there is such a wide range from which to choose, but also because worshippers have strong views and deep feelings.
These relate perhaps as much to the tunes as they do to the text.
Because those planning a service probably give greater weight to the words than to the music, the Commission believes that those texts which promote ancient truths in a readily-understood manner and in good, or at least passable, poetry are the ones which ought to be used.
Some of the modern hymns have a very shallow doctrinal content and may need to be rejected for that reason, whatever their other virtues.
There is still an important place for traditional hymns, many of which have a timeless quality about them, even if some of their language raises problems.
It is usually desirable to leave old words as they are, since hymnody is governed by the number of syllables in the line as well as by rhyming verse.
In the case of the exclusive language of traditional hymns, it is better that congregations be helped to respect and accept such hymns as coming from a former age than that they be either inappropriately altered or abandoned altogether.
Sometimes a small sensitive alteration can save a hymn from going out of use.
But there is no excuse for modern hymns to contain gender-based or sexist language.
They will be rightly rejected by most congregations.
Happily, there are many fine new hymns and hymn books now available, including those compiled by the Jubilate Group.
In addition to a wide choice of contemporary writing, both literary and musical, these offer a good number of traditional hymns from which unnecessary archaisms have been removed.
In this way they ensure the perpetuation of one of the great traditions of the Christian Church.
Hymns are the most accessible of all music for a congregation and they are the main musical ingredient in the worship of most churches.
They are also of ecumenical significance, being common to almost all denominations.
Hymns offer varieties of mood, style, origin, length, metre and key.
In a service there should be a mix of these and not a concentration on one metre or one key, for example.
It is helpful to worshippers if they have editions with at least the melody line printed with the words.
We are a more musically literate nation than formerly and if some members of the congregation can read music, their lead will be important in the singing of an unfamiliar tune.
Psalmody and Songs
The Psalms offer a rich mixture of spiritual, literary and musical expression and they have been at the heart of the Church's daily worship since biblical times.
The Commission believes that this is a tradition which must be maintained.
In addition to other considerations, there is again an ecumenical one, for psalmody is common to all the churches and is acceptable in those few churches where hymns are not.
According to the Parish Survey some 74% of parishes use Anglican chant at least occasionally, It is to be hoped that their congregations have copies of psalms and canticles which are pointed for singing.
The Methodist Hymns and Psalms (Methodist Publishing House, 1983) and the United Reformed Church Rejoice and Sing (Oxford University Press, 1991) include a number of psalms in their pages.
Anglican chant is a distinctive way of singing the Psalms and it would be a pity if it were lost altogether in the parishes.
It does nevertheless require some expertise and the melody line is often set too high for congregations.
The Commission recommends that parishes explore alternative ways of singing the Psalms.
These include plainsong and the responsorial or antiphonal methods of Gelineau, Taizé and Dom Gregory Murray.
Psalms for Today and Songs from the Psalms (Hodder and Stoughton, 1990) offer a useful collection of psalmody.
Where a musical setting is not feasible, the rhythmic and dignified speaking of psalms and canticles is an acceptable and traditional substitute.
In the Commission's view, this is best done either antiphonally, between two sides of a congregation, or responsorially between the leader and the people.
The widespread practice of saying a whole psalm or canticle together (unless it is a short one) is tedious, inartistic and spiritually unhelpful.
Another form in which psalms may be sung is when they provide the basis of the words of worship songs, frequently but inaccurately called choruses.
Most of these are paraphrases of biblical texts, and like hymns they vary in theological emphasis and musical appropriateness.
In some respects today's songs have something of the character of the Psalms, in their expression from the heart without the cerebral and linguistic demands of hymnody.
As yet there is usually a reluctance to follow the Psalmist in including the negative aspects of human emotion, but songs have considerable potential for the expression of anger and sadness.
Many of the new hymn books include worship songs and they find widespread acceptance.
The contemporary style of worship songs generally makes them easily sung by a congregation and they lend themselves to a variety of arrangements for voices and instruments.
Accompaniments are often provided by instruments other than, or in addition to , the organ.
They should be used together with hymns, rather than as replacements for them.
Chosen with discrimination, they make a welcome addition to parish church music.
Settings of Liturgical Texts
The Commission encourages the continuing use of musical settings of liturgical texts, both in the Eucharist and in the Offices.
It may be appropriate on occasions, or in certain traditions, for these to be sung by the choir alone.
But in most places, and particularly in the parish Eucharist, the congregation ought to be enabled to sing more than hymns.
The Commission therefore welcomes the availability of some of the new settings which provide parts for congregation as well as choir.
The revision of liturgical texts over the last thirty years has brought both problems and opportunities.
Problems have arisen because of the belief that none of the well-known and loved musical settings could be used in the new rites.
But these rites have also  brought opportunities for composers to provide new settings.
This Report has already mentioned both the composers who have taken these opportunities with happy results for the Church, and the production of much locally written music.
Jesus likens those who have been instructed about the Kingdom of Heaven to householders who bring out of their treasures things both new and old (Matthew 13:52).
It is now being recognised that it can be appropriate to use musical settings of the ‘traditional’ words in the ‘new’services.
The rubrics of The Alternative Service Book allow this, and a mixture of styles of language and music in worship is perfectly proper.
Anthems and Solos
The principle of including words of a former age in a modern rite is well established through the use of anthems.
Well-chosen and properly performed, these neither interrupt the flow nor intrude into the service and can be a powerful means of proclaiming the Faith.
Much has already been said here about the activity of listening by the congregation.
The singing of an anthem provides, above all, the opportunity for this.
So too does the use of solos or worship songs and instrumental pieces.
Organ and other Instrumental Music
The most common form of instrumental performance is the organ voluntary.
However, its use before a service needs to be reviewed in many of our churches.
It often has to compete against church bells or, increasingly, the chatter of the congregation.
The Commission does not wish to discourage the friendly greeting before the service, or the fellowship after it.
But it does not believe that music should be used to cover up, or encourage, worshippers to talk.
They will do so ever more loudly as the organ attempts to drown their noise.
In some traditions worship songs are used for some five or ten minutes before a service to prepare people for worship, often followed by silence.
Alternatively, there is the example of some churches overseas, where an instrumental prelude sets the mood and is the beginning of the service.
This takes the form of organ or instrumental music, or of a recording.
People listen quietly, and it is often balanced by a concluding piece at the end of the service during which the congregation remains quietly seated.
This presupposes that pieces are not too long and that they are properly rehearsed set-pieces rather than the meaningless  meanderings which too often pass for improvisation.
Silence is generally better than this, as it may be during a service.
It is not always necessary to plug a gap or fill every pause with music and there are points at which silence has significance.
These might include the preparation of the bread and wine for Communion or the time of Communion itself.
Nevertheless, extemporisation by a competent player at the end of a hymn can be thrilling, as it can during a procession before or during the service.
The Commission would like to suggest the revival of the custom in some churches of an occasional short voluntary during the service.
This can set a mood or enhance a period of reflection.
A central voluntary is used in some of the Free Churches for the taking of the collection and a hymn may not always be appropriate for this, if people are to think of what they are singing.
Indeed, it is a mistake to use hymns simply to fill spaces or to cover movements of ministers and musicians, except in the case of a liturgical procession.
A hymn should be an act of worship in its own right and not something to dispel a silence.
Composers and Commissions
The amount of new music being published might suggest that commissioning people to write music for worship is unnecessary, particularly given the expense which may be involved.
However, the Commission believes that the Church ought to invite composers to write pieces, particularly for special occasions.
This is in line with a long tradition and there may be more established composers willing to accept such commissions than is realised.
An up-and-coming composer would probably welcome the opportunity to write music in a religious idiom.
The gifted local amateur occasionally writes a piece of enduring worth, and not all commissions involve an expensive financial transaction.
For example, something may be written for the wedding of a friend, or for the local organist to play.
A good way of encouraging composers is by means of a competition.
The BBC's ‘Songs of Praise’ runs a hymn- and song-writing competition and some cathedral festivals, such as that at Norwich, invite the submission of choral pieces.
Composers of new hymn tunes should be discouraged from writing for a traditional text which is either wedded to a well-loved tune or has more than one good tune to which it may be sung.
On the whole, the Commission urges that new hymn tunes should be composed for new words, and vice versa.
There is  already an over-exposure of well-known tunes upon which some new texts have come to rely.
The suggestion of commissioning composers probably applies more to cathedrals and large parish churches with a strong musical tradition, than to the average local church.
Nevertheless, distinguished musicians might be pleased to tackle the challenge of simplicity required by a church with few musical resources, and congregations are not often taken into account in commissioned music.
It is important that those who commission a work give the composer a brief of what is required and information about the resources available.
Otherwise there is a greater risk of the result being unacceptable and unrealistic.
In commissioning music the Church has an opportunity of affirming the importance for society of musical creativity.
Conclusion
In seeking to be innovative and adventurous, church musicians will need to be careful not to abandon the traditional repertoire or to relegate it to second place.
Stewardship of our resources, as well as respect for the preferences of many of our people, demands that it be maintained at a high level.
Nevertheless, a fresh outlook and the readiness to explore and experiment will do much to put new life into the Church's music.
RECOMMENDATIONS
That those responsible for the choice of music in our churches take account of the varying tastes and preferences of their congregations and set up a system for congregational feedback (526–527).
That congregations be given ample opportunity to sing in services, even where they have to be unaccompanied (528–529, 540).
That those responsible for the choice of hymns and worship songs be guided by the quality of their doctrinal content, language and musical idiom, and that both the new and the old be included in the repertoire (530–533, 538 — 539, 541).
That parishes provide melody line editions of hymn and song books for their congregation (534).
That clergy and musicians ensure the continuing place of psalmody in Anglican worship, whether it be sung or said (535–537).
That congregations be taught to regard solo anthems, songs, and organ and other instrumental pieces, as integral parts of a service (542 — 545).
That parishes find ways of encouraging composers to write music for their particular needs and resources (546 — 548).
THE CONGREGATION AND THE LEADERS OF WORSHIP
Any attempt to revitalise the music of the Church of England must also involve its people.
Given that the most important and readily available musical instrument is the human voice, even the smallest congregation has the ability to make music in its worship.
Most of those who come to church expect and want to be able to sing, and the Commission believes that the music in parish churches ought to be substantially congregational.
Both the choir (if there is one) and the organist form part of the congregation, as do the clergy and other ministers.
With or without musical gifts or ministerial skills, all are called to serve each other, as belonging equally to the gathered people of God.
Holding on to the Familiar
People in church do not usually sing when they either dislike or do not know a piece.
But what is familiar is generally popular, and most people look to music to provide an enjoyable way of expressing their faith and aspirations.
They expect to feel comfortable, secure and unselfconscious as they do so.
This is one of the reasons for the choice of hymns and other music being so often limited to a few old war-horses.
But opportunities for both religious and musical development are lost where the repertoire remains narrow and static.
People reluctant to learn new music tend to take a similar attitude to new forms of service or variations within it.
However, it is not commonly recognised that the Anglican liturgy has been evolving continuously since the sixteenth century.
Staying with the familiar may well result in spiritual stagnation, particularly if this is because some people have become inflexible.
There has to be, by congregations, clergy, and musicians alike, the recognition or other people s needs and preferences.
None of us must expect to have what we like all the time, whether musically or in any other way, and personal Sacrifice is pad of the Christian way.
A reluctance to change may present an especial difficulty in respect of the younger members of society, so few of whom belong to our congregations.
For those of them who do come to church, particular sensitivity and encouragement are needed and they should never be patronised.
Like others, young people respond to high standards, whatever the style of worship or music.
Often their involvement is gained through membership of a choir or music group.
Introducing Change
It is by no means impossible to introduce people to music that is unfamiliar.
Congregational practices are not generally liked.
But much can be done to teach new music by one person using voice and gesture alone.
A ‘ginger group’ within a congregation, specially formed for the learning of new material, can be a useful way to introduce and give a lead in singing it.
There is also value in having it sung or played in advance, perhaps on several occasions, by the choir, music group or organist.
Responsibility Shared with a Worship Committee
Because changes in church services arouse strong emotions and can lead to serious divisions, the Commission believes that it is sensible for a parish to have a worship committee or group.
In Canon law the decision as to which services are to be used rests jointly with the incumbent and the Parochial Church Council (Canon B.3).
The ultimate responsibility for the ordering of music in worship rests with the incumbent (see Appendix 3.1).
It is difficult, and possibly unwise, for one person to attempt omnicompetence in an area of the Church's life in which there have been so many recent changes in rapid succession.
Responsibility could be shared with a body made up of certain ex officio members (the clergy, the director of music, others with particular responsibilities in worship), and representatives of the PCC, the congregation and particular constituencies such as the youth group.
Its task would be to advise on the devising or altering of services and their planning and execution, and it would undertake a regular review of the parish's worship.
Committees can become as tyrannical and authoritarian as individuals, and therefore the members of a worship committee need to take particular care to listen to comments or complaints from the congregation, and to take note of the varying temperaments and requirements of worshippers.
The committee should be ready to  attend lectures, courses and events devoted to the principles of worship, and to visit other churches in order to exchange ideas.
It would also be in touch with any diocesan or other body or person responsible for giving advice on music and the liturgy.
Such a committee might also help to satisfy those who are given to complaining about the choice of hymns.
It would need to delegate attention to this task to one or more of its members and to support them in it.
CLERGY AND MUSICIANS
With or without such a committee, both clergy and church musicians need to be valued and respected for their skills and responsibilities, as well as for themselves.
Only 3% of the incumbents completing the Parish Survey questionnaire indicated an unsatisfactory relationship with their director of music.
But there is a widespread impression that breakdowns in the relationship between clergy and musicians are common.
Not only are these harmful to the people directly involved and to their congregation, but they often receive publicity and may also bring the Church into disrepute.
The Resolution of Conflict
It is rare for the responsibility for causing conflict to rest solely on one side, and this may involve more than the organist and the minister.
However, as leaders of the Christian community the clergy should be the first to foster good relationships through effective communication.
Where these break down, clergy should take the initiative for their restoration and the resolution of conflict.
The observance of procedures agreed with the PCC in the appointment of a musical director and the provision of a proper Job Specification and Agreement (see Appendices 3. 1 — 3.3) should help to prevent trouble.
But even with formalities, the day to day working relationship between two people depends upon goodwill, sensitivity, tact, humility and a whole range of virtues on both sides.
Where a conflict cannot be resolved, it may be necessary to call in an arbitrator from beyond the parish.
This might be the Rural Dean, or Lay Chairman of Deanery Synod, or the Archdeacon.
It would be sensible for dioceses to establish procedures for arbitration in case these are needed to settle disputes.
It might also be desirable to use the services of a consultant, either from the Church or from a secular agency, in order to help parish leaders to develop inter-personal skills.
Certainly in these days of ever-greater sharing of roles and delegation  of responsibilities, clergy need to acquire management skills as well as the ability to run meetings.
CLERGY AND OTHER MINISTERS
The ability to manage people is the more necessary at a time when a number of different lay ministries are being encouraged and developed for the conduct of worship.
Readers, worship leaders, lesson readers, intercessors and musicians of various kinds are all involved.
Thus more of the laity, who already have a say in synodical affairs and carry an ever greater financial responsibility, are being encouraged to use their gifts in the Church's most important activity.
Many of these may already be recognised in their local community but are being lost to the Church, with consequent resentment, frustration and impoverishment of the parish.
A source of potential talent such as this is particularly important for rural areas.
A parish may have no Reader and its clergy may be overstretched because of having to care for a number of churches.
Here, as elsewhere, simple training of the laity in the conduct of services and the dynamics of communication could help beginners in the effective use of position, body, voice and words.
Sometimes in a country parish there is no organ or other instrument, let alone someone to play it.
Somebody, therefore, has to lead the singing, either unaccompanied or to the accompaniment of a pre-recorded tape, and training is needed for this as well.
The responsibility for organising the training and co-ordination of ministries, including that of musicians, is likely to fall upon the clergy.
Opinion is divided as to whether it is preferable to have an incumbent who is wholly unmusical or one who is at least as well qualified as the musical director.
Unmusical clergy may leave every — recruiting, and may not understand the inappropriateness or impracticality of a particular piece of music which has been requested.
Musical clergy, on the other hand, may find it hard to accept standards of choice and performance which are lower than they believe they could achieve themselves.
This is to portray extremes; most clergy have at least some musical skill, and a good proportion of church musicians have some theological knowledge.
Happily, in most of those parishes which have an official organist or director there is mutual respect and good co-operation.
It is the exceptions which make the headlines.
CLERGY TRAINING
Most clergy have received some instruction in voice production and singing during their theological training.
In spite of this, there are those who really cannot sing.
They should not undertake the sung parts traditionally assigned to them in the Offices and in the Eucharist.
When it is permissible, according to the rubrics, these parts may be delegated to others.
When it is not, it is better than both clergy and congregation resort to speech.
Clergy who intone their parts in the service should nevertheless be open to receive tuition from the musical director, where this is needed.
Neither an operatic performance nor an unattractive preciousness of style is acceptable in the context of worship.
The ability to sing a service is not, however, as important as having the skills required to lead worship.
Ordinands do not necessarily have more imagination than others.
But they do need to learn to understand the effect which different styles of communication and presentation have on a congregation.
It is clear from the evidence received from theological colleges and courses, that the training given to ordinands for their responsibilities in leading worship is seriously inadequate.
Little appears to be done to help them understand the place and use of music within it.
The Commission is well aware of the pressures upon curricula of theological training and understands the dilemma faced by those responsible for it.
But if worship is the foundation of all the Church's other activities, greater priority must be given to matters liturgical and musical, even at the expense of some subjects which at present form part of the syllabus.
Many skills can be learnt in the parish in which a person serves after ordination.
But there is no guarantee that the quality of the worship and music in that parish will provide adequate formation in what is arguably the most crucial area of the ministry of the clergy.
A first parish may prove to be perfectly satisfactory, or the formation of the ordinand's understanding and attitudes in respect of worship may have taken place before theological training.
But the worship of the college or course is obviously very influential.
It needs to be of the highest possible standard, and the music which is used within it should represent a variety of styles and traditions, as a preparation for leading worship in the wider Church.
Students are not necessarily less conservative in such matters than many congregations.
Given that many ordinands have musical gifts, it should not be too difficult to explore a wide variety of music for worship.
But there needs to be a commitment on the part of the college or course to give more time and greater attention to music's role in worship.
If finance allowed, the creation of a college bursary for a church musician to spend a period in residence would bestow great enrichment upon both the community and upon the individual.
Once ordained, clergy usually undergo some continuing training for a year or two.
Thereafter there are various in-service courses.
The opportunities offered by Post Ordination Training and in-service clergy training (CME) should be used much more than they are by most dioceses, perhaps in collaboration with music colleges or diocesan music advisers.
Valuable help could be given in areas such as the choice of music, examples of different musical styles, introducing new music, the resources available, and making the most of a limited budget.
Church musicians might be encouraged to attend such courses together with the clergy.
The Commission feels strongly that the training received by the clergy is crucial to the future of Church music.
It believes that theological colleges and courses must take a new look at the quantity and quality of the preparation given to ordinands for their responsibilities in leading public worship.
The parishioner's ability to worship depends not only upon the personal spirituality of a relationship with God in Christ, but also upon relationships with fellow worshippers, the atmosphere of the building and the vitality of the services.
The person with the greatest influence over these is the priest or presiding minister.
The task of ordering the Church's worship is too awesome to be left to chance, either in the hope that the person responsible for it will pick up the necessary skills or in the belief that it can be done by anyone.
CHURCH MUSICIANS
Second to the influence of the priest or presiding minister is that of the person responsible for the music, for music can make or mar a service as powerfully as anything else.
It is not, therefore, unreasonable for the Church to expect its musicians to have natural musical talents, some training and an adequate technique.
If the congregation is distracted by an inappropriate piece, and technical shortcomings or insensitivity in its performance, the worship will not get off the ground.
Recognition of the contribution made by leading musicians is shown in their being described increasingly as ‘ministers of music’.
This is common in many denominations in the United States of America.
Although there are those who cavil at using the term ‘minister’ for anyone other than those who are ordained, there is no doubt of the significance of the musician's role.
It is as much pastoral as it is liturgical.
Those churches which are blessed with good human and material resources may have a number of music leaders and musicians.
An overall director of music may supervise an organist, a choir conductor and the leader of a music group.
More common is a two-person team, consisting of an organist and a choir director.
Most common of all is one person who is responsible for both the direction of the choir and the playing of the organ.
Worship Leaders
There are a substantial number of churches, particularly in either rural or inner-city areas, where there is not even one trained musician.
Sometimes a largely self-taught pianist or ‘reluctant organist’ can be found to help, or a rota of local organists might be compiled.
Often, however, the person taking the service has to lead the music as well.
In this situation the Commission believes that consideration should he given to the use of a cantor, or animateur.
This is a person who, amongst other things, gives a vocal lead, with or without accompaniment, in singing phrases which the congregation repeats, or to which it responds.
This method can be used effectively with responsorial Psalms and some settings of the Eucharist.
Plainsong also offers wide possibilities for unaccompanied singing.
With a little training both the congregation and the soloist can produce good results, and thus provide a welcome supplement to the singing of hymns.
Where there is adequate equipment, consideration should be given to the use of pre-recorded hymn accompaniments and voluntaries.
An increasing number of these are being produced commercially.
Cantors or animateurs could also have a place in those churches with a thriving musical tradition and they should not be regarded simply as emergency personnel.
Nevertheless, they may be needed more widely yet.
For there is evidently a growing shortage everywhere of people who are both musically qualified and prepared to invest a  significant amount of time, energy and expertise in the Church's music.
To those who do make a commitment of this kind the Commission expresses its admiration and appreciation, particularly in the light of the small salaries paid to most church musicians.
The Musical Director
A director of music holds a position of great responsibility and a number of special qualities are required.
Musical competence and proper professionalism are obviously needed, but personality, teaching and managerial ability are no less important.
In addition to working with other musicians, whether singers or players, the director is likely to have dealings with people who are not regular churchgoers, but come to choose music for weddings or funerals.
For them this meeting may be one of the few contacts they have with the Church.
A director will also be expected to undertake at least some administrative duties.
It is not easy to find people with both musical and personal skills in perfect balance.
One side without the other is likely to create problems and it may be better not to make an appointment than to settle for someone who is seriously inadequate either as a musician or as a leader.
It is also unwise to overlook all else because of a person's Christian commitment.
The well-meaning piety of one who is neither leader nor musician ought to be used elsewhere than in the direction of the Church's music.
Having said this, and conscious of the arguments advanced in this Report against excluding non-believers, the Commission believes that the musical director needs to have some Christian commitment.
Experience has too often shown that problems arise where there is a lack of sympathy with the Church and its worshippers.
Damage can be done, particularly to young people in a choir or music group, if their director does not support the clergy and join in the worship, or does not receive Communion, for example.
The wisdom of having a contract and job description for the church's organist or director has already been mentioned.
Some protection of the position is afforded by the Church's legislation (see Appendix 3.1) and an intelligent job description will help employee and employer alike to avoid misunderstandings.
However, as has been said, relationships depend upon more than legal provisions.
Personal support, guidance and encouragement for the musical director are rightly to be expected from the clergy, parish leaders and  congregation.
In addition to the occasional attendance at rehearsals by the incumbent, positive words of appreciation can go a long way in making the musician feel that the job is worthwhile.
They also make any necessary criticisms and suggestions more easily acceptable when they are offered.
A worship committee should be able to offer support as well as advice to the director.
It needs to be emphasised, however, that just as the clergy's specialist knowledge of theology, spirituality, worship and pastoral care is to be respected, so too are the musician's particular skills and qualifications.
Healthy relations between all involved in the leading of worship are at the heart of the matter.
Both individually and corporately they should be nourished by their relationship with God.
Remuneration
Part of the problem which has created a shortage of church organists or directors is the level of remuneration which is offered to them.
Comparisons are sometimes made with the growing number of laity who give freely of their time and skills to the Church.
But many organists have undertaken some years of an expensive musical training and still give many hours a week to practising.
Evidence received by the Commission shows that cathedral and other professional church musicians receive salaries which are a fraction of the remuneration they could command on the basis of their qualifications, outside the Church.
Equally, what many parishes pay their musicians is barely sufficient to cover their expenses.
The Commission recognises that church musicians generally offer their skills as part of their Christian commitment and primarily pro Deo .
It also believes that if the Church wants better music and musicians, it will have to be prepared to pay more at least for its music leaders.
Where it employs professional musicians full- or part-time it should ensure that their salaries take account of their training and qualifications as well as of the time and contribution which they are expected to give to the worship.
The latter considerations apply to the majority of the Church's amateur directors of music.
A higher degree of commitment is demanded of church musicians than of any other leader of worship.
For all but a few weeks in the year there is the demand of regular attendances and rehearsals, often at unsocial hours, as well as regular private practice.
The General Synod could consider laying down salary scales for church musicians, as it does in respect of parochial fees.
Nevertheless, parishes should recognise their responsibility.
Guidance is offered by the salary scales suggested by the Royal School of Church Music for amateur organists (see Appendix 3.4), and by the Incorporated Society of Musicians for professional musicians.
Learning on the Job
With or without more realistic salaries, opportunities for further training could act as an incentive to serious musicians.
They could be encouraged to attend appropriate courses or continue with lessons.
Parishes ought to pay the costs of these, as they often do for their clergy or other personnel to receive in-service training.
In spite of its financial implications, this could be a good investment in helping organists and choir directors to develop their skills and expand their horizons.
This is particularly important if a ‘traditional’ training has kept them to a limited understanding and repertoire.
A greater difficulty than finding the finance may lie in persuading old hands of the value of such opportunities for learning.
Training events arranged by the RSCM and other organisations seldom attract those who need them most, perhaps for fear that their inadequacies might be revealed.
CONCLUSION
Whether or not budgets can run to making provisions such as have been suggested, it is important that the Church affirm and encourage its leading musicians.
It is important, too, that both during their theological training and throughout their subsequent ministry, the clergy be encouraged to give a high priority to their role in the planning and leading of worship.
To this end, there needs to be greater provision for training in liturgy and the use of music within it.
RECOMMENDATIONS
That congregations lie helped to explore and experiment with new music (550–554).
That parishes set up a worship committee, where there is none, in order to advise the incumbent and Parochial Church Council, and to support their organist or director of music (555–556, 579–580).
That clergy and musicians do all in their power to ensure close and amicable working relationships (557–559, 562).
That, where it is appropriate, clergy seek out and train others for the leading of worship (560 — 561, 573 — 575).
That theological colleges and courses, as well as those responsible for post-ordination training and continuing ministerial training, review their provision for the training of ordinands and clergy in the art of preparing for and conducting public worship, and the use of music within it (563 — 569).
That parishes aim to have an organist or director of music with Christian commitment, together with personal and leadership skills, as well as musical ability (570–572, 576–578).
That parishes work towards a realistic level of remuneration for their organist or director of music and make provision for their continuing training (581–584).
CHOIRS, MUSIC GROUPS AND RECRUITMENT
One of the major responsibilities, and a cause of much anxiety, for the director of music is the recruitment of people for choirs and music groups.
Without the status and obligations of a church organist, singers and players are not prepared in great numbers to accept the demands of weekly services and rehearsals.
There are those, however, for whom the offering of musical skills in worship is part of their offering to God.
For them it is a matter of Christian commitment and they serve the Church well and faithfully.
There are other reasons for belonging to a choir.
These range from the desire to make music, to meeting the wishes of parents.
For some there is the enjoyment of the social life which may be offered by the Church and its musicians.
Few join for the money, even where that is offered.
It is necessary, therefore, to make as attractive as possible the opportunities and challenge of singing or playing in church.
For youngsters in particular the personality of the director is as important as any musical qualifications.
Pastoral Care and Spiritual Development
To have an esprit de corps is important for any choir.
This is commonly fostered by the wearing of choir robes, competitions, chorister or musician training schemes, and a variety of out-of-church activities.
There is an important pastoral role to be played by the director, and non-musical demands can be time-consuming.
However, the Commission believes that time given in this way pays enormous dividends for a body of volunteer, amateur musicians and for those leading it.
Experience suggests that it is not just valuable but essential for recruitment, as well as for effective working relationships and enhanced musical performance.
There are those who have reservations about the value of choirs or other groups in worship, perhaps because of unhappy experience.
All will recognise, however, the considerable potential for evangelism which is afforded by them.
Evidence shows that people are often brought to Christ by membership of such a group.
A band of singers or musicians also offers a context and an opportunity for training in Christian discipleship.
It is not an opportunity which seems to be taken very often.
All too frequently choirs and musicians, as well as servers, are taken for granted because of their being in church Sunday by Sunday.
For many people, singing or playing at services is perhaps their only link with the Church, and it may well prove to be a temporary one.
Young people particularly need special care.
They find themselves involved in what is a mainly adult activity and they may be quickly bored by a church service.
Their spiritual development must be the responsibility of the clergy, perhaps with the help of others.
The clergy ought also to have a part with the director of music in the pastoral care of the choir or music group.
The Music Group
Repeated reference is made in this Report to music groups.
These consist of two or more instrumentalists, with or without singers, involving almost any combination of instruments.
Suitable arrangements for the instruments available have to be made and this requires some skill.
If this is not available from the director of music or some other person in the church, a local musician may be prepared to help.
The huge value of a band of instrumentalists is as yet largely unexploited by the Church.
Not the least of its benefits is that a music group provides a means of involving more people, especially youngsters, in its life.
The growth of instrumental tuition in schools means that large numbers of children with some musical ability are available to be recruited.
A music group adds to the variety of music used in worship and it may help a congregation to experiment and explore new possibilities.
In view of the Commission's belief that churches generally should be more adventurous in their choice of music, the formation of a music group is strongly recommended.
For several reasons this could be a positive step forward.
Music groups and choirs are usually drawn to differing styles of music and varying degrees of formality.
Experience has shown that this can lead to rivalry or even friction between the two.
If there is no  overall director of music for the church, the leaders of the two groups will need to ensure a close relationship and positive co-operation with each other.
Where necessary, the incumbent may need to be involved, for it is vital to the church's life and worship that there be mutual respect and the acceptance of the distinctive and complementary contributions of all its musicians.
Boys and Girls
A complicating factor in recruitment for church choirs may be the boy/girl issue.
Elsewhere in this Report there is some discussion of the question as it affects cathedrals.
It relates more particularly to parish churches, which rarely have single-sex choirs in these days.
Where there are boys alone in the front rows there may need to be parallel opportunities for girls, either by turn or by the formation of a second choir.
When girls have been introduced into a formerly all-male top line, most of the boys have disappeared.
Among the reasons for this is that girls seem to volunteer more readily for singing and the recruitment of boys is not given priority.
A particular effort is in any case demanded, to ensure a supply of trebles both for their own sake and in order to provide the tenors and basses of the future.
Boys, more than girls perhaps, face the problem of ‘street credibility’ with their contemporaries because of the public's perception of a church choir.
This underscores the need for it to provide more than musical training for its members.
If it can offer the fellowship of a club, young people may well risk the scorn of their peers to belong to it.
Its reputation in encouraging a variety of worthwhile activities will then gain increasing acceptance in the community.
Remuneration offered to children in parish church choirs is usually at the level of pocket money.
It provides perhaps little incentive for most youngsters in today's affluent society.
However, where funds can be round, the award of bursaries for education and music tuition has much to be said for it.
The Commission commends the example of parishes such as St. Mary's, Portsea, which have a scheme of this kind.
It has parallels with the cathedral and collegiate traditions.
The Children Act (1989)
Those who have charge of young people in choirs ought to be aware of the provisions of The Children Act (1989).
It is designed to  protect children and to ensure that care is taken in making appointments to any post which involves contact with children.
These might include clergy, vergers and others, in addition to directors of music.
The screening of applicants must be thorough and names may need to be checked against ‘List 99’.
This is a record of those convicted of crimes against juveniles.
Names can also be submitted to the police computer.
Recruitment and Future Organists
An imaginative and sustained programme of recruitment for choirs and music groups is required, not only to ensure their future but also to train tomorrow's directors of music.
Many of today's leading musicians, both in the sacred and in the secular spheres, began their careers through belonging to a church choir.
Learning to play the organ can also lay the foundation for wider musical skills, including the ability to direct a group of choral or instrumental musicians.
A recent survey in the Archdeaconry of Wiltshire suggests that the need is urgent.
Only one organist in five there is under the age of forty, and of all those serving, 40% are more than sixty years of age.
There is every reason to think that these findings are typical of many rural areas in England.
Assuming that the organ is likely to remain the most common instrument for worship, the Commission urges parishes and dioceses to set up schemes to encourage people to learn the organ.
The warm response to the successful National Learn the Organ Year in 1990 suggests that there are many people who are interested in doing so.
Consequently, its work is to lie continued by a number of bodies, chiefly the newly-formed National Organ Teachers' Encouragement Scheme (NOTES).
A few dioceses already have bursary schemes to encourage young organists, and extending this, both at diocesan and parish level, could prove immensely valuable.
A modest financial investment now could ensure the continuing and improved provision of church music in the future.
Every church ought to provide ready access to its organ for those who are learning or may wish to learn the instrument.
The Commission has been saddened to hear of cases where clergy and organists make it difficult or impossible for serious pupils to practise.
It is important for the organ to be properly covered by insurance, but making it available to students costs little and is again an investment for the future.
Also to  be commended is the example of those churches which purchase orchestral instruments for members of their music groups.
The recruitment of potential church musicians could be helped by the development of links with local high schools and colleges which offer music courses.
It is often possible to gain the services of a competent student for a year or two, either as an organist or as an organ scholar.
This is not only helpful to the church but provides valuable experience for the person concerned.
We should not overlook the possibility of attracting professional musicians into church music, and the teaching profession in particular contains people who might need only a little persuasion to help, at least on an occasional basis.
All church musicians should be afforded opportunities to sing or play alone, with others listening.
The balance between congregational and other music is one which has to be worked out in each church, with the advice of the worship committee where there is one.
The contribution that a good choir, singing or instrumental group can make to the worship of a parish cannot be underestimated.
If it is to give of its best, however, it must be appreciated and affirmed by being allowed to perform on its own, in addition to leading the singing of the whole congregation.
It is obvious that this requires a high degree of commitment to regular practice, with punctuality and concentration during rehearsals.
Much unseen work, including individual practice where that is required, is put into even a short public performance.
In a service, the musicians are often the focus of attention.
Even when they are silent their example in attitude and behaviour has a direct bearing upon the way their role is perceived by the congregation.
Poor discipline shows in whispering and giggling, and in fussy ‘busyness’ with music or musical instruments.
It is a distraction to other worshippers and detracts from the importance of church musicians.
As part of the whole, they are expected to enable all who are present to make their offering to God as fully and as well as they can, in addition to making their own contribution for him.
RECOMMENDATIONS
That organists or directors of music be fully supported by clergy and parishes in their efforts to recruit people for choirs and music groups (586–588).
That clergy, in particular, recognise the value of choirs and music groups for evangelism and nurturing in the Christian faith, and ensure that children participating in them receive spiritual and pastoral care (589–590).
That organists or directors of music give consideration to the formation of a music group, where there is none, and ensure its close working relationship with any existing choir (591–593).
That organists or directors of music work to recruit both boys and girls for their choir, and that both sexes be given equal opportunities and encouragement (594–597).
That dioceses and parishes give immediate attention to setting up schemes to encourage people to learn the organ, and make their instruments available for practice (598 — 601).
That parishes give consideration to forming links with musicians in local educational institutions (602).
That choirs and music groups be given opportunities in church services to sing and play on their own (603–604).
EDUCATING FOR THE FUTURE
Until the passing of the Forster Education Act in 1870, most training in music was obtained primarily, if not solely, through singing or playing in churches, chapels and cathedrals.
With the foundation of music colleges, the Church's responsibility for producing future musicians diminished.
But church choirs continued to have an active rule in music education, together with the schools, many of which remained in close association with the Church.
Continuing co-operation between Church and school will be needed if the music in our services is to improve and, indeed, if the presence of young people is to guarantee the future of our congregations.
CHILDREN IN CHURCH AND SCHOOL
Children are part of today's Church.
However, when they are separated from a Sunday morning congregation in a Sunday School they can easily be made to feel as if they are the Church of tomorrow.
For this reason, young people with their varied musical and other gifts should be encouraged from an early age to make their contribution to the corporate worship of the church family.
At first this might be a mixture of music, dance and drama, in a regular ‘children's slot’.
Later it could develop into music groups consisting of a variety of instruments and voices, bands, instrumental ensembles or dance groups.
As soon as possible, young musicians should be encouraged to become part of regular adult groups, and an all-age orchestra could play for occasional services.
Additional encouragement and training for children might be provided by congregational ‘creative’ days, when young and old alike meet together to make music, as well as to take part in other activities.
This Report has already pointed out that something more than singing and playing may lie needed if boys and girls are to remain part of a choir or music group.
If the Church is to keep its teenagers, especially, it has to compete successfully with many other attractions and activities which appeal to the young.
It is vital that young people feel not only welcome in the church, but also valued and needed there, whether in bands, music groups, orchestras or choirs.
The power of music should be harnessed to encourage them to belong.
If the congregation accepts them as they are, and if lively and attractive leaders give them time and energy, young people are likely to stay in the Church.
If not, they will vote with their feet when they are old enough to do so.
The question of children's spiritual development and formation has previously been discussed in this Report, and many former girl and boy choristers testify to the benefits, spiritual as well as musical, of belonging to a good choir.
These can last for a lifetime.
The Educational Value of Choirs
The fine choral tradition of this country owes much to the vocal foundation laid in so many of our churches and cathedrals down the ages.
This suggests that the Church has a continuing responsibility to promote choral music and to provide challenging opportunities for young singers in its choirs.
This is the more necessary, the Commission believes, at a time when the bias in schools has shifted towards instrumental music and composition, although a fair number of state secondary and senior independent schools continue to maintain a strong tradition of choral singing.
A survey on singing in schools was conducted in 1988 on behalf of the British Federation of Young Choirs, and the results have recently been published (‘Singing in Schools’, British Federation of Young Choirs, 1991).
These indicated that of those questioned, 73.8% of secondary schools and 43. 1% of primary schools believed that there had been a decline in the quantity of choral singing provided in schools.
Both reported a decline also in its quality (secondary 46.7%, primary 28.4%).
The Commission expresses its anxiety that the proposed syllabus in the revised music curriculum allows less time than hitherto for choral music.
It also notes that teachers' present contracts make it difficult for them to find time to run extra-curricular activities like choirs.
Singing in Schools
An additional cause for disquiet is the present shortage of music teachers in primary and secondary schools.
This has now been officially recognised and it is expected that extra student places will be provided  to make up the deficiency.
This is encouraging, for, as HM Inspectors have said, ‘the development of music in primary schools depends very largely on the level of expertise and quality of teaching available’(The Teaching and Learning of Music , Aspects of Primary Education series, HMSO, 1991).
Where there are no music specialists in post in primary schools, general class teachers are often driven to almost exclusive use of schools' broadcasts, both for assembly and for class music.
These are admirable programmes.
But the Commission believes that no radio or television presenter can adequately take the place of a live teacher, and that no school should depend almost wholly on a centralised choice of music, particularly of hymns or songs.
The recent government commitment to providing an element of specialist music teaching in primary schools is greatly to be welcomed.
Concern has been voiced to the Commission over the lack of a repertoire of music common both to schools and to the Church.
It should be possible for clergy and teachers to ensure both that churches include some of the school's repertoire in their own, and that schools make room in their assemblies for some traditional hymns.
The Commission recognises that many schools are undergoing a period of rapid and difficult change, in the wake of the 1988 Education Reform Act.
The demands of the National Curriculum have put great pressure upon the educational service in new forms of school management and there have been problems of staffing and funding.
It is unlikely that music will receive the same emphasis or resources as the ‘core’ subjects of English, Mathematics and Science in most schools, in spite of its designation as a ‘foundation’subject.
Significant among the changes in the school music curriculum (distilled in the reports of the National Curriculum Music Working Group, 1991), is the emphasis on performing, composing and listening.
The inevitable reduction in the amount of time likely to be given to singing challenges the Church to remedy this deficiency.
Only so may choral opportunities be provided for future generations of children.
Young Instrumentalists
The Commission welcomes the much improved standard of instrumental playing which is one of the schools' greatest recent success stories.
It is already proving beneficial to many churches, and the Commission has urged earlier in this Report that those churches which have nut taken advantage of it should do so.
This is an area in which young people's enthusiasm has been well and truly  aroused at school.
Given the opportunity, many more would doubtless welcome the chance to exercise their new-found skills in the context of church services.
They may not come from a church-going background, but with encouragement they might well respond to an invitation to be part of the Church's music, at least occasionally.
Co-operation between School and Church
The Commission urges teachers who are church members to involve children with musical talent in the worship of their church.
Churches in rural areas in particular could benefit from co-operation of this kind.
In their training of instrumentalists, schools offer the Church a golden opportunity to develop church bands, orchestras or music groups in which youngsters can participate, often on an equal basis, alongside adult musicians.
Far from taking this supply of trained musicians for granted, the local church should be providing its own kind of expertise to complement and augment that which comes from the schools.
It is unreasonable to look to the school to supply all the musical needs of the parish.
In its training of young people to sing, however, the Church will be making a welcome and reciprocal contribution towards the musical life of schools.
In line with an earlier discussion in this Report, the Commission recommends that local churches establish close working links with school music departments.
These could be most advantageous to both parties and could facilitate the recruitment of church musicians at an early age.
Without it, there may be few coming forward to serve the Church in the twenty-first century.
THE TRAINING AND RE-TRAINING OF CHURCH MUSICIANS
Many of the suggestions made in this Report presuppose a higher degree of expertise and commitment in church organists or directors of music in the future than is often the case at present.
The Commission believes, therefore, that specific initial and in-service training needs to be provided urgently for church musicians if significant progress is to be made.
There are many who require not only the further enhancement of their musical skills, but also some training in liturgy and theology.
Where a director of music has an inadequate knowledge of the liturgy, the musical contribution may be at best out of keeping with the rest of the celebration, and at worst destructive of it.
Teaching, communication and pastoral skills are also needed by those with responsibility for the training and direction of others.
A National Scheme
The first requirement is for a nationally co-ordinated scheme devised by all the churches, together with theological colleges and those educational and professional bodies which are concerned with church music.
An encouraging start to this has been made in the recent establishment of the Churches' Initiative for Music Education (CHIME).
This exists to enable co-ordination and co-operation in training, and the issuing of qualifications, by church music organisations of all denominations.
Any scheme of training will need to have methods of study which are flexible and tailored, as far as possible, to individual needs.
Inter-related courses might fit into a modular plan.
It would thus lie possible for studies to be pursued either full- or part-time, before or during employment as a church musician.
Courses would have elements which applied to both professional and to amateur musicians.
A modular structure would also have the advantage of helping to avoid too rarefied an approach.
Some modules could be shared with other musical and theological courses.
A comprehensive syllabus would include performing, accompanying, improvising, composing, arranging and orchestrating, voice training, rehearsing, recording and the use of electronics (including computers and word processors), liturgy and theology, and communication and management skills.
Its aim would be to produce people with versatile musicianship and proven teaching ability, based upon religious conviction.
The pastoral and spiritual care of students on the course would be no less important than their academic or technical instruction.
Just as teaching practice is prescribed for student teachers, so the course would include a ‘sandwich’ element.
This would involve several periods of working in the field alongside experienced practitioners.
Placements could be arranged for both observation and practice in several contrasting situations, such as a cathedral, an inner city parish, or a village church.
Tutors would supervise their students' work  in the manner of teacher trainers.
In this way, church music students would have varied opportunities to put into practice the theory learnt in their studies.
They would be rooted in reality.
Those who are considering a professional career would also gain a valuable overview of the various fields open to them when deciding where their future might lie.
The Organisation of the Scheme
It is tempting to the Commission to recommend the establishment of a church music staff college, perhaps building upon the foundation of the Royal School of Church Music.
This would provide a base and headquarters for the proposed educational programme.
However, realism leads to the suggestion rather of a joint enterprise between one or more designated colleges of music or polytechnics and some theological colleges, under the auspices of CHIME or some other body.
Its brief would be to devise, offer and supervise a comprehensive course devoted to the training of church musicians in all aspects of their craft.
The course would be a total entity in its own right, and not a subsidiary subject taken for one term by full-time students during the second year of a degree or graduate equivalent course in general musicianship.
Whilst making some use of material offered in other courses, it would be free-standing and designed to produce well-qualified and committed ‘ministers of music’.
Colleges, cathedrals and other churches which offer organ and choral scholarships might well consider widening the scope of their awards, so as to be an integral part of such a programme.
In-service and Amateur Training
The scheme outlined above would be designed chiefly with intending professional musicians in mind.
With sufficient flexibility and with the expertise gained by staff in operating it, however, it should be possible for serving church musicians, both amateur and professional, also to take advantage of it.
In addition to part-time study, there could be vacation or weekend courses at a regional level, and country-wide summer and winter schools, after the successful pattern pioneered by the Open University.
These might be organised at those colleges which are part of the scheme and could also involve such organisations as CHIME, the RSCM, the Benslow Music Trust and the  British Federation of Young Choirs.
In this way, new ideas would be widely disseminated.
Local Training for Musicians
It is important that parish directors of music be encouraged to take opportunities for in-service training.
The proposed scheme would offer facilities for this.
More local training initiated by dioceses and parishes should also be encouraged.
The RSCM has been offering a wide range of courses for many years, and there is a well-established pattern of deanery, archdeaconry or diocesan events and festivals in many places.
A fresh look could be taken at some of these, in order to determine their effectiveness in helping parishes both to respond to the liturgical changes of recent years and to explore a wider repertoire of music.
Renewal Music
For many people contemporary music meets a need which more traditional music does not.
Help may well be needed, therefore, for those churches which are beginning to include more modern styles of composition, instrumental and vocal music in their services.
Quite a number of the musicians who are at home in the ‘renewal’ idiom have grown up outside the Church.
Whilst they bring a welcome freshness and enthusiasm to worship, they may also lack a sympathetic understanding of the Church's liturgy and tradition.
Moreover, for home-produced music and self-taught instrumental playing, the only role models for many young vocalists and groups are provided through television and pop concerts.
It is not therefore surprising if there is sometimes an over-provision of microphones and electronic equipment and a prevalence of noise, not least the persistent beat of a drum kit.
Sensitive guidance may be needed for young musicians.
Without in any way discouraging them, they may need advice on providing music for worship which is acceptable to the many different people in a congregation.
There is an ever-growing amount of musical material in this genre and musicians and clergy need to be wise and selective in their choice of it.
Skill is also required to arrange it for a particular choir, group or instruments.
Training for the selection and use of music in a contemporary style is offered by an increasing number of workshops initiated by  people such as Chris Bowater, Dave Fellingham, Andrew Maries, Christopher Norton and David Peacock.
The programme of the RSCM is also expanding, to cover a wider range of instruments and styles.
The linking of a church having good resources and experience with another which is struggling could provide a useful and manageable means of learning, and both churches would derive benefit from it.
EDUCATING THE CONGREGATION
It is essential that the training of children and church musicians is supported by our congregations.
The emphasis in most of this Report is upon the importance of the whole people of God gathered for worship.
Unless the proposals of the Commission have their understanding and support, little will change in church music, except for the worse.
The people in the pew, not to mention the clergy and the musicians themselves, have to be convinced of the priority of worship, and the indispensability of first-rate music within it.
Otherwise, schemes for producing well-trained professional and amateur musicians will meet with little success.
Variety and Preferences
It came as little surprise to the Commission in its work to be reminded both of the rich diversity which exists in the field of church music and of the very different attitudes and preferences to be found within our congregations.
Some place their emphasis upon the transcendent otherness of God and the traditional ‘good’ music which expresses it.
Others seek to worship through readily understandable services and music which speaks of a personal relationship to God in Christ, and the dynamic working of the Holy Spirit.
Whilst generalising for the sake of simplicity, the Commission does not believe that there is any essential conflict between these two categories.
Each has much to offer to the other and there is no question of one tradition being right and the other wrong.
Conflict in a Congregation
Because music is so universally popular in society, and because feelings on the subject run deep, attitudes can harden and objectives diverge.
It can easily become a cause of friction, and is sometimes made the scapegoat for disagreement and discontent in other areas of a congregation's life.
When this happens, it is vital that the conflict be resolved and that broken or strained relationships which may have given rise to the problem be repaired.
This Report has already  discussed the matter of resolving disagreements.
Those between clergy and musicians often spill over into the parish, and sides will be taken.
Whatever the cause of division, there must be opportunities for the parties involved to air their grievances, to talk through the areas of conflict and to find a satisfactory resolution.
In achieving reconciliation, Myers-Briggs, Enneagram and similar personality-typing methods can be helpful.
In extreme situations, it may be necessary to resort to arbitration.
CONCLUSION
Some of the contents and recommendations of this Report may themselves be the cause of controversy in places.
If so, the Commission will at least have provoked thought and debate.
It hopes it may encourage congregations and others to consider important and urgent issues relating to music in worship.
It urges clergy and others to disseminate widely those parts of this Report which are relevant to the life of their local church, and also to help their congregations to recognise their responsibility in making progress possible.
If we are to enhance the quality of our worship and church music, there will have to be a new awareness and fresh resolution on the part of all God's people.
The implications in relation to resources are obvious, but the chief requirement will be the conviction and the will to achieve the necessary reforms.
RECOMMENDATIONS
That parishes seek to co-operate closely with local schools, partly for the recruitment of children for music in church and partly for mutual support in the music education of children (605, 615–618).
That children and young people, particularly those who are instrumentalists, be welcomed and encouraged to contribute to music in worship (606–609).
That schools be encouraged both to maintain their choral tradition and to liaise with local church musicians, in order to agree on a common repertoire of hymns and songs (610–614).
That a scheme for training church musicians be devised, suitable for students before and during employment, and for both professionals and amateurs, and that the Churches' Initiative for Music Education give consideration to this (619–627).
That dioceses and parishes consider the provision of local in-service training courses for church musicians (628).
That parishes enable musicians who are unfamiliar with the selection and use of music in contemporary styles to take advantage of any appropriate workshops (629–631).
That congregations be encouraged to support all endeavours to improve the musical offering of their church, and to appreciate the need for the best which is attainable (632–634).