

Rural population and employment
Although the distribution of rural population is no longer synonymous with agricultural employment, most people live in the same locality as their place of employment, and so this chapter considers population and employment as contiguous rather than necessarily related phenomena.
Within these phenomena four main areas of study have been of interest to rural geographers; first, and most enduring of all, the study of rural population change ; second, and more recent in its concern, the study of rural communities ; third, and of more general relevance to other chapters in this book, the classification and definition of rural areas by both their population and employment characteristics; and fourth, the study of employment in rural areas .
The study of both rural population and employment, however, suffer from the difficulty of finding enough up-to-date data.
For example, the main data sources on population (and often employment) are national population censuses, but these are traditionally held on a decennial basis, usually for cost reasons (Rhind, 1983).
For instance, the 1980 US Census cost $990 million (Cruickshank, 1981), and mid-term censuses in the UK for both 1976 and 1986 have been cancelled on cost grounds.
Nonetheless, many census agencies publish annual, quarterly, and even monthly estimates of population change (OPCS, 1984), but their usefulness is much reduced by the coarse spatial framework in which they are published.
For example, the monthly estimates are available at county level only.
Another drawback is that many census estimates concentrate on natural change (i.e. the difference between births and deaths) and tend to ignore the most effective component of population change in the western world, migration.
Accordingly, a number of other methods have been employed, for example, lists of those registered to vote (Edwards, 1973) and records of doctor's patients (Rees and Rees, 1977).
However, these too have drawbacks, notably the lack of children in the electoral register, and the difficulty of tracing migrants who have migrated to either new doctors (Devis, 1984) or to new electoral districts, but nonetheless they can still pick out new trends, like the repopulation of rural areas, long before the decennial census can (Kennett and Spence, 1979).
Notwithstanding the difficulty of data collection, a coherent body of fact and theory has emerged to produce a number of texts on Population Geography but as (Gilg, 1983c, 75) notes: ‘few if any of these studies…. look at rural populations specifically’.
Furthermore, two of the most recent texts (Jones, 1981; Woods, 1979) concentrate on the processes of mortality and fertility and devote only one chapter each, out of nine in both cases, to internal migration.
Yet it is migration to and from rural areas that has been the main concern of rural geographers in the last century, and so attention is now turned to the first major theme of this chapter, rural population change.
Rural population change
Although rural populations have traditionally been more fertile than their urban counterparts, by far the most significant factor in rural population change over the last century has been migration.
Accordingly, a number of migration theories and general statements have been formulated over the years, as shown in Table 5.1.
Out of these, push factors 2 and 5 and pull factors 1, 2 and 3 have been most important for depopulation in the western world, and pull factors 4 and 6. have been most important for people moving from urban to rural areas.
In a theoretical treatment Woods (1982) divides migration theory into the attitudes and behaviour of both individuals and groups, and then proposes a three-fold structure for integrating theories of migration: First, the theories must have the ability to understand the ways in which individuals form images of their worlds, how they assess those images and then decide whether to migrate or not.
In this case aggregate theory tells us that economic criteria are of prime importance in this image building.
Second, it must be possible to transfer these theories of group behaviour to generate predictive models, and third to apply this aggregate theory to the behaviour of individuals.
Finally, Mabogunje (1970,16) has proposed a systems approach which rejects the push-pull approach of Table 5.1 and sees rural-urban migration no longer as a linear, uni-directional, push-and-pull, cause-effect movement but as a circular, interdependent, progressively complex, and self-modifying system in which the effect of changes in one part can be traced through the whole of the system
.
Empirically however, the last century has been dominated by a major movement of people away from the countryside, although in the past 10 or 20 years there has been a significant repopulation of rural areas.
It is therefore prudent to examine both periods in turn before attempting to produce any general statements about rural population change.
Rural depopulation
As long ago as the late nineteenth century Ravenstein (1885) had formulated seven general laws of migration which placed a good deal of emphasis on rural   depopulation.
For example: Law 2 argued that urban areas will absorb the population of first their immediate rural areas and then even the remote areas; Law 6 stated that urban dwellers are less migratory than rural inhabitants; and Law 5 argued that migrants proceeding long distances generally migrate to the great centres of commerce and industry.
However, Ravenstein in Laws 1 and 4 also pointed out that most migrants only move a short distance (Law 1) and that each main current of migration produces a compensating counter-current (Law 4).
Until the recent repopulation of the countryside this last law, Law 4, didn't seem to apply and Laws 2 and 5 seemed to be operating inexorably.
For example, during the first half of this century, Saville (1957,7) noted that the percentage of the population in urban districts has risen from 72.0 per cent in 1891 to 80.7 per cent in 1951 and that:
The basic cause is everywhere the same.
Rural depopulation has occurred in the past century and a half, and will continue in the future, because of declining employment opportunities in the countryside.
Economic activities have steadily moved from the villages and the rural communities into the towns and the urban areas; and as employment opportunities have diminished in the rural areas, the village population have moved into the towns
.
Nonetheless, Saville also pointed out that the rate of decline had begun to slow down, and this was also confirmed by other studies of the time.
For example, Vince (1952) concluded that the primary population had fallen both in numbers and relative proportion during the period 1921–31, but that in some areas a new ‘adventitious’ population was beginning to replace them.
Willatts and Newson(1953) confirmed that depopulation trends had continued till 1951, but that some rural areas were by then beginning to show signs of recovery.
Nonetheless, the recovery was largely confined to the more prosperous southeastern lowlands and also, within these and other areas, to the larger villages and small towns.
For example, Bracey (1958) in a study of 375 Somerset parishes found that, in general , the more remote and less well serviced parishes were those with the worst and most persistent depopulation, and findings like this only encouraged the further development of theories of settlement concentration in the 1960s although these can also be traced back as far as 1918, when Peake (1918) advocated equally-spaced villages with populations of between 1,000 and 1,500 people.
Indeed in the 1960s, other reasons for depopulation, notably settlement size, began to be examined.
For example, Turnock (1968) in a study of northeast Scotland found that depopulation in the area was not only a function of a retreat from hill farming but also a process of concentration into fewer but larger settlements, and Johnston (1965) in a study of northern England found that village size was important in not only retaining the existing population but also attracting newcomers from nearby towns.
These findings were also confirmed in the USA, where Butler and Fuguitt (1970) and Hassinger (1957) from work in Wisconsin and Minnesota, found that rural settlements near larger albeit not very much larger towns, tended to grow faster than average, although the findings were not universal through either time or space.
Other reasons for depopulation were also examined during this period.
For example, Hannan (1969) found that the number of young people in an area tended to increase outmigration, as the more able young left to follow the kind of careers not available in rural areas, though Grafton (1982) has argued that  young people do not outmigrate from remote rural areas at a faster rate than their counterparts in less remote rural areas, and that any decline in such areas is due to lower levels of immigration, rather than higher rates of outmigration.
Other work has examined kinship, and Johnston (1971) has found that this has tended to reduce migration.
In another study of migrants in central Wales, Jones (1965) even went so far as to test all of Ravenstein's laws, but he could only definitely confirm Laws 1 and 5, which argue that most migrants only travel a short distance, but that those who do travel further migrate to the great centres of commerce and industry.
In summary, the detailed empirical work outlined above has enabled another general law to be formulated, the principle of circular and cumulative causation, in which the key factors are: an initial reduction in farm employment; which is followed by a deterioration in the age structure; which is in turn followed by a reduced rate of natural increase which then leads to a reduced population which in turn leads to reduced demands for rural services and thus a reduced demand for rural employment which then triggers another circular decline (Hodge and Whitby, 1981).
However, the rural repopulation trends, already noted earlier in the chapter, began to gather pace in the 1960s, and by the 1970s and 1980s, a new phenomenon emerged which seriously undermined the process of decline namely the phenomenon of counterurbanization.
Counterurbanization and rural repopulation
This new phenomenon wasn't quickly recognized in the literature and as recently as 1980, White and Woods's edited text (1980),The Geographical Impact of Migration , included three lengthy index entries on rural depopulation, rural-rural migration and rural-urban migration, but nothing on rural repopulation or counterurbanization, although there were four index entries for return migration.
In another example, Lewis (1982, 177) limits the repopulation to those ‘rural areas accessible to metropolitan centres and small cities’.
One reason for this slow recognition may have been doubt about the term itself and confusion concerning what is actually meant (Dean et al .,
1984a).
What wasn't in doubt, however, was the process itself, and even for the 1961–71 period, Champion (1976) was able to conclude that a marked acceleration had taken place in the rate of outward movement, from the conurbations and large towns, to surrounding areas, and that remote rural areas like the southwest and Wales had either reversed a century-long decline in population, or had reduced it significantly.
These trends continued and accelerated in the 1970s, and are discussed more fully in the summary at the end of this section, but in advance of the more definitive work allowed by the 1981 Census, a number of local studies began to identify a group of common themes.
For example, Jones (1976) in a study of central Wales found that employment, the desire to live in a better area and a former link with the area were important reasons for explaining the success of a growth pole town, Newtown.
In a more recent study in West Cornwall, Dean et al .
(1984b) found that the immigrants tended to be older, of a higher occupational status, from the more prosperous regions and to have former links with the area.
Indeed, 22.4 per cent of the migrants could be defined as return migrants (Shaw, 1984) and although this isn't as high as the 30 to 40 per cent rates recorded in north Norway  (Nicholson, 1975) it is much higher than the 5.5 per cent found in northwest Ireland (Foeken, 1980), and very different from the situation in northern Scotland where Jones et al .
(1984) have found that a significant amount of the immigration was from English-born people rather than from return migrants.
Many return migrants are elderly, and indeed retirement migration is a major factor behind counterurbanization in many rural areas, notably coastal and scenically attractive areas, and in all likelihood this trend will accelerate, as both the percentage of elderly in the population increases, and the age of retirement continues to fall (Law and Warnes, 1976).
By itself this might not be a bad thing, but elderly inmigration has tended to be accompanied by youthful outmigration, leading to a deteriorating age-sex structure.
Furthermore, counterurbanization may not necessarily reduce youthful outmigration, since although surveys in both prosperous and marginal regions (Drudy and Drudy, 1979) have shown that 49 per cent in the prosperous areas wanted to leave, compared to 68 per cent in marginal areas, in both areas, around 30 per cent of school leavers aspired to the sort of professional job not traditionally found in rural areas.
Another reason for the relatively slow acceptance of the term counterurbanization in Britain may be the fact that Britain may have been one of the last developed countries to experience the phenomenon.
For example, in the USA, books on the topic appeared as long ago as 1980, when Brown and Wardwell (1980) made the following observations about the phenomenon:
1
For the first time this century, population and economic growth in non-metropolitan America is exceeding population growth in metropolitan America.
2
Growth is occurring in remote and completely rural counties, as well as in counties that are partly urban or dominated by nearby metropolitan centres, but the south and west are increasing the fastest.
3
In most regions, the new growth is entirely due to changes in net migration, as movement out of the conurbations has exceeded the inflow to these areas, and low or convergent rates of natural increase have provided a passive background for these trends.
4
The migration reversal is as pervasive across the socio-demographic characteristics of movers as it is across regions.
In another study, Johansen and Fuguitt (1984) from a sample of 572 of the 11,334 villages in the USA (defined as a population of less than 2,500 in 1960) found that while only half of the villages had grown in the 1950s, two-thirds had grown in the 1970s, and that this growth was no longer restricted to the larger villages.
In spite of these broad generalizations the exact reasons for the turnaround aren't very clear, although Brown and Wardwell (1980) have suggested that three interrelated factors are economic decentralization, a preference for rural living, and the modernization of rural life.
But Campbell and Johnson (1976) have also concluded that a large amount of research needs to be done in this area.
Unfortunately, most of the research conducted so far hasn't produced more than a few tentative generalizations.
For example, De Jong and Humphrey (1976) found that the migrants tended to be younger, of a higher socioeconomic status and lived in smaller households, while Wardwell (1977) concluded that one major motive was a desire to live in smaller settlements and communities; but rather surprisingly, Fliegel et al .
(1981) found that this type of  migrant wasn't opposed to further growth in the new neighbourhood.
What is clear, however, is the widespread nature of the trend, not only in the USA which the 1980 Census confirmed, as shown in Figure 5.1 (Cruickshank, 1981), but also in Europe where Fielding (1982) concluded that in nearly all the countries of western Europe counterurbanization has replaced urbanization.
It also seems clear that the trend will soon emerge elsewhere, for as Vining and Pallone (1982) in their study of 22 countries have argued, the phenomenon is due to the fact that the scale economies of the core regions of any country either have been or are being reduced, as the peripheral areas manage to offer sites that are as competitive as those of the core regions.
Nonetheless, in spite of the widespread nature of the phenomenon, there is no agreed explanation of the causes, and these are probably as complex as the process  itself , which is by no means as simple as it first seems.
For example, Fielding (1982) takes the best elements of the three main models:(a) the desire to live in a more rural setting;(b) the availability of new jobs in the sunrise industries of the rural areas; and (c) regional planning by governments to argue that the two main factors are first, the development of a post-industrial society where the mobile middle classes are relocating the new industries, and second, the rise of service employment, particularly in the more attractive rural areas of each country.
However, Dean et al .
(1984a) have criticized both Vining and Pallone's and Fielding's approaches as being too ‘logically positivist’ in their approach.
Moreover, they argue that the term counterurbanization poses four significant problems.
First, there are problems over ‘ambiguity’, and whether to use Fielding's definition of counterurbanization as the opposite of urbanization, or to extend the term to Robert and Randolph's (1983) prerequisites including both decentralization and deconcentration.
Second, the term ‘presupposes’ the very phenomenon it seeks to identify.
Third, there is already a process of ‘reification’ although the process may be more apparent than real.
Fourth, and finally, although the process has been seen as an international trend, most studies have been too ‘parochial’ and ‘logically positivist’, and even in Fielding's work (Dean et al .,
1 984a, 10) which: ‘breaks out of the consensus mould and moves towards neo-marxist interpretations, a certain narrowness of outlook remains’.
Therefore Dean and his colleagues argue for a less ‘positivist’ and a more broadly based research effort, including marxist and structural approaches.
However, this type of work immediately meets the problem of data collection outlined at the beginning of this chapter, and for the foreseeable future most research will have to rely on official census data with all their limitations.
Nonetheless these data have allowed both the descriptive work outlined in the next section and the explanatory work outlined in the section after that (on the ‘Classification and definition of rural areas’) to be produced.
Rural population change: A summary
The first point to be made about recent rural population change is that the broad spatial processes of the 1970s and early 1980s can be traced back into not only the 1960s, but even the 1950s (Compton, 1983).
Compton has also concluded that decentralization has continued despite the energy crisis, the south is still gaining population at the expense of the north; East Anglia, the South West and the East Midlands continue to be the fastest growing regions; and that Wales is     about to join them.
However, the 1970s and early 1980s have seen one major change in population, not foreseen in the 1 960s, a massive drop in the birth rate and a virtual cessation of overall population growth, so that the increase of 5.4 per cent recorded in 1961–71 fell to only 0.5 per cent in 1971–81.
This means that migration now has a major impact on population change, even though Ravenstein's first law is still seen to hold, since Brant (1984) has shown that of the 9 per cent of people who moved between 1980 and 1981, a massive 70 per cent moved less than six miles.
The most mobile age group in this period were those aged 16 to 34, and the most popular destinations were the so-called ‘sun-belt’ counties of Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, Surrey, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire.
Within these rural areas there seems to be a definite preference in favour of not only smaller towns (i.e. those below 50,000 people) but also villages, for both the periods 1961–71 and 1971–81, and for both the USA and England and Wales as shown in Table 5.2.
However, the process is by no means uniform and Table 5.3 shows that a small number of towns in the rural districts actually lost population  between 1971 and 1981, although the dominant trend was increases of over 10 per cent in both of the rural categories at the foot of the table.
This is demonstrated spatially by Figure 5.2, which shows population change by aggregated districts, and although districts aren't the most suitable way of portraying population change, three areas of rural growth stand out.
First, the so-called ‘sun-belt’ from Norfolk through Oxford to Bournemouth, with many districts showing a growth of 15 per cent and over, second, a broad band of growth between 5 and 15 per cent across all of lowland England and the Welsh Marches, and third, a significant area of growth with rates of 30 to 60 per cent(Carruthers et al .,
1984) in the Scottish Highlands, but in this case it must be remembered that the absolute totals are fairly small.
The only areas to show only modest growth are west Wales, northern England and southern Scotland, where hill-farming environments have failed to attract either sunrise employment or the early retired.
In spite of the fact that Champion (1981, 20) has argued that ‘some of the most spectacular changes have occurred in those rural areas which are relatively remote from traditional metropolitan influences’ it must also be remembered that the extra numbers in the remote areas are relatively modest, compared with those in the outer margins of the main centres of population, as shown in Figure 5.3, and that most of the population growth has been strongly associated with smaller towns and accessible settlements in the countryside both in England (OPCS, 1981b) and Ireland (Duffy, 1983).
If this is the case, the changes of the past 30 years may be the first signs of a return to the more traditional population distribution of pre-industrial Britain, but it must also be borne in mind that it takes a very long time to shift major population patterns, and that the present trends may only be a veneer on an underlying and more permanent structure.
In conclusion, Robert and Randolph (1983) from a major study of the 1961, 1971 and 1981 Census data conclude that the counterurbanization explanation may not be as appropriate as first thought, and that the crucial flaw in the model is that (1983, 97) it is ‘a model of pattern rather than process’.
However as Pacione (1984,145) observes: ‘few models have been constructed to explain the population turnaround’, but out of these the model produced by Lewis and Maund (1976) and shown in Figure 5.4 may fit the present situation as described by Moseley (1983) in Table 5.4 the most closely.
Whichever explanation is revealed by the major research effort that is still needed for the rest of the 1980s, the population changes discussed above have also had a major impact on rural communities, and so it is to this topic that attention is now turned.
Rural communities
Because of the population turnaround in many rural areas, the definition of a rural community in a widespread and confused literature has become an elusive concept (Lewis, 1979) and although most parts of the UK have reached Time C in Figure 5.4a, some areas are characterized by a mixture of repopulation and depopulation in Zone III, and depopulation and repopulation in Zone II, so that the hallmarks of both the population and depopulation quadrants of Figure 5.4b can be found together in a very small area.
Another problem according to Lewis (1983, 149) is ‘the lack of an adequate conceptual framework’ and as a result (1983,149): ‘most rural studies have tended to be empirical and holistic, thus lacking comparability and depth’.
This was certainly true of the majority of studies before and even till the 1970s, which  usually adopted a social anthropological approach (Arensberg and Kimball, 1940) to static or declining farm communities (Davies, 1970) and even by 1 97 1 it was possible for Franklin (1 97 1,1 2) to argue that ‘the peasantry, though diminishing in number and importance, still forms the largest single category within the rural community throughout Europe’.
However, the effects of urban growth on rural communities had been recognized as long ago as the late 1930s, when Ashby (1939) argued that the unbalanced age structure and uneconomic service provision caused by rural depopulation had been offset by the spread of urban population into the rural areas in the inter-war years.
By the early 1 970s, the spread of urban influences and easier communications and telecommunications meant that a single culture began to emerge (Mogey, 1976) with regional and urban-rural differences being much reduced, and this invalidated the century-old division of society by Tonnies (1887) into ‘Gemeinschaft’(rural) and ‘Gesellschaft’(urban).
Instead, the idea of a continuum emerged (Pahl, 1 966b) based on the degree of urbanization experienced in an area and in the early 1970s Rogers and Burdge (1972) produced the continuum which is shown below and which depends upon  population size, population density and the degree to which the community members observe rural or urban norms.
Rogers and Burdge (1972, 264) have also provided a definition of a community which provides a useful insight into why so many people have moved into the countryside in recent years, since it reads:
A community is a group…it is composed of people in communication and together geographically with common interests or ties.
A community is simply one kind of group in which membership is based on locality
.
Since the locality in the case of a rural community is a village, with obvious territorial limits in contrast to the more amorphous boundaries of suburban neighbourhoods, many people have migrated to the countryside in search of a more friendly and obviously defined community.
Not surprisingly, the social impact of these migrants on rural communities was a major topic of study in the 1960s and 1970s, but in the 1980s, a new theme, related more to the political impact of the migrants on the power structure of rural communities has emerged, as rural sociologists and geographers have sought a more critical and a less apolitical and anodyne approach to rural society.
Accordingly, the rest of this section concentrates on first, studies of social change in rural communities, and then, the changing political structure of these communities, before considering one model for the future, California.
Social change in rural communities
Studies of social change in rural communities have been a major theme in rural community work since the early 1950s, when the first typologies (some of which have already been discussed in Chapter 4, and notably in Tables 4.6 and 4.7 were developed.
For example, Mitchell (1950; 1951) proposed two typologies as shown below:
Thorns (1968), from empirical work in Nottinghamshire, defined three types of village: first, villages with an established  pattern of stratification based on the traditional rural economy or squirearchy; second, villages in a state of transition; and third, re-established villages where professional newcomers have taken over the dominant roles.
The most influential typology however was probably that produced by Pahl (1966a).
already outlined in Table 4.6, in which the most important groups were the ‘spiralists’ and ‘council-house tenants’.
This typology further developed the fourfold classification of the characteristics of changing communities in the rural-urban fringe, outlined in Pahl's (1965) classic text Urbs in Rure namely:
1
Segregation of rural areas into large blocks of one class or price of housing;
2
Selective inmigration as rural-urban fringe parishes attract mobile, middle-class commuters who live and work in distinct and separate social and economic worlds from the established populations; and although
3
commuting is not confined to the middle classes the working classes are more limited by public transport; and
4
the collapse of geographical and social hierarchies as the community becomes more outward looking and the squirearchy is replaced by a class-based structure polarized around housing segregation.
Much subsequent work has tended to confirm both Thorns's theoretically based and Pahl's empirically based conclusions.
For example, Radford (1970) in a study of two contrasting Worcestershire villages found one village with an established pattern of stratification, but in the other village with a strong newcomer element, she found an increasingly mobile and polarized society.
In another study, this time of one village Ringmer in Sussex, which had doubled in size from around 2,000 inhabitants in 1961 to 4,000 in 1971, Ambrose (1974) found that the main reason for migration to the village had been for a job, or to be within commuting range of a job, thus confirming that the main reason for migration, as already outlined earlier in this chapter, is economic, but also that the most dominant newcomers are Pahl's ‘spiralists’.
However, Ambrose also found that these ‘spiralists’ did take part in community life, and didn't see the village as a transient bus stop as Pahl had forecast.
Nonetheless other work has confirmed Pahl's view that inmigration would lead to social segregation.
For example, Connell (1978, 131) in his study of central Surrey concluded that the growing division between the owner-occupiers (middle class) and council tenants (working class)‘characterizes many of the social relationships’ within the area.
Perhaps the most compelling confirmation has however come from Pacione (1980) and his study of the ‘metropolitan village’ of Milton of Campsie to the northeast of Glasgow.
Like Ringmer, the population of the village has rapidly expanded in recent years from just under 2,000 in 1971 to over 3,000 in 1981.
Furthermore, most of this growth has taken place in the large but separate estates of owner-occupied and council houses outlined by most typologies.
It is therefore in many ways an ideal empirical test bed for assessing the validity of Pahl's classification in the 1980s.
Some of the results are shown in Table 5.5, and Table 5.5a confirms the much more mobile nature of the private households.
Table 5.4b confirms the social-class divide between private and council households, and Table 5.4c confirms that the village is socially divided but that the middle class are far more open in their social activities, both socially and spatially.
In summary, Pacione's work appears to confirm Pahl's (1966a, 1149) conclusion that:
To the working class, life in the village means family life and possibly life at work, to the middle class spiralists, life in the village means life in the voluntary associations.
Nonetheless, it would be unwise to conclude that all areas or villages are falling into Pahl's typology.
For example, many villages haven't experienced the inmigration of young professional commuters, and in many areas, like Dorset, young adults are moving out and retired people are moving in (Moss, 1980) leading to a quite different set of social problems.
In the most remote areas, like central Wales, it is still possible to find three traditional types of rural community namely ‘scattered settlements’, ‘rural villages’ and ‘market towns’(Williams, 1976) and in other rural areas, like North Herefordshire, Lewis and Maund (1979) have questioned the true significance of social class, life style and length of residence as determinants of intra-community behaviour.
However, Lewis and Maund (1979) did find that social segregation was occurring in the areas with the largest influx of newcomers and the largest populations.
One other facet of rural community change is provided by the fourth element of Pahl's classification: the collapse of geographic and social hierarchies.
These have been best documented by Newby (1979) and his colleagues working in East Anglia, and though East Anglia is by no means typical of rural Britain, there is little doubt that their findings are probably fairly universal.
First, they confirm that rural life has become socially polarized by the influx of newcomers, second, that the  traditional rural economy has been eclipsed, and third, that the social power of the squirearchy has been much reduced (Newby et al .,
1978).
However, they do not agree that the political power of the farming community has also been eclipsed, and they found that most local councils were still dominated by farmers (Newby et al .,
1978).
Furthermore they concluded that farmers had used this political power to prevent new employment in order to keep farm wages lower, and to keep rural council house building rates at a minimum so as to keep farm workers tied to their cottages.
Nonetheless, they also found that the professional newcomers to the area were often upset by the environmental consequences of modern farming (see Chapters 8 and 9) and  since they lacked a rural power base they formed environmental pressure groups to protest against the farmers, thus creating a new form of social division in the rural community.
Although Newby and his colleagues have demonstrated the dogged hold of traditional rural society on the levers of power, the changes foreseen by Pahl and Thorns, and documented by Ambrose, Connell, Radford and Pacione, may be only the foretaste of a much greater change in rural society, if the development of rural communities in California is a guide to the future as it has been so often in the past.
In California the advance towards a new ‘post-industrial’ society has been more rapid than elsewhere and according to Bradshaw and Blakeley (1979,6) the four distinguishing characteristics of this ‘prototypical advanced industrial society’are:(a) high technology (for example, the explosive growth of microcomputers in the hitherto rural ‘Silicon Valley’);(b) up to 70 per cent employed in the service (tertiary) sector and only 5 and 25 per cent respectively in the primary (agriculture) and secondary (manufacturing) sector;(c) the intense rate at which knowledge is generated and transmitted; and (d) increasing interdependence between places for goods and services.
To some degree these conditions are already being experienced in Britain; in central Scotland, along the M4 corridor, and around some of the New Towns — and if they continue to develop, then Warner's (1974, 315) forecast will certainly come true:
The challenge of a post-industrial society for persons interested in knowledge about rural society is not the loss of significant work to be done, but the overwhelming scope and complexity of the task before us.
Spatially, this will be expressed in further counterurbanization and as Bradshaw and Blakeley (1979, 27) point out: ‘the rural areas [of California]grew at a rate nearly double that of the state as a whole’ between 1970 and 1976.
Once again if these changes continue to develop in the UK, the classification and definition of what constitutes a rural area will have to be radically altered, although there have already been some changes, as the next section demonstrates.
The classification and definition of rural areas
It has already been pointed out that the definition of a rural area, or a rural community, is an elusive concept, but many authors would agree with Bealer et al .
(1965) that most understandings involve the use of either ecological, occupational or cultural dimensions.
However, the first two approaches suffer from a number of defects.
For example, Buttel and Flinn (1977) in a survey of Wisconsin residents found only weak support for the hypothesis that ruralism was more strongly associated with environmental (ecological ) concern rather than agrarianism.
The second approach,occupational structure , has been invalidated by both the population turnaround and the loss of agricultural employment already discussed, but it did once allow a reasonable classification to be made consisting of agricultural-rural, rural and rural-urban (Robertson, 1961).
This therefore leaves the cultural dimension as the most important approach, but as Bealer et al .
(1965, 266) argue: ‘a single dimension…would probably not receive widespread acceptance.
A composite definition has more overwhelming appeal’.
Not surprisingly, therefore, most approaches have been based on the cultural dimension with the addition of ecological and occupational factors.
The simplest cultural dimension is to use local authority administrative areas but these often lag behind significant changes in population composition, and although Robertson's (1961) classification already outlined, defined 75 per cent of the areas as rural-urban, she was also able to comment that this reflected not only the extent of the outward movement from towns, but also the inadequacy of the census definition of rural population, namely all persons living in administrative Rural Districts.
However, in the 1981 Census an attempt was made to physically define urban areas, at the enumeration district level, by using a threshold of 1,000 people and 20 hectares of urban land (Denham, 1984).
These low thresholds gave an urban population embracing about 90 per cent of the total, and the rural/urban differences shown in Table 5.6,which reveals that the greatest contrasts are to be found in cars per household and the percentage of people travelling to work on public transport (both related to each other and to the low density of rural areas); the percentage in social classes I and II; the rate of unemployment; and the percentage of those working in manufacturing.
Although these areal units will alter less with time than administrative units, they are nonetheless transitory and so, ideally, smaller and more permanent units like kilometre grid squares should be used, as they have been by the OPCS in a limited fashion, as the basic building block.
Nonetheless a good deal of basic information can still be portrayed with the traditional concept of population density based on administrative units.
For example, density figures can show (OPCS, 1980, 2) that: ‘the greater part of the physical area of the countryside is inhabited at relatively low densities’.
Put another way, 25 per cent of the population are spread over 90 per cent of the land area, or that while the average density is 2.4 people per hectare, the median density is only 0.5 people per hectare.
Nonetheless, the population turnaround and planning controls are imposing average densities over larger areas of the country, and Craig (1979) reveals that it is the areas of suburban density that have experienced the greatest overall population growth in both population and extent.
Best and others (1974, 206) have further developed this theme by using regression analysis to propose a density-size rule which states: ‘As the population size of settlement increases, the land provision declines exponentially’.
Empirically they found that densities were tending towards a pivotal density, with metropolitan areas shedding their populations by redevelopment and smaller country towns increasing their densities by infilling.
In another study, based totally in rural areas, Best and Rogers (1973) used land use maps from the Second Land Utilization Survey and the development plan maps of local planning authorities to produce a least-squares regression model of the form:
This model was able to show deviations from the norm and thus show areas of unexpectedly high or low density.
In spite of this useful work, density remains a rather static and misleading statistic in that it depends very much on the unit used to compute the density.
An   alternative but related statistic, population potential (Craig, 1972) has therefore been developed to take into account the catchment area of population, but once again different spatial units can produce considerable variations in population potential distributions (Craig, 1974).
Nonetheless, the concept has been developed to include accessibility and this use is discussed more fully in the next chapter on Rural Transport and Accessibility.
Density might have remained the most accepted form of classification but for three developments in the 1970s which gave a great impetus to the classification of rural populations into different typologies or groupings:
1
The advent of really powerful computers;
2
The publication of census data on computer tapes or discs, and increasingly by smaller spatial units, and even more usefully, grid squares; and
3
The widespread availability of package programs for multivariate statistical techniques like factor, cluster and principal components analysis.
Nonetheless, some of the models developed were still fairly simple.
For example, Craig and Frosztega (1976) simply tested whether density declines with distance from the centroid of a population centre, and if the population of these centres follows some regular pattern (e.g. rank-size or log-normal), and found an increasing fit from 1931 to 1961.
Far more complicated were the models based on multivariate statistics.
For example, Cloke (1977b) used 13 census variables and three variables based on distance from an urban centre, in a principal components analysis, to produce the index of rurality for 1971 shown in Figure 5.5.
Although one suspects that the extreme rural and intermediate rural areas would be reduced in area if the same exercise were repeated for the 1981 census (unfortunately it hasn't and anyway would be difficult to do so since local authority boundaries have changed since 1971), the analysis did allow Cloke (1978) to compare degrees of rurality between 1961 and 1971, and to produce a three-fold typology of rural areas that were becoming increasingly non-rural, were static or becoming    increasingly rural, and to produce maps of these three types for each of the four rural areas shown in Figure 5.5.
Cloke then proposed a cyclic process for rural change with reverse depopulation and reversed growth as two poles of the cycle.
This followed the same lines as Woodruffe (1976), who divided rural districts into six types depending on their history of population change:
1
Accelerated depopulation
2
Reduced depopulation
3
Reversed depopulation
4
Reversed growth
5
Reduced growth
6
Accelerated growth and Matthieu and Bontron (1973) who divided population change in France between 1962 and 1968 into:
A
Maintenance or acceleration of depopulation
B
Weak slowing down of depopulation
C
Strong slowing down of depopulation
D
End of depopulation
E
Acceleration of repopulation.
Another example of the multivariate approach is provided by Webber and Craig (1978) who used 40 variables from the 1971 Small Area Statistics Census data to classify the British population into six main family types and a number of sub-clusters, making 30 groups altogether, as shown in a simplified form in Figure 5.6.
The rural and resort areas shown in Figure 5.6 are characterized most of all by a high concentration of self-employed and agricultural workers, and small proportions in the 15–24 age group.
Socioeconomically the rural areas are close to the national mean but are over-represented by professional/managerial and semi-skilled workers.
This dichotomy  between rich and poor in rural populations is also brought out by other variables, for example, an above average share of owner-occupied housing is counterbalanced by an above-average share of unfurnished privately rented accommodation (probably tied cottages).
Although these classifications and their spatial  patterns tend to confirm the generally accepted view of rural population already discussed here and in Chapter 4, Webber and Craig admit that multivariate classification is a subject on which virtually no two practitioners agree either in the UK or in other countries like France (Chapius, 1973) and therefore argue that the crucial test should not be the methodology but whether the classifications are useful.
Nonetheless, in a critique of the classification, Openshaw et al .
(1980) point out that statistical classification methods are by their very nature exploratory data-analysis techniques, dependent on the methods used and on a number of arbitrary definitions, and it is therefore inevitable that the results should be seen as a pioneering first attempt, rather than as a polished final product based on the application of well established proven methods.
In a reply to Openshaw's strictures Webber (1980), however, reiterated the difficulty of working with such vast data sets and with new complex statistical procedures involving dozens of variables, and claimed that the classification was as far advanced as any could be, bearing in mind the constraints of public policy and the realities of time and cost.
Not surprisingly therefore, other workers have abandoned the census and looked at individuals.
For example, Es and Brown (1974) returned to Bealer    et al .
's (1965) three dimensions and in a survey of heads of household in Illinois, found that socioeconomic status generally accounted for more of the rural-urban variation than either occupation or residence, and then rejected Bealer's approach when they argued that future work should concentrate on single-dimension variables.
Nonetheless, most recent work into the psychological attitude of people as to whether areas are urban or rural has used multivariate techniques.
For example, Miller and Luloff (1981) used factor analysis to argue that a rural culture still exists in America, and used multiple discriminant analysis to suggest that although residence and occupation are correlated with a rural culture, more central variables could be place of residence at the age of 16, along with several personal demographic features such as religion, income and age.
In a British example, Palmer et al .
(1977) used a semantic differential questionnaire and factor analysis to define the countryside image, and though the findings were difficult to interpret, they suggested that the key variables could be crowding and wilderness, thus returning the argument to one of density.
One other key variable that has traditionally been used to delineate rural areas is the percentages employed in agriculture and forestry.
However, although this still may be effective in the less-developed world where about 50 per cent of the world's labour force are still engaged in agriculture (Grigg, 1976) it can no longer be used in the developed world for, as the next section shows, primary employment in most western countries has fallen below 10 or even 5 per cent.
Employment in rural areas
At the outset it is necessary to reiterate the point made at the beginning of this chapter, namely, that accurate up-to-date and spatially relevant data on rural employment, like rural population, are difficult to obtain.
There are two main reasons for this.
First, the areal units used often contain substantial towns within their borders, and second, the annual and monthly data collected by the Department of Employment only record ‘employees in employment’.
The following categories of workers are excluded: working proprietors, partners, the self-employed, wives working for husbands, husbands working for wives, persons working in their own homes, former employees on the payroll as pensioners only, and private domestic staff working in private households (McCallum and Adams, 1981).
In rural areas these categories are often over-represented.
For example, most farmers are self-employed, many farmers now work part-time in other occupations but may still be classified as self-employed farmers, farmers' wives often work for them as partners, professional people may often work from home preferring a rural to an urban base, and large estates still employ a number of private domestic staff.
McCallum and Adams (1981) have pointed out that this can lead to major discrepancies.
for example, the Department of Agriculture for Scotland (DAFS) estimated there to be 75,000 people working in agriculture in Scotland in 1976, but the Department of Employment data for the same year revealed only 33,000 people, or just 44 per cent of the DAFS total.
In another case, Department of Employment data for the Western Isles of Scotland showed only 26.4 per cent of the population in employment, compared to 42 per cent for Scotland as a whole, and clearly this discrepancy is largely due to the  definitional problems outlined above.
In spite of problems with the data, a number of themes and trends do however emerge.
The most certain of these is that employment in the primary sector has fallen for over 100 years, and continues to fall by around 2 to 3 per cent a year.
Originally most of the loss occurred among farm workers, but now as Chapter 2 demonstrates, farmers themselves are retiring from the industry in increasing numbers, and not being replaced.
The reason for the decline is not always poverty (which it often is for smaller farms or those in marginal areas) but in the better areas is due to increasing agricultural efficiency, and even in the mid-1980s to agricultural surpluses (see Chapter 9).
For example, Drudy (1978) in a study of a prosperous farming area, north Norfolk, found that changes in agriculture were the foremost reason why the population of the area had decreased by 3.7 per cent between 1951 and 1961, and by 6.9 per cent between 1961 and 1971.
(Note however, that Figure 5.2 shows a population increase of between 5 and 14.9 per cent for the same area between 1971 and 1981).
In more detail, a study of 153 farms in the area found that redundancy was the most important single reason for leaving farm employment between 1960 and 1970, as shown in Table 5.7.
Nonetheless, as Table 5.8 shows, employment in primary industry can still account for 12 per cent of all employment in rural areas, and when all the ancillary trades  associated with agriculture are counted in, for example, food processing, machinery, and fertilizer and pesticide production, agriculture may well account for some 10 to 15 per cent of all national employment, although there are no accurate figures for this.
What has happened, therefore, is a transfer of production from the field to the factory floor, so that the field is now but one stage of the production-line process.
The decline of agricultural employment can also be related to wider depopulation.
For example, Drudy (1978) found evidence that depopulation had been worse in small settlements, and concluded that a low level of service provision, when added to the lack of a sufficient employment alternative to agriculture, could lead to a vicious circle of decline based on the theory of cumulative causation, already outlined.
And Hodge and Whitby (1981), the theory's authors, have indeed argued that rural labour markets are at the core of the problem of rural depopulation in developed countries.
In this respect the key variable in the 1980s is the large number of young people entering the rural labour market, following the baby boom of the 1960s.
Many studies of previous generations have shown that many young people leave rural areas before they even enter the job market, and that these migrants are the most    able and motivated (Rieger, 1972; Hannan, 1969) thus adding weight to the theory of cumulative causation, as the less able young, the old, and the redundant come to form a greater and greater proportion of the population.
More recent information on this topic has been provided by Gilg (1980a) in a report on a Ph D thesis by Sally Dench.
As Table 5.9 shows, this thesis not only revealed major differences between male and female aspirations, but also major gaps between aspiration and experience.
For example, only 11.4 per cent overall favoured factory work, but 21.8 per cent had actually obtained such work, and while 12.5 overall favoured clerical work only 2.6 had obtained such work.
Accordingly, Drudy and Drudy (1979) have advocated the provision of professional and office jobs, and Gilg (1976) has advocated more jobs in office employment and tourism, as well as jobs in manufacturing, as an alternative to agricultural employment, so that not only the aspirations of the whole ability range of young people may be met (Drudy, 1975) but also to increase the level of female activity rates found in many rural areas (Moseley and Darby, 1978).
However, until very recently the accepted wisdom (CRC, 1977a) has been that only manufacturing jobs can provide the sort of economic basis needed for sustained job provision, and that neither hill farming or forestry, as shown in Table 5.10, or service employment and tourism could provide a long-term solution to rural employment problems.
However, these analyses have been largely invalidated by the employment ‘counterurbanization’ of the countryside outlined in the following paragraphs.
Conceptual arguments in favour of employment deconcentration can be traced originally to the need to decant industry from over-congested conurbations to adjacent market towns (Woods, 1968) and then to an acceptance that the extreme population concentrations of older industrial societies was neither economically necessary or inevitable (Commins, 1978).
Empirical evidence also began to build up, and Spooner (1972), in a study of employers who had moved to the southwest found that more of them cited the attractive environment of Devon and Cornwall as reasons for moving to the area, than its labour supply, and Lonsdale and Browning (1971, 267) found that manufacturing plants in 10 southern USA States were more orientated to rural than urban areas and that: ‘manufacturing firms appear to be placing increased emphasis on rural and small town sites’.
The main reason for this shift was the reduced importance of the major variable in most economic location models, transport costs, as improved transport and telecommunication facilities have overcome the friction of distance, particularly for the new ‘sunrise’ industries of micro-electronics and    software design.
Furthermore, Hodge and Whitby (1982, 26) have pointed out that many employers in small rural businesses are now more able to exploit the advantages of rural locations: ‘cheaper space, less congestion, attractive environments and a lower likelihood of industrial disputes’.
The net result is that rural areas have gained an increasing share of manufacturing and service employment as both Table 5.8 and Figure 5.7 show.
This is not however mainly due to migration, as in the case of population, or to neo-classical location theories, but according to Fothergill and Gudgin (1979; 1982), the main process differentiating urban and rural areas is no longer structural variation, but appears to arise primarily from indigenous performance, i.e. from different growth among similar firms in different areas, rather than from the movement of firms or changes in industrial structure.
In another study Frost and Spence (1984, 145) also argue that industrial restructuring has had a negligible impact on changes in employment patterns, either positively or negatively, and that these are anyway offset by ‘very rapid  growth in certain service activities’, notably the health services, to produce the different patterns of change shown in Figure 5.7.
Indeed Frost and Spence conclude that the main result of their detailed study of employment change between 1971 and 1977 must be (1984, 146)‘the critical role that service activities and particularly the widespread public services have played in influencing the nature and patterns of employment change over the period’.
Nonetheless, for the rural geographer the most important conclusions of Frost and Spence's work are that:
1
The important and all pervasive theme of decentralization is confirmed;
2
It is a fact that the main growth zones of the country lie in the inner metropolitan periphery; and
3
Core decline and peripheral growth is verified as a principal feature of the nation's changing distribution of employment.
The only drawback to both the studies, by Fothergill and Gudgin, and Frost and Spence, is that they predate the economic recession of the 1980s and the reduction in public sector employment pursued by the Conservative government since 1979.
One clue is however provided by Owen et al .
(1983), who used partial data (unemployment registers classified by last employment) for the period 1979–82 to conclude that the regional north/south split was as important as the urban/rural split, and that future growth would probably be dominated by free-standing towns in the ‘sun-belt’ of the southeast.
These changes are not confined to the UK and Keeble et al .
(1983) have found a relative shift of manufacturing industry from highly urbanized to rural regions across the entire European Community, and Bradshaw and Blakeley (1983) have pointed out three significant trends in the US rural economy: first, that agriculture is no longer the dominant employer; second, that manufacturing employment has grown in rural areas; and third, that services have expanded to employ nearly 60 per cent of the rural labour force and to provide the new basic economy for the growing rural population.
Furthermore, these changes have spread to not only the more isolated areas but also to the protected landscapes of national parks.
For example, Hedger (1981) in a study of mid-Wales found a massive resurgence in population, housing and employment, but pointed out that manufacturing had only provided 120 new jobs while service employment has provided over 1,000 new jobs between 1971 and 1977.
Similar findings have been reported for both mid and east Devon where both service and professional activities have increased considerably (Glyn-Jones, 1979; 1982).
Within the national parks ‘service industry and in particular tourism is a large and growing sector of the economy of each park’(TRRU, 1982, 127) and this experience has raised doubts about the validity of ‘the conventional wisdom that the creation of employment to replace jobs lost from primary industries is best pursued by encouraging small-scale manufacturing industry’(Countryside Commission, 1981a, 73).
These doubts will be considered more fully in Chapter 9 but they also raise the prospect of a radically different future.
For looking ahead even a mere 10 years or so, it is possible and even probable, that a much smaller proportion of people's lives will be spent in paid employment (Gilg, 1983c), and that people will retire earlier, work far fewer hours and days per week, and will have very long holidays, so that work can be shared around.
The effect on population and employment patterns could be profound and Blake (1979, 10) has suggested that:
The constrictions of our older cities will become more and more irksome.
There will be a demand for more second homes in the countryside, and some families may reverse the process altogether by moving to the country and keeping a town pad for use while at work.
In other scenarios, almost everyone could move to low-density countryside houses and communicate via the electronic technology that is already available, or alternatively people could recolonize the countryside and run smallholdings (Anderson, 1975).
If these forecasts are correct, and they of course ignore the inertia of the system, and the immense social capital invested in cities, then the population and employment changes revealed by this chapter are only the precursors of a massive recolonization of the countryside, not only in the UK but also the USA (Fisher and Mitchelson, 1981).
However, before this arcadian millennium is reached, the real rural problems of today still have to be resolved, namely poor rural transport and accessibility, low levels of service provision and rural deprivation.
Accordingly these are considered in the next chapter.
Rural transport, service provision and deprivation
Change in rural transport is not only the key to many of the changes outlined in Chapters 4 and 5, but it is also a central connecting factor linking service provision and rural deprivation.
At the outset however, it should be stressed that many of the changes have been beneficial.
In particular, the massive increase in car ownership from about 10 per cent in the early 1950s, to about 58 per cent of all urban households and around 70 per cent of rural households in 1982 (Phillips and Williams, 1984) has let more and more rural people travel to a greater range of destinations at their own time and convenience.
At the same time, it has allowed urban-based employees to commute from not only exurban areas (Lawton, 1968) but also remote rural areas (Lewis, 1967) in ever increasing numbers and these commuting fields have been used as another, albeit disputed way of defining rural areas (Ball, 1980).
In addition, increasing car ownership and high-speed road provision has been a main factor in the massive increase of rural recreation enjoyed by many people since the 1950s, and discussed in Chapter 7.
Nonetheless, although for many people the rise in car ownership can be seen as a great success, for a significant minority either unable to drive or unable to afford a car, notably the old, the young, the unemployed, the housewife (left at home without a car) and the disabled the corollary of increased car ownership has been a rapid decline in rural public transport, a concentration of services into ever more remote central places with increased journey lengths as shown in Table 6.1a, and a real sense of isolation and deprivation.
Ironically, the advent of modern telecommunications has often increased the sense of physical isolation, by demonstrating more vividly the opportunities being missed and by heightening (Clark and Unwin, 1981, 55)‘people's awareness of their spatial immobility’.
Most recent geographical research work has concentrated on the three related problems of declining public transport, centralization and reduction of rural services, and increased rural deprivation.
Accordingly, the rest of this chapter discusses these three topics in turn.
Rural transport and accessibility
Although some studies have been made of rural railways, the majority have looked at road-based public transport (Halsall and Turton, 1979), since only the road provides the flexibility required in rural areas.
Until recent innovations, that meant the rural bus.
As Table 6.1 b shows, however, bus journeys have been in rapid decline, and as a consequence ‘many rural bus services have been reduced severely in frequency and part routes and whole routes have been withdrawn’(Knowles, 1978, 668).
This reduction would have been even more   severe if subsidies hadn't been paid since 1968 and some of the innovations shown in Table 6.2 hadn't been introduced.
Nonetheless, a 1978 survey of innovative rural bus services found that only one was making a profit, and most were making losses of between 14 and 48 a week, albeit smaller losses than the 64 to 347 a week losses experienced on some conventional routes (HC Select Committee, 1978).
The main reason for the continual losses, apart from the switch to private car transport already outlined, is that the modal split outlined in Table 6.1a makes it very difficult to provide an economically efficient service.
For example, in the Herefordshire survey shown in Table 6.1a the 36 per cent of trips accounted for by shopping involved about 700 passengers per hour between 10 a.m. and 5 p.m.; the 29 per cent of trips accounted for by work involved about 1,000 passengers per hour between 7 a.m. and 9a.m. and around 500 passengers per hour between 4 p.m. and 7 p.m.; and the 23 per cent of trips accounted for by education involved about 2,000 passengers per hour between 8 a.m. and 9 a.m. and around l, 000 passengers per hour between 3 p.m. and 5 p.m.
It is clearly very difficult to provide an economic service to provide for such peaks and troughs in demands, and so most attempts to ameliorate the decline in rural public transport have tried to be ‘user-specific’ or to use ‘spare capacity’on services already in existence.
Examples of the ‘user-specific’ approach are provided by commercial minibuses and midibuses, hired village buses, community buses,-and social car schemes.
Examples of the ‘spare capacity’ approach are provided by post buses and school buses (National Consumer Council, 1978).
However, although the National Consumer Council concluded that such schemes do make a very real contribution, and also make possible extra journeys and excursions which would not be provided by fully routed bus services, they also pointed out that the schemes could not provide a complete answer to accessibility problems in    rural areas.
Furthermore, they appeared to work best in areas of good conventional provision, where they could plug the gaps, but worked least well in areas of poor conventional provision.
A weakness of both the conventional and innovative approaches, however, is that they have been dominated by not only the need to break even financially, but also by the ‘behavioural approach’ to and the financial view of the problem, which collectively (Stanley and Farrington, 1981, 65) have:
engendered studies that try to enumerate the demands for transport in rural areas and then attempt to change network and service configuration to minimize the subsidy needed and meet the demand so enumerated.
Demand is normally measured by collecting information about the behaviour pattern of individuals, and finding out how and why people are travelling.
The dominance of the behavioural approach has led to the equating of need with willingness to pay or expressed demand…[but]a by-product of behaviour-based transport planning is that individuals who do not show ‘demand’ for movements are assumed not to ‘need’to move
Therefore one major trend in rural public transport studies has been a move away from‘behavioural’ to ‘need’studies and in some cases a joint approach.
For example, Peat, Marwick and Mitchell (1980) from a study of ‘need’ in Dyfed in Wales, not only produced the stratified definition of ‘need’shown in Table 6.3 but from a ‘behavioural’study also produced the fourfold stratification of need shown below:
Implicit in both stratified approaches adopted by Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co. is the concept of time-space geography shown in Figure 6.1.
This approach has been used by Moseley (1979) to measure accessibility by constructing a time-space matrix for each rural/social/age group (rows) and for each rural service needed (columns).
Other methods to measure accessibility have involved questionnaire surveys of hospital visits (Haynes and Bentham, 1979) or matrices of distance from various centres of population as shown in Table 6.4, or surveys of access to a car as shown in Table 6.5.
At its most basic level then, accessibility (Moseley, 1979, 7) measures three components:
1
people, the residents of rural areas;
2
the activities or services which they require;
3
the transport or communication links between the two.
A number of authors have tried to produce statistical models for numerically evaluating accessibility.
For example, Robertson (1976) used real road distance and estimated population for 5 km squares in Argyll to test an algorithm in which services search over the population surface until locations are found which minimize the cost, time or effort involved in people travelling to these services.
In another study in Wales, Nutley (1980a) used around 10 indices, including bus services, distance to shopping centres, and access to Cardiff, to   produce a composite index, and in a Scottish example Nutley (1979, 153) has also argued that a number of a different methods should always be used, ‘as no single method can  adequately represent the various alternative conceptions’ of accessibility.
Accordingly Nutley used three measures of accessibility in a study of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, namely travel timings from a central point, shortest paths through a network between every pair of nodes, and potential surfaces; and in yet another study of Scotland, Nutley (1980b) used multiple regression to test both objective (i.e. bus capacity) and subjective (i.e. people's perceptions) measures of accessibility.
All of these different methods however produce significant measures of mobility deprivation in rural areas, and since neither the conventional nor innovative approaches to public transport have been shown to do more than ameliorate or delay the decline in rural transport provision, many authors have called either for some of the options in Figure 6. 1b or for a ‘total approach’ to the problem.
For example, Moseley et al .
(1977) have argued that resources should be shifted between spending heads and even between agencies, and Banister (1980) has argued for a total welfare perspective which involves the best use of all existing facilities, not just the transport-related ones.
Finally, Stanley and Farrington (1981, 78) also conclude that public transport is only one      component of accessibility and argue that accessibility deprivation can be alleviated in one of three strategic ways:
1
By improving the conditions of the population;
2
by redesigning the provision of facilities required by the population; and
3
by providing public transport  explicitly tailored to the population's needs.
Two of these strategies directly relate to the topics to be considered next in this chapter, namely (2) the provision of facilities (rural service provision) and (1) socioeconomic conditions (rural deprivation) and so attention is now turned to rural service provision and rural deprivation.
Rural service provision
Almost any collection of papers on rural services, even those conceived and executed in virtual independence, will produce two clear themes (Moseley, 1978), first, an inadequate access to opportunities and rural services, as shown in Table 6.6, and second, a feeling among rural residents that their needs are not being adequately reflected in the policies and services produced by local and central government agencies (Smart and Wright, 1983).
A third and almost as clear a theme is that even this inadequate level of services has been declining very fast, in both the USA (Johansen and Fuguitt, 1984) and in the UK.
For example, 13 per cent of villages in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire lost their village shop between 1972 and 1977 (Standing Conference of RCCs, 1978) and the number of rural bus services in north Norfolk fell by 17 per cent between 1975 and 1981 (Harman, 1982).
There are two clear reasons for these losses (Woollett, 1981).
First, both private and public services have raised their population thresholds (Bell et al .
1974) in a desire to achieve the economies of scale concentration (already discussed in Chapter 4), and second, the dramatic increase in   accessibility for those with private cars has allowed the majority of people to travel much further distances to better and/or cheaper facilities (Rowley, 1971).
Both these reasons have combined to produce a vicious circle of decline.
Virtually no service has been immune from this process.
The two most likely services to trigger a process of decline are the post office, which often acts as a multiple service facility (Taylor and Emerson, 1981), and the primary school, which is not only a central feature of the community but also a vital ingredient in retaining a young and active population (Jones, 1980).
If either or both these facilities close, the village shop may well be left to cater for only the poor, the old and the immobile, and since the shop on its low turnover has to charge high prices, these people are doubly disadvantaged (Harman, 1978).
One final nail in the coffin may be the accelerating rate of rural petrol station closures since this would further encourage the car owner to leave the local village for petrol and other services (Dean, 1983).
In summary, the decline and concentration of rural services has hit the most deprived sections of rural society hardest, and nowhere is this more so than in health care, where the closure of rural health facilities has meant that those in greatest need, women, the old, and the poor, now have least access to the services they need (Haynes and Bentham, 1979).
The picture of declining services presented above does, however, tend to ignore the impact of the counterurbanization processes discussed in Chapter 4.
There is little evidence so far, though, to suggest that counterurbanization has halted the decline of service provision, since population thresholds for services have at the same time been rising (Johansen and Fuguitt, 1984).
What evidence there is from the USA suggests that local authorities there are simply not prepared, either physically or mentally, to deal with the new service demands of the exurban inmigrants (Green, 1983) although work in Canada, using a game-playing approach, has tended to suggest that the inmigrants have the same service demands as the existing inhabitants (Joseph and Smit, 1983).
The economics of service provision, and the arguments in favour of service  concentration, especially when savings can be made across all the services (Warford, 1969) have already been discussed in Chapter 4.
Although much recent work (Maos, 1983, 47) confirms that ‘the efficiency of services is higher in concentrated settlement patterns and can be further improved by the transfer of service functions from lower to higher ranking centres’, some recent work has called for less emphasis to be placed on the economic evaluation of service provision.
For example, Askew (1983) has produced a welfare model which attempts to resolve the efficiency-equity conflict inherent in public facility location modelling.
Woollett (1981) has shown not only how rural people can provide their own alternative services but can also further extend them, and Clark (1980) has argued that if we want to sustain rural services it will have to be by self-help.
Nonetheless, it is often the most deprived areas or people who are least able to help themselves, and in many rural areas the decline in rural transport and rural services outlined above has led to real rural deprivation.
Rural deprivation
Unlike urban deprivation, which is concentrated in large areas of run-down property and visibly apparent physical decay, rural deprivation is spread more thinly.
This can lead (Walker, 1978, 3) to the ‘ecological fallacy’ in which theories of deprivation use average scores of deprivation measures to pin-point deprivation ‘black spots’, which under this approach are far more likely to be found in urban rather than rural areas.
Nonetheless as Moseley (1980) has pointed out, there are many areas of overlap between urban and rural deprivation, particularly in the inner urban and outer rural areas, as Figure 6.2 shows.
Moreover, in the USA the 11 million rural people with incomes below the poverty threshold account for a disproportionately large share of the nation's poor, 38 per cent(Daft, 1983, 75) and ‘one can find small pockets of rural poverty spread throughout almost every part of the nation’.
However, most workers stress that rural deprivation isn't a function of rurality but is instead a product of the national social structure which according to Neate (1981, 20–1) is then:
compounded by the problems of poor accessibility in areas that are relatively (or absolutely) sparsely populated and increasingly deprived by the concentration of employment and services in centres of population.
And Walker (1978) has argued that although all rural dwellers are burdened by the extra costs of gaining access to services, doing without them, or consuming inadequate services, that these costs bear disproportionately on the rural poor.
Within the overall concept of deprivation, a rural deprivation cycle has been identified in which three types of deprivation (Shaw, 1979; ACC, 1979) interact as shown below:
Mclaughlin (1981) has added one further item to these factors, namely the problems relating to the dominance of the prevailing Conservative political ideology in rural areas, which emphasizes enterprise and the market at the expense of public sector responsibility and support (Newby et al .,
1978).
Newby (1977, 83) has also shown how this same group, the farmers, have managed to keep farm workers deprived, partly because the conditions of the recent past were so bad with:
near starvation wages, wretched housing, benevolent paternalism or arbitrarian despotism and anti-trade-union oppression…that it now…seems difficult to believe that, despite the amelioration of his circumstances, in relative terms the position of the agricultural worker has remained substantially the same.
Newby therefore introduces one further element into the rural deprivation model, namely the relativity of deprivation, and reasserts the two basic problems of the model, the apparent well-being of rural areas based on their attractive environment, and the difficulty of defining deprivation when it is spread in small pockets over much of the countryside.
Accordingly, recent work has looked at new ways of defining rural deprivation over and above the arithmetic of woe shown in Tables 6.5 and 6.6.
For example, Knox and Cottam (1981 a), although they used Scottish parish and district data to confirm Moseley's hypothesis (Figure 6.2) that the most deprived areas are the inner urban and outer rural (when they found that central Glasgow and the Western Isles of Scotland were the most deprived), also argued that better results were obtainable from not only a welfare, but a questionnaire-based approach to individuals' satisfaction or dissatisfaction with their way of life (Knox and Cottam, 1981b).
In another example Cullingford and Openshaw (1982) list five different approaches to the identification of rural deprivation: income, individual perceptions of quality of life, accessibility, distribution of facilities, and social area analysis by multivariate statistics.
Although social area analysis suffers from the ‘ecological fallacy’ already outlined, Cullingford and Openshaw improved its precision by eliminating urban areas and variables from a cluster analysis of rural deprivation.
However, though the only currently practicable approach to identifying rural deprivation was an area based one and although it has been possible to make some sense of census data for rural areas, they still concluded, in line with Knox and Cottam, that it would be far better if the analysis could be performed at the individual level.
It is clear from the above commentary that a number of rural geographers have become deeply interested in rural deprivation and Cloke and Park (1980, 60) have even suggested that:
The primary aim within rural geography could become one of ensuring equity of opportunity, well-being and quality of life between all sectors of the rural community coupled with the creation and maintenance of a productive and self-perpetuating rural environment.
Laudable as these aims are however, they ignore the situation set out at the beginning of this chapter, namely that the majority of rural inhabitants are very satisfied and happy with their life style, and have consciously chosen to live in the countryside.
Many of these people are moreover less concerned with the socioeconomic issues discussed in the last three chapters, but more with the changing environment of the countryside and the increasing pressures being placed upon it.
Accordingly attention is now turned towards environmental issues in the countryside, beginning with recreation.
Rural recreation and tourism
In a recent review of rural leisure and recreation research Owens (1984) has commented on not only how participation in rural leisure and recreation grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s, but how it was also accompanied by a surge of interest in applied research which has since spawned an enormous literature.
Although this literature has now grown to gargantuan proportions, Owens has also managed to discern a number of themes and trends.
Initially, the subject was dominated by fact finding at the level of both national and regional demand surveys (what people did or wanted to do) and site surveys (what they did when they got there).
Until the mid-1970s these types of study dominated the field (Coppock and Duffield, 1975) and produced a very useful baseline for further work.
However, these studies also recognized that the strong links and relationships they described (e.g. increasing rates of participation with car ownership) were permissive rather than causal.
Accordingly, from the mid-1970s, research began to examine the perception and behaviour of individuals, and then to develop general conceptual and theoretical research, in a shift from the ‘inductive’ to the ‘scientific’route shown in Figure I. I. Smith (1983) in another recent summary broadly agrees with Owens, and divides his textbook Recreation Geography into a four-stage continuum from description, to explanation, to prediction and finally to policy formulation.
Accordingly this chapter examines rural recreation from the viewpoint of recent trends (broad patterns of recreational use),impact studies (more detailed studies of recreational behaviour and its effects on the environment),second homes (a specific type of impact study), and theoretical and quantitative approaches , before asking whether recreational geography has come of age.
Recent trends
Virtually all commentaries on rural recreation (Blacksell, 1983; Countryside  Commission , 1980) point out that the three main factors that explain rates of rural recreation, time, income and mobility, have beneficially increased since the war.
Furthermore, the government (Minister of Land, 1966, 3) has not only sanctioned this growth when, as long ago as 1966, they stated ‘that townspeople ought to be able to spend their leisure in the countryside if they want to’ but following a report of the House of Lords (HL Select Committee 1973) has also endorsed and encouraged recreational uses when they accepted (Secretary of State for the Environment, 1975, 1) that ‘recreation should be regarded as one of the community's everyday needs and that provision for it is part of the social services’.
Nonetheless, virtually all studies also conclude that rural recreation rates are  still strongly influenced by social class and income as shown in Figure 7.1 and that the more affluent have much greater participation rates as shown in Table 7. 1.
Other factors not shown in Table 7. 1 are education (with higher rates for the better educated) and sex (with lower rates for women (Birch, 1979).
Table 7.1 also shows that participation rates are fairly sensitive to economic growth and although ‘positive factors’ increased between 1977 and 1980, ‘negative factors’also increased, to contribute to the marked fall in recreational activity also shown between 1977 and 1980.
Another change has been noted in longer-term recreation, i.e. tourism, which in some rural areas, notably National Parks, is the mainstay of the rural economy (TRRU, 1981).
In another area very dependent on tourism, the southwest of England, the eight million tourists who visited the area in 1973 spent 227 million and employed at the peak of the season 100,000 people (South West Economic Planning Council, 1976).
However, against this must be set an extra local authority expenditure on services of 4.6 million, and a regional multiplier of only between 0.35 and 0.45, to provide about 5 per cent of regional income.
However, not only is domestic tourism static, but the regional multiplier is also falling, since the one major trend in tourism is a move away from high-multiplier tourism in hotels to low-multiplier tourism in self-catering accommodation.
Between 1970 and 1982 the percentage of holidaymakers staying in hotels and boarding houses fell from 31 to 27 per cent, while rented accommodation and camping grew from 29 to 35 per cent (BTA, 1983).
The trends outlined      above are, of course, only broad averages to set the scene and so attention is now turned to more detailed and more specifically geographical studies.
Impact studies
Data of the type outlined in Table 7.1 have two drawbacks for the rural geographer.
First, they by and large provide only aspatial or coarsely aggregated data, and second, the sample sizes needed to produce statistically meaningful data-sets mean that only national survey organizations can undertake the large surveys needed.
However, a good number of geographers have conducted recreational surveys in the last 20 years and a good deal of experience in the methods and techniques for conducting visitor surveys, in particular, has been obtained, so that it is now generally agreed that the following procedure should be followed:
1
Select sample unit and size;
2
Collect information by (a) mechanical techniques or (b) observation techniques or (c) questionnaire techniques; or by a combination of (a),(b) and (c); and
3
Codify and computerize data and finally analyse it (TRRU, 1983).
Since it is easier to achieve a meaningful sample size at the recreation site, most rural geographers have concentrated on these types of study, rather than demand-based questionnaires in the towns and cities.
Exceptions are provided by contract work, for example, the Tourism and Recreation Research Unit (TRRU)(1975 to 1977) was sponsored by a number of government agencies to produce four reports on rural recreation in Scotland, based on a survey of 11,600 tourists in their cars and 6,800 Scottish residents in their homes, and in another sponsored survey of 35,810 cars leaving Edinburgh they were able to produce the pattern of recreation shown in Figure 7.2a.
Most work has however concentrated on the recreation site itself and particularly sites in the uplands , the urban fringe and wildlife sites .
In the uplands , where access is almost universally by car or coach trip, virtually all surveys point out that well over half of visitors never leave either their cars or the car park and that there is a marked and almost complete segregation of the active walker from the passive pursuits of picnicking and scenic viewing (Haffey, 1979).
Moreover, as Figure 7.2b shows, there is a marked tendency to congregate at a very few ‘honeypot’ sites.
Accordingly these areas are heavily used and subject to severe environment erosion.
Even when people do go for walks, they tend to keep to public paths and these are often also severely eroded (Coleman, 1981).
However, in a study of recreational impacts on other land uses, Gibbs (1976) found that only farming was particularly affected, notably by damage to walls and fences and by trespass nuisance, but that the impacts on grouse numbers and water gathering were negligible.
Nonetheless, all three uses experienced a greater need to warden or patrol their areas in seasons of recreational use.
In the urban fringe it has already been shown in Chapter 3 that recreation can have an adverse impact on farming, but other work has shown that the 500 or so informal recreation sites which cover 5.7 per cent of London's Green Belt (Ferguson and Munton, 1979) are not heavily used by either car-owing suburban dwellers (who leapfrog over the green belt into so-called proper countryside since they perceive the sites as being too near to be worthy of a special car trip) or by carless inner city residents (who spurn the use of public transport)(Harrison, 1983).
Instead, the sites are used by local residents, of who some 25 per cent or so come by foot and use the sites like an urban park, primarily to take a walk (Harrison, 1981).
Therefore, in an unexpected contrast with the uplands, informal recreation sites in the urban fringe do not normally suffer from recreational over-use.
In wildlife sites however, even a minor increase in visitor use can disturb a habitat and reduce the wildlife interest of the area.
A major problem is that many people visit a wildlife site, not because it is one, but because it provides access and a car park.
For example, on the north Norfolk coast McLaughlin and Singleton (1979) found that only 15 per cent of visitors had come to birdwatch, compared to 27 and 19 per cent respectively who had come to walk or sunbathe.
Not surprisingly, many visitors to the area could also see no problem in picking wild flowers, or allowing dogs to run freely.
These activities and the sheer weight of numbers have caused an ever-present danger of a ‘blow-out’ of the sand dunes, and a subsequent inundation of the sea onto reclaimed farmland behind the dunes.
Such major physical impacts are fairly easy to assess, but not enough work has yet been done to assess the effect of visitors on wildlife itself, though it is known that shy species will decline, while common species will often increase, and that fauna both on land and in water will decline faster than flora (Liddle and Scorgie, 1980).
Nonetheless, it has been claimed that the problems of recreation have been overstated and Fitton (1979, 57) has argued that: ‘There has been a tendency to view recreation in the countryside as a problem rather than a welcome opportunity for people to enjoy themselves’.
One reason for this problem-dominated view is the over-concentration of people into a few undesigned places, largely because people do not have either the knowledge or the confidence to leave the beaten track, whether it be road or footpath.
There is however much evidence that people want to be more adventurous, and to learn more about the countryside    through interpretation (Countryside Commissions, 1975) and one excellent way of combining all these attributes is in a specially designed recreational site, the Country Park.
Most of these were set up in the early 1970s, often from existing sites rather than de novo .
Many of the parks were established near centres of population following the Countryside Act 1968 which provided grant aid for parks in an attempt to relieve congestion on the roads, to ease pressure on more remote and solitary places, and to reduce the risk of damage to vulnerable and valuable areas of countryside (Brotherton, 1975).
Although most country parks are monitored by crude counts of visitors, there have been few studies of whether they have achieved the aims set out above.
One example has however been provided by Cloke and Park (1982) in their study of Craig-y-Nos Country Park in the Brecon Beacons National Park of South Wales shown in Table 7.2.
They concluded that the Country Park had been successful in absorbing some potential visitors from open roadside sites (e.g. the Trecastle Road site), and that many Country Park users were former users of the Trecastle Road site.
They also concluded, however, that a significant number of visitors preferred the freedom of the Trecastle Road type of site (an unfenced road running through moorland) to the more organized nature of the Country Park.
In conclusion, all impact studies have confirmed that there is a very strong pattern and indeed concentration of recreational activity along the lines shown in Table 7.3.
There are however two further types of recreational impact, both of a longer-term nature, namely tourism and second homes .
In the case of tourism , the economic impact in holiday areas like the southwest of England and the National Parks has already been pointed out.
In recent years tourism has also made an increasing impact on farming, particularly in the more scenically attractive and marginal farming areas, and in Scotland, at least 20 per cent of farms indulge in farm tourism, and farm tourism accounts for at least 10 per cent of net income (Denman, 1978).
Similar findings have been reported by Davies (1983) for the ‘less favoured areas’(the uplands) of England and Wales.
In these areas 20 per cent of the farms sampled indulged in farm tourism, but most farmers saw it as a supplement rather than as an alternative to farm income, although Davies argued that it could be a much    more profitable use of the farms' resources.
Indeed, in France this has been widely recognized in the very successful ‘Gites’ scheme.
However, the main impact of tourism has been felt in the European Alps where tourism has led to a dramatic reversal in population decline, major changes in the socioeconomic structure of local communities, and often very intensive physical development in the landscape (Mallet, 1978).
In a rare survey of local residents' attitudes, the Kariels (1982) have found that in spite of the many negative aspects  often ascribed to tourism, the overall evaluation of local inhabitants was strongly positive, although at the same time they wanted the landscape to retain its traditional character and felt that family life had been weakened by tourism.
On the whole though, mass tourism on the alpine scale must inevitably destroy much of the existing culture, including local languages (White, 1974) but the greatest impact is probably felt in areas where another type of tourism has developed, namely second homes.
Second homes
Although there is no generally agreed definition of a second home (virtually every study provides its own) it is methodologically very difficult to locate them, and the numbers of homes fluctuate wildly from year to year (Shucksmith, 1983).
It is generally agreed by the plethora of studies made of the phenomenon that:(a) they have been rapidly growing;(b) they are most common in Europe (see Table 7.4);(c) they are strongly related to the upper income bracket (Bielckus et al , 1972);(d) they are concentrated in the more scenically attractive areas, and within these a contagious process can lead to further concentration (Thissen, 1978);(e) they tend to form a further ripple of urbanization beyond the immediate commuter belt of big cities (Boyer, 1980); and (f) they are also relatively and increasingly absolutely important in upland and mountainous areas (Cribier, 1973).
Less is known however about the impact of second homes on the local environment, and although there has been a good deal of speculation about their impacts, as shown in Table 7.5, there are few hard or agreed empirical data to back this up.
For example, De Vane (1975) concluded that their economic regional multiplier was roughly the same as hotels, but that insufficient data were available to assess their effect on house prices.
In contrast, Ashby et al .
(1975) asserted that one of the principal effects of the increased demand for second homes was to inflate prices.
It is even harder to assess the social impact, and although Bollom (1978) has argued that local attitudes to second-home owners depend on the structure of the local community, and that antipathy to    second-home owners ironically tends to decline with increasing percentages of second homes, another study (Downing and Dower, 1972, 32) has argued that:
While second homes consist merely of properties no longer wanted as first homes they cause relatively few problems; but when they grow beyond this, political , social, economic and environmental problems arise.
In conclusion, it could be that the problems have been exaggerated, and indeed one study of second homes in the southwest of England, the second most important area after Wales, concluded (South West Economic Planning Council, 1975, vii) that: ‘second homes do not pose a problem that is widespread in the region nor are they likely to do so’.
This happy state of affairs could well continue if recent trends towards the construction of purpose-built houses  (as the stock of existing property is bought up), and more especially towards time-share developments, which spread the economic benefits over a wider season and ownership, continue into the late 1980s and early 1990s (White, 1978).
Nonetheless, there is as yet not enough evidence to decide whether second homes are a ‘curse or blessing’(Coppock, 1977).
In the meantime one way in which the impact of second homes and other recreational uses could be more effectively assessed could be the development of theoretical models and statistical relationships, and so attention is now turned to this topic.
Theoretical and quantitative approaches to rural recreation
One of the most simple concepts in rural recreation studies has also been one of the most useful and enduring, namely the ‘leisure budget’.
This divides the use of time into essential activities (sleeping, eating, etc); work; travel to work; and the residue, leisure time (Martin and Mason, 1976).
Within this residue, which now totals about 40 hours out of the 168 hours in a week, the detailed choice of leisure depends on the availability of three further resources, money, space and facilities, and also of course personal preference as shown in Figure 7.1.
The most easily quantifiable, if however the most elusive, value in these factors is money, and so not surprisingly a good deal of attention has been paid to this variable.
For example, there has been a lot of evidence that petrol prices have a marked effect on rates of rural recreation (Shucksmith, 1 980b), since the demand relationship is not only stable, but is also highly price-elastic.
To achieve these conclusions, Shucksmith used perhaps the most widely used method of ‘demand curve analysis’ based on monetary values, the so-called ‘Clawson method’(Clawson, 1959).
The basis of the method is a three-step process of ascertaining the relationships between:(a) visitor rates and distance;(b) visitor rates and cost; and (c) number of visits to the site and an assumed set of admission charges.
Although the Clawson method has been widely used and adapted (Everett, 1979), and other monetary or cost-benefit approaches have been tried, for example, regression analysis and consumer interviews of willingness to pay (Curry, 1980), the method still has a number of underlying weaknesses.
For example, it assumes an entrance fee for resources that are by and large free, and it ignores not only the intervening opportunity of other sites but also personal preference, which is likely to be a key variable in a basically non-economically motivated activity.
Personal preference has been examined in a number of statistical ways.
For example, Everett (1978) used multiple regression analysis to analyse 2,816 questionnaires concerning people's wildlife preferences, and found that these were positively related to the number of colours and brightness of different species.
In another multivariate approach Roome (1983) used principal components analysis to conclude that professional visitors to nature reserves were positively attracted by fragile species, but amateur visitors by the access provided, and in an interesting attempt to reconcile the different expectations of different types of visitor, Price (1979) used questionnaires to derive satisfaction curves representing a range of tastes.
Perhaps the most innovative approach however has been Brotherton's (1982a) attempt to relate the frequency of visits with the rate of site return as shown in Figure 7.3b.
This not only provides an excellent summary of recreational use (since it is based on a 1977 home-interview  survey of 5,040 respondents)(Countryside Commission, 1982) but in addition it also provides an explanation for any deviation from the curve, as shown in Figure 7.3a theoretically, and in Figure 7.3b in practice.
These deviations also allow any imbalance between supply and demand, a central concept of much recreational work, to be assessed.
One aspect of this relationship is mobility and Cracknell (1967) has examined the potential supply of access provided by minor roads around one major city, Leicester.
However, the advent of motorways has extended the range of the day trip, and Edwards and Dennis (1976) using gravity models and regression analysis have predicted that motorways could increase the number of longer-distance day trips to the southwest of England by between 11 and 17 per cent.
In another use of the gravity model, Colenutt (1969) tried to widen its power by incorporating behavioural variables.
Nonetheless, reviews of the whole gamut of recreational traffic models in rural areas, including trip generation models, distribution models, direct demand modelling, traffic assignment models, system simulation (Miles and Smith, 1977), and gravity models (Baxter and Ewing, 1981) have pointed out the following deficiencies which still need to be remedied by further research on:
1
Differing levels of road accessibility;
2
Effect of fuel prices and other costs;
3
The relative attractiveness of different sites;
4
The function of the journey itself;
5
Multiple purposes of any trip (not just to visit one site);
6
The size and type of zones to be used and the time periods to be employed; and
7
The different types of demand, effective, deferred, and potential (Countryside Commission, 1970).
Another variable to be considered, as already pointed out, would be social characteristics, and Settle (1980) has used both multiple regression analysis and the so-called ‘linear logistic model’ to produce a close fit between sex, car licences and age, and the number of anglers.
This is not the only model to produce a close fit and in conclusion it seems that Lavery's (1975, 198) assessment of the use of models in forecasting recreation demand is still very relevant for the mid to late 1980s:
Although our understanding of the whole and individual elements of the recreation system is very imperfect, we do know the main activities which generate the greatest growth and demand for space and we can identify current and potential conflicts with other land use activities.
Nonetheless, these broad relationships remain permissive rather than causal and, although rural recreation studies have produced remarkably concurrent findings, as outlined earlier in this chapter, while these relationships remain permissive it is still fair to ask if rural recreation geography has come of age.
Rural recreation geography: An emerging or mature discipline?
Owens (1984, 174) has commented that the 1970s saw a hiatus in recreation research as a period of evaluation replaced the previous period which had been characterized by:
The accumulation of an ever-increasing number of empirical case studies which    together comprise(d) a broadening data base to describe users, activities and patterns of use in relation to the existing supply of opportunities.
This conclusion can be confirmed by a study of the books published in the early 1970s.
For example, Coppock and Duffield (1975) employed the ‘leisure/resources’ approach outlined above by Owens in a British context.
Simmons (1975) in a world-wide review also employed this approach, and in another text, Lavery (1974) argued that there was no uniquely geographical approach.
It must now be asked if the same could said in the mid-1980s.
In helping to answer this question two direct comparisons are available.
First, Patmore (1983) has broadly replicated the ‘leisure/resources’ approach of his pioneering (1970) text, and the multi-author text Land and Leisure , Fisher, Lewis and Priddle (1974), and Doren, Priddle and Lewis (1979) has also used this approach in the American context.
There therefore doesn't seem to have been much of a change, and furthermore Smith (1983) in his text specifically entitled Recreation Geography has also followed this model, albeit in the modified form of the relationship between ‘travel/resources’ which he calls the two main branches of the tree of recreation geography.
However, Smith also points out that there is another division in the subject, between the logical positivist (objective) and the phenomenological (subjective) approaches, and that this split is delaying the development of a rural recreation geography paradigm.
In conclusion, Owens (1984) has commented that the 1980s have been characterized so far not by significant conceptual developments, but by a further widening of the empirical base.
The fact that no powerfully theoretical recreation geography has emerged, however, should not be seen as a defeat for the subject, for the empirical work that has been produced has not only been very useful in its own right, but has also shown a significant mismatch between leisure aspirations and recreational resources.
Attempts to reconcile these imbalances, as well as to deal with other rural problems, have formed the basis for the work of a growing number of rural geographers in the field of rural planning.
Accordingly, these rural planning issues are the theme of the last two main chapters of this book 
Land use and landscape
For many decades studies of rural land use and landscape were at the heart of all rural geographical work, and land use and landscape studies are still of intrinsic interest to many rural geographers.
However, in recent years the methodological changes outlined in Chapter I have not only reduced the relative amount of work in this field, but also transferred the focus of interest away from the fairly limited concept of land use towards not only the more abstract concept of landscape, but increasingly to behavioural studies of how we value land and landscapes.
Accordingly this chapter is divided into land use studies, landscape studies , and land and landscape evaluation .
Land use studies
In spite of the fact that there has been a very long tradition of work on rural land use, including the invaluable land use survey of the 1930s (Stamp, 1962), and its revival in the second survey of the 1960s and 1970s* (Coleman et al , 1974) and much other detailed work from other sources (Hart, 1980; Coppock, 1960a; Best, 1981) as shown in Table 8. 1, there is still a desperate need (Hall, 1 974, 414) for a ‘national Domesday book for land use, preferably updated every 10 years at the time of the population census’.
This statement still remains true today despite the valiant and continuing voluntary efforts of the Land Decade Educational Council to produce a national land use survey by the late 1980s (Balchin, 1981).
So the first problem facing any study of land use is the paucity of good and compatible data, for as the upper section of Table 8.2 shows, there can be considerable variations between different estimates, although the data do provide broad answers to the main points of interest defined by Peters (1970) namely: How much land is there? how is it distributed between the major land uses? and how have the allocations changed over time (and space)?
Nonetheless, Peters's second and third questions also highlight the three main problems encountered with all land use work: first, the multiplicity of data sources shown in-Table 8.1; second, the different temporal and spatial units employed by these sources; and third, and perhaps most important of all, the different classifications involved.
In spite of the fact that a national land use classification has been produced (DOE, 1975) it is very unlikely that the future will be any better than the present, and that national land use statistics will continue to be (Dickinson and Shaw, 1978, 299) *Both are discussed more fully in Chapter 2.
a meaningless amalgam of figures based on different classifications applied to dissimilar areal units with varying degrees of precision.
One of the most serious differences in the classifications that have been employed so far have arisen from whether to divide land up by its use (formal) or by its activity (functional).
Although both the National Land Use Classification (DOE, 1975) and Dickinson and Shaw (1978) have argued for an activity (functional) based classification, most geographical studies have employed use (formal) classifications, as shown in Table 8. 1, since these are easier to ascertain in field surveys or from remote sensing sources.
However, as Table 8.1 also shows, these are not the only sources available.
For example, Coppock (1978) has produced a comprehensive list of sources, and Rhind and Hudson (1980) have combined these into four main sources:
1
data from lists and texts;
2
data from maps;
3
data from remote sensing; and
4
data from ground surveys.
These are now considered in turn.
As Table 8.
I shows, Best (1981) has used lists and texts , in particular the agricultural census, to demonstrate that Britain is not excessively urbanized as shown in Table 8.2, and to argue that more space should be allocated to homes and trees.
Anderson (1977) has used systematic point sampling from the Ministry of Agriculture's Land Classification maps (see the last section of the chapter for a commentary) to produce land use estimates very similar to Best's as shown in Table 8.2, and in the uplands, Parry et al .
(1982) have used old Ordnance Survey maps to show that there has been extensive reclamation of   moorland on the plateau uplands of the North York Moors, Exmoor, Dartmoor and the Brecon Beacons.
Remote sensing for agricultural land use has already been discussed in Chapter 2, but for wider land use purposes, the Department of Environment (DOE, 1978b) has used air photos to define accurately the extent of all built-up areas in England and Wales.
But the future almost certainly lies with multi-spectral images from satellites.
In this field the LANDSAT series of satellites provides an enormous amount of data (Harris, 1979).
Although a good deal of success has been achieved with regard to mapping vegetation (Hathout, 1980), there are still problems with resolution and cloud cover (Allan, 1980) and although these are gradually being resolved by radar, the problem of more detailed and fine-grained interpretation will remain for the foreseeable future (Deane, 1980).
Although high technology might have appeared to make ground surveys redundant, they still have a very useful role, particularly when it is the function of the land use rather than its appearance that is important (Coleman et al , 1974), and when the process of detailed land use change is being analysed (Blacksell, 1981).
Indeed ground-based land use surveys have still provided almost all the usable knowledge we have about our land use base.
For example, the irregular sample surveys conducted by the Forestry Commission (1983b) provide a mass of information on woodland age structure, species composition and ownership as well as the increase in the forested area from 6.2 to 7.3 per cent in England, from 6.8 to 11.6 per cent in Wales, and from 7.2 to 12.6 per cent in Scotland, between 1947 and 1980.
However, this source suffers from the long time gap between  censuses, and so more detailed and more frequent information on changing land use within the forest still has to rely on ad hoc surveys.
For instance, Peterken and Harding (1975) from air photos and ground surveys have shown how modern forestry has reduced the numbers of ‘poor colonizer’ species.
Harkness (1983) from land use maps, Ordnance Survey maps and air photos has shown how increased forestry has affected the landscape of National Parks.
At the same time Brotherton (1983) using documentary evidence has demonstrated that the rate of afforestation has been three times greater outside the National Parks.
Within the National Parks, all land use surveys have shown how their landscapes have been much altered in recent years by the advance of agriculture and forestry (Leonard, 1980) although as Table 8.2 shows, both National Parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs) still contain very few urban areas (Anderson, 1980).
Interestingly, AONBs have more woodland but less farmland than National Parks.
Attempts to provide land use data for other countries are bedevilled by even worse problems of definition and classification than those already outlined, but Best (1979) has tried to harmonize European national statistics to produce the figures shown in Table 8.2, and in the USA although Jackson (1980, 6) has argued that: ‘it is almost impossible to provide adequate statistics on land use…because of differing definitions’, he has nonetheless provided the estimates shown in Table 8.2 using Department of Agriculture statistics.
However, the difficulties are highlighted by the high percentage of other land shown in the table, 17.4 per cent, which is largely accounted for by swamp, desert and bare rock.
Similar problems are found in Canada, but in both countries there is a growing realization that the land resource base is not limitless and that more information is needed on land use change (McCuaig and Manning, 1982).
In spite of the difficulties already discussed and the limited information available, a number of general conclusions can be made about land use and land use change.
First, it is essential that the two-way flow of land use change should be emphasized, for as both Figures 8.1 and 8.2 show, net gains can conceal a far more complex picture.
In addition, the rate of change can be exaggerated, because it is often the same pieces of marginal land that are being continually transferred from one use to another, and then back again.
This is emphasized by Coleman (1969), who has advocated a departure from the traditional classifications of agricultural land, forestry and so on, and instead produced a concentric ring model radiating out from townscape to urban fringe, to farmscape, to marginal fringe, and finally to wildscape.
Second, it can be concluded for both the UK (Best, 1976) and for the EEC (Best, 1979) that although there are major differences within countries, notably in the relative areas devoted to woodland and urban land, that there is a common pattern of land loss to both urban use and woodland as shown in Figure 8.1.
However, because of the recent advent of food surpluses, this isn't the same problem as it would have been a few years ago.
In the USA, a similar      pattern of land loss to urban use is also observed (Jackson, 1980), but a major difference is a loss of forest land and farmland in equal amounts to other extensive uses, notably recreation and conservation.
Although studies of land use like those outlined above provide useful overall data, they only produce a limited picture of what the countryside actually looks like and how it is changing in appearance, and this type of study remains at the heart, if not the mind, of many of even the most socioeconomic quantitative geographers.
Landscape studies
The study of landscape is one of the oldest sub-disciplines within geography, but during the quantitative revolution of the 1960s and early 1970s such work was roundly criticized for its descriptive nature and its search for uniqueness.
For a while, landscape work was restricted to historical geography, where it produced, and continues to produce, a rich vein of national (Hoskins, 1955) and regional (Armstrong, 1975) descriptions of the evolution of landscape.
This book is, however, confined to contemporary change, and by the mid-1970s concern about landscape change and particularly the loss of traditional features led to a revival of interest in the field, particularly by those geographers employed in the public services.
Indeed the main studies in both the two major landscape types, the lowlands and uplands , have been conducted by public agencies, and these provide the essential evidence for the rest of this section.
In the lowlands the basic facts of land use have already been outlined in Table 8.2 (8th line of data) and although there have been a number of local studies of landscape change (Blacksell and Gilg, 1981), only nationally commissioned studies can provide a large enough resource base for an adequate survey of both landscape change and the behavioural aspects behind the change.
Fortunately, the Countryside Commission has not only commissioned one such study (Westmacott and Worthington, 1974) but was wise enough to commission a re-study in the early 1980s (Westmacott and Worthington, 1984).
The initial study compared the landscapes of 1945 and 1972 and examined farmers' motives and attitudes to landscape change in seven ‘type’ areas: intensive arable; extensive arable (2); dairying; mixed; general cropping; and livestock rearing, dairying and mixed.
As Table 8.3 and Figure 8.3 show the most dramatic changes were the enlargement of field size and the loss of hedgerow trees, with a much greater rate of change in the arable areas in order to take advantage of large modern machinery.
More subtle but equally important changes were the cleaning and straightening of water courses, the ploughing up of herb-rich grassland, and the construction of modern farm buildings, out of scale and out of character with the traditional landscape.
The main reasons for the changes were economic and the increasing redundancy of certain features like hedgerows.
This pattern of change wasn't, however, completely repeated in the 1970s, according to the 1980s re-study, which compared the landscapes of 1983 with those of 1972 as shown in Table 8.3.
First, the re-study noted a marked slowing down in the rate of change, partly because there was little left to change, particularly in the arable areas.
Second, there appeared to have been an evening-out of change, with the mixed/pastoral farming areas recording similar rates of     change to the arable areas, partly because arable farming had markedly expanded into these areas during the period from 1972 to 1983.
Third, major landscape changes appeared to be more and more confined to a change in either tenure or farming type, and were clearly the result of well-thought-out decisions rather than the often piecemeal changes of the 1960s.
Fourth, and in some places a reversal of the previous trend, the number of hedgerow trees had either declined less rapidly or even started to increase (apart from major losses due to Dutch Elm disease as in Warwickshire), and in particular the number of saplings had markedly increased.
One major reason for this slowing down was the developing ‘social conscience’ of farmers, in reaction to increased criticism of their actions.
But at the same time, the economic arguments in favour of larger fields have continued to grow, and Sturrock and Cathie (1980) have calculated that an increase in field size from 10 to 20 hectares will give an 11 per cent increase in work rate with a  3-metre wide implement, and a 24 per cent increase with a 12-metre wide implement.
The official reaction to these changes (more fully discussed in Chapter 9) has been to try and persuade farmers to adopt a more conservationist attitude, notably on unproductive land (Leonard and Cobham, 1977).
But other commentators have called for the introduction of planning controls over farming operations and have branded the changes as the ‘theft of the countryside’(Shoard, 1980).
In the uplands , the basic facts of land use have already been outlined in Table 8.2 (7th line of data), but these data ignore the distinction between farmland and rough pasture, which is particularly important in Scotland, where much of the so-called agricultural area is moorland.
They also fail to show the steady decline in the amount of grazing land as shown in Figure 8.1 and the complex two-way flows between uses also shown in Figure 8.1.
Indeed, unlike the lowlands where much of the change is due to a rejection of the 200-year-old ‘enclosure landscape’ much land use change in the uplands is the result of a continuing revaluation of the economic benefits, or otherwise, of reclaiming moorland for agricultural use, and abandonment of farmland (Parry, 1976) can take place along-side reclamation (Parry et al .
1982).
It is therefore very important to try and assess the more enduring changes shown in Figure 8.4, and Table 8.4.
Within the post-war period, the two most enduring changes appear to have been a marked transfer from rough pasture to either woodland or farmland, and Parry et al .
(1982) have shown that about three-quarters of the change has been to woodland, as shown in Figure 8.4, and that this pattern is fairly geographically even, except for Dartmoor as shown in Table 8.4.
Other studies have shown that much more land could be converted to forestry, to give a possible 30 per cent cover to produce (ITE, 1978, 31): ‘a dramatic landscape change’ and a landscape: ‘similar to that of Sweden’.
However, this isn't likely to occur within the National Parks and although, as Table 8.2 shows, they have a higher percentage of woodland than the rest of the uplands, voluntary agreements to limit any further afforestation will reduce their relative share.
Table 8.4 has already shown that most National Parks lost more rough pasture to woodland than to agriculture, but in the southwest Table 8.4 also shows that Dartmoor lost more rough pasture to farmland than to woodland, and in a study of land use change in the nearby Exmoor National Park, Lord Porchester (1977) found that the moorland area had been reduced, from 24,000 hectares in 1947 to 19,000 hectares in 1976, with 3,800 hectares     going to farmland but only 1,200 hectares going to woodland.
Although the studies outlined above provide useful information, they fail to produce a detailed picture of landscape change or the reasons behind these changes.
Fortunately, in parallel with the re-study of lowland landscapes, the Countryside Commission has also commissioned a similar study of upland landscapes in both a full (Sinclair, 1983) and abbreviated form (Allaby, 1983).
Both volumes adopt the lowlands study formula and examine the changes and the reasons behind them in 12 ‘type areas’ ranging from northeast to southwest England as shown in Table 8.5.
In addition, more attention is paid to the socioeconomic structure of farming and in particular the greater reliance of hill farming on government and EEC grant aid and subsidies.
These grants have encouraged changes in hill farming which have led to a loss of semi-natural vegetation, traditional farm woodland and field boundaries, and have been offset by increases in commercial forestry, and cultivated crops and grass.
The main reasons for these changes are said to be economic pressures, grant aid, and a gradual replacement of older, smaller, and more conservative farmers with younger, larger and more profit-orientated farmers.
Indeed, only 29 per cent of farmers had actually altered field boundaries between 1949 and 1 978, and only one-third had reclaimed moorland in the last 7 to 1 5 years, and so the picture that emerges is one of a more dynamic profit-motivated minority replacing a more conservation and landscape-orientated majority where still 56 per cent of farmers are over 50.
In addition to the major landscape changes already outlined, Sinclair (1983) has also found a small increase in the amount of enclosed land (1.8 per cent), but a major change from vernacular enclosure to fences, with the area enclosed by walls and hedges down by 13 and 37 per cent respectively between 1949 and 1978, but the area enclosed by fences up by 45 per cent , to give the overall pattern shown in Table 8.5.
Another change has been extensive draining of moorland (Stewart and Lance, 1983) and this allied to increased sheep numbers and other factors (Anderson and Yalden, 1981) has led not only to a decrease in moorland vegetation but to a reduction in wildlife, notably grouse.
Wildlife changes are the final element in the landscape equation, and the changes outlined above (in both uplands and lowlands, as a result of the increased use of machinery and also chemicals) have led to the destruction of 95 per cent of herb-rich meadow, 80 per cent of lowland sheep walks, 40 per cent of lowland heaths, 30–50 per cent of ancient lowland woods and 50 per cent of lowland fens and mires since 1945 (NCC, 1984), and therefore the extinction or rapid decline of much flora and fauna.
Two key features in the landscape change process, as the above discussion has shown, are farmers continuing revaluation or reclassification of land, and the behavioural attitude of farmers to change.
However, farmers aren't the only group to value land and landscape and so the last section of this chapter examines the varying ways in which land and landscape can be assessed by other groups.
Land and landscape evaluation
Traditionally land has been valued mainly for its intrinsic worth as a factor of production, but with the growth of recreation and tourism, land in the form of   landscape can be just as, if not more, valuable a resource.
Both land and landscape are however very difficult to value.
In the case of land, its market price is of course one yardstick, but this can be distorted by all types of factors, for example, proximity to expanding towns.
Therefore, virtually all methods of land evaluation have limited themselves to the physical factors of climate, relief and soil.
An example of this approach is provided by the Ministry of Agriculture's ‘Agricultural Land Classification’ maps which use rainfall, transpiration, temperature and exposure as the key climatic indices; altitude, slope, and surface irregularities as the key relief indices; and wetness, depth, texture, structure, stoniness and available water capacity as the key soil indices (Agricultural Land Service, 1966).
These indices have been used to produce 113 maps for England and Wales at a scale of 1:63,360 and although the five grades shown on the maps provide a broad pattern of where the best (grade 1) and worst (grade 5) land is, the maps have, however, been roundly criticized.
For example, the width of the five grades is not consistent, and grade 3 not only accounts for about half the land, but also covers a much wider range of possibilities than, say, grade 1 (Gilg, 1975a), and even the subsequent sub-division of grade 3 in the 1970s cannot be applied objectively (Worthington, 1982).
 Other criticisms relate to the size of units used (a minimum of 80 hectares) and the fact that the system is based on the flexibility of land and not on its productivity or capability (Boddington, 1978).
These  types of criticisms can, however, be extended to most methods of land classification and evaluation, and so Flaherty and Smit (1982) have proposed a broader-based system in which other parameters valuation, and so Flaherty and Smit (1982) have proposed a broader-based system in which other parameters including housing, recreation and conservation are included.
Similar types of comments can also be made concerning landscape evaluation, and once again the methods employed are very dependent on the purpose of the evaluation.
For example, Figure 8.5 shows that this can vary from landscape improvement to recreation, and that the two main spatial units have been kilometre squares and landscape tracts (Penning-Rowsell, 1975).
The most common practical uses of landscape evaluation have however been in the preparation of land use plans (Penning-Rowsell, 1974) planning in rural areas (Rogers, 1981b) and the definition of areas of scenic value like Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (Anderson, 1981b; Preece, 1980).
In spite of the fact that landscape evaluation techniques only date from the mid-1960s a voluminous literature has evolved.
Penning-Rowsell (1981) has provided an excellent review of the literature during this period, and has concluded that it saw a sustained attempt to devise techniques for the quantification of the scenic quality or value of landscapes.
Penning-Rowsell has also concluded that these were inspired by a growing awareness of landscape deterioration, through either urban expansion or inadequate management, and a perceived need for increased protection of those areas of greatest landscape quality.
However, most of these methods paid insufficient attention to the highly complex nature of landscape values, while overemphasizing scenic attractiveness.
Furthermore, excessive emphasis was placed both on measurable landscape attributes and on devising universal methods, while neglecting the social attitudes, feelings and values of the general public.
In more detail, Penning-Rowsell (1981) has defined three clear stages in the development of landscape evaluation: first, an early emphasis on intuitive and morphological approaches; second, the development of complex statistical approaches; and third, an emphasis on public preference .
The first,intuitive and morphological approaches (Linton, 1968) were heavily biased in favour of land form, and were divided into two stages.
An initial objective inventory of landform and land use, and then a qualitative assessment of the value of each type of landscape so identified.
However, these approaches tended to use geomorphological concepts of landform, and only recently has research examined how people actually see landforms, by using artists' sketches (Killeen and Buyhoff, 1983) and computer-generated models to produce  artificial landscapes (Guldmann, 1980).
Hull and Buyhoff (1983), however, used the more traditional medium of colour slides to show that the further the horizon the greater the perceived scenic beauty.
In a search for a greater relationship between landscape and numbers the early to mid-1 970s produced a set of more complex statistical approaches.
These not only involved far more variables, but also secondary data sources in addition to field survey.
In the first and most quoted example of the genre, the  Coventry-Solihull-Warwickshire study (1971) set the mould by using multiple regression analysis as shown in Figure 8.6.
This study attracted a good deal of interest and replication (Blacksell and Gilg, 1975) and in a massive appraisal of the approach (Robinson et al .,
1976) the method was modified to standardize the preference scores in step B of Figure 8.6, and a factor analysis was made of the measured landscape variables in Step A, so that criticisms of the statistical   validity of the method could be overcome.
Nonetheless, this latter modification has been rejected (Dearden and Rosenblood, 1980) and Dearden (1980) has tried to develop the multiple regression model by making the dependent variable more representative, and the independent variables more comprehensive.
In another multivariate approach, Shuttleworth (1980a) has used principal components analysis to show that relief accounts for 20.5 per cent of the variation in landscape description produced by a nine-point semantic differential scale.
However, few of the statistical methods have achieved more than a 70 per cent explanation rate, and furthermore, the regressions have often been based on very small samples of professional people, and the mechanistic techniques have cloaked what is essentially unquantifiable with an indefensible professional mysticism.
In a reaction, therefore, to these problems the last few years have seen two major changes in approach.
First, a return to viewing the landscape in totality, rather than the sum of its component parts, and second, a much greater emphasis on the preferences of the general public, rather than professional people, even though some studies have shown quite a good correlation between the two (Preece, 1980).
Nonetheless, the public preference approach is not without its problems, notably how to assess people's preferences, and whether a consensus could or should be achieved.
Two problems arise with assessment.
The first is how to represent the landscape, since assessment in the field is too laborious and costly.
Although slides and photos have been the traditional medium, and are widely accepted as substitutes for the landscape (Shuttleworth, 1980b), Kreimer (1977) has also argued that they need to be put more fully into their context.
The second is how to elicit people's preferences, and though score sheets, questionnaires and semantic difference scales have been widely used, the search is still on for a more effective method (Propst and Buyhoff, 1980).
With regard to the search for  consensus the results are often contradictory.
For example, Penning-Rowsell (1982), in a survey of 540 people, found a general consensus which was related to familiarity with the area and also age, but   unrelated to social class and sex.
However, Wellman and Buyhoff (1980) have found no regional familiarity effect, Lyons (1983) has found an age differential, and Buyhoff et al .
(1983) have found that although different nationalities broadly agree over landscape quality, select national groups produced a greater degree of similarity.
Nonetheless, a substantial degree of agreement has been achieved, not only between different demographic groups, but also between the whole range of approaches,intuitive, statistical and personal preference (Briggs and France, 1980) and it can generally be concluded that good landscapes will have substantial relative relief, a major water body, diverse land use, and some historical artifacts, but will lack modern industry and major transport facilities.
This still leaves the fundamental question of how people value landscapes, and how different tastes and needs can be catered for.
Accordingly, there has been a gradual realization that the endeavour should advance over a broader field rather than trying to seek a ‘universal’ method (Dearden, 1981), that subjective methods are probably more cost-effective (Price, 1976), that any method should include room for different tastes (Jacques, 1980), and that much could be learnt from the approach of experts in the area of aesthetic and artistic judgement (Carlson, 1977).
Indeed the relationship between landscape and the arts has been extensively  explored in recent years, and Olwig (1984) Pocock (1981) and Relph (1981) have shown how many of our values are derived from such sources, notably humanism and literature.
Perhaps the most stimulating approach however has been Appleton's (1975) brilliant development of prospect-refuge theory.
This theory, which has been developed from an extensive survey of landscape paintings, argues that landscapes are highly symbolic habitats in which the most valued landscapes allow us to see (prospect) without being seen (refuge) and therefore relate to our origins as hunter-gatherers.
However, landscapes can now be seen in a variety of ways, in pictures, from the air, and in maps (Johnson and Pitzl, 1981) and this adds further to the list of problems yet to be solved in Lowenthal's (1978) excellent essay on finding valued landscapes which include varieties of taste, the effect of social milieu, the distinction between landscape and place, differences between public and professional preferences, whether tastes are innate or learnt, the effect of literary and historical factors, season, time of day, viewpoint chosen and direction of view, novelty and familiarity, distance and memory lending enchantment, personal sensitivity and intensity of feelings, and the effect of experience and training.
It is not surprising therefore that Lowenthal (1978, 389) has concluded that:
landscape evaluation studies neither ascertain landscape tastes nor assess public preferences; they tell us nothing about what landscapes the public values or why.
This is maybe one reason why increasing attention is being turned to methods by which the general public can (a)‘read the landscape’(Muir, 1981),(b) have it interpreted for them (Countryside Commission and CCS, 1975); or (c) even interpret their own everyday landscape (Meinig, 1979) rather than having experts trying to value the invaluable.