

1
DAWN was still a full hour away, but Colonel Windsor was already at his post.
His presence in the pitch darkness was marked only by the dull glow of a cigarette, its red tip pulsing into light every few moments to reveal the black pencil of the Colonel's moustache as he sat, immobile behind his desk, reflecting on the previous day's visitor.
He had not expected to run across Tubby Walters again, not within only two years of their end-of-war farewells in London, and certainly not in Ireland.
Somehow he had missed the announcement that Tubby was in command of one of the Dublin Black and Tan units — he had enough to do maintaining the morale and the strictly military role of his own division in Cork without spending time scanning the lists of appointments elsewhere in the country.
Besides, he had no sympathy with the Black and Tans' methods — they were only making a bad situation worse.
So when Tubby was shown into his office wearing the already infamous khaki and dark green uniform the shock almost bowled him over.
Tubby, like himself, had been a career soldier, with an army record second to none — India, Malta, then France and the Somme.
What was he doing as a Black and Tan officer?
How could he possibly be associated with the excesses of such a raggle-taggle outfit?
An even greater surprise was Tubby's appearance.
It wasn't merely that he had lost stones in weight — dash it, the man's sobriquet was a libel now — but that his whole demeanour was that of a soldier completely confused, completely disorientated.
Shell-shocked was almost how the Colonel would have described him.
His eyes were  lack-lustre and bloodshot, the cheeks of his moon face had collapsed into wan saucers, and the generous tyre of flesh on which the face used to ride was little more than a slack tube.
Even worse, Colonel Windsor's sharp glance detected a tremor in the hand that avidly accepted the whiskey and soda he had poured out to celebrate the unexpected reunion with his old comrade-in-arms.
‘To the future!’ the Colonel had said, raising his glass.
Tubby had made no response but drained half his drink in one quick swallow and, as if the Colonel's toast only then reached his ears, replied: ‘No, Eric, not the future.
Not that.
Let's say ‘To old times’.’
The Colonel was not normally one whose nerve or self-confidence could be shaken by a comrade's torment — he had seen too much and, besides, a soldier in the field made his own luck — but sitting now in the darkness, hardly aware of the familiar sounds of a barracks coming to life, the hollow ring of that dead voice seemed to re-echo in his ears.
Could there be a warning for him in the circumstances of Tubby's decline?
‘There but for the grace of God…eh?’ he muttered.
No, he couldn't really see himself ever reduced to such a state.
Even so, he lit the lamp on his desk, put a fresh cigarette in his holder and firmly affixed his monocle — all as if to reassure himself, as if to confirm both his identity and his authority: Colonel Eric R. S. Windsor, DSO, Colonel-in Chief of His Majesty's 16th Infantry Division, currently stationed in Cambridge Barracks, Cork.
He was glad he hadn't gone on to the Reserve after the Armistice, as Tubby had — though, if he had, he would have stayed retired.
Old soldiers should never return to the colours except in cases of dire necessity.
Conditions in the Army were changing — had changed — so quickly that unless one were continuously involved there was no hope of keeping up.
Ironically, it was change that had driven Tubby back to active service — change in civvy street and in the set ways of the pre-war world he had been used to.
‘It was gone, Eric,’ he had explained, his eyes fidgeting to every part of Colonel Windsor's crammed office as if seeking some corner which would not awaken images of once familiar surroundings.
‘It was all gone.
Nothing the same.
Children grown up and away.
Wife an old woman before her time.
No sap in her; too much waiting, y'see, waiting and worrying.’
He broke off, apparently only to finish his drink, but then as he sat hunched in his chair contemplating his empty glass some overpowering depression seemed to crush him into silence.
The Colonel frowned.
Tubby's speech, he noted, still bore all the marks of his military training and background — clipped, precise, factual but the note of self-pity was totally out of character.
Colonel Windsor coughed, and Tubby looked up sharply.
as if suddenly remembering where he was and why he had come, he resumed.
‘What was left for me?
Elevenses in the garden,The Times over my face, pension at the end of the month and not a damned thing I wanted to buy with it.
I was bored, Eric.
You were right to stay on.
I missed it — the only world I ever really knew.
God, how I missed it.
So when the chance came to get back…‘
‘Well, wasn't that just what you wanted?’
Tubby Walters held out his empty glass without a word.
Colonel Windsor refilled it, and Tubby took a large swallow before gathering himself together to reply.
‘Oh, yes, it seemed the very thing.
When I got the nod that the Government was looking for ex-army officers to form a new force for service in Ireland, I tell you, Eric, I thought my prayers had been answered.’
‘And hadn't they been?’
Colonel Windsor had to prompt when Tubby relapsed once again into a brooding torpor.
‘My God, man, don't you know?’
Tubby flashed, his cheeks suddenly going scarlet with passion.
‘Know what?’
‘They're thugs, Eric.
These Tans are just hired killers.
That can't be news to you, man.
You've had plenty of incidents in your own area.’
‘But, damn it, Tubby, you're the boss.
You're in command of your unit — surely you can control them?’
The Colonel was startled by Tubby's reaction.
What had seemed an innocuous and perfectly reasonable suggestion was answered with a moan as of a child in pain.
There was a crash as Tubby's empty glass fell to the floor and he covered his face with his hands.
‘Easy, old man, easy,’ Colonel Windsor urged, momentarily at a loss.
If it had been any other soldier, he would have told him sternly to pull himself together and be a man.
But not Tubby, not an old friend.
Besides, they had been through enough together for Colonel Windsor to know that Tubby was a man — or, at least, he had been.
Bit by bit the Colonel had pieced together Tubby's story.
According to him, the Black and Tans were a terror force, hastily recruited from ex-soldiers to carry out a policy of naked and bloody reprisals against the IRA.
They had been put nominally under the command of ex-army officers like Tubby, to give them a cloak of respectability, but Tubby pointed out that they weren't army units or subject to army authority.
They were attached to the Royal Irish Constabulary yet had no police training, and, knowing the British Cabinet would turn a blind eye to their activities, they had quickly proved uncontrollable.
They wreaked havoc in the country villages, looted and burned at will and were drunk more often than sober.
None of this told the Colonel anything he hadn't already known.
Black and Tan outrages had drawn only lame excuses, even denials, from the Government, and it was becoming more and more difficult to contradict the widespread assertion — by the local newspapers, by the man in the street, even by the RIC themselves — that the whole purpose of the Black and Tans was to crush Sinn Fein and the Irish Republican Army and cow the population.
It was hard to credit that a British Cabinet would  pursue such a policy but, then, there were plenty of hard men in the Government.
They knew the RIC couldn't be relied on; they knew they had no hope of persuading the Army to go on a reign of terror; so a new force with carte blanche ….
‘But what happens when you arrest these men?’
Colonel Windsor had asked.
‘You do arrest them, Tubby?’
‘If I arrested all of them who deserved to be put under arrest, then I'd have no one left,’ was the reply.
‘Oh, I did at the beginning.
But Dublin Castle quickly had them released.‘
‘What about the Secretary for Ireland?
Did you complain to Greenwood?’
‘Complain to London?’
The venom in Tubby's voice confirmed the worst of Colonel Windsor's suspicions.
‘It was a waste of time, Eric, a sheer waste of time.’
‘Why?
What happened?’
‘Nothing.
Absolutely nothing.
‘Complaints being studied’, et cetera, et cetera .
But no action, no support.
The blind eye, Eric.
Don't you see, man?
They're all in it together.’
‘You're sure of that, Tubby?
It wasn't just red-tape delays, Home Office routines, that sort of thing?’
There was a brief silence, and then ‘There's a village by the name of Balbriggan, just outside Dublin,’ Tubby said, his voice unnaturally low.
‘Wasn't there a policeman shot there a little while ago?’
‘Yes, the Head Constable.
Assassinated in broad daylight.
A dastardly act.
I don't hold with it.
I don't excuse it.
But….‘
His hands clenched and unclenched.
‘Go on,’ Colonel Windsor urged.
He could see that whatever was agitating his friend had pushed him to the limit but he judged it better to let him get it off his chest than keep it bottled up.
‘That night, in Balbriggan, the RIC and the Tans looted four public houses.
Then they burned them down.
Then they burned down a factory and forty-nine other houses.
Then the RIC picked out men they said were  Sinn Feiners.
Six of them.
Two were bayoneted.
God knows where they got the bayonets.
They're not even supposed to have them.
The other four were shot by the Tans.
Just shot without trial or question.
By my men, Eric.
Men supposed to be under my command.’
‘But surely you reported that?
Surely you told London?’
‘Oh, yes.
I reported it.
I certainly reported it.
Names, places, time, every detail.’
‘And?’
‘Nothing.
Except….’
‘Except what?’
‘Don't know if it's true.
But it came from a reliable source.
I was told that when the Cabinet got my report of what the Tans had done Churchill said he could see no harm in it.’
Colonel Windsor's initial reaction had been to discount that, no matter how trustworthy the source; but now, as he reflected on it, he felt it could well be true.
Churchill was a particular hothead and, after all, if the Cabinet didn't condone what had happened, why hadn't they authorised an enquiry?
Why had they just ignored Tubby's report?
‘What can I do, Eric?’ he had pleaded.
‘I can't stop such outrages but I can't just stand by and let them continue.
These men are supposed to be my responsibility, and I'm powerless.
Just a figurehead.
Not even that.
A puppet.
I'm ashamed, so ashamed.
I never thought…after the career I've had, the service I've given….’
‘I know, Tubby, I know.
It's not your fault.
It's not something you, personally, have to be ashamed of.
You're just being used.
It's not really your disgrace.’
‘But it is.
I feel disgraced.
And what can I do about it, Eric, what can I do?’
The panic in Tubby's voice alarmed Colonel Windsor.
He poured his friend a fresh drink and pressed the glass into his shaking hand.
‘Drink that and I'll tell you what to do.’
Tubby took one swallow and then looked up at the Colonel.
‘What?’ he asked.
The Colonel put a hand on his shoulder and said quietly: ‘Resign.’
The response did not greatly surprise him.
The light of hope that had flickered in Tubby's eyes died and he shook his head wearily.
‘I've thought of that.
I can't do it.
It would be like deserting.’
Colonel Windsor resumed his seat.
‘Nonsense,’ he replied.
‘You must resign.’
‘On what grounds?
On the grounds that I can't control my men?
That would look fine on my record.
What an end to my career — to my life.’
‘No,’ Colonel Windsor explained.
‘You resign on medical grounds.’
‘But I'm not sick.
I'm not, Eric, am I?
Do you think I'm sick?’
It was a flash of the old soldier, the true grit of a seasoned campaigner who refuses to leave the field of battle despite his wounds.
That ingrained courage, the belief that he must continue to fight on — the ability to fool himself into thinking that he could fight on — was all that was left to Tubby, and Colonel Windsor realised that to take it away from him could precipitate the final breakdown.
Equally, however, he saw that, unless Tubby did resign, breakdown was inevitable.
‘No,’ he assured him, ‘of course you're not sick.
You know what you're doing — you know what you're saying.
You're under pressure, that's obvious, great pressure.
But you're not sick yet.
What I mean, Tubby, is that if you continue like this you'll end up sick.
And for what?
For the empty command of a gang of thugs and for a government that's just using you.’
He paused to see what effect his words were having.
Tubby was sitting up straight, shoulders back, head  raised, looking for the first time in his visit like the confident soldier he had been.
Pride — that's all he needed, Colonel Windsor recognised: restore his pride and he'll see sense.
‘You don't want any of this charade, Tubby,’ he went on.
‘You don't want to have anything to do with it.
You're too fine a soldier to be dragged down.
You have your record to consider — a sterling record, old chap, I don't have to tell you that — and you have your self-respect and your pride.
These are things you can't afford to lose, not at this time of your life.
So you resign on medical grounds.’
He stubbed out his cigarette in the already half-full ashtray, inserted another into his holder, and slowly lit it.
‘It's the only dignified way out.
It's the only dignified way of telling them that you're not going to be made a fool of any longer and you're not going to be dragged down to their level.’
It had been the right advice — Colonel Windsor knew it was — and Tubby had promised to take it.
That at least was something to congratulate himself on, but there had been nothing else in the encounter to afford the Colonel any consolation.
The implications of the Black and Tans' behaviour and of the complicity of the Government in their reign of terror had been clear for some time, but Tubby's experience had brought it all into sharp focus.
Ireland had been slipping out of Britain's grasp — Sinn Fein had almost swept the board in the local elections, they had set up their own provisional government in Dublin and in some areas of the country theirs was the only authority recognised — and, on top of all that, in September alone there had been over two thousand IRA arms raids.
The Colonel knew there were only two possible answers to that situation: massive repression or get out.
The Government had in its wisdom decided on the former — hence the Black and Tans.
Colonel Windsor was a soldier, not a politician; he mightn't like the choice, but his duty was to make the best of it.
He lit a fresh cigarette, screwed his monocle more firmly into his eye, and took out his pen.
His only concern was for his own men and for the standards and traditions he expected them to live up to.
The British army garrisons had stayed aloof from Black and Tan outrages; and the IRA, in concentrating their attacks on the Tans and the RIC, had seemed on the whole to recognise that.
But already there were signs that the mood was changing, that to the people all uniforms were alike; the Army was now being tarred with the same brush as the Tans, and its patrols — as his own men had recently learned — were no longer immune from IRA attacks.
Colonel Windsor took a sheet of paper from his desk and wrote out the day's Orders: Friday, 12 November 1920 To all section commanders Special General Order Section commanders are warned that the severest disciplinary measures will be taken against any sign of looting or retaliation.
These are breaches of conduct which would merit the death penalty if the Army were on active service.
If police operating with troops begin to engage in reprisals, the commander of the troops will withdraw his men, after giving the police due warning of his intention.
(Signed) ERIC R. S. WINDSOR Colonel-in-Chief 16th Infantry Division That, the Colonel felt, was the most he could do.
As Colonel Windsor laid aside his pen, dawn was breaking murkily over the County Longford village of Granard, some 150 miles north of Cambridge Barracks.
Longford was far from Owen O'Clery's usual haunts in the south and east.
It was a county he wasn't familiar  with, and Granard he didn't know at all.
Not all that distant from the rocky stretches and barren wastes of Mayo and Connemara, Longford mightn't be the most profitable place for a wandering fiddler, Owen thought.
And if it wasn't profitable it mightn't be welcoming, either.
Not that he was inclined to blame its inhabitants for that.
Struggling peasants they'd be for the most part, trying to keep body and soul together in difficult times.
It wouldn't be their fault that there wasn't enough to go round.
They had always had it hard.
Wasn't it in the first cousin of just this sort of place that two centuries earlier another wandering fiddler, the blind poet Raftery, had composed his famous lament about ‘playing music to empty pockets’?
God be trusted, Longford and Granard wouldn't be as bad as that.
Still, if there were villages in Ireland these days where a man might be in danger of meeting the same ill-fortune face to face, Owen feared he was getting near them.
Not but that he ever needed much.
For bed a roadside ditch in the summer, a barn or hay-loft in the winter was all he sought, while for food and drink a farmer's wife never begrudged him the plate of bread and potatoes washed down by a mug of tay.
And it was seldom his tunes failed to draw the odd penny from a shopkeeper's pocket or, indeed, a bottle from the publican to sustain him to the next village.
The open road was all he knew; he had spent forty of his fifty-five years tramping it in every kind of weather with only the fill of his pipe for company.
He wouldn't stay long in Granard.
The way things were, it was best to keep on the move.
But where could he go?
Dublin had the richest pickings and the south was hospitable, but they were too disturbed for his liking, and getting worse.
He had seen enough terror there to last him the rest of his days.
He had seen fear, and bravery, too, and savagery and oppression, homes burned down, wheels smashed off carts and farm implements so that the land could not be cultivated, crops ruined — he had seen  it spread everywhere and he didn't want to see it any more.
Even if there mightn't be much for him in these parts, be it without strife that little would have God's blessing on it.
He couldn't complain, anyway, about his first night's lodgings in Granard.
He had reached there late after a long tramp from Ballyjamesduff in the next county.
It had been a cold evening, heavily overcast, not a splink of moonlight to pierce the darkness of his last few miles.
Still, he had been treated fairly in Ballyjamesduff, so that he didn't need to go seeking his next bite before breakfast.
Just as well, for with the state the country was in people would be wary of a stranger who'd come knocking on their door at an hour when they might be warm and snug at the gates of dreamland.
Time enough and soon enough to greet them in the morning's light when the men would have said their prayers and the womenfolk would have been to Mass and a stranger with a fiddle might be a welcome diversion from the day's chores.
Until then a safe shelter under a dry roof would be Owen O'Clery's sufficient address and a good night's rest would fit him to take Granard's measure.
The safe shelter he had found on the edge of the village could not have been more comfortable, for all that on awakening and having his first lightsome look it struck him as a mite strange.
But the shed at the side of the road had been unlocked, and when he peered into it the outline of the covered carriage he had been able to make out in the darkness promised adequate protection and a degree of comfort.
A degree of comfort it had certainly provided.
He had climbed in and settled himself down with a sigh of contentment at the way the softness and smoothness of the upholstered seats favoured his weary limbs.
He felt he might have been a lord, or at least a prosperous shopkeeper about to be driven to his mansion — except that there was no horse.
The horse, he reflected, was probably asleep in his stable.
‘And so should yourself be, too, Owen O'Clery,’ he had muttered  as he laid his fiddle-case on the opposite seat, curled himself up and was immediately transported to his own dreamland.
Now, in the reluctant dawn light, he stood eyeing the carriage and rubbing his grizzled chin.
The gleaming black exterior with the polished silver lamp-brackets and the forbidding curtains within that could be drawn to hide its occupants from prying stares told him it was a mourners' carriage he had spent the night in.
He smiled to himself.
‘Better that than a coffin,’ he whispered, adding as he leaned in to retrieve his fiddle: ‘And if my coffin is half as comfortable ‘tis a smooth journey I'll be having to Paradise.’
Straightening up, he heard a sudden peal of church bells cleave through the silence.
It was a welcome sound.
The village would be awake, he could get Mass himself and no doubt his breakfast, too, from a kindly worshipper.
It looked as if St Christopher, the patron saint of travellers, had been watching over him and had guided his steps to Longford and Granard.
He might linger a while in this village after all.
And if he did itself, he thought, as he doffed his cap to the carriage and shook hands with one of its shafts in mock farewell, at least he had reserved select accommodation where no one was likely to disturb him.
Pulling open the shed door he poked out his head to see if anyone was about.
He sniffed.
He sniffed again.
There was no mistaking the smell.
Burning.
There was a fire somewhere.
Was it some other traveller, camping nearby perhaps, and brewing his breakfast mug?
The presence of a rival could blight his own prospects, and if he happened to be from the locality, then Owen O'Clery told himself he might as well be moving on immediately.
He looked around.
There was no one in view.
Twenty paces or so beyond the shed the road twisted out of sight, and it was from that direction the smell of burning was being carried by the breeze.
Above the bare-branched trees on the edge of his vision he could see clouds of  smoke.
That came from more than a few crossed twigs and dry leaves.
That was a real fire.
Tucking his fiddlecase under his arm he set out to find it.
‘Mother of God!’
The words, both exclamation and prayer, were forced out of him as he reached the bend in the road and came on the village of Granard.
The sight that met his eyes sent a spasm of horror through him.
He took a few steps, then suddenly weak with shock he reeled and collapsed on the road, his fiddle-case falling from under his arm.
‘Oh Jesus!’ he groaned.
‘Oh Jesus, Mary and Joseph!’
At the other end of Granard's single short street, cottages on both sides were ablaze.
Black smoke gushed out of open doors and through windows and roofs only to be suddenly consumed by tongues of fire that licked heavenwards, raising up their flaming fangs like the arms of satanic dancers placating some obscene god.
Beyond the twin pillars of fire eating their way towards him and throwing billowing curtains of smoke across the road Owen could fitfully see the gathered villagers clinging to each other in terror.
Their wails and screams rose above the crackle of their burning homes and were made even more blood-curdling by the clangorous din of the church bells that frantically appealed to heaven for aid.
Some of the womenfolk had turned away, unable to look.
Others had drawn their shawls across the faces of their children to shield their eyes from the sight.
A straggling line of men feverishly passed to each other splashing pails of water from a roadside pump where a perspiring youth, naked to the waist, was madly working the handle to keep the chain of buckets supplied.
But what struck like an ice-cold knife into Owen's heart was the group of six or seven men standing in the middle of the road, between him and the fire, laughing and jeering at the villagers' puny efforts to save their homes.
He knew only too well their dark trousers and khaki coats.
‘The Tans!’
Owen breathed.
‘Oh Jesus, the Tans!’
Suddenly one of them turned and saw him.
Owen tried to rise, but his legs were like lead and kept getting entangled in his long coat.
It was no use — even if he could have got to his feet, he knew he'd never be able to escape.
Already the Tans were running towards him, guns being waved menacingly in case he tried to get away.
As they surrounded him, eyes red-rimmed and faces glistening from the heat of the flames, their whooping cries added to the pandemonium and it seemed to Owen as if he had already died and retribution for the sins of his life was about to be exacted by Satan's minions.
Weakly he crossed himself.
‘Hi, Captain, there's some old bastard here sayin' his prayers.
What'll we do with him?’
One of the Tans raised his rifle, and Owen closed his eyes, cringing away from the blow.
The weapon descended with a thud.
But it was Owen's fiddle-case, not his skull, it was aimed at, and as the lid flew open the Tan pounced on the fiddle and bow.
‘Wotcher!’ he shouted as he scraped on the strings.
‘How about a little victory dance?
Come on, take your partners there.’
Gleefully two of his companions linked arms and cavorted around Owen, drawing their guns with their free hands and wildly shooting into the air.
Their maniacal screeching, the exploding bullets, the crackle and thunder of the approaching flames, the hammer-blows of the still booming church bells and the nerve-rasping wailing of the fiddle whirled around Owen's head, but even that maelstrom of noise could not drown the cries of the villagers.
‘You can't bleedin' play that thing,’ a prancing Tan shouted, grabbing the instrument and throwing it onto Owen's prostrate body.
‘Come on, you.
Give us a tune there, a proper tune,’ he demanded.
A wave of his gun made Owen reach desperately for the fiddle.
He struggled to his knees, but the menace of the leering faces surrounding  rounding him drained the strength from his limbs, so that when he tried to draw the bow across the strings the result was a tuneless scratch.
‘Come on, up!
Get up!’ one of the dancers ordered; and then, turning to another of the group, he said: ‘No malingering allowed.
Right, Captain?’
For answer the Tan addressed drew his gun and fired into the ground at Owen's feet.
‘On your pins, Nero,’ he bawled, taking hold of Owen and jerking him upright.
‘Give us a tune.
A good dancing tune now, or else you might be dancing yourself on the end of a rope.’
The fear which before had turned Owen's limbs to water now suddenly galvanised him.
If he didn't want a beating, or worse, he'd have to pander to these monsters.
He rose to his feet and struck up a reel.
The Tans immediately began to prance around him, laughing and howling.
One of them broke into a wardance like a Red Indian and the others followed suit, but their captain quickly intervened.
‘Hey!
We don't want any of your bleedin' Irish jigs!
Give us some real music, something civilised.
That right, lads?’
‘Right,’ the others shouted, echoing his demand.
‘Give us a good old English tune,’ came from one of them.
‘I don't know…
I don't know any…
,’ Owen stuttered.
The circle of grimacing faces thrust themselves at him, guns and fists roughly bruising him as the calls for something English were repeated.
The approaching flames were nearer now, and beyond them he could see the villagers trying to peer through the smoke to make out what was happening.
A few of the men were pointing at him, struggling as if to go to his aid but being restrained by their companions and womenfolk.
It was an awesome sight to Owen — the charred and burning cottages almost totally engulfed, the huddled families powerless before the wanton destruction of all they possessed, their torturers still encircling him, screaming out the names of tunes he had never even heard of.
But, even if he had known one, he still wouldn't style these beasts by playing it.
The fear was banished from his heart by pity for his fellow-countrymen and anger at what was being done to the little village of Granard that he had thought would be a haven of peace.
He'd play — yes, but he'd play for them , for these stricken people; he'd play something they'd know, something that might lift their hearts in their plight and strengthen them to defy their oppressors.
He stiffened his legs, put the fiddle under his chin, and sounded the first notes of ‘The Manchester Martyrs’, a song in praise of three Fenians who had been captured in England and hanged over fifty years before.
It was a ballad that since then had been sung and played in the streets and pubs of Ireland.
That was a tune they'd be familiar with — oh, by God they would.
It was a tune to give them heart and remind them that they were not alone in their suffering.
Owen played with all the strength and passion at his command.
He saw the knot of people beyond the flames gazing at him in puzzled amazement, but they made no response.
Then he realised that his music was being drowned by the noise of the conflagration.
Without hesitation he started to walk towards them, despite the searing heat of the flames now only yards off.
The shouts and jeers of the Tans battered against his ears.
He ignored them.
He could feel the perspiration stinging his eyes, and his hands became wet and clammy as he strode on.
Now he had drawn level with the fire, and as the villagers caught the air of his song he was quickly rewarded with the sound of their voices — men, women and children — lifted in unison.
‘Attend you gallant Irishmen and listen for a while
I'll sing to you the praises of the sons of Erin's Isle —
It's of those gallant heroes….’
Suddenly there was a shout from one of the Tans behind him.
‘Jeez, Captain, listen to them.
The bastard's playing a rebel song’— and immediately a shot rang out.
The violin flew from Owen's grasp as the force of the bullet jerked him upright.
For a second he stood, his arms extended towards the horrified villagers, before staggering a few steps and collapsing into the flames.
With his last ounce of strength he tried to stretch a hand to his fiddle, but it was already burning fiercely.
He heard its strings twang, snapped by the heat, and then he heard no more.
2
AS THE FIRST chimes of noon from the bells of Shandon broke over the pavements and washed into the busy shops, the people of Cork halted in their step or turned from what they were doing to cross themselves and murmur the Angelus prayer.
For those few moments life seemed not to be quite the noisome beast it had become of late — the pale November sun was a warming coin in the palm, fear was forgotten, bloodshed cleansed away, losses solaced.
The swell of responses seemed alone to fill the crisp air, even the rasp of soldiers' boots on the paving-stones went unheard.
Then the sound of the bells faded and, like water suddenly released from a dam, vigour and brawl and bustle flooded back into the scene.
The revived activity made North Main Street wholesome once more to Boxer Sullivan.
He was perched on the seat at the front of his open cart — the sides of which declared in now weatherbeaten letters ‘JAS.
SULLIVAN, VICTUALLER’— and alternately reined in his horse and then with his whip prodded its jittering rump.
The fitful progress that resulted was the most the overcrowded state of the narrow roadway allowed.
On each side were stalls heaped with fruit, vegetables, fish and other staples, behind which strapping black-shawled women bawled produce and price, oblivious of the packs of snarling dogs and ragged children lunging in and out between them for whatever scraps they could scavenge.
In both directions — south towards the Grand Parade and Patrick Street, and north to the quays — other horse-drawn vehicles threaded their way, wheels screaming, drivers cursing and cracking whips, the while throngs of Friday shoppers darted from one side of the unpaved road to the other, dodging between carts and traps and under horses' necks as if they weren't there at all.
And every now and again a Crossley tender carrying a company of Black and Tans, their guns held at a threatening angle, would butt its way through the press, its progress-retarded — sometimes even brought to a halt — by as unlikely a variety of breakdowns and traffic jams as the doggedly obstructive citizens of Cork could improvise this side of outright rebellion.
The bedlam in no way flustered Boxer Sullivan.
The return to normality after the Angelus hush made him feel that the all-seeing spirit which had for a while hovered doubtfully over his actions had now moved on.
Reality's raw challenge, especially if it engaged muscle and pluck, was his more favoured companion.
His nickname, his flattened nose, a crossed scar like an emblem beside one eyebrow had all been won honourably, in and out of the ring, and whatever suspicions he might have about the feelings — even about the suitability for the present assignment — of Denis Hurley, sitting back-to-back with him on the cart, he knew that he would be man enough for anything,his nerve would not fail.
The confidence of this self-knowledge sounded a note of cockiness, amounting almost to elation, as he remarked over his shoulder: ‘It's tricky enough here.
Probably be like this until we're past Wellington Barracks.’
‘Well, just go easy.
Don't take any risks,’ answered Hurley.
Advice rather than command, apprehension riding authority was dominant in the urgent tone.
There was a third passenger in the cart, but he said nothing.
He was lying on his back at Hurley's feet, hedged in by fruit-baskets, potato-sacks and bags of meal.
His body was completely buried under a dirty rug, part of which Hurley held with one hand, ostensibly to cover his knees from the wintry air, but more particularly to hide his other hand in which was a gun pointed straight at his prisoner's head.
The gun troubled him.
He had been in the unit over  six months now and this was the first time he was seeing action, the first time he had been entrusted with a weapon — apart from a few training sessions.
It was too long to go without being blooded.
The right time would have been immediately after he had joined, when he was still almost dizzy with anger at the way the city's Lord Mayor, Tomas MacCurtain, had been murdered.
A squad of armed and masked men had broken into MacCurtain's home one night in March and shot him dead in front of his wife and children.
The assassins had never been traced, and the British authorities had said they were Sinn Feiners; it was a stupid accusation, for MacCurtain had been a staunch Republican himself, so nobody had any doubt that the killers were Black and Tans.
The coroner's jury had even brought in a sensational verdict, that ‘the murder was organised and carried out by the Royal Irish Constabulary, officially directed by the British Government, and we return a verdict of wilful murder against David Lloyd George, Prime Minister of England….’
It was a verdict which had fired many a nationalistically minded but hitherto passive young Irishman to join the IRA, and it had prodded Denis into convincing himself that the time had come for him to stop wavering and take an active role in his country's struggle.
Since joining his local unit, however, he had been given nothing to do but monotonous night drilling in almost inaccessible fields with shovels or hurleys as substitute rifles, dire shortage of arms and ammunition having restricted the unit to only two sessions of real firing practice.
The months of frustration had begun to drain his enthusiasm, until the arrest of Terence MacSwiney, MacCurtain's successor as Lord Mayor, and his death in Brixton Prison after seventy-four days on hunger strike banished at a stroke his returning doubts.
Even so, two meagre sessions of firing practice in all that time were of little help in strengthening his nerve or stoking up his fighting spirit.
Anyway, practice was different.
It wasn't  the real thing.
This was.
And the gun he held now, pointed at an unarmed man's head — its menace was chillingly different from those few target practices.
Then it just shot bullets at a tin can.
It missed mostly; when it did score a hit there was a screaming ping and no more.
Not like a human scream.
And no blood.
No gasps.
No pleading eyes.
He had hardly noticed its weight before.
Now it was leaden in his hand.
It threatened him as much as it did his victim.
It would kill at the pressure of a finger on the trigger.
His finger.
He stirred himself and shivered into alertness.
He'd need to keep his senses sharp and try to put any such callow thoughts quite out of his mind.
It was probably the tension that had him jittery.
Most action was bound to be like this — a span, long or short, in which one did nothing — could do nothing except be at the mercy of one's nerves — and then the moment, the test…
He shook himself again and nudged Boxer.
‘What's it like ahead?’ he asked.
Sitting with his back to the way they were going was unsettling.
He was supposed to be the leader in this assignment, but how could a man lead going backwards?
Hardy should have thought of that and found them some more suitable conveyance.
‘Much the same as it is behind,’ Boxer replied.
‘Don't worry, we have bags of time.’
They were passing over North Gate Bridge, and below them the River Lee flowed on to Cork harbour and the open sea.
Denis loved the river, had loved it as long as he could remember.
As a child he had been taken by his father for walks every Sunday always along the banks of the Lee.
Sometimes they would stroll under the leafy canopies of the Mardyke, where the river was not a river at all but a stream — his father used to say that you couldn't even call it a branch of the Lee, perhaps a twig at best— often dried-up in summer and so narrow that he could nearly have jumped across it if he had been allowed; at other times their route would take them down the Marina where the river was a broad rink-like expanse  that copied in shimmering reflections the haughty hills of Montenotte drawing themselves up from its other side.
Ships — two- and three-masters — would frequently glide by as if on skates, coming from or going to the river's mouth.
The city's motto came to mind:Statio bene fida carinis —‘A good and safe haven for ships’.
For ships maybe; not for people.
Not nowadays anyway, be they Irish or British — or even neither.
He resisted the temptation to look under the rug and see how his prisoner was getting on.
They weren't out of the woods yet — far from it.
There were still soldiers patrolling, and as the cart turned right into Pope's Quay they came under the scrutiny of a Royal Irish Constabulary man on duty at the corner.
Boxer Sullivan chose that moment to pull an apple from his pocket and polish it on his coat.
‘I'll save you the heart,’ he joked.
Denis didn't answer, but ‘Wouldn't doubt you, boy,’ the local catchphrase denoting approval, rose silently to his lips.
Lucky Boxer!
This assignment was eating and drinking to him.
But, then, Boxer not only had no nerves, he also had no qualms; the morality of their actions — of any action in the national struggle — was not a question he ever weighed.
Not that he was stupid, just uncomplicated.
He believed in doing, and came into his own when he was free to renounce the responsibility of reasoning anything out and could trust himself entirely to his own reflexes.
Denis envied him.
If only he could accept things without question.
But how could he possibly feel happy about the role he had been given?
Kidnapping an old man for ransom was demeaning, sheer gangsterism.
It had nothing to do with the struggle; it wouldn't help beat the Black and Tans.
Hardy had said it would — not that Denis would believe a word from Hardy, even if he was the unit Officer-in-Command.
‘Headquarters in Dublin has OK'd it,’ Hardy had assured him, but Denis did not believe that, either.
‘HQ needs the money for arms, and this is the safest way.’
Yes, Denis knew how precious arms were.
What guns the unit possessed  had been captured in raids on isolated police barracks or ambushes on convoys in which men — his comrades — had willingly risked their lives.
Certainly without guns they had no hope, they might as well give up.
The more weapons they could capture — or preferably beg, borrow or buy — the better their chances.
And it was known that some of the Royal Irish Constabulary were ready to do business if the offer was tempting enough.
That made money in a way as important as guns — if they could find enough.
But kidnapping for ransom….
The whole exploit had all the marks of Hardy's twisted mentality.
‘Old Josh, Iron Josh, he's your mark.
As rich as Rothschild.
And, anyway, it was from the British he made his money, selling them scrap iron during the war, so it will be an extra pleasure to make him cough up that sort of loot.’
It had been useless for Denis to protest that Iron Josh was an outsider with no involvement in their cause one way or the other.
Not even an Irish outsider, but a foreigner — a Jew.
Why kidnap a Jew?
‘Because he's rich.
He won't miss the money.
And it's an old Jewish custom — buying their safety with their wealth.
Jews never fight; they just pay up.
You'll have no trouble with Josh Cohen.’
Iron Josh had certainly given them no trouble when they had driven into his yard at the back of Old George's Street and ordered him to climb into the cart.
Few words had been spoken — Denis had been glad of his gun's eloquence as he found his own voice suddenly unreliable.
He had made Iron Josh lock up before they left — Hardy had told him that on winter Fridays the Jewish sabbath commenced in the afternoon, so no one would be surprised if the store was closed extra early.
Oh, Hardy was a crafty planner all right, you'd have to give him that.
But Denis had been totally unnerved by the complete lack of fear or even concern the Jew had displayed at the sudden sight of the gun.
Calmly he had removed the black skull-cap from the back of his head, replaced it with a bowler hat, and donned a heavy overcoat.
He  might, indeed, have been finishing his week's work and locking up to go home and celebrate his God's sabbath.
Denis didn't remember what happened to the bowler hat after the old man had laboured to haul himself up into the cart and, in response to a wave of the gun, had carefully stretched himself out on its messy floor.
He supposed it was somewhere under the rug, perhaps held on to by old Josh as some sort of comforter.
Boxer had been steadily bowling along the quays, where the traffic was less congested.
They passed lock-up stores, splendid Georgian terraces, and the stern front of St Mary's Church with its massive columns which had always seemed to Boxer like the fingers of an upraised hand ordering him to halt, enter and say a prayer.
A touch of restraint on his horse's reins to reduce its gallop and an extravagant sign of the cross were the best amends he could make this time for his inability to comply.
Once out of its range, however, he quickly whipped the animal on again and was soon able to announce: ‘The Barracks coming up.
Denis tightened his grip on his gun.
This was a dangerpoint.
With the city in such a ferment, they could be stopped on a whim by police or soldiers.
He looked hard at the outline of the body under the rug.
Its only movement was a regular tremor in unison with the rhythm of the cart.
Still, he couldn't take any risks.
If Cohen showed the slightest inclination to get up or cause a commotion, he'd have to knock him out — swiftly and silently.
To forestall any such eventuality he bent his head down towards the rug and growled into it, as loudly as he dared, ‘One move from you and you're a goner,’ underlying the threat by prodding the body with his boot.
There was no response.
It appeared that Josh Cohen had no intention of giving them any trouble — just as Hardy had predicted.
Boxer was forced to reduce pace at this point by the congestion of traffic in and out of the Barracks.
Police and army vehicles were interspersed with civilians' traps  and tradesmen's carts, the latter having to submit to careful scrutiny before being allowed to enter the Barracks square.
There was even a gleaming newfangled Ford tractor, the racket of its engine filling the air and little jets of steam spurting from its radiator like the darts of hot breath expelled from the nostrils of the horses in the street.
‘I suppose that's from above in the Marina,’ Boxer commented.
Denis nodded.
The building of the Henry Ford factory on the Marina had been started a few years before; and Denis, whose regular walks to Blackrock — solitary now that his father was no longer there to accompany him took him past the site, had watched its growth from the first brick.
He knew that what he was seeing meant jobs for Cork, wage-packets for its workers, money for its shopkeepers, business for its tradesmen; but, more than that, more even than the commerce that would result on a national scale, he saw it as history in action.
Henry Ford's family had been born just outside Cork city and had emigrated to America, he himself had become a multi-millionaire and now, as a national benefactor, was perpetuating his name in his ancestral home town.
Already it had its place in local balladry.
Denis smiled to himself as he thought of the jingle going the rounds:
There was a little man and his name was Henry Ford,
He took a bit of rubber and an old piece of board,
He got a pot of glue and an old tin can
And he stuck them all together and the damn thing ran.
How many other exiles like him would his example encourage?
Ireland would have need of plenty of ‘money from America’ when its day of freedom dawned.
And yet, if it had not been a conquered repressed country from which so many of the flower of its youth were forced to escape, would Ireland have been able to produce sons like Henry Ford?
It was almost a treasonable thought, and  Denis was relieved when Boxer, observing that the tractor was a ‘queer-looking contraption’, drew him back to the present.
They were proceeding at no more than walking pace past the numerous hut-like structures around the perimeter of the Barracks, and Denis kept his gaze resolutely in front of him.
It was a building he didn't particularly want to see, though he didn't imagine he could ever succeed in burying its memories and associations.
‘You know that place well, I'm told,’ Boxer ventured.
‘What do you mean?’
But Denis knew what he meant, and Boxer's comment brought home to him the fact that even if he were able to blot out its significance he wouldn't be allowed.
‘Wasn't your oul’ fella stationed there?’
It was a statement rather than a question, more information-seeking than accusation.
So you know, Denis reflected resignedly.
You all know, the whole unit.
He wasn't really surprised.
He had guessed that Hardy wouldn't keep that titbit to himself.
Denis had had to reveal it when applying to join — they'd have found out anyway that his father had been in the RIC.
And of course that was why Hardy had taken against him, why he had left him on the sidelines any time he picked a team for some action, why he had now given him a job that he knew anyone else in the unit would have balked at.
But he didn't need to give it to anyone else — no one else was flawed in the way Denis was, no one else's loyalty gave grounds for doubt and therefore for the most unsavoury of tests.
‘You wouldn't want to fail first time out, would you?’
Hardy had urged as he signed out the gun and ammunition to Denis.
‘You know what to do.
I'll expect you back with the money.
Or without the Jew.’
Denis wished that his father was still stationed in Wellington Barracks.
Far better even that than where he was now — stretched six feet deep in a foreign grave.
Boxer hadn't pursued his question, so he must know that, too.
Of course he did.
Denis could imagine Hardy telling the others in the unit about Hurley's old man, such a reliable, dependable, loyal,Irish subject of King and country that he answered His Britannic Majesty's call to arms and fought across the seas under the British Crown for the rights of small nations!
That was just how he'd tell it; Denis could hear the tone of sarcastic relish in his voice.
Reliable, dependable, loyal — what did such labels mean?
They could be turned inside out, like those optical-illusion drawings of a cylinder that could be made to appear either concave or convex, depending on how one focused one's gaze.
And love?
Admiration?
The rhythm of the cart, moving once more at a steady pace, rocked the kaleidoscope of memory.
He could recall — how old was he then?
Ten?
Eleven?— regular visits to the Wellington Street Barracks canteen where, list clutched in his hand, he did the weekly shop while his father was in the orderly room.
Things were cheaper there than outside — butter, sugar, candles, tea, fruit — and he felt grown-up, puffed with self-importance, at being allowed with all those policemen, seeing them taking their ease, sitting at table, drinking, smoking, laughing, playing cards, some with their coats off and braces showing.
They were friendly, jolly men, his father's comrades.
They asked him how he was doing at school, made up questions to test him, twitted him about imaginary girlfriends, and there was always someone who wanted to know if he was going to be an RIC man like his dad when he grew up.
Of course he'd join the RIC.
It was his dad's world, everything in it happy and unclouded, and Denis saw himself and his father patrolling its streets together.
After the shopping Denis would sit in the orderly room, watching his father write in ledgers twice as wide and twenty times as thick as his school exercise-books, or he'd gaze longingly at the Royal Irish Constabulary uniforms of his father's colleagues with their shining buttons and belts hanging neatly from pegs on the wall, the caps, the spiked helmets and the little pill-box hats of the  cavalry police lined up, as if on parade, on a table along with whistle-chains, handcuff-cases and batons.
He would touch the menacing batons very gingerly, withdrawing his fingers sharply from their hardness and flinching as he imagined the solid clump sound as a baton descended on someone's skull.
That was a time when young and old had thronged the streets to welcome in a new century and, though anything with the 1800s about it was already as dead as history, it still took some years before the magical 19 in the date lost its strangeness and one would write it without a slight hesitation.
That was a time when the proudest moment of Denis's young life had been being brought by his mother to Fitzgerald's Park to see his father, brave and bold and handsome in his dress uniform, standing firmly to attention with his company as His Majesty King Edward VII — who seemed to Denis like a huge teapot with his cigar puffing steam like a spout — and Queen Alexandra moved sedately among the flower displays at the Great Cork Exhibition.
He had been proud of his father then, had admired him, had loved him — and had not needed to understand him.
Now?
Now he mourned him — but secretly.
He hadn't dared take part in yesterday's Armistice Day service in the city in case he'd be seen by any of his IRA comrades.
He didn't doubt there were many others also who had brothers, fathers or sons among the fifty thousand Irishmen slain in the Great War and who had to swallow their grief and mourn in private.
The irony of it, considering the hundreds of fellow-Irishmen who attended Armistice Day ceremonies in the smaller towns throughout the country only because the Black and Tans had forced them to shut their businesses and turn out.
‘How are we doin' for time?’
Boxer's question suddenly shook the kaleidoscope again, and Denis was back in the present.
He glanced at his watch and looked around.
They were out of the suburbs now, skirting the graceful slopes of Montenotte on one side, the level river on the other.
‘Not too bad.
It's safe enough to put a bit of speed on from here.’
‘Right enough, then’— and a ferocious crack of the whip electrified the horse into a gallop.
‘That's funny,’ Denis mused.
‘What's funny?’
‘That whip of yours.
Wouldn't you think that a sudden noise like that — like a rifle-shot, I'd say — would startle a man if he wasn't expecting it?
Yet there wasn't a move from our friend here.’
‘Jesus, Denis, you don't think he's died on us?
His heart could have given out.’
Denis lifted the rug and put his face near to Cohen's.
‘Well, is he all right?’
There was a note of real anxiety in Boxer's voice.
‘Is he breathing?’
‘Oh, he's breathing for sure,’ Denis laughed.
‘Would you believe it, the bugger's fast asleep, like a newborn babe.‘
‘Thank God for that,’ Boxer grunted in satisfied relief.
Denis, however, had his doubts.
He bent low to examine his prisoner's face even more closely.
Yes, he wasn't shamming; he was certainly asleep.
Hardy had said he'd be no trouble.
Jews don't fight, he'd said.
They just pay up.
Perhaps.
But what sort of a man was it who could be kidnapped, bundled into a cart and made to lie on the floor under a rug with a gun at his head while being driven halfway across the city on a cold November afternoon — and then just calmly and quietly fall fast asleep?
3
‘SOON.
Very soon.
Soon now.
Soon.’
Abie Klugman's week's work was done.
He was going home.
He relaxed his roly-poly figure in the cart and let his piebald pony, who knew the way home as well as he did, trot ahead through the darkness of the berry-lined road.
‘Yes.
Very soon.
Very.
Soon now.’
Abie spoke little to anyone apart from himself and various personages from his past and his future.
The people in his past had been real once but, although that was a very long time ago, he had never been able to forget them or what they had done to his life.
The people in his future were imagined, but to him not imaginary.
They existed, too, somewhere, seeking him out in every corner, and if they ever found him they would surely drag him back to the terror from which he looked forward to escaping, finally and permanently, soon.
‘Very soon.
Soon now.
Soon.’
But as the pony trotted on under the cloud-filled November sky the voice that soon stole into Abie Klugman's mind was not from his past or his future, but from his present.
‘Klugman!
Klugman!
That's a good joke, Abie.
You know what klug means?’
It was the voice of Mickey Aronson, who lodged in the small attic room next to Abie's in Ada Neumann's home at 17 Celtic Crescent.
Celtic Crescent wasn't a crescent, and it was a long time since it had been Celtic.
Built in 1881 to accommodate the employees of the nearby Rocksavage railway station, it was a straight terrace of some thirty tiny one-storey houses, each fronted by a strip of  grass and hedged railings betokening the gentility of its original occupants.
That gentility had, however, suffered a sea-change, for Celtic Crescent was now the centre of Cork's ‘Jewtown’.
‘Ada,’ Aronson would insist to his landlady, ‘you know what klug means.
‘Clever’.
Klug means ‘clever’.
Would you say that Abie was clever?
Abie Klugman had long grown used to the taunt — it was Aronson's stock joke for all of the ten years they had been lodging with Mrs Neumann, and he no longer minded it.
He knew he was slow-witted; so many things that were simple for other people quite defeated him, and he was aware that this made him different — he had even heard himself referred to as ‘not all there’.
But, dull and wanting though he might be, he at least had dignity, consideration,mensheskeit .
Never would he have committed the outrage of addressing his landlady by her first name.
‘Mr Aronson,’ she would respond in her mixture of Yiddish and English on hearing Abie taunted, ‘don't be annoying Mr Klugman.
Luz em alein .
Let him eat his food.
You like?
Special kugle ich hub gabakt.
Ess .’
To Ada Neumann her lodgers were not grown men but children, the only children she had ever had.
Left penniless when her husband dropped dead suddenly one Monday morning as he was putting his horse between the shafts to go to the country on his weekly door-to-door round, her pride had not allowed her to accept for long the charity of the community's Board of Guardians.
‘But you're entitled, Mrs Neumann,’ Zvi Lipsky insisted, his watery eyes almost overflowing with frustration at finding someone evidently intent on undermining his whole function as Hon. Treasurer of the Board.
‘You're entitled.
Your husband was a member.
Sixpence a week he paid.
He never missed a week.
You're entitled.’
Mrs Neumann shook her head.
‘Keep it for those who need it.
Gott tzu danken , I have my health and strength.
I won't starve.
I'll always have tzu essen.
Nu ’— and she  searched in her purse and found the Treasurer a coin ‘he paid every week; I pay every week.’
Treasurer Lipsky, the community's dentist, ground his teeth as he bowed to her adamantine will.
Writing out a receipt he bethought himself of the verse from the Book of Proverbs: ‘Eishes chayil….
A woman of virtue is a price above rubies.’
A trial, too!
As soon as the Shivah days of deep mourning were over, Mrs Neumann converted her small front parlour into a shop selling basic foodstuffs and domestic items and set up a camp-bed for herself in a corner of the kitchen by the range so as to rent out the two attic rooms to lodgers.
The dormer windows faced a high wall which hid railway storerooms and repair sheds, but the absence of dwellings on that side of Celtic Crescent helped to give the wider roadway an open aspect.
Other Jewish families living in the warren of neighbouring streets where the rows of cramped houses confronted their twins at almost arm-stretching distance had no such suggestion of exclusiveness and seemed to encourage the natural ebullience of their inhabitants as well as confirming their more straitened circumstances.
To Abie Klugman, Celtic Crescent was more than just board and lodgings.
It was a place where he was protected by the known and familiar, a refuge where each week the Sabbath, like a bride embraced, renewed his strength.
While there, he was able to forget the ritual of Monday morning when, in the darkness of winter or the bright light of summer's early dawns, Celtic Crescent and the streets of Jewtown would be clamorous with the noise of horses being led from nearby stables and harnessed to carts, of men shouting instructions and calling to each other in Yiddish and English as they struggled under the weight of trunks and knapsacks stuffed to overflowing with clothes, fancy goods, kitchen articles, holy pictures, enlargements of family photographs — anything that might be suitable for selling from door to door on a weekly-payment basis.
Some of them would make their  way to the railway station, but a few, having no horse and trap and unable to afford even the train fare, would travel on foot the whole week, often sleeping rough in the fields or in barns or farmhouses.
Then on Friday they would stream back to Cork from all over the province of Munster to clean themselves up, don their best clothes, and go to synagogue to greet the Sabbath.
For Abie this Friday meant something special; there was even more than the Sabbath to return to.
As he journeyed home in the early-morning gloom, he tried to fix it in his mind with words.
Words made things whole for him, words were what he always aspired to.
‘He is coming,’ he muttered to himself, almost tentatively.
Then again: ‘He is coming.’
After a pause he asked himself: ‘Who?’
The answer rose eagerly.
‘Karlinsky.
An important man.
Berel Karlinsky.
From the Jewish National Fund.
To tell us about Eretz Yisroel —the Land of Israel.’
He rested for a minute, weighing Karlinsky's impending visit, dreaming himself into the spell of its promise.
His eyes closed.
A smile slowly puffed out his fat cheeks.
The cart bounced on over the rutted road.
He opened his eyes again and saw a vision of the land of milk and honey to which he and a small band of pioneers led by their Rabbi had for so long planned to emigrate.
Anticipation was like a fever bursting through his very pores.
‘To take me to Eretz ! he shouted to the empty fields round about.
He looked sharply to all sides, searching the banks and hedges, protesting ‘Not!
Not!’ in a loud voice.
To give the dream words would warn his pursuers.
They might be waiting — waiting to snatch him from salvation at the very last moment.
Abie trembled, more angry now than afraid.
Familiarity with the voices that had haunted him down through the years had encouraged a bravado that was little like his real self.
The imaginary conversations he held as he travelled the country roads were not simply distractions  to while away his lonely journeys but rehearsals of the arguments he would use to outsmart the hunters and send them back home empty-handed.
But how would he know them?
They might be dressed as soldiers — he had noticed with growing suspicion that there were far more soldiers on the streets in recent months — or they might just be posing as ordinary officers of the law.
Abie peered fixedly at the way ahead.
In the half-light that was not yet day, roadside trees could conceal could even be — the dreaded pursuers, caught up with him at last.
He kept his gaze on one particular tree.
Was it a tree?
Were these branches or…?
Abie did not bother to make a closer scrutiny.
It looked like a policeman.
Nu , let it be a policeman.
He was ready.
He drew in the horse's reins and waited silently, his eyes momentarily tightly closed.
Words tumbled through his mind, and inside his head he could see himself — as if on a stage — daring the figure to make its business known.
What new trap could it lay for him?
POLICEMAN: I'll have to search your cart, Mr Klugman.
ABIE: You have a warrant?
(He didn't know what a warrant was but he had often heard locals use the phrase when the RIC came to search their houses.)
POLICEMAN: I don't need a warrant, Mr Klugman.
By law I can search your cart if I want.
ABIE: What for?
POLICEMAN: I think you may be carrying arms.
This made Abie grip the reins tightly; the muscles of his neck knotted and grew as all his worlds — past and future, real and imagined — became jumbled together and in his confusion the voice in his head rushed out of his mouth.
‘Who told you that?
It was that meshuggeneh , Aronson.
He's always at me.
Every time I see him he says he's going to the police.’
There was no answer to his outburst.
The wind in the trees and the whistle of his horse's breath were the only sounds to break the silence of the night.
But Abie did not  hear them.
He had closed his eyes again and was once more listening to his voices.
POLICEMAN: And why should he go to the police?
ABIE: To tell them about my gun.
POLICEMAN: So you have a gun, Mr Klugman.
ABIE: Of course I have a gun.
I had a gun before you were born.
POLICEMAN: But it is against the law for you to have a gun, Mr Klugman.
ABIE: My gun is not against the law — it is against the Russians.
POLICEMAN: Russians?
What Russians?
Here Abie threw up his hands at the ignorance of policemen.
He got down off the cart to pick a leaf from a roadside bush, and hoisting himself back into his seat resumed his journey, sucking on the leaf as he started to explain.
The story of the gun was the story of the most important part of his life, but it was a part too painful for him to describe coherently.
Silence quickly overtook him as memory tried just to keep pace with the tumbling images.
The gun was a rifle, Russian military issue, assigned to him when he was conscripted into Tsar Alexander III's army on 17 August 1881.
He remembered how he had been taken by force from his home in the Lithuanian village of Akmeyon when he was sixteen; how he was beaten and spat upon by the officers because he was a Jew; how he was forced to eat treif , and how his life in the regiment had been such a hell that he decided to desert.
Abie urged his pony on.
The image of the policeman had faded back into the trees, the fear of pursuit was momentarily forgotten as he relived the saga of his escape.
Stealing from the camp one night with only his rifle and iron rations, wading the river at the border, finding a sympathetic ship's captain to take him to Sweden, working there for a while and then making his way down through Poland and Germany and the rest of Europe, village by village,shtetl by shtetl , always moving  west, America the ultimate goal, until he reached Cork.
There he stayed, exhausted by his years of wandering, his mind unhinged by the daily terror of the sudden hand on his shoulder.
All he had by then were the rags he stood up in — and his gun.
That was something he would never yield up — it was his protection if the Tsar's soldiers ever tracked him down and tried to drag him back to his regiment to be court-martialled and shot, which was what Mickey Aronson said would happen.
So the gun went with him to the country every week, wrapped securely in sackcloth and tucked under the seat of his cart.
It went into the farmhouses where he lodged overnight and where he was known and befriended.
The farmers' wives indulged him in the harshness of his religious practices, never minding that he brought his own delph and cutlery and would eat only boiled eggs and bread.
They thought it was all part of his evident ‘foolishness’.
‘Sure God save us,’ they would say, ‘isn't it soft in the head the poor man must be to be carrying round an old gun for to fight the Rooskies?’
And out of compassion they would always buy something small from his stock of knick-knacks and fol-de-lols to help distract his thoughts and put some money in his purse.
But nothing erased the images from Abie's mind.
Even if it were true that the Tsar was long dead, as people said, Abie knew that no army ever gave up the hunt for a deserter.
Soon, however, that would all be over.
He would go to Palestine with the others leaving the community.
He had no skills — but what skills did they have?
What skills did they need?
Strength of limb, willingness of spirit-that would be sufficient.
Abie was no youngster any more, but that much he had and he would accept any task he was given — eagerly and gratefully.
Only let him reach Eretz ; Palestine was his star of hope, his refuge.
He would take nothing there, for he had nothing to take but himself; he would leave nothing behind — nothing except his gun.
There he would need no gun, there no one would ever find him.
Only let him reach Eretz .
That was all he prayed for.
Only let him reach Eretz .
‘Jish ish my shixth jish morning, Mishish Cohen.’
The knife gripped between his teeth slightly distorted Rev. Levitt's articulation but did not inhibit his chatter, which rose above the shrieks of the fowls beating their wings in panic against the coop and the even more frenzied squawking of the hen imprisoned in his hands.
He pulled the bird's neck straight, smoothing away the feathers, then deftly swept the knife from his mouth and with one clean stroke severed the gullet.
The squawking continued for a moment before dying out in a final gurgle as Rev. Levitt recited the prescribed blessing.
Then he eased himself up from his straddle-legged posture over the small backyard shore, holding the cut artery open while the blood drained away.
‘Finished?’
Bertha Cohen asked as she emerged from the kitchen.
The weekly ritual slaughter was too gory a ceremony for her to watch, though every time it took place she was reminded of how it always fascinated her daughters when they were children.
‘Finished,’ the minister confirmed as the last red drops fell.
He balanced the warm bird in his hand, testing its weight, put his head on one side and suggested: ‘Eight?
Eight and a quarter?’
His eyes danced behind their heavy spectacles, and the neat square of his moustache twitched with anticipation.
Bertha Cohen nodded, and Rev. Levitt smiled in self-congratulation.
A man of small but many prides, he regarded the accurate guessing of a bird's weight as proof of his expertise.
‘All part of the service, Mrs Cohen.
All included in the charge.’
The charge was reasonable enough — a few pence per bird — and with a community in which many families kept hens or whose menfolk were able to buy them direct from the country farmer Rev. Levitt's qualification as a slaughterer of fowls brought him a regular, if modest, bonus on his salary.
Other extras were the fees received for circumcisions and for officiating at burials and weddings.
Such events, however, were not very frequent — a whole year might pass without one — and so the only additional earnings he  could usually rely on were his winnings at the weekly bridge school.
They'd never amount to a fortune — not at a penny a hundred points — but at least they paid for a few packets of cigarettes.
And soon Miriam Levy and Reuben Jackson were getting married; that was certainly something to look forward to.
Luckily for him they had decided to be married in Cork before going out to Palestine.
A wedding was a great earner, for on top of the handsome fee which was traditionally the obligation of the bride's family the exuberance of the occasion invariably resulted in his being tipped quite generously by the groom's family as well.
The thought of the forthcoming windfall reminded Rev. Levitt that his last wedding had in fact been that of Mrs Cohen's elder daughter.
‘And your daughter, Mrs Cohen, how is she?’ he enquired.
‘Keeping well, I trust.’
‘Which one?
I have two.’
The minister was not put out by the note of impatience in Bertha Cohen's voice.
He had long marked her down as a less than sociable woman who appeared to nurse some secret grievance.
‘Ah, yes,’ he smiled, ‘but I know Judith is well.
I saw her at the butcher's this morning.
I meant Molly, the girl in Leeds.
My last kallah .’
‘She's all right,’ Mrs Cohen grudgingly conceded.
‘The happy event is very soon, yes?’
‘Next month.’
‘Please God everything will be fine and you'll be a grandmother.’
Bertha Cohen snorted as if to convey that she expected as little from grandchildren as from children.
Rev. Levitt finished washing his knife under the tap.
He dried it, slid it into its sheath, and accepted the coins Bertha Cohen drew from her apron pocket.
‘Well, Mrs Cohen, I won't keep you,’ he said, not wishing to delay himself when he had more money to earn and no prospect of any worthwhile gossip from this quarter.
As he tapped a cigarette on its box preparatory  to departing, the front door — always on the latch — was opened and Judith Cohen came into the small kitchen.
‘I'm finished, Judith,’ Rev. Levitt told her.
‘Just leaving.
Good morning to you, Mrs Cohen.’
Bertha Cohen nodded briskly from the scullery sink where she was cleaning the blood from the dead hen's neck before plucking its feathers.
‘'Good morning,’ he says,’she complained as Judith returned from accompanying the minister to the front door.
Good morning’!
It's nearly afternoon already.
What kept you?’
Disgruntlement always led Bertha Cohen to exaggeration.
It was not yet eleven o'clock, but Judith did not argue.
She knew her mother's moods; she recognised the strain of annoyance that drew the long delicate features of her face into a severe mask.
‘Oh, it was the butcher's,’ Judith replied.
‘There seemed to be more people than ever there.
And I was a bit late, so I had to wait a long time to get served.’
Soft answer, she felt, might turn away wrath — whatever it was that was making her mother grumpy.
‘There's a letter from your sister.’
So that was it.
Judith glanced up at the mantelpiece above the range where letters were always left and saw the familiar blue envelope.
It was over three weeks since Molly had last written, and the delay had angered her mother.
‘What has she to do?’
Mrs Cohen had been protesting with increasing frequency as day overtook day with no news.
‘She has a husband who makes a good living.
She has a fine home.
She has a shiksah to do the housework.
Yet she's too busy to write to her mother.’
‘But she's having a baby, Mother,’ Judith would point out.
‘Her first baby.’
‘She's having a baby!
She's having a baby!
What has that to do with it?
It won't be for another month.
Is she the first woman to have a baby?
I had babies, too.
Your sister was my first baby.
Has she forgotten that?
But she'll  need me some day.
You mark my words.
She'll need me some day and then she'll be quick enough to write to her mother.
Children I should have?
Stones I should have!’
As Mrs Cohen sat herself down on one of the wooden kitchen chairs, a basin between her feet, and commenced with some savagery to pluck the feathers from the hen's carcass, Judith made no comment.
She presumed there had not been enough news in the letter to compensate for its late arrival.
Better not read it immediately so — that might only start off another litany of complaints, and a strained atmosphere on Friday morning was one thing Judith wanted to avoid.
Her regular shopping trip to get the food for the Sabbath was something she always enjoyed as the prelude to the best part of the week with its special evening meal, its rituals, her zeide's stories of his life in Lithuania — no matter how oft repeated — and of course not having to go to work in her father's store.
She hated even the slightest shadow to be cast over these few days.
So better give her mother time to cool down and not stoke her anger further by trying to defend Molly.
She knew it would be no use.
What did it matter anyway?
Molly had got out — got away from all the criticism and tantrums.
Judith knew how relieved her sister was to have escaped.
Molly said so in her letters- not those she wrote home but the ones she addressed to Judith at the store.
Of course her father saw them arrive but he never mentioned them.
Joshua Cohen was a man able to keep his own counsel — and other people's, too.
Those secret letters were in a way Judith's lifeline.
She and Molly had always been close until Molly's marriage to Sol Stein, owner of a thriving factory in the rag trade in Leeds.
Their closeness was less due to their nearness in age — though with only eighteen months between them it had been easy for them to grow up with similar interests and shared confidences — than to the fact that neither of their parents had ever made much of them.
Their father had wanted a son — he had got one eventually, their young brother, Jacob; their mother had wanted aristocrats — attractive, shapely, superior ladies, royalty without crowns.
Such a progeny she could have looked upon simply as reproductions of herself, who, when they grew up, would be sure to marry distinguished professional men.
She would have basked in the reflected glory of their marriages; she could have boasted of her sons-in-law for ever more.
But what had she got?
As the years progressed and the girls grew from babyhood to childhood and on into girlhood and womanhood, Bertha Cohen could not prevent her early hopes from first wilting and then withering: what she had got were two daughters who were replicas, not of herself, but of her husband.
The same pugnacious jaws, the same steely eyes and, worst of all, the same muscular thickset build — they answered to nothing in their mother's self-portrait.
By the time Judith was seven, it was quite obvious to Bertha Cohen that if she was to have any hope of achieving the enlargement of her life that she dreamed of she would just have to try again.
Jacob was still not the daughter she had set her heart on, but even though he was a male child he was, at least, physically recognisable as her offspring, and as he grew up he displayed artistic tendencies of a kind which she was sure could have flowered in her had she been given the chance.
In his early teens he turned to reading poetry, then to writing it — and, though he showed his poems to his sisters, he kept them secret from his mother.
Now, at seventeen, he was bowing to Mrs Cohen's wish and had entered University College to study medicine.
One way or another there would be a professional man in the family.
If his mother's ambition for him was not discouraged by any of the family, neither had it occasioned much more than a passing interest.
Joshua Cohen had long ago recognised that Jacob would never make a businessman and had quickly abandoned his dream of having his son join him in his scrap-iron store.
Joshua's father, Moishe, the community's Rabbi, cherished his grandson and would have devoted what was left of his life to guiding  him through the intricacies' of Talmud and Gemara to the Rabbinate if Jacob had shown any vocation.
But the patina of religiosity his demeanour had acquired through attendance at Hebrew classes and preparation for his bar mitzvah was quickly shed when the classes and his bar mitzvah had passed and early manhood overtook him.
He found the teenage years confusing — college would at least provide a different background, new faces, fresh distractions and, eventually, the chance to shake off ghetto restrictions, to escape.
Escape was something Judith could not see in her own future.
Marriage, of course, would be a way out but there was no prospect of that.
Besides, she didn't want to take such a step merely for escape's sake and perhaps find herself ending up as a prisoner in just another house in just another town.
‘You were lucky,’ she wrote to Molly once in answer to her sister's repeated urgings that she should come over to Leeds where there were plenty of young Jewish men who were starting businesses and wanted wives to help them.
‘You took a chance and it has worked out and I am so happy for you.
But I don't want that sort of marriage — no disrespect to your Sol, sister dear!
Don't ask me what I do want.
I wish I knew.
I sometimes (no, often) feel that you are much more than eighteen months older than me.
You are mature.
You're a realist, like Daddy.
I shall probably still be here when you're a buba sending your grandchildren over to spend their holidays with me!’
Now, as Judith started to help her mother prepare the Sabbath-evening meal, she continued to avoid mention of Molly's letter.
‘The butcher's was so full, and of course nowhere to sit down while you're waiting.
And that butcher gets ruder every week.’
Her mother's contemptuous sniff meant, Judith knew, ‘What can you expect from a goy?’ but that was too familiar a piece of bigotry to provoke her into argument.
‘I'm always amazed,’ she continued, ‘that someone in the  community doesn't open a kosher butcher shop.
Then we wouldn't have this nonsense of having to get our meat through a Christian butcher twice a week.
We could get it as and when we like.
Planning meals would go so much easier.’
‘Oh, what a chachem you are!
Where's your sense?
Do you think Watson could live just on what this little community buys from him?
In two days we get everything we want and for the rest of the week he has his Christian customers.
But a kosher butcher wouldn't have goyim coming into his shop, would he?
And do you imagine he could make a living from our little community alone?
Ai, what brilliant thoughts you have.
A fine businesswoman you must make!’
Judith was well aware of the economics involved in the provision of kosher meat for Cork's forty or so Jewish families, but it was worth submitting to a lecture on it from her mother if it helped to make her more amenable.
‘Dora Klein was there — more fussy than ever.
Asking for extra liver for her visitor.’
‘Ah, Karlinsky,’ Bertha Cohen said.
There was an edge of disdain in her voice which Judith presumed to be a comment on Mrs Klein, wife of the community's President, with whom Karlinsky would be staying.
She watched as her mother spread newspaper on the kitchen table and swung the hen on to it with ‘Here.
It's ready for you.’
Judith rolled up her sleeve and commenced to clean out the hen's entrails preparatory to stuffing the carcass.
‘Your zeide says he's a big man in the Jewish National Fund — that Karlinsky.
A baaleboss ,’ Mrs Cohen observed.
‘I suppose he's coming to make the final arrangements for the group going to Palestine.’
‘Well, he certainly isn't coming to collect the Blue Boxes.’
‘That reminds me.
I didn't put my penny in yesterday.
I'll do it as soon as I've finished the hen.’
Judith glanced  up at the blue and white JNF money-box, with the map of Palestine embossed on its face, standing on the mantelpiece next to Molly's letter.
For the first time they struck her — both letter and box — as symbols of escape.
Was that why a handful of Cork's Jews had decided to emigrate to Palestine?
To escape?
Of course no one gave that as a reason — except for Abie Klugman, and poor Abie didn't really count.
No, they were Zionists, they were believers, they were responding to the call or answering a challenge.
But Judith wondered if it was really as clearcut as that.
Perhaps Reuben and Miriam were secretly not happy with the prospect of raising a family in Cork.
Perhaps Benny Katz didn't want to spend the rest of his life as a viklehnik a weekly-payment collector.
Who could blame him?
And Sam Spiro — he had been like a lost soul since his wife died.
Maybe he dreamed of finding another wife in Palestine.
Had they all in fact something to escape from, perhaps something they didn't even acknowledge to themselves?
Was there a secret reason that made them hanker for a new life in a new world?
But what about her zeide ?
Surely his determination to go to Palestine, at his age, was an example of pure Zionism.
From what could he possibly be trying to escape?
As Judith finished cleaning out the hen for the next day's dinner, she made room on the kitchen table for her mother to prepare the Friday-night traditional meal of gefilte fish.
‘Another month and they'll be gone.’
‘So your zeide says,’ agreed Bertha Cohen as she spread the hake, thoroughly washed and cleaned, on a wooden board and cut it into thick pieces which she liberally sprinkled with salt.
‘I wish zeide wasn't going,’ Judith said.
‘It seems madness at his age.’
‘You know how stubborn he is.
If he says black is white, black is white.
He's made his mind up.’
‘But he's seventy-six.
What can he do in Palestine?’
Bertha Cohen, judging that the salt was by now sufficiently absorbed, took the pieces of fish to wash under the scullery tap.
As she returned, carefully drying each piece with a towel, she answered Judith's question.
‘I'll tell you what he can do in Palestine.
He can die in Palestine.
To him that would be like dying in heaven.’
‘That's something I just cannot understand.
Why should he want to die in Palestine — away from his family and people?’
‘You can ask such a question!
What's his name?
Moishe.
What was Moses?
A leader.
He led the People of Israel out of slavery in Egypt, led them through the Red Sea, led them forty years in the wilderness and brought them safely to Palestine,Eretz Yisroel .’
Bertha Cohen spoke slowly, as if recounting something by rote, her hands intent on the job of scooping out each piece of fish without breaking the enclosing skin.
This operation, so delicate, captured the concentration of both mother and daughter and the conversation was temporarily suspended.
As each piece was released, Judith took it in charge to chop it up finely on the wooden board, then season it and return it to her mother.
‘But, for goodness’ sake, that was thousands of years ago,’Judith resumed.
‘I don't see what connection there is.
Bertha Cohen was silent as she restuffed each empty piece of skin, assembled the whole fish again, with the tail, in a dish, and put the dish into the range oven to cook.
Then she sat down and shook her head from side to side at her daughter, disbelief in her eyes.
‘You don't see what connection there is!
Have you forgotten what it says in the Haggadah, what you read every Passover?
Each Jew must imagine that he personally was brought out of bondage in Egypt and taken to the Holy Land.
You can't imagine that, can you?
To you that is all in the past, someone else's past, long ago.
But to your zeide it is his past.
You were never a slave in Egypt, but your zeide was.’
‘You mean Lithuania?’
‘Of course Lithuania.
Who brought us here?
Your father and I would still be in Akmeyon if it wasn't for your zeide .
And most of the Yiddin in Cork — you know them, you know them all.
Ask them.
Ask them who brought them here.
Who begged and argued and fought for them until they were free to go?’
Bertha Cohen turned her head aside, and Judith knew she was fighting back tears for her own family — her parents, her brothers and sister — who had not escaped.
To Judith they were just faces in a photograph.
Her mother had kept in touch with them for years, and Judith remembered that when she was a child her father had sent them money to have that photograph taken.
Months later it had arrived in the post and since then it had stood in its velvet frame, beside her mother's bed.
The photograph was there, but where now were the people who had posed for it, stiff and unsmiling, in their clothes all washed and ironed for the occasion?
Not long after it was taken, her mother's letters went unanswered.
Had she had a premonition?
Was that why she wanted a memento of her family?
Because she knew that now they would never escape and might not for long even survive?
‘That was your zeide's Egypt,’ Bertha Cohen said as she packed her memories away again, blew her nose and determinedly rose from her chair.
‘More than that I don't have to tell you.
You've heard it all before and you'll hear it again.’
‘So now for him it's really Leshana habaa b'Yerushulayim .‘
‘Yes.
‘To next year in Jerusalem.’
For him.
That, too, is in the Haggadah.
That, too, you say every year.’
‘But it's only a prayer,’ Judith suggested.
‘Does a person pray for what he doesn't want?’
‘But there are prayers and prayers.
Some are just well, just words and phrases.
We don't actually mean them.’
‘Speak for yourself,mein kinde ,’ Bertha Cohen said.
It  was an admonition more than a reprimand.
‘Some mean them.
Only by meaning them can you make them happen.
To you it is a phrase because you've lived all your life at peace here in Cork.
No suffering.
No want.
But other Jews…the ones who have suffered like your zeide …for centuries they have been praying ‘To next year in Jerusalem’ and meaning it.
Your zeide is a rabbi, a holy man.
What every holy Jew prays for is to end his days in Eretz Yisroel .
Now for many of them it is possible.
Your zeide is blessed.’
Is that being blessed?
Judith asked herself.
To be allowed to choose where to die.
Perhaps it is — for some.
For holy men and patriots.
Not alone Jews.
She remembered a phrase from her Irish history lessons in the convent school most of the girls of the Jewish community had attended.
What was it?
Something the Wild Geese used to say — the Irish soldiers who had fled Ireland after that big battle at the end of the seventeenth century when they were dying on foreign battlefields they used to say: ‘Would that this were for Ireland.’
Bas in Eirinn : ‘death in Ireland’— the fervent wish of every true patriot, Sister Assumpta, their history teacher, had called it.
How unexpected to find both the Jews and the Irish nourishing the same sort of dream.
Yet it wasn't all that surprising, was it?
Two persecuted races.
But there, Judith thought, the similarity ended.
It seemed to her that the reason the Jews of Cork got on so well with their Catholic neighbours was because they were actually poles apart.
There would hardly have been harmony between them if they had the same desires, if their interests coincided, if they were a threat to each other.
Bertha Cohen went out to the yard to release the hens from the coop, calling to Judith to bring some meal for them.
Outside the air was cold, and in the small space almost entirely surrounded by walls there was little light.
As Judith scattered the meal here and there, calling out ‘Chook, chook, chook,’ to the hens, she heard the Angelus bells ring.
All over the city, all over Ireland, now, people would be pausing to recite a prayer.
She didn't know what that prayer was but she wondered if they meant it or if to most of them it was…just words and phrases.
Maybe she should say a prayer herself.
But for what would she pray?
Love?
She had no idea what love was like and, if she didn't know what it was like, how could she know if she wanted it?
There truly seemed to be nothing she really desired.
Escape?
Not even escape.
She wasn't ready for that yet.
If she had been, if she really hankered after it, she would have prayed for it long ago.
But, then, while Molly was at home Judith had little cause to feel discontented.
With Molly gone, it wasn't the same.
Something — something more than just missing her — had been vaguely unsettling.
Perhaps it was that being monotonously grumbled at by her mother and taken for granted by her father were becoming irksome when there was just herself.
Or perhaps Molly's departure had in fact sown the seed of restlessness in her and the prospect of others — especially her zeide — emigrating to Palestine was beginning to nourish that seed and make it grow.
The Angelus bells ceased ringing and, the spell broken, Judith shook off her doubts.
Returning to the kitchen she heard the sound of a horse and cart in Celtic Crescent and she went to the front door to look out.
Just as she expected.
It was the same every Friday: Abie Klugman was home for the Sabbath, always the first to return.
4
THEY HAD ALREADY BEEN almost half an hour inside the barn.
Disused, ramshackle, and whistling with draughts, both its windows had been boarded up, and to obtain some light Denis had had to leave the door open after persuading Joshua Cohen in by pressing the gun firmly into the small of his back.
Farm machinery covered what little space there was, but it all seemed to be derelict or broken beyond repair — rusted scythes, mould-encrusted harness leathers, cracked buckets, discarded ploughpieces, an axe-blade that lacked a handle.
One corner of the barn had already been cleared to make room for two kitchen chairs placed facing each other, with an old tea-chest in between .
To Iron Josh, stiff and bruised after the discomfort of his journey in the cart, even a kitchen chair had looked inviting.
Without waiting for direction from his captor he had sat down, his overcoat, muddy and stained, pulled around him for warmth, and his bowler hat, the crease of a dent in its crown, clamped on his head.
Denis had turned the other chair round and now straddled it, his arms crossed and resting along its back, the gun on the tea-chest within easy reach.
‘It's a lot of money, two hundred pounds,’ Joshua Cohen was saying in a voice that was warm, amicable, almost paternal.
‘Don't be messing me about,’ Denis warned as harshly as he could.
‘Sure two hundred pounds is nothing to you.‘
Cohen's eyes flashed with a sudden steely glint, and his eyebrows shot up.
‘Oh?
You know how much money I have, do you?
You've counted it?
Or perhaps you have friends in my bank, eh?’
Denis cursed to himself for his indiscretion.
He took the gun and went to the door, checking that the horse and cart were still safely tethered.
Boxer came out from the nearby farmhouse carrying a bag of oats and waved.
Denis made no acknowledgement but before turning away he looked up at the sky, now completely hidden in dark cloud.
There wasn't much time left — certainly not enough time to be taking the wrong tack with old Cohen and antagonising him.
Anger tended to drown fear — that was a lesson he had learned himself.
But what in the name of God was the right tack with such a man?
It was easy for Hardy to say Josh Cohen would give him no trouble, that the Jew would come through without a murmur.
He obviously didn't know Iron Josh.
He couldn't ever have met him or else he'd have recognised the calibre of the victim he had selected.
If he had known him….
But speculation wouldn't help.
Denis just couldn't fall down on this job; he'd have to get the money somehow.
After all, he had a gun and his captive was no tough aggressive youth who might be foolhardy enough to try to disarm him.
Cohen had no means of protecting himself; he was an elderly Jew — well, perhaps not elderly but clearly past his prime — and it was most unlikely that he'd have the guts or the strength to attempt physical resistance.
His obstinacy up to now might be all bravado.
It must be all bravado.
What alternative could the man possibly have to paying two hundred pounds for his life and freedom?
Denis returned to his seat, but before he could frame a new approach Josh Cohen started to drum his fingers on the tea-chest, looking about him and nodding his head in a calculating manner.
‘I'll make a bargain with you,’ he said.
I'll give you twenty pounds for the lot.’
He gestured around at the conglomeration of abandoned implements, hardly any of which he could put a name on.
‘It's a fair offer, believe me.
Most of it isn't even scrap iron, but there may be a few pieces I could use.’
Denis almost gasped aloud in astonishment.
He didn't know whether to laugh or scream.
Such cheek!
Was the man mad?
Or bluffing?
Or trying to be funny?
But there was obviously no point in wasting any more time expecting to get results the easy way.
If Cohen wouldn't cooperate, Denis would simply have to get tough.
‘That's enough of this cod-acting,’ he barked, pointing the gun at his prisoner.
‘I want two hundred pounds and I want it now, or else….’
‘Or else?’
Cohen echoed.
‘Or else you'll be locked in here until you decide not to be so stubborn.’
The threat just might make him see sense.
It was worth a try anyway.
‘And if I still refuse?’
Jesus, how far would the maniac push him?
Well, there was no going back now.
‘If you still refuse’— and Denis levelled the gun at Joshua Cohen's heart —‘I'll just have to shoot you.’
He tried to keep his voice firm, but the thought of actually having to kill the man in cold blood numbed him.
Up to now the possibility had seemed so remote as not to need consideration — an order given by Hardy as a matter of course, accepted by Denis as a standard instruction in an operation of this nature.
But it had been inconceivable that it would really come to such a point.
In the silence that followed Denis was suddenly aware, for the first time since arriving at the barn, of farmyard noises nearby.
Cattle lowed, there was a jingle of harness and the rhythmic suck-slurp of a horse's hoofs crossing muddy ground.
The creak of a pump-handle and the answering gush of water made him feel his own thirst and taste his tongue's rancid dryness.
He envied Boxer Sullivan waiting for him in the farmhouse, as like as not with a bottle of beer in front of him or at the very least a cup of tea.
God in heaven, he seemed to do nothing on this job but envy Boxer and his easy role.
‘Come on, come on,’ he rapped out despairingly, conscious that — gun or no gun — he simply had no control  of the situation and was struggling to stave off panic.
Josh Cohen was quick to respond.
He raised his hands resignedly, nodded as if to himself, and then drew his wallet, along with some letters and documents, from the inside pocket of his suit.
Methodically he straightened the collection of papers to fit it back into the pocket, and then opened the wallet and inspected its contents.
He took from it a ten-shilling note which he placed on the tea-chest, smoothing out the folds to make it lie flat.
Then, his expression quite impassive, he dug a hand into a trouser pocket and carefully, as if trying to hold fast to quick-silver, brought up a fistful of small change.
He arranged the coins neatly in their denominations on top of the note, halfpennies and pennies at one corner, sixpences and shillings at another, two florins at a third, and a half-crown covering the last unanchored corner.
It was a ludicrous ceremony to Denis, but he was mesmerised by it, powerless to interrupt.
He looked at old Cohen.
Silently Joshua returned his stare, then made what sounded like a snort which quickly became a chuckle until finally he exploded into outright laughter.
‘What the hell is the joke?’
Denis shouted at him.
‘Oi vey!
Oi vey !’
Joshua gasped as his heavy frame shook.
He started to wipe the tears from his eyes with the backs of his hands.
‘Why didn't you tell me before we left that you wanted two hundreds pounds?
I haven't brought much more than two hundred pence.’
‘Shut up!
Shut up!’
Denis screamed as Cohen was about to go into a renewed bout of laughter.
‘Don't try to make a fool of me.
You don't think I expected you to have two hundred pounds on you, do you?
What sort of a gom do you take me for?
You have a chequebook.
Write out a cheque and we'll take it back to town.
There's time to cash it before the banks close.
Come on now!
Don't give me any more trouble.’
He waved the gun menacingly.
Joshua smartly became serious again.
He collected up the coins and put them back into his trouser pocket.
He  took out his wallet once more, along with the assorted papers and documents, and restored the ten-shilling note to its place.
From among the papers he extracted a chequebook and, drawing his chair close to the tea-chest, he rested the chequebook on it, took out his fountain pen and looked up at Denis.
‘Two hundred pounds?’
Denis nodded, almost unable to believe that Cohen was, after all, giving in, having had his little joke.
‘Payable to?’
‘Never mind that,’ Denis urged him, anxious to get the whole business over with quickly before Iron Josh changed his mind again.
‘Leave the name blank.
It'll be filled in later.’
Joshua nodded.
He took his bowler hat off and placed it on the chest.
Then he un-screwed the top from his pen, opened the chequebook and wrote in it, quietly dictating the words ‘Two hundred pounds’ to himself.
He tore out the cheque and handed it to Denis.
Denis, leaning over, half-raised from the chair, grabbed it in his hand and read it.
He remained poised in that position as he jerked up his head.
‘But you haven't signed it!’
Joshua Cohen calmly closed his chequebook and put it back, with his wallet and papers, into his inside pocket.
He screwed the top back on to his pen and clipped that in beside them.
Then he lifted his hat from the tea-chest, rubbed some dirt off it with his sleeve, placed it on his head and stood up.
‘That's right,’ he said.
‘I haven't signed it.
And I don't intend to.
Now, my young friend, let us go home.’
Denis was furious; rage and humiliation at being toyed with like a small child drove out all caution.
He rushed at Cohen, digging the gun into his ribs.
‘Sit down.
Sit down and sign that cheque,’ he commanded, ‘or you'll be bloody sorry.’
Joshua looked into his eyes, as if weighing up the strength of his anger and calculating the possible effect  of even further defiance.
The searching gaze was too much for Denis.
To escape it he pushed Iron Josh back into his chair and resumed his own seat.
He mustn't give in; he mustn't allow temper or panic to take over; he just mustn't break, no matter how great the provocation.
‘Look, Mr Cohen,’ he appealed, ‘I'll give you one last chance to sign that cheque.
If you don't, I'll just blow your brains out.
I have my orders — come back with the money or without you .
I have no alternative.
It's up to you.’
Cohen smiled.
‘If you blow my brains out, you'll have to do without the money.’
‘If I have to do without the money,’ Denis answered civilly in an effort to match his adversary's self-control, ‘I'm likely to want the satisfaction of blowing your brains out.
Besides, I told you my orders: the money or — a bullet.’
Joshua's demeanour changed again and he threw up his hands impatiently.
‘You keep on talking with your gun.
What do you think you have in your hand, Aaron's staff?
I'm telling you, it is useless to you.
Throw it away.
It cannot make me change my mind, so if you intend using it use it and shoot me now.
Otherwise you're wasting your time.’
Denis was frozen to his chair, the gun held fast in his hand.
He could neither move nor think, as if all power had at a stroke been cut off from both body and brain.
Suddenly there was a step outside the barn and Boxer Sullivan appeared in the doorway.
‘Are you all right?’ he asked anxiously, seeing the gun pointed at Iron Josh.
When Denis made no reply he asked again: ‘Are you all right?
Did you get the money?’
‘No,’ Denis barked back — and then, forcing himself out of the nightmare of his paralysis, he added: ‘Not yet.’
Boxer was about to remind him that time was getting on but then thought better of it and withdrew.
Denis's ‘Not yet’ might have been a hint that he was nearing success and didn't want any interruptions 
Left alone again the two men faced each other, but Joshua gave Denis no time to think about his next move.
He pulled his overcoat about him, shivered exaggeratedly and, as if resuming a friendly conversation, complained mildly: ‘It's cold in here.
Don't you feel the cold, Mr…eh?’
‘No, I'm not cold.’
‘Ah, it must be hunger, then.
I had my breakfast at half-past seven.
I get up at half-past six every day.
An old habit.
It's a long morning’— and he pulled out of his overcoat pocket a neatly tied brown-paper package.
Ignoring Denis and the gun still pointed at him, he opened the string to reveal a mound of sandwiches, wrapped in greaseproof paper.
Jesus above!
The man was having a picnic with a gun in his ribs.
But Denis was past being surprised by anything Cohen did.
Maybe he should try humouring him.
He certainly wasn't going to get anywhere making more threats.
‘Half-six?’ he said.
‘Why so early?
And what do you do for an hour before you have your breakfast?’
‘Morning prayers.
Jewish morning prayers are very long,’ Joshua explained, taking a sandwich in his hand.
‘You are hungry, too?
There's enough for both of us.’
He leaned forward to offer the package to Denis.
‘They're very good,’ Iron Josh assured him.
‘Cold meat.
And Jewish brown bread.
You've never had Jewish brown bread?
My wife made it.
She's a good cook, my wife.
She bakes good bread.
It's strong — like your beer.
And mustard.
I hope you eat mustard?’
Denis recoiled, as much from the sudden flood of talk as from the sandwiches which were now almost under his nose.
He stared at the unfamiliar brown bread, dark brown with an even darker, almost black crust.
When he still made no move to accept Cohen's offer, Joshua put the package on the tea-chest, held up his sandwich and uttered a short Hebrew prayer before putting it to his mouth.
He chewed away for a few moments and then  nodded with pleasure.
About to bite into the sandwich again he stopped suddenly, as if only just realising that Denis still had the gun pointing at him.
‘You wouldn't shoot me now, while I'm having my lunch, would you?
At least wait until I've finished.
I'll have a better stomach for it then.’
Overcome by his own joke he broke into a fit of choking laughter until tears sprang from his eyes.
Denis flung down his gun in disgust.
The man was impossible.
It was useless; there was no way he could master him, not at the moment anyway.
He might as well let him finish his sandwiches.
Joshua, wiping his eyes with a snow-white handkerchief, continued eating and gestured to Denis to help himself.
‘Try one.
Tell me what you think of it.’
Denis hesitated for only a moment before surrendering to his instinct to meet kindness with kindness.
Having discarded his gun it was awkward having nothing to occupy his hands, and he would feel even more foolish sitting like a dummy just watching a man he was supposed to shoot eating his lunch.
Besides, he was hungry himself.
He took a sandwich as casually as he could, covering the embarrassment of his capitulation by asking: ‘What were those foreign words you said a moment ago?’
‘That was the Grace Before Meals — in Hebrew.
‘Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, Who bringeth forth bread from the earth.’
Short and sweet, no?
Sensible.
Who wants a long Grace Before Meals?
Ah, but our Grace After Meals — now, that's another business altogether.
Half an hour — at least: songs, prayers, loud prayers, silent prayers.
By the time you've said the last blessing your food is digested.’
Iron Josh finished his sandwich and took another.
‘What do you think?
Good, yes?’
He didn't wait for Denis to answer.
‘Tell me, my young friend,’ he went on, ‘those orders you have to shoot me — if I don't give you  the money you want — who gave you such orders?’
‘Oh…my boss,’ Denis replied evasively.
‘Your boss?’
‘Well, my unit OC.’
‘OC?’
‘Officer-in-Command.
Irish Republican Army.’
Cohen laughed.
‘Army!
How many men in your army?’
‘Every patriotic Irishman is in the IRA — or supports it.’
‘And you think you can beat the British by ambushes and blowing up police barracks?’
‘We are beating them.
And if we had more arms we'd finish them off.
We have them on the run,’ Denis insisted.
‘Why do you think they brought in the Black and Tans?
If you read the newspapers, you'll see that we're winning.’
‘I read more than the newspapers.
I've read your history.
The fighting Irish, you're called, Isn't that so?
If you haven't anyone else to fight, you'll fight among yourselves.
But you're wasting your time — and your blood.
You can't beat the British Army.’
Denis was stung by Cohen's dismissive tone.
‘Ireland is our country.
Why should we be ruled by a foreigner?’
‘I'll tell you why,’ Joshua answered almost patronisingly.
‘Because the foreigner was stronger than you and conquered you.
And you're not strong enough to throw him out.
It's not fair, but you have to put up with it.
If you read more history instead of newspapers, my boy, you'd realise that's the way it has always been.’
‘So you think we should do nothing,’ Denis said, remembering Hardy's conviction that Jews don't resist.
‘If you can get out of Ireland, find somewhere else to go to start a new life, then go.
Others have had to do it other people in other countries.
Why not the Irish?
If you don't, then you must make the best of living here.
At least it would be better than throwing your life away.’
‘But we can't do that, man.
We just can't give up.
This  is our home.
Wouldn't you fight for your home?’
‘For my home, yes, if I had to.
But what is my home?
My home is my self, my body.
I live in my body, in my family.
That's my home.’
‘And your country?’
Denis asked.
‘What's that?
A piece of land where I happened to be born.
A piece of land ruled by tsars, kings, princes, politicians — people I have never met.
People I don't know and cannot influence.
People who don't care about me — or about you.
Is that what I should fight for?
Is that all my life is worth?’
Denis was taken aback by the passion of Joshua Cohen's argument — and also by its bitterness.
But, then, Cohen didn't have a country to fight for .
He was a wandering Jew, a refugee, driven out of the land he had been born in.
You could hardly expect him to be ready to defend it, or give his life for it.
You could hardly expect him to regard it as his home.
He didn't have a country, so how could he understand what Denis felt for Ireland?
But what about Palestine?
Wasn't it called the Land of Israel?
‘Would you fight for Palestine?’ he asked.
‘Isn't it the place all Jews look on as their home?’
‘Biblical home.
Spiritual home.
Something to pray for.
It might have been that a long time ago, when people believed in prayer.
But these prayers haven't been changed for centuries.
Fight for it? ow?
The British rule it, just as they rule this country.
How could we beat them?
How could we even fight them?
There are only a handful of Jews in Palestine.
We would have even less chance than you and your IRA.
It would be madness.
Denis shook his head in denial and disbelief.
Perhaps Hardy was right after all — Jews just aren't fighters.
Money, not resistance, was their weapon.
But, if that was so, why had Cohen resisted the threat to his own life?
Why had he refused point blank to buy it off with money?
‘You don't make sense.
You say your life is too precious to give it up for any country and yet it's not valuable enough for you to pay me two hundred pounds  not to shoot you.
I don't understand.’
Cohen gave a satisfied smile.
‘Of course I would pay two hundred pounds — two thousand pounds every penny I have — to stop you shooting me.
But you aren't going to shoot me, are you?’
‘Who says I won't?
I wouldn't be too sure of that.’
‘No, my young friend, you won't shoot me.
Not because you've shared my lunch — it's not a very big bribe, is it, a few sandwiches?
But I don't think you've ever shot anyone, have you?’
Denis hesitated.
The question was a trick.
He couldn't answer yes because it wouldn't be true — and he didn't feel confident of being able to deceive Iron Josh; and he couldn't answer no because that would reveal him as the beginner he really was.
He ignored it and said: ‘What makes you think I wouldn't shoot you?’
Cohen stood up.
‘When we reached here,’ he said, ‘I was getting out of the cart and my hat fell to the ground.
You picked it up and gave it to me.
Perhaps you don't remember that, my boy.
But that was your real nature, and it told me that nothing would make you kill an innocent man, a complete stranger, who had done you no harm.
Not money, not orders, nothing.’
He took the sandwich wrapping off the tea-chest and shook out the crumbs before folding it neatly and putting it into his pocket.
‘Now let us go back.
It's very cold here and it is getting late.
It will be dark soon.
Shabbos — that's the Jewish Sabbath — will be commencing.
If I'm not home for it, my family will be looking for me.
You don't want them to go to the police, do you?’
Denis did not move.
This time, however, it was not indecision that held him, but relief — relief at not having to play a role any more.
He knew he would do as Cohen had directed.
That he had failed miserably in the role did not worry him — yet.
He looked down at the gun lying by his feet on the ground.
Joshua, anticipating him, bent to retrieve the weapon and handed it to him.
‘I'd better take it back,’ Denis said, blushing at his  carelessness.
‘We're very short of guns and ammunition.
That's what we wanted the money for.’
He went to the door, shouted, ‘Boxer!
Boxer!’ and led Cohen out to the cart.
Boxer, coming at a run and seeing Iron Josh, took success for granted.
‘You got it, then?
Wouldn't doubt you, lad.’
Denis let the question pass.
He'd have enough explaining to do later.
‘Let's get back,’ he said.
‘And hurry.
It's late.’
He helped Joshua into the cart, sitting him on the floor again but this time leaning up against a wing, and tucked the rug under his legs.
As he was about to sit down himself on the cross-seat, Joshua caught his arm.
‘What's your name?
I'd like to know your name.’
Denis hesitated.
‘Don't worry,’ Cohen assured him.
‘I won't report you to the police.
I give you my word.’
‘Hurley.
My name is Denis Hurley.’
‘All aboard?’
Boxer called over his shoulder, cracking his whip as they moved off.
At first Joshua took an interest in their route, peering into the gathering darkness in an attempt to identify some landmark.
After a while he seemed to recognise his whereabouts and closed his eyes.
Denis was slumped in his seat, his chin sunk into his chest.
The abortive kidnapping had left him drained — too exhausted even to contemplate the consequences of his failure.
Boxer alternately whistled and sang above the noise of the cart, familiar songs and ballads the words of which Denis allowed his mind to echo in a silent duet.
A tug at his trouser leg awakened him from his reverie.
Iron Josh beckoned him down, and Denis knelt beside him in the cart.
‘We're nearly at Tivoli.
Put me off there.
I'll walk the rest.’
When Denis started to remonstrate, Joshua interrupted him.
‘I must.
You see, it's very nearly the Sabbath, and a Jew is not allowed to ride on the Sabbath.
Do not worry  — it's not far to my home.
Anyway, in case the police or the soldiers stop you, better for both of us if I'm not your passenger.‘
Denis nodded and leaned forward to speak into Boxer's ear.
As the cart came to a halt he jumped out to help Joshua down.
‘Do me a favour,’ Iron Josh said as he stepped on to the road.
He opened his coat and got out the ten-shilling note from his wallet and the coins from his trouser pocket.
He lifted Denis's hand and placed all the money in it.
‘That's another thing a Jew cannot do — carry money on the Sabbath.’
‘But what will I do with it?’
Denis protested.
‘Well, it won't buy a gun.
Perhaps a few bullets?
But give it to charity.
If you don't take it, I will just have to throw it away.’
‘I hope you'll be all right,’ Denis said as he put the money in his pocket.
‘Are you sure you'll be all right?’
‘Yes, I'm sure, Denis Hurley.
I'm sure.
Now you must go.’
Denis jumped back into the cart, and Boxer immediately urged the horse into a trot.
As they drew away into the darkness, Joshua Cohen stood and looked after them.
Denis waved to him, and he returned the wave.
The Hebrew blessing of thanks for deliverance from danger sprang to his mind, but without the requisite minyan of ten males to make the obligatory responses he was unable to recite it.
That was another thing a Jew could not do!
He buttoned his coat and with firm long strides began to walk.
5
THOUGH FATHER MCGIFF ADMITTED to himself that he was no longer a youngster, he knew it wasn't his age that had him suddenly welcoming autumn and winter far more than he had ever welcomed spring and summer.
There was nothing aesthetic or spiritual about his unexpected response: it was simple gratitude.
He would stand at his study window before the open curtains, his bespectacled eyes blinking into the night and his lips parted, but motionless, until after an interval they would shape a soundless ‘Amen’.
Such oblations to the darkness of the early evenings had not been necessary in previous years when, whatever the season, bright hour and night hour had been dedicated to the service of his flock there were Masses to be said, sick to be visited, meetings to be chaired, burial services to be conducted, bereaved to be comforted.
It had been an exacting treadmill, not at all what he had envisaged when, as a young priest, newly ordained, he had arrived in Cork from his County Longford village of Granard.
His resolve had been to give himself up every evening to a period of deep meditation.
It was a resolve he had fulfilled for as long as he could, relishing settling his mind on sacred thoughts and holy themes in an effort to make himself spiritually equal to the demands of his calling.
But that had been all of thirty years ago, and very quickly these demands had multiplied, absorbing more and more time and energy, so that the moments of evening meditation were soon subsumed into the preoccupations and stresses of an active Christianity.
Yet the exchange had been all gain, for this became the happiest, the most rewarding period of his life, when to lose himself  utterly in God and His Work was truly to find himself.
This was a time of real communion, and it was not long before his parishioners began to think of him, as well as to address him, as Father Brendan rather than as Father McGiff, and he began to look on them as his family, and on Cork, their city, as his only home.
He had returned once to Granard — to bury his widowed mother beside her husband in the hillside cemetery — and he knew that that would certainly be his last visit to the place of his birth.
There would be no more family graves to warm the soil beside those of his parents, for no more was the name McGiff to be found in Granard.
His sister was a member of an Order in Scotland and his five brothers, all senior to him, were scattered in various parts of Britain and America, and so the little village had nothing left to hold him.
Too small even to be found on many maps, too hidden for any of its innocent affairs to be worthy of attention, Granard seemed no longer to be part of the priest's past.
So far removed was it, both in time and in temper, from the realities of a large city parish and the growing bewilderment and tribulation that the first two decades of the new century had visited upon its inhabitants that his birthplace and its memories became as insubstantial as the tales of Cuchullain and the Red Branch Knights that he had read about in school.
It was a faery world, a faery past, and for many, many years Father McGiff had given it neither thought nor tongue.
Time and its buried hoard, however, had only been waiting in the wings, and it was now that the priest was discovering just how perfidious Time could be.
He began to notice how people deferred to it, seeking to mollify its tyranny: this business, for instance, of praising the compassion it displayed in healing old wounds.
But it didn't always heal old wounds.
What about the ones it reopens, he reflected bitterly, the old memories that, long dormant, it gratuitously stirs up until nostalgia becomes a pain that no balm can alleviate?
Perfidious was certainly  the word for the way it operates.
First, it blots out the past so that a body can face up to the present.
And then, when you think you have everything under control, when you're certain you're in complete command of it all your thoughts, your life, your world and your work what does Time do?
Nothing dramatic, nothing sensational.
It just slows you down so that there are no longer enough hours in the day, and then some things get put off and other things are only half-completed and you're told you need help — an assistant priest, no less, to concentrate, as the Bishop with his unfailing instinct for the wrong word put it, on ‘the donkey work’(well, perhaps after all I was only a beast of burden, Father McGiff conceded) to give you ‘a chance to relax, take life more easily, think a bit more, pray a bit more, meditate’.
At least that was some consolation: meditation.
Yes, indeed.
Now, Father McGiff told himself, I'll be able to resume my old evening routine when I can stop my ears to the world outside and listen only to God within me.
It was a prospect the priest found both exciting and soothing.
That it turned out to be neither was because of Father McGiff's discovery that there was more to Time's perfidy than just the simple ruse of slowing him down.
Oh, yes, that boyo had a much better trick up his sleeve.
Slowing him down had been merely the preparation for the real poisoned phial.
Early that summer the new curate took up his duties, and Father McGiff at last was able to sit at his desk of an evening and compose himself for his planned period of meditation.
He wasn't too upset when at first his mind rebelled at the change of pace — a cluck or two was sufficient to make his straying hand release an unanswered letter, a firmer reprimand put aside his list of tasks for the next day.
But after a week of total failure to concentrate for more than a minute he had to acknowledge to himself that nothing was going right.
It was the view from his study window opposite his desk that was distracting him, and he thought fleetingly of sitting  somewhere else.
But then he'd have to take the desk with him if he wasn't to be completely disorientated, and he'd never be up to manhandling such a heavy piece of furniture.
No, it was too late to change places at this stage of his life.
Besides, what he saw outside the window had too much potency, too much spell-binding sweetness for him to turn his back on it.
That old devil, Time, was what he saw there, Time at his insidious work, leafing through the picture-album of his past and using the sky outside the window to throw long-forgotten images onto its evening brightness, each disposition of cloud-shape and colour-tint magically re-forming into a scene from his Granard childhood.
At first the memories intrigued him, then they amused him, then they entrapped him.
Landmarks he had completely forgotten seemed to materialise before his mesmerised gaze — like the moat of Hugh de Lacy's twelfth-century castle, now overgrown and weed-filled, the castle itself a ruin, and in front of it at the end of Granard's gently curving single street the already greying walls of St Mary's Church that his labouring father had helped to build.
He remembered the brackish stream where he had fished for pinkeens with — who was it, Tommy Murtagh and Seanin Carty?— and the mercifully short walk to the National School that in good weather he made in bare feet over stony roads, with in winter a sod of turf for the schoolroom fire crushing the jam sandwich in his satchel.
He couldn't dismiss the images, he couldn't stay Time's hand as it turned page after page of that memory-album until tears flooded his eyes at the scenes recalled: his mother, her brown hair screwed into a bun at the back of her head, taking him to see a house at Edgeworthstown where she said a famous woman writer had lived; he hadn't paid much attention, not being interested in books then, but when he grew older he read Maria Edgeworth's novels and went again for himself to gaze at her home.
His mother — God rest her — had got more of a spark out of him when they went to nearby Ballymahon and Oliver  Goldsmith's birthplace, but that was only because he had already at school learned off by heart the whole of ‘The Deserted Village’.
Evening after evening Father McGiff sat at his desk, ashamed of his indulgence, upbraiding himself for his inability to drag his eyes away from the window which, like some perverse crystal ball, conjured up only ghosts of the past instead of promises of the future.
It was enfeebling, it had killed off his efforts at meditation, and there was something almost sinful in allowing his imagination to feast on these buried years when he considered the present turmoil and growing anarchy engulfing the city that had made him one of its own.
That should be his concern — Cork and its agony.
If his mind was too restless to maintain any hold on the spiritual, then didn't he have something far more immediate to face up to rather than to be wallowing in daily bouts of nostalgia?
It wasn't, however, until summer had faded that he could at last feel he was his own man again and was able to address himself to the present.
The bright evening skies that had served as a backdrop for the parade of revenants had been blotted out by a darkness which entombed them once more in the grave of the past.
But as the priest stood at his study window, fingers joined in thanksgiving to the night sky for his release from the bitter-sweet torture of reliving what was dead and gone, his mind quailed before his new dilemma.
He was a man of God — and a man of God was surely a man of peace.
His whole inclination was against the violence all around him and against the insurrection it bred.
Not that he didn't know its history — he had been part of it, if only as a silent witness of his brothers' refusal to join the Fenian organisation which had started trying to recruit the young men of their day.
‘You can't solve Ireland's problems with a gun,’ their father had told them and he had repeated so often the words of Archbishop Paul Cullen, one of Ireland's great clerics, that they were still fresh in Father Brendan's mind.
‘Those who engage in and encourage  secret plans and conspiracies may think they are patriots, but they are the worst enemies of their country.’
And, in case that wasn't enough to show the people where their duty lay, hadn't the Church's ban on Fenianism been reinforced later by a papal decree?
How could any Catholic — much less a priest — argue against that?
But that had been half a century ago, and now most Catholics and many priests were arguing against it.
Father McGiff turned from the window and wearily sat at his desk.
Was he going to be chained here for evening after evening, tearing his soul to pieces with a moral dilemma to which he was no longer sure there was one certain simple answer?
He had already spent months like this in one sort of mental prison and here he was again in another.
Past and present — Time, the old enemy, again.
Time never stops-he had learned that much.
And, if it never stops, it must evolve; things must change.
Things did change, God knows that was true — facts, events, circumstances.
But principles?
Moral truths?
There was the Bishop of Limerick defending the Easter Rising, a man who thirty years before had been speaking out against resistance to civil authority.
Why had he changed his mind?
And only the previous week the head of the Irish College in Rome — a widely respected Monsignor had said that illegal resistance was the natural protection against immoral laws and that ‘the Catholics of Ireland rightly disowned what force made them endure’.
Who was right?
Where did truth — God's truth — lie?
Father McGiff sighed heavily.
There was no answer anywhere, no solace for him anywhere, not in the pronouncements of the other clergy, nor in the speeches of politicians, and certainly not in the daily litany of murder and worse than murder that the newspapers carried.
He took up that morning's Cork Examiner .
It had lain there all day, still unread, for he knew that just to look at it, just to scan its heavy headlines announcing further death and destruction would only make him sink deeper into the bog of doubt.
But it was his duty to suffer, if  only vicariously, with his people, and as long as he had any strength left he would fulfil his duty as he saw it.
He opened its news page.
As expected, another instalment of the seemingly never-ending agony — the same as yesterday, the same as the day before, the week before, the month before.
No matter where he searched in the page, the same, the same.
And then his eye was caught by a smaller heading in one corner: ‘Granard tragedy.
Bizarre outrage in Longford village.’
His hands trembled as he read the report.
‘Oh my God!’ he moaned.
‘Oh Jesus, Lord above.’
The words choked in his throat as the newspaper slipped from his grasp.
Sinking to his knees, the priest put his head in his hands and sobbed.
For a full minute he was bent double, like a stricken animal.
Then slowly Father McGiff raised himself back to a kneeling position and, taking off his spectacles, he made the sign of the cross before closing his eyes in prayer.
6
THE CORK SYNAGOGUE was much younger than the Cork Jewish community.
No more than ten minutes' walk from Celtic Crescent, in a wide drab street that was unserved by any tram route, its tall aspect, railed forecourt and large Star of David hewn out of the brickwork over the doors drew attention to its foreignness.
Although its walls had been painted a self-effacing grey, it still stood out like some exotic folly among the neighbouring tenement houses.
Within view was the River Lee, curving around Morrison's Island and the busy South Mall in its circle of the city, conveniently providing the flowing water beside which, each Jewish New Year, Rabbi Moishe and the devout turned out their pockets as they murmurously recited Tashlich , the prayer symbolic of casting one's sins into the river.
The affairs of the community were managed by an Executive Committee headed by an annually elected President who habitually was one of the community's more long-established and successful businessmen.
The office called for a thick skin, a loud voice and an aggressive personality — qualities which the pressures of competitive life in an unfamiliar environment tended to develop.
Max Klein, its incumbent for going on ten years, revelled in those qualities.
A squat chunky man whose face was stitched by tiny red veins, his head rested on his shoulders like a box on a shelf, and the rasp of his voice could drill through any argument.
Originally a resident of Celtic Crescent, he had found that even with the occupancy of two adjoining houses there it was becoming impossible for him to accommodate his growing family along with the near and distant relations from Dublin and  England who availed of his hospitality in a constant procession.
So he had moved away from Jewtown to a considerably larger and more imposing semi-detached house in Blackrock — a suburb which, though no more than a mile beyond Celtic Crescent, was undeniably middle-class and rising.
Its nearness to his original Cork roots meant that he could easily retain his contact with the main body of the community, and it also kept him within fairly comfortable walking distance of the synagogue — an important consideration because of the religious law forbidding riding on the Sabbath or on solemn festivals.
Max Klein's wife, Dora, however, had recently begun to tolerate this prohibition with definite, if unexpressed, ill-grace, finding that it greatly restricted her opportunity of parading before the community Max's newly acquired Ford motor-car.
Whatever his faults, the President himself was not one to flaunt his wealth or success.
Boast he occasionally might, but that was part of his childlike pride in the continued expansion of his wholesale fancy goods business; from a weekly round of nearby villages it had grown over the years into a limited-liability company with an extensive warehouse and a solid share of the city's and province's retail market.
What his co-religionists sometimes found it difficult to put up with, however, was his abrasive personality and haranguing manner, a combination which ensured fiery exchanges and injured feelings in the frequent communal meetings.
Still, Max Klein's steamrolling tactics, accompanied as they were by afterbattle embraces and chucks under the chin of opponents young and old, in the end always proved irresistible.
And his tzedaka — the performance of charitable deeds enjoined on him by his religion — won him the gratitude and loyalty of many of the young men and their dependants, for it was as his travellers that they made their weekly Monday-morning trek to the country, secure in the knowledge that, no matter how erratic the week's takings might be, their basic wage was guaranteed by Max Klein.
The Saturday evening of Karlinsky's address provided Dora Klein with the perfect opportunity of drawing attention to her status as the President's wife.
That the other women had never shown any deference to that status was a perennial aggravation.
Now, however, her husband had a motor-car — the first Cork Jew to possess one — and as they drove to the synagogue, their distinguished visitor, Karlinsky, beside her in the back seat, she felt she had at last come into her kingdom.
‘Drive slow, Max, drive slow,’ she urged, anxious that none of her friends walking to the meeting should fail to notice her in the darkness.
As she hitched up the fox fur draped about her neck, she was tempted now and then to give them a regal wave but decided that to sit back in dignified hauteur was more fitting to her role.
Fortunately for the walkers, the drizzle of the morning and early afternoon had ceased and the sky was clear.
The evening air had its accustomed November nip, but the groups making their way from Celtic Crescent were impervious to it.
They strolled along, bidding goot vuch ‘good week’— all round, and heightening with chatter and speculation the excitement they all felt about Berel Karlinsky's visit.
It was an event which no one wanted to miss.
Here they were, a tiny outpost in the Diaspora, and someone from the very heart of Jewry had come to address them, someone so important that his coming all that way proved they were important, too.
But, more than that, it made them feel involved at last.
Chaverim kol Yisroel —‘All Israel are brothers’— was what went through many minds.
Indeed, Percy Lovitch voiced the thought to Rev. Levitt as he strode past the minister and his wife.
Levitt smiled polite agreement, no more; he was privately jealous of Lovitch whom he looked upon as little more than a huckster — though it was a well-stocked music shop that Lovitch owned.
Rev. Levitt's antipathy sprang from the fact that when he was ill or needed a break in the non-stop Day of Atonement services it was Percy Lovitch who deputised for him, his tall corpulent figure seeming to fill the small pulpit and his exquisite  tenor voice quite outshining Rev. Levitt's pedestrian baritone.
What if the man had for years been an opera singer in England — it was a chillul hashem , a profanation of the Divine Name, to mix operatic arias in with the traditional sacred melodies.
The minister was not an opera-lover himself, but many of the congregation were, and such blasphemies distracted them from their devotions into vying with each other to identify the operatic intrusions.
But, true enough, all Israel were brothers; and as Rev. Levitt looked ahead and behind him at Cork's Jews, in ones and twos or groups and households, converging on the synagogue to hear Karlinsky, it was indeed like going to take part in a family meeting.
Years was it four or five?— had passed since Rabbi Moishe first suggested that they should set up their own settlement in Palestine.
It had seemed an impossible dream at the time; but to have an impossible dream was a harmless comfort, and their love and respect for Rabbi Moishe made it difficult for them to grudge him their co-operation.
Besides, the Zionist fever was gripping Jewry everywhere, and even if the dream did not come true for them — well, their regular donations would redeem some small plot in the Holy Land which could provide a home for other less fortunate brethren.
The fact that the dream was, after all, coming true quite bemused the community.
Earlier in the year fittingly, during Passover, the festival which celebrates the Israelites' escape from Egypt and the beginning of the journey which eventually took them to the Promised Land — Rabbi Moishe announced with quiet satisfaction that their contributions had mounted up to a sum sufficient to buy three hundred dunams of land in Palestine, that the purchase was in the process of being arranged on their behalf by the Jewish National Fund, and that he himself would lead an advance party of settlers from Cork before the end of 1920.
Anyone who wished to accompany him was welcome.
It took some time for the first volunteers to come  forward.
A few weeks passed before the initial shock wore off.
Then those who felt attracted by the idea of emigrating discussed it among themselves to see if it was at all feasible for them — there would be their affairs in Cork to liquidate, there might be family ties to take into account, there was even the question of whether they could endure the change of climate.
But with Rabbi Moishe's encouragement, with advice and co-operation from the Jewish National Fund leading to a visit by one of their emigration experts to answer questions, resolve doubts, fill in forms and outline all the preparatory steps — by summertime fourteen members of the community had responded to the call and committed themselves to going.
Before the year-end would be their departure date, the official had confirmed as he shook hands with each one of the party before he left.
Now, with hardly more than a month of 1920 remaining, they were being honoured with the presence of the JNF's top secretary, who would make the final arrangements, tie up the loose ends, perhaps name the day.
Above all, Karlinsky would tell them — those who were going, those who weren't going, those who were still undecided — what Palestine was really like, what living there entailed.
Karlinsky was the harbinger of their Promised Land, their Jewish National Home.
Inside the synagogue long wooden bench-seats facing the curtained Ark of the Law were filling up, and the high roof made the din of conversation echo loudly.
The men called to each other across the floor or wandered from group to group, while their womenfolk exchanged their own news in undertones.
Their restraint was mainly due to their feeling of strangeness — it was unique for them to be sharing the seats with the men, their usual place being in the high gallery around the side-walls.
From there they were accustomed to having something like a bird's-eye view, seeing their husbands and the other male members of their families not as the tall figures they were familiar with and on whom they relied  but as the busy little children they often privately felt them to be.
To be imprisoned side by side with them in the male domain made them look forward beyond Karlinsky's address to the regular Saturday-night social in the communal hall next door when they would be able to get together, relax and talk without constraint.
Joshua Cohen, sitting with his wife and daughter at the back of the synagogue rather than in his usual seat near the Ark of the Law, kept glancing up at everyone as they passed him.
Bertha Cohen felt his anxiety and shared it.
She knew it was not her father-in-law, Rabbi Moishe, he was searching for — the Rabbi would be in a waiting-room with the President's party — but for their son, Jacob.
She was worried about her husband; it had been obvious for the past few days that something was preying on his mind.
It would be useless to ask him; she had learned that much from experience.
Whatever problems he had faced in their life together he had kept to himself.
He would tell her about them afterwards of course, when he had overcome them, but share them he wouldn't.
Was it Rabbi Moishe's imminent departure to Palestine that was making him more withdrawn than usual?
That must be disturbing him greatly; for, after all, though the Rabbi was not her blood relation and she had known him only since her marriage, even for her it was an intolerable wrench.
What must it be like for Joshua?
They had never been parted before — they had never even lived in different houses.
So how could he not be far more upset than he would admit at the thought of the gap it would leave in his life and the prospect of probably never seeing his father again?
Bertha Cohen wished she could believe that that was the explanation, but in her heart she knew it wasn't.
Her instinct told her that it was something far more worrying.
And she wasn't depending only on her instinct — yesterday he had come home too late to go to the Sabbath commencement service and looking very tired.
And all he would say was that he had been delayed.
That had never  happened before.
What could have delayed him?
Business?
No, he wouldn't let business make him late for Shabbos.
A visit to the doctor?
She was afraid to consider such a possibility.
She had stolen many a glance at him since yesterday to see if perhaps there was anything that might show, but it was difficult, she did not want him to feel he was under examination, and anyway today the tired look was gone.
But there was something important troubling him — that much Bertha Cohen was sure of.
Iron Josh also had his instinct and it told him that, no matter how much he had tried to hide the fact that he was worried, Bertha had guessed.
He had caught her looking sharply at him when she thought he wouldn't notice.
But how could he tell her?
He could have told her about the IRA kidnapping him, but that would have alarmed her and the whole household.
And what would have been the point?
It was over, he was unhurt, and it hadn't cost him a penny apart from the few pence in his pocket — and as the kidnapping wasn't what was eating his heart out he knew he couldn't pretend it was.
It wouldn't fool her.
But to tell her the truth?
He might as well get a gun like Denis Hurley's gun — and put it to her head and shoot her.
He almost wished Denis Hurley had shot him .
But that would have solved nothing.
They'd have found his body and gone through his pockets and discovered the letter.
He had received it in the post almost a week ago, and the moment he read it his heart had frozen — he had actually felt himself go ice-cold.
He remembered every word: Dear Mr Cohen, Do you know that your son Jacob is going with a Christian girl?
He meets her every day in college.
A WELL WISHER
He had read it again and again, scores of times, since then.
He had examined it minutely — written on a sheet of white copy-paper — but there was nothing he could  learn from it about its sender.
Anyway, what did he care about its sender?
He cared only about what the letter said.
Was it true?
Could it be true?
He had no idea, for the letter forced him at last to admit to himself that he knew nothing about his son, that he had lost touch with him, had allowed him over the years to drift further and further away so that now they were virtual strangers.
His own flesh and blood!
As he sat waiting for Karlinsky to appear, looking around him he could see other men's sons, boys of Jacob's age, sitting with their fathers.
But Jacob wouldn't be joining them; Josh Cohen was quite certain of that.
No matter how long he waited or how often he looked up to see who the latest arrival was, he knew in his heart of hearts it wouldn't be his son.
And where was he?
Out with his Christian girl?
But no — he mustn't condemn him.
He mustn't think of him as guilty.
He had no evidence — nothing but an anonymous letter which might easily be the work of some anti-Semite.
He must wait until he could find out the truth.
But where would he start?
Whom could he ask?
Jacob himself?
No, he couldn't confront his own son.
And, even if he did, would Jacob tell him?
He took his gold watch out of his waistcoat pocket and snapped it open.
Six o'clock.
So that the meeting and the usual Saturday-night social that was to follow it could end before curfew, proceedings had been due to commence at six but, even so, no one really expected a punctual start.
Joshua shifted uneasily in his seat and wished they would hurry up.
Iron Josh wasn't the only one made fretful by the delay.
Zvi Lipsky, the Burial Society Treasurer, had spent the whole afternoon trying to rid his mind of the annoyance of Arnold Wine's advertisement in that morning's Cork Examiner and now there was Wine himself, as bold as brass, sitting up in the front seats if you please, instead of at the back where he should be.
To Zvi, Wine was an upstart — an interloper who had suddenly appeared in the community a year ago (real name, Zvi  had been told, was Benny Wineberg from Brighton), set up as a dentist, and by charging ludicrously low fees had been taking clients from Zvi.
It was a chutzpah ; Zvi Lipsky had taken thirty years to build up his practice and reputation.
Only in the last ten years or so had he been able to give up going to the country towns and villages for uncomfortable, if lucrative, one- or two-day visits; only then had he found it possible to move from Jewtown to commodious rooms in Patrick Street, Cork's main thoroughfare, where he could live as well as have his surgery.
Now that he was getting on in years he wanted to take things just that little bit easy, not see patient after patient, cramming in as many as possible, but space them out — eight, ten a day was enough — for with his practice so long established and his clientele so solid he couldn't imagine any reason to fear blanks in his appointments book.
‘A fly-by-night,’ Zvi hissed into his wife's ear, his angry breath making her pearl ear-ring shiver in response.
‘What's that?’
Myra Lipsky asked.
‘Wineberg.
Over there.
His ad was in the paper again today.
With his photograph as well.’
‘Oh!
With his photograph!’
Perhaps Zvi should put his photograph in, too.
After all, he was a handsome man.
At least, he had been when she married him.
Of course that was thirty years ago — he had lost most of his hair since then, and his jaw muscles were beginning to sag noticeably.
She hadn't yet seen his own advertisement in that morning's paper, but he had told her he was putting one in.
Zvi couldn't remember how long it was since he had last found it necessary to advertise, but with Wine telling the Cork Examiner's readers for the last three weeks that ‘owing to the great increase of my practice’ he was moving to larger premises Zvi felt he had no alternative.
And the photograph was especially annoying.
It had obviously been touched up, exaggerating the waves in his dark hair, making him look a masher and younger than he was — just the thing to attract the lady patients.
Perhaps Zvi could put his own photograph in next time — an early one.
But no; if he did that, he'd have to face the laughter and ridicule of the community.
‘Remember Rosenstein?’
Zvi reminded his wife.
‘Rosenstein?
Who's he?’
‘Don't you remember?’
Lipsky repeated impatiently.
‘Soon after I started here.
Rosenstein used to go to all the country villages before me doing fillings and extractions for half-price.’
‘Oh, yes.
My God, that was years ago.’
‘Yes, but what happened?
He ruined people's teeth.
And then he disappeared.
Another fly-by-night.’
Myra didn't remind her husband that Rosenstein's butchery had made more business for Zvi.
‘It's terrible that all these quacks can come along without proper qualifications,’ Lipsky complained, forgetting that he himself had set up as a dentist without qualifications, there being as yet no legal requirement for special training as there was for doctors.
‘As soon as Wine has made enough, he'll be off somewhere else.’
But that was Zvi Lipsky's wishful thinking.
His real fear was that the interloper might set down roots and eventually steal the bulk of his clientele.
His morose ruminations were interrupted by Benny Katz, who wanted anyone he could find to listen to his tale of woe.
Why he should think there was anything special about his troubles, Zvi couldn't imagine.
All the men of the community who had to travel to the country every week to sell their goods — at least, any who didn't have his own means of transport — had for months been finding it increasingly difficult relying on the railways.
Zvi's own practice had been affected by the strike.
Quite a few of his country clients had been late for their appointments, or had failed to turn up at all, and the story was always the same: British troops had boarded the train as passengers so the driver or the fireman or the guard or ticket-collector — sometimes all four — refused to work and the train never moved.
‘I had to rush around trying to find a farmer with a cart who might be going where I wanted,’ Katz lamented, his woebegone countenance matching his sorry tale.
‘Oi vey , in the country it's a real tzuriss getting from village to village.
I couldn't see half my customers — and then I had to leave early to be certain of getting back.’
Lipsky, however, wasn't very interested.
Viklehniks' worries were no concern of a professional man like him.
‘Buy a horse and cart,’ he advised gruffly.
Katz made a face.
‘Animals, animals, I don't like animals.’
‘Beggars can't be choosers,’ Zvi said with a snort, but there was no silencing Katz.
‘I got the ten-thirty from Mitchelstown yesterday morning,’ he insisted.
‘Listen, listen.
Would you believe it?
Just as the train pulled out of the station a lorry load of soldiers drove in like maniacs.
But they were just too late to get on.
We got away.
We just got away,’ he was  repeating loudly to his neighbours when he realised that the noise of conversation had ceased and people were all sitting down.
He turned to find the President, Max Klein, leading his party up the aisle and he hastened to take his own seat.
The President, freshly shaved, his Sabbath suit replaced by his High Festival suit, was wearing his special spats, and on his head was a new Homburg instead of the white yarmulkah he usually sported in the synagogue.
‘He's like a lighthouse,’ Mickey Aronson whispered to Ada; and, indeed, Mickey's comparison was well chosen, for the smile of pride Max Klein could not suppress at being the baaleboss for such a momentous occasion seemed to reach his lips only after first puffing out his chest.
He strode ahead of Karlinsky, upon whom all eyes were fastened, and a few steps behind Karlinsky came Mrs Klein.
She was followed by Rabbi Moishe, his sallow face with its rippling white beard inclining first to one side and then to the other as everyone did him honour by rising until he had passed, and just behind him came another black-garbed figure, a bespectacled priest, greying head covered by a yarmulkah.
‘Vee is der galach who is the priest?’ a few were heard to ask, but they were more recent settlers who did not live in Celtic Crescent.
Those who did live there all knew Father McGiff and they were able to inform the ignorant that he had been a close friend of the Rabbi ever since the Jews had arrived in the city.
The President ushered his party into seats which had been kept vacant in the top bench and then he turned to address the community.
‘I don't have to tell you why we're here tonight,’ he commenced, almost threateningly, so that some of the men turned to their wives or neighbours with the prediction: ‘That means there'll be a collection afterwards.’
‘We've come to listen to a very distinguished visitor, Berel Karlinsky, a famous man we've all heard of.
Earlier this year we had a visitor from the Jewish National Fund who told us how badly they need men — and women, too -in Eretz , as well as money.
Well, we've always given money for Eretz and now we're giving men and women, including our beloved Rabbi.
I don't have to tell you how much he'll be missed.
But this is not the time to talk about that.
We all want to hear our distinguished visitor who has come to us to make the final arrangements with those going to Eretz — and with any others who might want to go, too; there's still plenty of time, it's never too late.
But I'm sure our distinguished visitor has a lot to say to us, so I won't say any more.’
He motioned Karlinsky forward and with a generous flourish directed him up the three steps on to the small platform in front of the Ark of the Law where a lectern had been placed.
To loud applause Karlinsky shook hands with the President before ascending the steps where he put his face against the blue and white silk curtain with the gold braid which hung before the doors of the Ark.
He lifted the curtain to his lips, kissed it tenderly, and then turned to his audience.
Berel Karlinsky was a striking figure.
His thick white  hair and silver-streaked goatee beard gave him a look of experience and authority, while soft blue eyes and a hint of wryness in his smile suggested a mortal to whom disappointment was a familiar companion.
Wherever Jews were to be found — whether in the Holy Land or in the far-flung Diaspora — his name had become a household word as one of the select band of zealots whose spirit had never relinquished the hope of one day setting up a Jewish state in Palestine.
Certainly it was the British who now ruled the land but they ruled it not as owners or conquerors, but as trustees for the League of Nations.
And the British Government had already, two years earlier, issued the Balfour Declaration formally recognising the Jewish right to a National Home in Palestine.
Never since the Lord's promise to Moses to bring the Israelites to a land flowing with milk and honey had Jewish hopes been so high, Jewish dreams so wild, Jewish spirits so elated.
And in the creation of all this euphoria Berel Karlinsky had played a leading role.
The Jews of Cork hung on his words.
‘But everything is still to be done!’
Karlinsky's opening sentence was followed by a brief silence and then a restrained buzz of conversation.
‘What did he say?’
‘He said ‘But everything is still to be done’.’
‘Yes, yes, I heard that.
What did he say before that?’
Karlinsky stroked his beard and smiled.
‘Do not be puzzled, my friends, I will explain.
For some time now, we, the Jewish people, have had joy in our hearts because the British Government has committed itself, by the Balfour Declaration, to the establishment of a National Home in Palestine for the Jewish people.
We have celebrated all over the world — in the Diaspora outside Palestine, and inside Palestine too, in the Yishuv itself.
But the celebrations in the Diaspora and in the Yishuv have very often had a different spirit behind them.
In the Diaspora, our Jewish people have been inclined to sit back and think that the battle has been won and that in a little while we Jews will have our National Home in our  Promised Land.
In the Yishuv we know that is not so.
The Balfour Declaration is there, yes, but in Eretz we know that nothing will change unless we ourselves change it.
And that, my friends, explains why my first words to you, my first peculiar words, were ‘But everything is still to be done’.’
The listeners turned to each other, each anxious to assure himself that his neighbour appreciated the speaker's remarks and the wisdom of his approach.
Rabbi Moishe nodded energetically, and Father McGiff took it on himself to applaud — a lead which the rest of the audience immediately followed.
Karlinsky waited for the applause to die away.
He sipped at the glass of water on the lectern and then resumed.
‘Before me I see you, the Children of Israel; behind me’— and he put a hand on the braided curtain —‘is the Torah, the Law of Israel.
It is two thousand years since the Children of Israel have been able to follow the Torah of Israel as citizens in their own land.
Yet to bring them together — the people and the Torah-in Eretz Yisroel is what we in the Jewish National Fund intend to do.
We are mad!
Of course.
We are attempting the impossible!
Of course.
We have no army; we have no institutions; we have no seat in the councils of nations; we have nothing to trade.
We are trying to populate a land which has been derelict for two thousand years with a people which has been scattered for two thousand years.
We are mad, ladies and gentlemen.
And so are you.
For you sit here, thousands of miles away from Palestine, a land which most of you will never see, and yet which you will certainly pay for-with your money, yes, and some of you with your blood and sweat — you sit here and you listen to me as I tell you about this impossible, this ridiculous dream, and it doesn't occur to you that we are all mad, you and I and all our people?’
There were ripples of self-satisfied laughter, as if to have such a mad dream was something for which they  could congratulate themselves.
Mickey Aronson could not resist nudging his landlady beside him and whispering: ‘Now I know why Klugman is going to Palestine.
With all these madmen he'll feel at home.’
‘Hush!
That's a cruel joke to make.’
Ada Neumann shook her head in resignation and once again concentrated her attention on the speaker.
‘Twenty years ago the Jewish National Fund was established for the purpose of purchasing land as the inalienable property of the Jewish people.
Land costs money.
We all know that.
You have given money.
I know that in every one of your homes there is a JNF Blue Box and I know that wherever it is in your homes it is not gathering dust.
But land costs people, too.
Money alone will buy land but money will not clear the deserts, move the rocks, turn the soil, plant the seed.
Only people can do these things, and people we need as much as we need money.
We have not come to you before to ask for people, but we are asking for people now.
And just as you have in the past answered our call for money, so you are now ready to answer our call for people.
I have come to you tonight as much to thank you for that answer as to explain to those of you who already plan to make your home in Eretz — and to any others who may make such a decision in the future — what lies before you.’
There was a rustle of excitement as the listeners exchanged expectant looks and then shifted for more comfort on the hard wooden seats.
This was what they had come to hear.
Karlinsky painted a grim picture — endless hardship, unceasing toil and sweat, back-breaking labour in hostile climatic conditions, some of it in malaria-ridden areas.
Their habitations would be huts, which they would have to build themselves, in desert land away from the few cities; their diet would be healthy and sustaining but it would be monotonous, and they would have to do without delicacies which many of them might have become used to in the Diaspora.
Family life would not be the  family life they knew now.
Meals would be taken in common.
Parents would not see their children for most of the day, and when they finished their daily work they would be too tired for much except rest.
‘It would not be so bad,’ Karlinsky continued to his now rapt audience, ‘if there was nothing else to worry about but the hardships and difficulties I have described to you.
But there are others.
Often worse than these hardships and difficulties.
I will hide nothing from you.
How could I?
I am sure you read the papers and know the stories.
There are dangers to life.
Even though your settlement may not be in a known danger area, no one can be sure.
Few of the settlements in Palestine have any means of protecting themselves, and so they are sometimes attacked by armed Arabs.
These attacks might only be cattle raids — that's bad enough-but sometimes they might be more hostile.
‘In February of this very year there was the attack on the settlement of Tel Hai when six of its defenders were killed by marauding Arabs.
And even in the big cities one must always be prepared for danger.
You will ask ‘Is not the British Army protecting the people of the cities?’ and I would have to answer ‘Yes, that is part of their duty.’
Yet only last Pesach, in Jerusalem itself, there was a pogrom.
I am sure you read about it, so I don't have to say much more.
Except that in the capital city of Palestine, a city covered with soldiers, it was possible to have Arab riots in which six Jews were slain and no soldiers around to prevent it.
‘That, my friends, is my story of Palestine today and Eretz Yisroel of the future.
I have ended the story with killing and bloodshed because I want to leave that picture before your eyes — a picture which stands for all the anguish and hardship and disappointment and dangers anyone going to Eretz must expect.
Those of you who have already said you will go — and any others who may wish to join them — I will talk to privately later.
But now, before I finish and let you commence something  more enjoyable, I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.’
Karlinsky sipped water and waited while the people looked around, each encouraging the other to ask a question.
For a few moments no one spoke and then there was some activity in one corner where a young man was trying to persuade the girl beside him to stand up.
At his urging she raised a tentative hand as if at school, and Karlinsky smiled down at her.
‘You have something to ask me?’
The girl was pushed to her feet.
‘My name is Miriam Levy,’ she said, her strong voice belying her embarrassment, but before she could continue Karlinsky interrupted her.
‘Ah, yes, Miss Levy.
You are one of the brave young women who have already put forward their names for Eretz .
What can I tell you?’
‘Well, I would like to know — well, what would I be doing there?
What would my work be?’
‘Yes, of course, that is important,’ Karlinsky began, addressing the whole audience as Miriam Levy resumed her seat and her fiance, sitting beside her, squeezed her hand.
‘I am sure you know,’ Karlinsky went on, ‘the high place — the very high place — that the Torah accords to women in the direction of Jewish family life.
In Eretz family life will not be the same as you have known here in Cork or anywhere in the Diaspora because in the settlements women are involved in communal work just as much as the men are.
Nevertheless, the high status of the woman's influence is in no way diminished.
But what work is it you will be doing?’
Here Karlinsky turned to Miriam Levy, drawing momentary blushes to her cheeks.
‘Well, you will be doing the sort of work women do in the home anywhere — cooking, cleaning, minding children, laundering — all those tasks to which women are no strangers.
That doesn't mean that you would be engaged  in the same boring work all the time.
These tasks rotate — a month in the kitchen, a month in the laundry, a month in the vegetable gardens, things like that.
But also women work in the fields — if they wish to and are physically fit for it.
Sowing, threshing, tobacco-farming, citrus-planting, even building — no activity is closed to anyone.
And if you have any special skills or knowledge that can be made use of they would be more than welcome.
Does that answer your question?’
Miriam blushed again and nodded.
As Karlinsky waited for any other questions, the President stood up to turn and survey the congregation.
‘Nu?
Nu?
Anyone else?’
When there was no reply he went on: ‘Then I shall ask Father McGiff to propose a vote of thanks to the speaker.’
There was polite applause and some surprise that the priest should be asked to speak.
Father McGiff, however, did not himself seem to share the surprise and it was clear that his participation had been decided on beforehand.
‘My very good friends,’ he commenced, ‘I won't keep you long.
I'm sure many of you would prefer to get your weekly social started rather than listen to me.
Not that I'd blame you, not that I'd blame you.
But to be serious for a moment’— and he hitched his spectacles up higher on his nose.
‘I may not be of your persuasion but tonight I have been persuaded that the world is reaching a turning-point in its history and that the ancient biblical promise to your people is about to be redeemed.
I believe it is.
I hope it is.
Because it would be a miracle, you know, a sure sign of the grace of the Lord Who created all of us.
But when that miraculous day dawns and your wanderings are over’— another hitch of the spectacles ‘I hope you won't all leave Cork.
I have been a friend of your wonderful Rabbi and of many of you for a very long time.
I cherish his and your friendship, and I can say in all sincerity that Cork would be the poorer without you.
But I'd better not keep on like this or I'll be accused of queering Mr Karlinsky's pitch.
It's a privilege and an  honour for me to thank him, on your behalf, for coming here tonight and addressing us in the way he has.
I wish him and all of you good luck in all your hopes and endeavours.’
The priest went and shook hands with Karlinsky.
As soon as the applause died down Max Klein called out, ‘Well, what are you waiting for?
Go and enjoy yourselves,’ adding, with a gravelly laugh, as if he knew they were expecting something else: ‘There'll be no collection tonight.‘
Banter and mocking cheers greeted the announcement as the drift to the communal hall commenced.
Already in the hall, having slipped out while the priest was speaking, Judith Cohen had lit the gas under the tea-urn and unwrapped the sandwiches.
Drawing the curtain across the windows she looked out on the gloomy, almost deserted street.
Drizzle was falling again, and she saw two RIC policemen patrolling past, their capes gleaming.
They would be based in Union Quay barracks just around the corner; that would be their home.
The word stirred her, and she recalled what her mother had said to her the previous day: that Cork had been her home all her life, with no suffering and no want — a safe and secure home.
What home was safe these days?
The policemen's homes weren't — their barracks were being attacked almost daily all over the country.
The Irish people — their homes weren't safe, either — the papers were full of reports of houses being burned by one side or the other.
Jewish homes?
When were they ever anything but targets — real or potential?
Even in Palestine Karlinsky hadn't tried to hide it — they had to be on their guard.
And Cork?
She had never felt in danger before, at least not from the sort of attack that menaced the settlers in Palestine, the RIC in their barracks, the Irish in their homes.
Her home might be secure, but was she herself?
Suddenly she knew that, without her having noticed it was happening, her sense of permanence, her feeling of stability, had already begun to crumble.
At the  realisation, a shiver ran through her body.
Fear or anticipation?
She could not tell.
She heard voices, laughter, the sound of hurrying footsteps approaching the hall, and she quickly wound the gramophone and lowered the needle on to the record.
7
EVEN IN THE BEST OF WEATHERS the view from the officers’ mess of 16th Division's Cambridge Barracks was dispiriting.
At seven o'clock on a chilly Saturday evening in November, the shroud of darkness enveloping it was a kindness as far as Captain Roddy Simcox was concerned.
As he gazed out over the still wet cobblestones, all he could see was the glimmer of lights — lights on the barrack square, lights on the sentry posts at the main gates, lights in the barrack huts, and beyond them the lights of the hospital's east wing.
There was a hint of menace about the scene, an unnatural stillness in which the Captain was aware of his body's answering tension.
He felt that something was waiting out there, that to venture beyond the lights' pale embrace for whatever reason — necessity, whim or duty — was to take one's life in one's hands.
‘Stuff and nonsense,’ Captain Simcox muttered to himself as he threw back his head, downed the last of his whiskey and dried the ends of his thick red moustache with finger and thumb.
What a ruddy nightmare the whole blasted show is, he thought.
He tapped his empty glass, then shrugged his shoulders as if too indifferent to meet some sort of challenge and almost defiantly poured himself another large measure.
He knew he was drinking too much but, damn it all, what else was there to do when a man was off duty and his wife was hundreds of miles away?
It was too early yet to go to his lodgings and he had already made his visit to the hospital to see how Byford was getting on.
Poor bugger had caught a bad one in an ambush outside Blarney the previous day.
He'd probably have to lose a leg, was the MO's report.
‘They came from nowhere, Captain,’ Byford kept repeating.
‘One minute the road was clear, and then….‘
‘I know, Corporal, I know how it is,’ was all Roddy could offer.
‘You just rest and try not to think about it.’
Captain Simcox knew very well how it was.
He had himself frequently led patrols along the narrow roads and boreens that ran like veins through the countryside about Cork, and before that he had spent more time than he cared to remember in the muddy trenches and dug-outs of France with shells screaming overhead.
Touch wood, he had been lucky and come through it all unscathed, but it would be no consolation to Byford to tell him that he had been un lucky, that it was the RIC and their Black and Tan recruits rather than British army patrols that were the main IRA targets.
Byford had only to read the newspapers or listen to the barrack-room talk to know the figures: over 400 police stations destroyed so far in 1920 alone and two senior police officers assassinated.
as if that wasn't enough, what about the 2000 arms raids on RIC depots all over the country in the past two months?
And now, to cap it all, poor Byford had to be the first army victim of the latest IRA tactic — Flying Columns-compact bands armed only with a few rifles and automatic pistols, moving soundlessly at night along country lanes on foot or on bicycles, and waiting behind roadside hedges — waiting for hours, days if necessary — for a patrol to come along.
This time it had been Byford's patrol, not the police or the Black and Tans.
‘You pays your money and you takes your chance'-that was war.
Privately Captain Simcox hoped the IRA would be a match for the Tans — well, perhaps that was expecting too much — but it would be something if they could put some manners on them and give them a bloody nose now and again.
Contempt was what every man in the barracks felt for them.
Even Windsor, their Colonel-in-Chief, made no secret of his belief that they were only licensed thugs rampaging through the countryside in drunken  gangs, shooting indiscriminately at passers-by, looting shops, setting fire to farmhouses and stock.
The Government might fool the British public by denying the atrocity stories, but the Army in Ireland knew the truth, the newspapers knew, the people knew.
It was obvious that the Tans had been given carte blanche by a panicky Cabinet.
Why, so hasty had been their recruitment that there even weren't police uniforms ready for them when they were rushed over to Ireland and they had to make do with some rag-tag-and-bobtail hotch-potch of khaki tunic and dark green trousers, supplemented with the black leather belts of the RIC.
Well, maybe the IRA would be a match for them after all.
They could be just as ruthless and at least they had most of the military advantages: a thorough knowledge of the countryside, the support of most of the people, and a cause to fight for.
Plus a British-trained commander!
Intelligence had reported that the Flying Columns were directed by a soldier named Barry who had fought for Britain in the Great War!
If Intelligence was right, that would be a fitting irony.
After all, in the war Barry would have been told that he was fighting to uphold the rights of small nations, so what could be more logical than that he should now fight for the rights of his own country, Ireland, a small nation if ever there was one!
The sound of the mess door opening made Roddy turn from the window, but whoever it was closed the door again and disappeared.
Thank goodness they're not looking for me, he thought as he crossed the room.
Checking his watch, he poured himself a last drink and sank into one of the easy chairs before the fire.
He should have enough time to finish his drink and be away before his fellow-officers started to drift in.
He'd be just as pleased to avoid them.
Especially Campbell —‘By-the-book’ Campbell as he was known — a nickname he was secretly proud of, though he publicly deplored the practice of addressing officers of the British Army in any other way  than by proper rank.
He was the only one in the mess who complained about Roddy's preference for outside lodgings rather than barracks quarters.
‘It's not the right example, Captain Simcox,’ he'd say aggrievedly, the musical Scots burr belying the complaint in his voice.
‘The officers are a team and all the members of the team should stick together.
Ye know what I mean.’
Roddy knew but did not care.
King's Regulations allowed an officer to have outside accommodation and, if the Colonel-in-Chief didn't forbid it, it was none of ‘Bythe-book’ Campbell's business.
There was a time when Captain Simcox had fitted comfortably into the officer class — but that was before the war and his marriage to Elizabeth.
What he wanted now was a normal married life away from uniforms, fighting, and the whole insanity of men being paid to kill their fellow-men.
He lived for his reunion with Elizabeth; all that sustained him until then was the daily letter from his new wife waiting for him in his lodgings.
He still thought of her as his ‘new’ wife even though the wedding was now a two-year-old memory.
He had been serving in France when he met her, they had married as soon as the Hun had been finished off, and after the honeymoon it had been back to the colours for him and straight over to Ireland.
The two years in the Cork posting had seemed like twenty years to Roddy.
If he had to be shifted to Ireland, why couldn't it have been Dublin where he'd at least have been nearer to Elizabeth and might have managed to hop over to England more often.
Since being stuck in Cork he'd had only two brief periods of leave with her.
Still, to look on the bright side: if they had been together all this time, by now they might already be a dull settled couple, instead of which the long separation had preserved the thrill of courtship in their marriage, with letters passing between them constantly.
And with a baby on the way there would surely be some compassionate leave for him soon.
He'd have to stick it out until then.
Somehow.
Despite the fact that he had come from a long  line of soldier forebears, even the combination of breeding, upbringing and training no longer made it easy for him to bear the tedium of army life with good grace.
He had something to live for now, something infinitely more worth while than the seemingly mindless routine of military discipline and the risk of pointless death or — what was often worse — horrible mutilation.
As he put the glass to his lips to wash out the thought, his eye caught the soldierly portraits all around, the Divisional insignia above the mantelpiece, the roll of battle honours flanking them on each side, and he had a sudden vision of the mess walls decorated not with these trumpery monuments to man's stupidity but with the torn and mangled limbs of countless unfortunates and, in the place of honour, Corporal Byford's shattered, still bleeding leg.
‘Ugh!’
Captain Simcox shivered and rapidly swallowed the last of his drink.
He bent to throw a few pieces of turf on the fire and was reminded that the locals called them sods of turf.
The word seemed to him to describe perfectly the smelly, often damp cakes of earth they were forced to burn since coal supplies had been so reduced by the constant cancellation of goods trains.
‘Sod it all,’ he muttered, the fire and whiskey combined sending a flush of warmth through his body.
He forced himself out of the chair and fastened his tunic.
If he didn't get away now, he'd only be waylaid by the others, there'd be more whiskies, and it would be all hours before he'd get to his lodgings and the letter from Elizabeth.
He threw his greatcoat over his shoulders and then, remembering ‘By-the-book’ Campbell, donned it properly.
At the main gate he acknowledged the sentry's salute and turned to face the short hill up Southern Road to his rooms.
As he strode out into the darkness, the gloom and chill of the evening only served to sharpen his anticipation, so that he had no eyes for the RIC men on patrol, the few pedestrians hurrying along, or the horse and cart just moving off beside him on the road, the  barely discernible name JAS SULLIVAN painted on the cart's side and a burly figure with a flattened nose and scarred face hunched on the driver's seat, desultorily twitching the reins.
8
SATURDAYS the Jews of Cork spent with their families and their God, Sundays they spent with each other.
On Sundays three or four houses in Celtic Crescent and its neighbouring streets — always including Rabbi Moishe's would be the venue for morning prayers.
There groups of men along with youths over the bar mitzvah age of thirteen would gather at eight o'clock, and to the muttered accompaniment of the special blessings each would kiss his phylacteries, wind one around left arm, palm and second finger, encircle his forehead with the other, and then join in reciting the ritual prayers.
More intimate and relaxed than synagogue services — whoever felt inclined could take it on himself to lead the responses — these minyanim were held in the front rooms of the tiny houses and anyone passing along the street at the time would be assailed by a chorus of  incantations like the sound of bees swarming in a hive.
In fact the only pedestrians abroad then were early churchgoers on their way to second Mass at St Joseph's, its echoing carillons summoning them to their house of God.
Prayers in Jewtown over, the men would drift out onto the street, each separate group mingling with the others in a leisurely trading of news and gossip before eventually they entered their own homes where breakfast awaited them.
In Rabbi Cohen's the exodus followed very soon after the last Amen, for the Rabbi spent little time in idle conversation and his withdrawal from the room was the signal for the other worshippers to leave.
But outside the house on this Sunday morning the usual gossip was forgotten, for Max Klein's new motor-car was parked at the Rabbi's front door and it seemed that half the community  had gathered to wonder at it.
Many of them had seen it at the synagogue meeting on the previous night, but now in the daylight they were able to examine it more closely and exclaim at its resplendence.
The black wings and running-board set off the sober mole colour of the body, and the President glowed as he proudly explained the working of the controls and gear lever, opened the doors to display the interior with its adjustable foot-rests for the rear-seat passengers and obliged a request from one admirer to see how much space there was in the luggage compartment at the back.
‘That must have cost a pretty penny,’ Mickey Aronson declared, not really expecting to be told the price.
To his surprise Max Klein announced: ‘Two hundred and fifty pounds.
The latest model on the market.
This year's.’
There were gasps and whistles at the magnitude of the figure.
‘Kein aynhoreh!
Mazeltov !’ the admirers congratulated the President, who almost blushed.
He hadn't meant to boast of his wealth, but he couldn't resist rejoicing in it and basking in his friends' appreciation.
But when someone tried to test the security of the spare wheel attached to the side of the body by pulling at it roughly and then, intrigued by the pair of leather driving-gauntlets resting on the front seat, fitted them on and passed them around for general examination he decided it was time to leave.
He took the crank-handle, inserted it in the hole at the bottom of the radiator and, encouraged by a chorus of ‘One, two, three, heave!’, swung it energetically until the engine sprang to life.
‘Did you remember to cut a few inches off the exhaust-pipe?’
Mickey Aronson shouted as the President sat in behind the wheel.
‘What for?’
Max Klein shouted back above the engine noise.
‘To circumcise it, what else?’
Mickey Aronson replied, delighted at the ribald laughter that greeted his witticism.
But not for nothing had Max Klein spent the best years  of his youth and early manhood at country fairs and markets learning to give as good as he got.
He waited for the laughter to die down and then, ignoring Mickey Aronson, he leaned his head out of the window, gave his gravelly laugh and confided to the other men: ‘A bigger ignoramus I never met; he doesn't even know that ships and cars are always female.’
The exchange put him in excellent mood for his breakfast.
Rabbi Moishe, too, was looking forward to his Sunday breakfast.
For him it held a special appeal; the one day of the week he could break bread with his family and not have to feel that they were only loaned to him for the while — his son Joshua had no business to go to, his grandson Jacob no college lectures.
The Sabbath meals, of course, were family occasions also, but they were invested with the day's solemnity and holiness.
If the Sabbath was a day of rest from labour, Sunday, Rabbi Moishe sometimes thought — but it was not a thought he voiced for fear of being misunderstood — was a day of rest from the Sabbath.
And breakfast was not only a leisurely start, it was also the only Sunday meal when he could be sure that all the members of his family would be together at table.
Jacob, increasingly since he commenced going to university, might be missing for the rest of the day; Joshua, particularly in the summer, would go out for long walks in the country, following, he said, the course of some meshuggeneh game in which young men threw an iron ball along the road and ran after it — could there be such a game?
Molly and Judith frequently went visiting other girls in the community after dinner and as often as not did not come home for tea; and, since Malka had married and left Cork, Judith spent even more Sundays out of the house.
Bertha, of course, never went anywhere, but Rabbi Moishe sometimes wished his daughter-in-law had a little more — humanity? no, no, he mustn't judge — a little more inclination to mix with the other married women; he respected his daughter-in-law, she was holiness itself, as frum as an angel, and as for housekeeping.
…But there were times, when they were alone in the house together — and even though the Rabbi might be in his own room teasing out a bissle Talmud — his attention would suddenly stray from the holy words and he would become uncomfortably aware of some dybbuk , some spirit of unhappiness, brooding in the kitchen.
Still, on Sunday mornings there were no such worries and the Rabbi could look forward to the family breakfast — and to bagels .
At five o'clock in the morning Ada Neumann would have been in her kitchen, simmering the dozens of doughnut-shaped rolls in hot water for a few minutes before baking them in the oven, glazing them with egg-white and then showering them with sesame seeds.
After the minyanim the men would collect them to bring home, sweet-tasting harbingers of the new week.
To Rabbi Moishe, however, they were more than just delicacies, more even than symbols of the hoped-for good week to come — they were remembrances from the past, taking him back forty and more years to his distant home in Lithuania.
There his family, like all those in the village, had been too poor to eat anything but black bread, and so bagels,baked with expensive white flour, were the rarest of luxuries.
He had come a long way from there to this home in Ireland.
God willing, he would soon go on a final long journey to another home, his real home, in Eretz .
Karlinsky's visit could almost be regarded as the signal for the journey to commence.
Rabbi Moishe felt that at last the past was about to bear sweet fruit.
This Sunday morning, as he broke a piece from the bagel to pronounce over it the Grace Before Meals, there was a special fervour in his voice, his blue eyes were full of love and good humour, and he refused room in his heart for the sorrow he knew he would feel on leaving his family.
Here and now he was with them and while with them he would enjoy.
‘Karlinsky, he was at the minyan ?’
Bertha asked.
She lifted a large saucepan of eggs from on top of the hot range and gave one to each person.
‘There's more if you  want them.
You'll have two?’ she urged her husband.
Joshua distractedly waved the second egg away as the Rabbi answered his daughter-in-law's question.
‘Nein, nein .
He left early this morning, to catch the first train to Dublin.
The President drove him to the station.’
Then as he broke off the top of his egg he grimaced and tugged at his beard.
‘What is it?
Vos ?
A blood spot?
Here, take mine; there's plenty,’ Bertha Cohen said, passing her egg to the Rabbi and taking his to the yard to throw it in the rubbish-bin.
‘When will you know about Eretz — about your departure date, I mean?’
Judith enquired.
‘Did he say?’
‘He will write me a letter immediately he gets back to London.
He still has some details to arrange.
I'll know this week — in a few days perhaps.’
‘But it will be soon, before Christmas?’
Bertha Cohen remarked.
‘You'll be leaving soon?’
‘Before Christmas,’ the Rabbi agreed.
‘I hope not before Malka has her child.
I would like to be here for that.’
‘Here — there — what's the difference?’ his daughter-in-law grumbled, pouring out cups of tea.
She hoped the departure would be as early as possible so that she and Joshua could go over to Leeds for the birth of their first grandchild.
‘If I'm here,’ Rabbi Moishe replied, in the sing-song voice he would adopt to explain a point in the Torah, ‘I'll know about it sooner.
When the Almighty makes an old man a great-grandfather, better he should learn of it quickly.‘
‘Will it make you feel any different?
Will it make you feel any younger?’
‘Ai, mein kinde , let me tell you a story.’
He paused, a spoonful of egg halfway to his mouth.
‘About old Mrs Rubinstein who went to the doctor.’
Jacob nudged Judith; this was one of his grandfather's chestnuts — he told it at least once a year, unfailingly on his birthday.
‘The doctor examined her and said: ‘Mrs Rubinstein, organically you are in perfect health.’
‘So,’ Mrs Rubinstein said, ‘vos iz de meisa mit mir ?’
‘What is wrong with you?
Something, Mrs Rubinstein, that medicine cannot cure.
It cannot make you younger.’
‘Who wants to be younger, Doctor?’
Mrs Rubinstein answered, ‘I want to be older.’
The same with me — the older I grow, the better my chance of becoming a great-grandfather.’
Pleased with himself, he returned to his egg and bagel .
The laughter was dutiful, except for Joshua who merely grunted and shrugged his shoulders.
The Rabbi brushed some crumbs from his beard and turned to his grandson.
‘Nu, Yankeleh , how do you feel about becoming an uncle?’
Rabbi Moishe was the only one of the family who had always called his grandson by his Yiddish pet name.
Jacob now only vaguely remembered childhood days when his grandfather had loved bouncing him on his knee until the boy's tiny yarmulkah almost slid down over his eyes, while chanting ‘Yankeleh, Yankeleh, geb tzu zein zeide a bonkeleh.’
‘Vos iz a bonkeleh ?’
Jacob's father once asked.
In sing-song came back the reply: ‘A bonkeleh is a greisa kuss ’— accompanied by a noisy demonstratory kiss on the child's forehead.
‘I never heard of that,’ Joshua answered.
‘I think you just made up the word.’
‘Ai, ai,’Rabbi Moishe crooned to Jacob, ‘your tata is such a chachem , such a wise man!
‘You just made up the word,’ he tells me, as if that is forbidden.
How does he think words are made?
Does he think a boy-word meets a girl-word, they get married, and in time another word is born?
Ai , is that it?
No,Yankeleh , you tell him: people make words.
Yankeleh, Yankeleh, geb tzu zein zeide a bonkeleh .’
As Joshua sat, unconsciously shepherding the crumbs on his plate into a neat pile as if they were pieces of scrap in his store, he listened to the Rabbi talking to Jacob, heard the warmth in his voice, and felt a pang of envy at the bond that existed between his father and his son.
He wished he had been able to act as unaffectedly, but some reluctance that he could never understand always held him back.
Was it just shyness?
Or was it because he had had two daughters before the son he wanted eventually arrived and by then he was too old, with all the eagerness and spontaneity of early fatherhood dried up?
Or perhaps it was that he had not wanted to turn Bertha's disappointment with her daughters into bitterness by seeing him show too much interest in his son.
Whatever the answer, it was too late now to turn back the clock, too late to understand anything about Jacob.
Yes, he did envy the affection that flowed between the boy and the old man.
He envied it, but he feared for it, too, for when the Rabbi departed to Eretz who would show Jacob the same affection?
Not his sister, Judith — the gap between them was too wide; not his mother — it would not fit her image of the man she wanted him to become; and not his father not even his father.
Jacob would have to look elsewhere for it.
Perhaps he already had.
‘Oi, gevald ,’ Joshua murmured to himself, unable to suppress the age-old cry of suffering and despair as he momentarily covered his eyes with his hand.
But Bertha, sitting across the table from him, saw the involuntary action and the slight movement of his lips, and her heart ached to share her husband's burden — whatever it might be.
Whenever Jacob was meeting Deirdre outside college hours he waited for her at the bottom of Patrick's Hill where it joined King Street.
It wasn't King Street any more of course— at least , not officially, for some months earlier the Cork Corporation had defiantly renamed it MacCurtain Street in honour of the city's martyred Lord Mayor.
But the sign on the wall still said King Street, and Jacob presumed that as yet only members of the IRA  and their supporters would call it by its new name.
Perhaps that meant most of the city's population — it certainly included Deirdre.
He kept his eyes fixed on the crest of the hill over which she would appear freewheeling down on her bicycle, black hair streaming and her long skirt ballooning out on either side like a bat's wings.
Patrick's Hill was so long and steep that even pedestrians found it an excessive strain, and its footpaths had been layered with sets of steps at regular intervals to make the ascent tolerable.
Coming down, especially on a bicycle, was exhilarating, even dangerous if the handlebars developed a wobble.
One's impetus was such that, provided there was nothing in the way, one would be carried through Bridge Street, right over Patrick's Bridge, and halfway into Patrick's Street, Cork's main thoroughfare, before having to put foot to pedal once more.
At ten o'clock on a Sunday morning traffic was almost nonexistent, and as soon as Deirdre came into view Jacob began to cycle towards the bridge.
He was only halfway there when she passed him at full speed, shouting ‘Slow coach!’ as she flew ahead.
He did not hurry to catch up with her.
For him these first moments of meeting each day were so exciting an elixir that he always tried to make them last as long as possible, and the sight of her in full flight on her bicycle never failed to set his blood tingling.
She came to rest beside the statue of Father  Matthew , the Apostle of Temperance, and as Jacob drew up to her he joked: ‘You wouldn't want to get too close to him.
You'd never know what way he'd take you, being without a drink for so long.’
‘Safer in his arms than some I could mention,’ Deirdre joked back.
The veiled allusion of her reply, the intimacy of her tone of voice, reassured Jacob.
Having known her for less than two months, he was not yet confident of any strong hold on her affections, despite the fact that she seemed quite willing to accept his embraces and kisses.
But he  did not feel that she looked upon their amorous exchanges as more than innocent dalliance.
If her beauty, her year advantage in age, and her casualness were not completely deterring, they often induced in him a tentativeness and an uncomfortable awareness of his own inexperience.
‘Come on, let's go,’ Deirdre said.
‘There are too many policemen around here for us to be hanging about.’
Pairs of RIC men were patrolling on each side of the wide thoroughfare and, though to Jacob they were of no more account than any other pedestrians, he realised that Deirdre could not feel so unconcerned.
He glanced at the basket on the front of her bicycle.
As usual it was full, her handbag plonked on top of bags of fruit which on the outward journey were reserved ‘for my grandmother in the country’, but which, her assignment completed without incident, they would eat on the way home.
The assignment was the distribution of An tOglach , the banned IRA newspaper, hidden beneath the fruit.
If they were stopped by the police and her basket was searched, he was to say that he knew nothing about the newspapers — she made him agree to this arrangement if he wanted to accompany her on her clandestine journeys.
His acceptance of the condition was made with an easy mind — he didn't feel that distributing a newspaper, even a banned one, would be considered a particularly heinous offence for a young girl, and anyway he could not imagine that he would be in any danger himself if he admitted knowledge of the basket's contents.
‘Where to today?’ he asked as they set off, weaving between the trams drawn up at the Statue terminus and careful to avoid getting their tyres caught in the tramlines.
‘Gougane Barra.’
‘Gougane Barra!
But that's miles away,’ Jacob expostulated.
‘We couldn't possibly cycle there and back in a day.’
Deirdre laughed at his alarm.
‘No.
I only said that to  wake you up.
We'll go as far as Coachford — that's on the way to Gougane.
Do you think your lordship could manage that much?’
‘I think so,’ Jacob replied and then, in a fruity voice, declaimed:
‘There is a green island in lone Gougane Barra
Where an allua of song rushes forth as an arrow.’
‘What's that?’
Deirdre asked.
‘A poem.
Called ‘Gougane Barra’, by Jeremiah John Callanan.’
‘Who's he when he's at home?’
‘Shame on you,’ came the bantering reply, ‘not to know one of your own local poets.
Admittedly he is rather obscure and it's nearly a nundred years since he died.
But you wouldn't approve of him anyway.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because at one stage of his life he joined the British Army.’
‘Oh, a renegade,’ Deirdre commented.
‘Not exactly.
He was just too poor to do anything else.’
‘There you are.’
There was a note of triumph in her voice.
‘Why was he poor?
British oppression.’
‘Yes, that's true,’ Jacob agreed.
‘But it doesn't disturb you .
It doesn't affect you.’
As they cycled along side by side, Deirdre put a comradely hand on Jacob's shoulder, as if to deny any accusation in her words.
‘After all, you're not Irish — or so you keep telling me.’
They had reached the end of Patrick Street and were turning into Grand Parade.
Jacob pointed to an elaborate fountain a hundred yards ahead of them in the middle of the road, the distance making the play of water seem frozen in midjet.
‘See that?’
‘What?
You mean the fountain?’
‘Yes, Berwick Fountain.
Do you like it?’
‘Like it?’
Deirdre echoed in puzzlement.
‘I don't know.
I never thought about it.
It's just a fountain.’
‘Just a fountain.
And Patrick Street is just a street.
And that lovely shop we just passed — Queen's Old Castle — is just a shop.
Oh, beggin' your pardon, ma'm, but with a name like Queen's Old Castle I could hardly expect you to like it.’
‘What are you ramaishing about?’
Deirdre laughed.
‘Listen to me, Deirdre.
I'll tell you.’
Jacob, however, wasn't sure what he had to tell.
He had never been able to grasp it himself, never been able to assemble the jigsaw pieces of his identity into a clear recognisable picture.
There was no form of words he could quote to define himself or his purpose, like a lodestar or a motto an ancient family would bear on its coat of arms.
The whole puzzle became even more tantalising whenever he tried to fashion it into a poem.
But he was encouraged by his feelings for Deirdre, by his desire to impress her, perhaps also by some vague idea that to excite her sympathy would automatically make him more attractive to her.
Most of all, she was the only person he knew to whom he could talk without embarrassment, and it was a help that cycling side by side he didn't have to look at her as he tried to explain.
‘You and I were both born here, in Cork, but you think of it as Cork, Ireland, while I think of it as just Cork, where I live.’
‘It's more than that,’ Deirdre interrupted.
‘It's where you were born — as you said—with all that that implies.’
‘That's just it.
What does it imply for me?
Cork is where I happened to be born.
Where did my family come from?
Lithuania.
They happened to end up in Cork but it might just as well have been Hamburg or Paris or London, or America, as so many other Jews did.
Where were your people born?’
‘Father Cork City, mother County Cork, grandparents different parts of Ireland.’
‘There you are,’ Jacob said, giving his bicycle bell a  ping as if to reinforce his point.
‘And probably — no, almost certainly — your great-grandparents were born in Ireland, too, and their parents before them.
You.
Are.
Irish.
I'm not.
Oh, technically, officially, I am.
But I can't be Irish.
I can't feel Irish.’
‘You're talking about roots, aren't you?’
Deirdre asked.
‘Roots and what grows from roots.
Involvement, commitment.’
There was a pause while Deirdre considered this.
Then, as if she had found a flaw in his argument, she pinged her own bell and announced: ‘But you love Cork.
You've told me you love it.
You know so much about the city.’
‘Yes.
But that's the very point I'm trying to make,’ Jacob threw back at her.
‘Cork is as deep as my roots go.
Remember, I never mixed with Christians until I went to college and met you.
You're the first non-Jewish girl I've ever said more than ‘Nice day’ to.
I've lived my life in a ghetto — Jewish people, Jewish friends, Jewish history, Jewish affairs, Jewish concerns, that's been my world.
And that world, that ghetto, happens to be in this city, in Cork.
It's all I know, or feel, of Ireland — my physical surroundings.
They appeal to me emotionally, aesthetically, but not — not — viscerally.’
‘God above, you're using horrible-long words,’ Deirdre laughed.
‘Sorry.
Blame my medical training — all six weeks of it.
But, seriously, to me Cork is a beautiful city.
I love its buildings, its river, its setting, its atmosphere.
While I've grown up in it, it has grown in me.’
Jacob paused, and then with a side-glance added light-heartedly: ‘Oh, and I love some of its people, too.’
‘Now, don't try to change the subject,’ Deirdre admonished him with a smile.
They had reached the beginning of Western Road and were passing the Cork & Muskerry Railway station.
From there the single line emerged onto the road, and along one side of it the train to West Cork would puff and blow at a brisk but not incautious pace, its smoke staining the leaves of the roadside trees, the guard ringing his bell almost without stop until they were approaching Carrigrohane and could reasonably expect to be out of range of busy pedestrians, excited children, and messenger boys on bicycles plaguing the engine-driver by trying to outspeed him.