

Special need groups
CHILD DEPRIVATION AND FAMILY WELFARE
THE PROBLEM OF CHILD DEPRIVATION
The need for children to have a stable home life and happy upbringing has long been recognized.
Children are dependent on others for their very survival, and the quality of the care they receive, physically and emotionally, will go far to determine the sort of adults they will grow up into.
It is therefore vital that they are given the right sort of care, so they can grow up to be well developed and strong physically, mentally alert, contented and emotionally stable.
Only then can they grow up able to enjoy full lives, to become responsible and useful citizens and to make good parents in turn.
Most children are reared by their natural parents and most are cared for well.
As recognition of the importance of the early formative years has deepened, however, the state has taken an increasing part in concern for child care.
It has demonstrated its concern in three main ways: by aiding parents in their job of child-rearing through the provision of services such as maternity and child welfare, schooling, etc.; by taking care directly of children who have no parents; and by taking over the care of children whose parents are not providing properly for their physical and emotional well-being.
Aid to parents is provided mostly through the basic social services.
Child benefits indicate the state's recognition of the financial implications of parenthood.
As we saw in Chapter  2 on social security, however, these do not keep the very low-paid workers above the officially defined poverty line.
But the aim is to help parents financially even though the actuality falls short of the intention of preventing family poverty.
The maternity and child welfare services have been developed to help parents do their best for their children.
Mothers are given ante- and post-natal care and children are medically inspected, vaccinated, etc., periodically.
The health visitors at the clinics and on domiciliary visits offer advice and help on many aspects of child-rearing and can refer children for further specialized attention where necessary.
Education services, of course, are a vitally important aid to parents in providing schooling and ancillary services.
The state, then, offers a fair amount of help to all parents in their task of rearing children.
It also has to assume responsibility for those children who lack parents or are not receiving proper care.
In the case of orphan children the position is relatively clear: a child without parents needs someone to care for it.
But children, with parents, who are not receiving proper care are a more complicated category to define.
The state has, in a sense, to define what proper care is, or at least what falls short of it.
It has to take powers to intervene in family life and take into care children who are being neglected or badly treated.
So the reasons why many children are in care depend on what the statutory powers and duties of the child care service are.
These have tended to widen as our understanding of the needs of children has developed.
Initially only orphaned, abandoned or destitute children were cared for by the state; then those who were cruelly treated or delinquent; and today any child who is deprived of normal home life on a temporary or permanent basis.
Before looking more closely at the reasons why children come into care, and at the numbers involved, it is necessary to look briefly at the main legislation in this field and the powers and duties of the child care service.
CHILD CARE
The main legislation relating to the care of children is the consolidating Child Care Act of 1980, the Children Acts of  1948 and 1975 and the Children and Young persons Acts of 1933, 1963 and 1969.
However, at the time of writing, a new Children Bill is making its way through the legislative process, and will, once enacted, form the basic legislation relating to childcare in the 1990s.
Central responsibility for child care rests with the Department of Social Security through the personal Social Services division.
Responsibility used to lie with the Home Office and there was a separate Inspectorate for child care and a Central Training Council in Child Care.
Following the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 responsibility was transferred to the DHSS when child can became part of personal social services.
Responsibility for development and inspection was taken over by the Social Work Service and the work of the training council has been absorbed into the Central Council for Education and Training in Social Work.
At local level, responsibility for child care rests with the social services committees of the local authorities.
Counties and county boroughs became responsible for child care under the 1948 Children Act.
This gave them a statutory duty to appoint a committee and a chief officer specifically for the care of children.
Local authority children's departments were established following the report of the Curtis Committee in 1946.
This recommended the creation of a specialist children's service to replace the existing provision, which was fragmented among various departments, including public assistance.
The report of the Seebohm Committee recommended the creation of unified social services departments which, from 1970, have been responsible for work under various Children Acts.
The Child Care Act of 1980 was a consolidating Act replacing the Children Act 1948.
Under part 1 of the 1980 Act, local authorities first have a duty to promote the welfare of children by making available such advice, guidance and assistance as may diminish the need to receive children into care.
Then, as section 2 of the 1980 Act, they have the duty, originally spelt out in section 1 of the 1948 Act, to receive a child into care where it appears that a child under 17 ‘has neither parent nor guardian or is lost or that his parents or guardian are, for the time being or permanently, prevented by reason of mental or bodily disease or infirmity or other incapacity or any other circumstances  from providing for his proper accommodation, maintenance and upbringing; and in either case, that the intervention of the local authority under this section is necessary in the interests of the welfare of the child’.
A very wide variety of cases are received into care under this section.
Children are also taken into care when they are committed by the courts under the 1969 Children and Young Persons Act.
The major reasons for a care order are that the children have themselves committed an offence, they are in need of care, protection and control, or they or another child of the same family have been victims of an offence or are in the same household as a person convicted of a serious offence such as manslaughter, cruelty or suchlike.
Most of the children coming into care under section 2 of the Child Care Act do so at the request of their parents, and their parents can take them home whenever they wish.
Indeed, the local authority has a clear duty to restore the child to his or her natural parents as soon as this is consistent with the child's welfare.
In the minority of cases in which the child does not return home, he or she will remain in care up to the age of 18 if necessary.
In some cases, where the parents are dead or permanently unable to care for the child the local authority assumes parental rights over the child.
Children who are committed by the courts to the care of the local authority cannot, of course, be taken home by their parents whenever they wish.
The authority is given parental rights over the child by the court order and unless this is revoked these remain in force until he or she reaches 18.
However, children over whom the local authority exercises parental rights may be allowed to return home on trial if this seems to be in their best interests.
Social services departments thus receive children into care for a variety of reasons.
The bulk of receptions are under section 2 of the Child Care Act.
Some of these are children who have no parents or who have been abandoned, and these will be long-term cases.
The majority, however, are children who have come into care because their parents are unable to look after them.
A large number of cases are received because of the short-term illness or confinement of the mother.
Other circumstances in which children come into care include long-term illness, particularly mental illness, the  imprisonment of the parent, the death or desertion of the mother, homelessness of the family through eviction, and unsatisfactory home conditions.
Not all requests for admissions into care are complied with, of course.
Parents are encouraged to make their own arrangements where possible, and are helped by such means as the admission of younger children to day nurseries.
Concern for the prevention of break-up of families has greatly increased since the Children Act of 1948 and local authorities now have a statutory duty to develop preventive work, as the next section will show.
Where children do come into care, close contact is maintained with the parents and they have to pay towards the cost of their children's upkeep according to their means.
Children who come into care through the courts are committed to the care of the local authority either because they are themselves offenders, or because they are the victims of offences or because they are found in need of care.
Children are found in need of care, protection and control if the court establishes that they are not receiving the sort of care a good parent may reasonably be expected to give and they are falling into bad associations, are exposed to moral danger, or the lack of care is likely to cause suffering or seriously affect their health or proper development, or if it establishes that they are beyond the control of their parents.
Obviously children who have been neglected to the point that they are the subject of care proceedings are likely to be difficult and sometimes very disturbed.
They are likely to need very careful handling if their substitute parents are to establish a happy relationship with them.
Older children who are beyond control and difficult or delinquent will not take easily to substitute homes and will often cause a good deal of trouble there.
They might need a less emotionally demanding environment in which they can recuperate and relax before they are able to tackle relationships again.
While the children sent by the courts are likely to be, on average, more disturbed than those received under section 2, the differences are not too noticeable.
All children will tend to suffer from separation from their parents, siblings and familiar surroundings.
Short-term cases are often small  children to whom the separation is so alarming that its temporary nature is irrelevant to them.
Children tend to come into care after upsetting events at home, such as a mother's illness or following the trauma of eviction and homelessness.
And often they come from homes where there have been difficulties — rent arrears, marital troubles, sickness and so on— for many years, before a further crisis causes the children to be taken into care.
Many of the children will have experienced poverty and insecurity, if not actual neglect, and may well have been known to the health or education authorities as children at special risk before they come into the care of the social services department.
In short, some children will come from relatively stable homes for temporary care, others have had very damaging and painful experiences and come from permanently broken homes and are likely to require long-term care.
All will be disturbed and unhappy to some extent at the loss of familiar surroundings and some will be deeply hurt in their capacity to trust and respond to the people who endeavour to provide substitute homes.
There are currently nearly 67,000 children in the care of the local authorities in England and Wales.
The total has grown since the present service was set up in 1948, although in fact the proportion of children in care per thousand of the total population under 18 has not altered so much.
But the turnover is very great, the vast majority of children in care being short-term cases.
The type of care offered to children must vary according to their needs.
But in most cases the aim of the social services departments is to find the child a substitute home as near to a good, normal home as possible, until such time as he or she can return to their own home.
While good standards of physical care, hygiene, nutrition and so forth are clearly vital, it is now realized that the most important need is for the child to receive personal attention and genuine affection.
Only in a secure and loving atmosphere can the child cope with the shocks that have preceded and accompanied their coming into care, and develop to their full potential.
This realization has led to the abandonment of the large institutional type of children's home and a policy favouring the boarding out of children in  ordinary homes where possible.
Boarding out (or fostering) has been practised for many years and the Curtis Committee on the care of children strongly urged that this should be the first choice in finding substitute homes.
Under the Children Act of 1948 the local authorities were given a duty to place a child in foster care unless this was not practicable or desirable in the child's best interests.
Where it is not possible, children's homes are kept as small as possible and are not isolated from the community around them.
The range of substitute homes offered by the local authorities varies considerably and it is of course essential to try to match the different children coming into care to the most appropriate home.
Accordingly, all authorities must provide facilities for the initial and temporary reception of children with the necessary skilled staff for observing and assessing their physical, mental and emotional condition.
These reception centres are also used for the temporary care of children where it is necessary to change the foster or other home.
In cases where it proves very difficult to place a child, the reception centre might end by providing relatively long-term care, but this is not usual or desirable.
After assessment by the child care officer or reception centre, the child is placed in a suitable substitute home.
This is, as already indicated, a foster home where practicable.
About one-third of the total number of children in care are in foster homes, but the proportions of children boarded out vary between different areas.
Foster parents are paid a weekly allowance that covers the basic costs of maintaining a child, but care is taken to see that fostering does not become a materially profitable exercise.
In selecting foster homes social workers interview and assess would-be foster parents for their general suitability, then great care is taken in placing a particular child in a particular foster home.
Where the arrangement works well, children obtain a secure substitute home.
They are able to form a good relationship with their foster parents and they have the advantages of remaining in a normal setting, going to school, making friends and generally participating in the life of the neighbourhood.
However, fostering does not always work out so well.
The reasons for the success or failure of fostering are not well understood.
Clearly in some cases the parents expect  to lavish care upon a poor, neglected child who will respond with gratitude and affection.
They receive a child who has been badly let down in the past, who has to learn, painfully, how to care and trust again.
Far from experiencing simple gratitude, such children will most likely feel terribly torn and anxious when faced with their foster parents' offer of affection.
If they come out from their defensive withdrawal and hesitantly accept the affection they are likely to need to test it out, to see whether it can withstand some heavy strain or whether, like past ties, it can be broken.
So a hurt child will be moody and often intensively provocative, testing out the validity of the proffered affection and expressing some of the pent-up anger and agony from the past.
Not surprisingly, some foster parents are bewildered by the bad behaviour.
It is the skilled job of the social workers to help the foster parents cope by understanding their anxiety, explaining the child's difficulties and helping them to get along together.
It is hard for foster parents to cope with very demanding and disturbed children and no less hard to part with them once they have learnt to love them.
Foster care is not permanent and many children will return to their natural parents, and here again foster parents will need support and help in easing a parting.
It is not easy to find enough foster parents to care for very difficult children; all too often fostering breaks down and the child has to be returned again to the reception centre.
Repeated failures in fostering are obviously very damaging to a child to whom it means repeated rejection.
So for some children it is deemed better to place them in small homes where it is easier to maintain continuity of care.
Most local authorities now run small family group homes instead of the larger children's homes common before the 1948 Act.
These typically cater for up to a dozen boys and girls of various ages, and they are run by a houseparent with some assistance by day.
Often the houseparent is a married woman whose husband goes out to work but acts as a father to the children in the evenings and at weekends.
The home will usually be a converted older house or even a large council house on an estate, and the children will go to the schools, churches and clubs in the neighbourhood.
At some small homes children from the same family can be  kept together, whereas fostering would entail splitting them up.
Also, various children deemed unsuitable for fostering — because of behaviour problems or physical handicaps, for example, or because there are strong ties with the natural parents — can be accommodated, together with those who have had a foster placement breakdown.
Following the 1948 Act efforts were made to foster a deprived child where possible and homes were regarded on the whole as second best.
But in recent years the wisdom of fostering in all cases has been questioned and the merits of a less emotionally demanding atmosphere, which a home can provide, have been increasingly accepted.
Some authorities now favour homes taking fifteen to twenty children, particularly for the difficult medium-term cases where the child is away from their natural home for more than a few months.
Practice varies quite widely in different areas, of course.
In addition to the provision already described, some authorities still retain some of the older-type large homes and several run residential nurseries.
But most authorities have been closing down their residential establishments in recent years.
Broadly speaking, the aim is to provide, whether by fostering or small family group homes, as much individual attention and as near normal an environment as possible for the child who has to come into care.
Alongside this aim is that of returning the children to their natural home wherever possible.
This is a duty in respect of section 2 cases, and, even with children committed by the courts, efforts are made to ensure their eventual return to their own homes.
This involves allowing the children home on trial, a practice that has increased sharply since 1948, and taking whatever steps are necessary to rehabilitate the family so that full parental responsibility can be resumed.
Since the implementation of the relevant sections of the 1969 Children and Young Persons Act, social services authorities have integrated the previously separate system of approved schools and remand homes for delinquent children with their ordinary children's homes.
They now aim to provide a full range of community homes, including not only the family group homes already described but also larger homes with educational facilities.
Some authorities provide hostels for older children who need some care but not the full care of  a family group home, but on the whole the needs of young workers and older school children are not well catered for.
A growing proportion of children in care of the local authority are not actually placed in homes or boarded out but are left under the charge of parent, guardian, relative or friend with some supervision from the social workers.
Apart from their major tasks of receiving children into care and providing substitute homes for them, local authority social services departments have various other responsibilities in the child care field.
One of these concerns the supervision and arrangement of adoptions.
For children permanently deprived of their natural home, adoption provides a secure alternative home.
Under the 1958 Adoption Act, local authorities have a duty to secure the well-being of children awaiting adoption.
Persons who wish to adopt a child may contact their local social services department, which may either place children for adoption itself, or contact a registered adoption agency, or make direct arrangements with the child's parents.
The social services departments supervise the child during the statutory three-month period that elapses between the notification of adoption proceedings and the making of an adoption order by the court; a social worker is usually appointed as a guardian ad litem , i.e. for the duration of the case, to interview the prospective adopters, investigate the relevant circumstances and report to the court.
Attempts are made to consider the best interests of the natural parents and the would-be adoptive parents, but the interests of the child are, of course, of paramount importance.
Following mounting concern about some of the problems of adoption and fostering, a departmental committee was set up to investigate.
Its report on the Adoption of Children was published in 1972.
This recommended a change in procedures so that adoptive parents would be assured that no changes of mind by the mother at a late stage could result in the removal of a child.
Moreover, it suggested that foster parents who had had the care of a child for five years or more should be able to apply for an adoption order without risk of removal by parents before a hearing.
Despite considerable controversy, a Children Act was passed in 1975 based on these recommendations.
It aims to improve adoption procedure and provides for more  say from the child, as well as from the adults in a disputed case.
But, however much care is taken, there are situations where it proves extremely difficult to be fair to both natural parents and prospective adoptive parents and this will always be a sensitive and emotional aspect of child care work.
Another function of the departments is that of child protection.
Under the 1958 Children Act, local authorities have a duty to ensure the well-being of children who are fostered privately.
The social work staff visit and inspect and offer advice and guidance where necessary in the interests of the child.
Social services departments also provide care and after care for older children, by running hostels for working boys and girls and helping with the costs of further education and training, or simply by offering friendship and advice.
Social services departments cooperate closely with voluntary organizations concerned with the welfare of deprived children.
They can place children in homes run by voluntary organizations and make contributions to their costs, and they have certain powers to inspect voluntary homes.
Voluntary effort has been prominent in the development of services for deprived children.
Organizations such as Dr Barnardo's, the National Children's Homes and the Catholic Rescue Society pioneered methods of child care during the nineteenth century and still play a very active part in the child care service.
Approximately 12,000 children are currently being cared for by voluntary organizations.
PREVENTION: FROM CHILD CARE TO FAMILY WELFARE
As the preceding paragraphs have shown, child care is, until the Children Bill becomes law in the early 1990s, based on the Child Care Act 1980, under which one major duty of the local authorities is to receive children into care and provide them with adequate substitute homes unless or until they can be returned to their natural parents.
The majority of children come into care at the request of their parents, because they are temporarily unable to look after them, and they will return to their own homes in due course.
However, a substantial  proportion of the long-term cases are children who have been taken into care against the wishes of their parents because they have not been receiving adequate care or control.
The 1948 Act initiated many changes in child care.
The terms under which children could be received into care were considerably widened, the methods of care were made more sensitive to the needs of children and the unified administrative structure ensured more uniform standards of care over the country.
Moreover, major advances were made in training child care staff both for residential work and for the fieldwork of finding substitute homes, supervising fostering and keeping contact with parents.
Nevertheless, the twenty years following the Act were ones of such rapid development in policy in the child care field that by 1968 the Seebohm Report recommended the absorption of the child care service by unified social services departments and the merging of specialist child work into generic social work.
The emphasis had shifted radically from the child-centred approach of 1948 to the Seebohm concern for family and community.
This change was essentially the outcome of concern for prevention in the child care field.
Interest in prevention of the break-up of families was discernible from the inception of the child care service.
There are several reasons why it received greater emphasis as the years went by.
More knowledge of the emotional needs of children demonstrated the importance of maintaining a warm and continuous relationship between a child and his or her mother or mother substitute.
The study of sociology began to show the importance of the family and class and cultural factors in child development.
The increased use of trained child care officers who had studied the growth and development of personality meant that more people were aware of the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of compensating a child for the break-up of his or her natural home.
Practical considerations, such as the difficulty of finding enough foster placements and adequate staff for children's homes, also lent weight to arguments in favour of preventing children from coming into care.
Moreover, there was some evidence of a feeling in the country that the state must not too readily take on the care of children lest it undermine the responsibilities of parents.
So efforts were made to prevent children from coming into care.
Essentially this meant working with families at risk of break-up.
In some cases it meant helping families who had applied for their children to be taken into care to find an alternative solution.
But it also meant trying to contact families and individuals — doctors, schools, health visitors, housing departments, etc. — when they felt a family had too many problems.
This resulted in the children's department undertaking general family case work and finding they lacked the power to provide much constructive help in many cases.
Their powers were accordingly widened by the 1963 Children and Young persons Act, which gave local authorities a duty to prevent and forestall the suffering of children through neglect in their own homes.
Under this Act they were given responsibility ‘to make available such advice, guidance and assistance as may promote the welfare of children by diminishing the need to receive children into or keep them in care’.
Assistance could include assistance ‘in kind or, in exceptional circumstances, in cash’.
Preventive work now had full legislative sanction.
Children's departments were not the only agencies involved in family welfare, however.
Within the local authorities, health departments were increasingly concerned, especially through the work of the health visitors, who were often closely involved with families in difficulties, and also welfare departments through their responsibility for homeless families, and education authorities through the education welfare services.
Voluntary bodies also played, and still do play, a prominent part in family welfare, especially in the larger towns and cities.
A description of some of the more prominent of these will indicate the scope and style of their contributions.
In many centres of population there exists a Family Welfare Association.
These associations can often trace their origins back to the nineteenth century when they were, under different names, primarily concerned with giving relief in cash and kind to families in distress.
In London, the Charity Organization Society (COS) did pioneer work in developing a casework approach to the families who came to it for aid, helping them to solve their problems and help themselves rather than become dependent on charitable funds.
The COS became the Family Welfare Association shortly after the Second World War and  its functions have widened in scope as the need for basic relief has been reduced by the growth of statutory income maintenance services.
The story is similar in other areas, with an older organization or group of charities coming together as a local Family Welfare Association.
Today the organization and staffing of the local FWAs vary, but they have roughly the same aim: to promote family welfare by helping families overcome their problems.
They still have funds to dispense and many clients initially come in financial distress, but social workers are also available to give advice and support.
Another very important, but very different, family service is provided by the Family Service Units, a national organization.
The FSU operates through local units, many of which are generously grant aided by local authorities.
all the major conurbations have units which provide an intensive casework service to families referred by other statutory and voluntary social agencies.
The FSU was founded in 1947, and was based on the experience of the Pacifist Service Units, which had helped families who were overwhelmed by the destruction, separation, chaos and strain of the war years to cope and re-establish themselves.
This experience showed that the problems of many families had little to do with the actual wartime conditions which were only an additional stress for families already overwhelmed by financial, housing and emotional problems of their own.
The need for help did not, therefore, end with the war, and FSU continued the work subsequently.
The essence of the FSU approach consists of the family caseworkers having very small caseloads so that they can visit families frequently-several times a week if necessary-and help directly with the practical as well as emotional problems the families face.
In London, Family Groups were started by the London Council of Social Service, now the London Voluntary Service Council.
Family Groups consist of a network of small local groups mostly of mothers and young children, meeting regularly under the guidance of locally recruited group and play leaders.
Through mutual help and group development, local families are able to share their problems and pool their resources, and develop skills and confidence.
Family Groups are a major preventive approach, strengthening families in  their capacity to cope with the stresses of financial difficulties, urban living, family life and child-rearing.
The work of fostering and supporting such groups has now been taken over by a national organization called Cope, which works closely with local social services departments and adult education departments to spread the approach across the country.
The National Society for the prevention of Cruelty to Children is increasingly concerned with helping families to cope better with the demands of rearing children.
Various bodies concerned with the particular problems of the unmarried mother or with single-parent families also increasingly see their role as contributing to family welfare.
At national level, the National Council for One Parent Families acts as a central organization drawing together the various statutory and voluntary bodies concerned and generally offers advice and information in this field.
At local level, voluntary welfare organizations, usually run on a diocesan basis, often act as agents for the local authority in providing facilities for the reception of unmarried mothers and some provide long-term accommodation for mothers and their growing children or general social work help as long as it is necessary.
Increasingly evident in this field are self-help organizations such as Gingerbread or Mothers in Action.
Relate (formerly Marriage Guidance), is a voluntary organization with a national council, coordinating the activities of local councils, which aims to promote successful marriage and parenthood and thereby helps to maintain family welfare by improving marital relationships.
The list of all the voluntary agencies concerned directly or indirectly with family welfare would be too long to provide here.
Facilities vary considerably from area to area.
For example, in some areas, in addition to statutory departments and the main voluntary agencies, there are family rehabilitation units or holiday and recuperative homes for mothers and children.
So it is impossible to generalize about the extent of the provision.
Suffice it to say that in this field voluntary effort has long played a considerable part and there are signs that it intends to increase its contribution to this field.
In 1980 a Family Forum was established bringing together representatives of many of the voluntary bodies involved in  family welfare.
The forum exists to facilitate a coherent expression of the needs of families and to act as a pressure group to improve provision for them.
From the experience of voluntary bodies and of the different local authority departments concerned, much was learned about the difficulties of families and of the ways in which they could be helped.
Initially it had been felt that some families failed to take advantage of the services offered by the welfare state and, despite the basic social services, they fell into poverty and sickness, remained ignorant of the skills and attitudes needed to cope with life and failed to find accommodation for themselves.
Subsequently, especially during the late 1960s after the mounting evidence of shortcomings in the basic provision, there was a contrasting tendency to blame the services and society for forcing people into intolerable situations.
It is undoubtedly the case that poverty and bad housing conditions are still very much in evidence, that the poor have alarmingly inadequate provision of health care and educational opportunity and that homelessness is a very real threat.
It is also the case that people who live with financial anxieties, poor health, and insecurity of employment income and accommodation are rarely happy and usually suffer not only from the actual privations of poverty or homelessness but also from a demoralizing sense of failure.
Society makes certain demands and assumptions and, when families cannot live up to them, they can be made to feel outcast and inadequate and this does not help their ability to cope.
It is humiliating to be living in debt and squalor in the midst of affluence and bewildering to feel helpless in the face of laws, regulations and procedures that one cannot understand.
The strain and tension created by constant difficulties can lead to other problems and it can be hard to sort out which came first; it is all too easy to blame the surface symptoms of child neglect or indebtedness on irresponsible parenthood rather than on an unjust social system.
In fact, there are many reasons why families fail to stay together or to provide for their children adequately, reasons that include the stress of ill-health, unemployment or irregular employment, low pay, poverty and deprivation, bad housing and a poor environment and low levels of social support.
These  circumstances are found more often amongst poorer groups in society — single-parent households, those in lower-paid occupations, large families, those dependent on social security benefits, and so on— and, whilst it is at times difficult to determine patterns of cause and effect in such situations, structural and environmental factors are clearly of great importance in being able to care for children.
One essential paradox is that it is those groups who are poorest in terms of resources to cope with difficulties who are beset with the greatest problems.
For example, it is often women in poor health, living in poor and crowded conditions, on a low income and without private transport, who are trying to bring up and cope with the demands of small children on their own.
Many families who get into difficulties have been struggling with problems that would daunt the most energetic and resourceful of people.
So it is not surprising that those suffering the greatest stress — who are disadvantaged in terms of income, housing, environment, and health — are also those most likely to need help.
And as stress increases, so too does this vulnerability.
For example, as the housing situation worsens (in terms of shortages, high rents and insecurity of tenure), the first to become homeless are precisely those suffering greatest difficulty in other respects — large families and single-parent households.
Some families in difficulties appear to have had long histories of problems, and often the parents themselves have suffered a difficult childhood.
The problem of the physical and sexual abuse of children, which has become a dominant theme of family studies and of the work of the social services in the 1970s and 1980s, is increasingly seen as one that replicates itself across generations.
Child physical abuse emerged dramatically as a major problem in the 1970s with the death of a child as a result of such abuse.
Headline hitting cases such as those of Maria Colwell and Jasmine Beckford, for example, led to in-depth investigations into the action of the social workers and other professionals responsible for the children's welfare, and also alerted both professionals and society in general to the existence of child abuse on a wider scale than hitherto acknowledged.
Similarly, in the 1980 greater attention from both professionals in the field of child care and the media has increased our  awareness of child sexual abuse, and the numbers of reported cases have grown considerably over the past decade.
In both physical and sexual abuse, the abusers have often experienced such abuse themselves as children, and this in part is seen as an explanation.
However, sexual abuse of children clearly differs in nature from physical abuse: the perpetrators are mostly male, the victims mostly female,(although the number of cases of boys being abused in this way is growing), and understanding the origins of such abuse must lie within an understanding of sexuality and the distribution of power within our society.
Sexual abuse is found across all classes and all circumstances, whereas physical abuse is often related to stresses such as poverty, bad housing and overcrowding.
One of the greatest difficulties in discussing both forms of abuse, however, is that of knowing the true extent of the problem.
Many children are unable to tell of their abuse, and some who do are not believed — it may be that abuse is more widespread than currently thought, whilst those families already under supervision by the social services for other difficulties are not more likely to abuse, but are simply more likely to be found.
What can be done to help families and prevent, not only their break-up and the admission of children to care, but also the problems of child neglect and abuse and the general unhappiness of those who feel overwhelmed by problems?
Just as the causes of family failure are many and varied, so too the approach to family welfare must be on a wide front.
In so far as the causes lie in faulty social provision, there must be action to change such things as the social security provision and to improve housing.
In so far as the causes lie in individual problems, help must be made available to families, help that not only is relevant but is made accessible and acceptable even to those who are very angry or demoralized or despairing.
In terms of official policy the movement from child care to family welfare resulted in demands for the creation of a more effective family service.
There was a desire to create a single referral point and a truly accessible and localized service that everyone would know about and use.
The growing concern for a unified approach meant that when the Seebohm  Committee concluded its review of personal social services it recommended the creation of a single local authority welfare department.
This has already been described in Chapter 7.
One of the major tasks of the social services departments is that of helping families in difficulties.
Help starts with social work and this is now more readily obtained locally through the area team structure.
Social workers must first diagnose the problems and then help with such practical aids as they have at their immediate disposal.
They can now offer some material aid, including at times of emergency some cash assistance.
They have a major part to play in helping clients get their rights from other social services.
As services have become more selective the importance of the welfare rights movement has increased.
There are now several benefits — family credit, free school meals, housing benefit and grants from the Social Fund, for example— that can help families in financial need, but the processes of application and appeal for these are complex enough to warrant the assistance of social workers in many instances.
In particular, the operation of the Social Fund — a benefit offered as a loan — often calls for social workers to provide support for a particular case, given the limited budget of the fund and the rationing that must be applied as a result.
A vital part of family welfare involves help with housing by social workers taking a client's part in helping them get an application for council housing considered or encouraging the formation of community housing associations.
The day and domiciliary services of the local authority can be brought to bear if relevant — day care of small children can help enormously in many family problems where the welfare of children is at risk.
Liaison with other agencies and people concerned with families and children remains important.
Where, for example, children are considered at risk of physical harm it is important that medical authorities pass on relevant information about non-accidental injuries and teachers report cases of obvious neglect, or comprehensive risk registers are compiled.
Despite many years' experience of child care and family case work there is still a lively debate about the causes and extent of family failure and about what further measures should be taken  to reduce it.
In 1974 the DHSS, with the academic and administrative help of the Social Science Research Council, funded a seven-year programme of research into these questions.
Numerous research projects were set up to investigate patterns of transmitted deprivation where families appear to hand down problems from generation to generation.
From the evidence it appears that narrow intergenerational patterns of deprivation have been exaggerated: family failure is best understood in the context of the larger problem of social class.
There is a network of disadvantage in society in terms of income, access to housing, educational and employment opportunities, etc., and large numbers of families caught up in this network are relatively deprived and vulnerable to breakdown.
The DHSS/SSRC initiative, which at the outset looked for explanations of deprivation within families, ended by acknowledging the importance of structural factors.
Whatever the cause of failure, help to families has to operate on a wide front.
There is room in family welfare both for the development of effective social policies in housing and income maintenance and for sympathetic support and individual help with particular problems.
Social services departments and voluntary bodies can help with a wide range of services and approaches: playgroups, money advice centres, family or women's groups, nurseries, support for child-minders, counselling and case work, all can play a part in preventive work with families.
The work that social workers, and other professionals such as paediatricians and GPs, do with families, however, has become a difficult question of balance between policies of prevention that involve family and community support and policies of intervention where the immediate interests of the children are given priority.
Social services departments were strongly criticized in the 1980s for not taking more effective action to protect children at risk.
The distressing case of Maria Colwell , who died whilst under local authority supervision in 1974, was sadly followed by similar cases of child deaths in the 1980s.
These cases led to profound questioning in social services departments, and in the inquiries that ensued, of the desirability of attempting to keep the family together wherever possible.
Clearly the social services must be flexible  in their attitudes and responses to such problems.
However, the inquiries also revealed the difficulties of social service departments in terms of staffing levels, training and supervision of inexperienced social workers.
More recently, the problem of child sexual abuse has been highlighted, and here too difficulties for social workers in protecting the children may sometimes be in conflict with other interests.
This was most graphically illustrated by what has become known as the Cleveland Controversy, where there was a very rapid increase in referrals of cases of suspected child abuse in the summer of 1987.
These referrals became the focus of national attention when some of the parents fought the court decision for the removal of their children to a place of safety.
In fact, only a minority of the children were returned to their parents and in a large number of cases suspected abuse was subsequently confirmed.
However, the debate highlighted again the difficulties for those working in the field in getting the right balance between protecting the child and supporting families, particularly in an area so emotionally fraught and where evidence of abuse may be intangible.
Legislation in the field of child protection has emphasized the role of the local authorities.
The 1980 Child Care Act placed the duty of promoting the welfare of children as the first responsibility of social service departments.
The new Children Bill of 1988 repeals the 1980 Child Care Act, along with other relevant Acts such as the 1975 Children's Act.
However, the Bill retains the duty of local authorities to protect children at risk.
In effect, the Bill, when enacted, will be the major legislation governing the care of children.
The focus of the Bill is on the protection of children, and in particular it replaces the concept of parental rights with that of parental responsibilities in relation to the care of children.
The first major change in the structure of child care law is the introduction of the concept of paramountcy — that is, that the child's welfare must be seen as paramount in all decisions relating to the care of the child, residence, access, and so on .
Under section 7 of the Bill, four types of court order relate to the child's upbringing.
These concern residence, the exercise of parental responsibility in specific instances, access, and steps that are prohibited in the care of the child without the court's approval.
The Bill also replaces the idea of voluntary care — where parents have asked to have children taken into care because of specific problems — with the duty of local authorities to provide care and accommodation for any child who needs it.
One further important change is the replacement of place of safety orders with what are to be called emergency protection orders.
These, obtainable from the court, last eight days, but the parents will have the right to appeal after 72 hours.
The new emergency protection orders also allow courts to order a medical examination of the child, whilst parents may, after 72 hours, challenge any medical evidence as a result of this examination and request an alternative examination.
The new Bill reflects the dilemma over protecting the children, the difficulties in obtaining medical evidence to substantiate suspicions of abuse, and the need to meet demands for parental rights in the wake of the Cleveland affair.
In many respects it fails to answer these issues satisfactorily, although allowing the court to order medical examinations without parental consent legitimizes a position well established on an informal basis amongst the professionals involved.
Perhaps the most important advance is the recognition of the need to place the child's interests and welfare above any other considerations — although this may prove simpler in the abstract than it is in practice.
CHILDREN IN TROUBLE
The development away from specialist child care to unified social services was the result of an increasing awareness that the family must be supported and assisted if child deprivation was to be avoided.
The importance of the family for the prevention of delinquent behaviour was also recognized and it is now widely accepted that the delinquent child and his or her family are in need of the same kind of attention as the deprived child and his or her family.
There were accordingly several moves to bring services for the young offender closer to those for the deprived child.
These culminated in the 1969  Children and Young Persons Act, which brought about some radical changes in the treatment of young offenders.
The arguments for treating disturbed, delinquent and deprived children alike are based on the assumption that the child is the product of his or her home and not a totally separate responsible individual.
Deprivation at home can lead to various forms of maladjustment, including delinquent behaviour, and court procedures and punishment are seen as an inappropriate response to the situation.
It is considered better to work, over a period of time, with the family as well as the child, providing whatever support, training or care appear to be appropriate at different stages of development.
In this approach a court order following an isolated offence is regarded as too rigid a way of tackling a complex problem and one that fails to involve the family adequately.
In the mid-1960s, when these arguments were much canvassed, there was some pressure to abolish the whole system of juvenile courts and to rely instead on family councils and family courts.
Radical proposals were put forward in the 1965 White Paper,The Child, the family and the Young Offender .
These proved too controversial and modified proposals appeared in the 1968 paper Children in Trouble , which formed the basis of the 1969 Act.
Juveniles who break the law have been dealt with by separate courts since 1908 and since 1933 the courts have been specifically charged to have regard to the child's welfare in all their dealings.
The courts had a variety of treatment orders available in respect of the children brought before them, including placing children on probation and sending them to attendance or detention centres or to approved schools.
The juvenile courts also had powers to place children in care, and the former children's departments had to receive children in need of care and protection and find them substitute homes.
Child care authorities were also involved in running remand homes and approved schools.
The 1969 Children and Young Persons Act retained the juvenile court system but reduced the effective powers of the juvenile magistrates.
Action to deal with offenders was to be taken on a voluntary rather than a court basis where possible.
Prosecution of children aged 10 and under 14 was to cease, though this has never been implemented.
If a child has committed an offence and the parents are not providing adequate care, protection and guidance, or the offence indicates the child is beyond parental control, then they can be brought before the court as in need of care, protection and control.
For the age range 14 and under 17, prosecution is only possible for a limited number of offences on the authority of a magistrate, and the extended care, protection and control procedure is used in most cases.
The courts must now make care orders committing children to the care of the local authority.
The local authority (now the social services departments), must decide on the most appropriate form of care.
For all children in care, a comprehensive system of community homes is now being developed, organized on a regional basis and managed by local authorities or by voluntary organizations in collaboration with local authorities.
Community homes include former remand homes and approved schools and former children's homes.
So children sent from the courts, whether they were offenders or offended against, can now be placed in whatever type of residential care is deemed most appropriate to their needs at the discretion of the social workers of the local authority.
This part of the Act has been strongly criticized and to some extent misused for a minority of very difficult cases.
Since magistrates are no longer able to make approved school orders, it appears that some are sending children to the higher courts for possible custodial sentences.
Another problem is remand for very difficult children.
At present, too many young offenders are being remanded in prisons because local authorities lack enough secure accommodation for them.
Steps are being taken to provide more secure places for the unruly and disturbed children who would otherwise disrupt community homes and reappear before the courts.
The local authority also undertakes supervision of children and this replaces the previous probation order.
Supervision is by a social worker, who can make certain requirements such as that the supervised person resides in a specified place or participates in specified activities.
Under these provisions local authorities are expected to provide Intermediate Treatment, which is designed to replace attendance and detention centres.
Intermediate Treatment is meant to help not only children in trouble but those at risk of getting into trouble.
The idea was that a wide range of activities would be developed for groups of young people that would allow them to gain a sense of personal involvement and achievement.
Children under supervision could be directed to such projects as appeared appropriate to their needs although the projects would not be exclusively for young offenders.
Projects would be run by youth groups and voluntary organizations as well as local authorities.
Many social services departments have appointed special Intermediate Treatment organizers to develop suitable projects, but progress has been slow.
Intermediate Treatment needs enormous enthusiasm, imagination and energy in the design and carrying out of projects, and the necessary resources of staff and funds have not been forthcoming.
This has seriously weakened the therapeutic and remedial potential of supervision orders and it is to be hoped that greater priority will be given to this area in the next few years.
Essentially the 1969 Children and Young Persons Act involved a transfer of responsibility from the courts to the local authorities.
This meant in practice that magistrates had less say in determining what happened to children in trouble while social workers gained more say.
This was in accordance with the expressed intention of the Act to merge the previously separate concepts of ‘delinquent’ and ‘deprived’into one category of ‘children in trouble’.
The changeover has not proved easy.
Local authorities have had to implement a controversial Act, involving a considerable increase of responsibility for them, at a time when the creation of the new social services departments preoccupied the child care and social work staff.
As a result the magistrates, never very happy with the Act, were quick to criticize the way it was carried out.
They claimed that the courts were inadequately served by the new social services departments.
More fundamentally they criticized the reduction of their power to make residential orders and the merging of treatment for delinquent and non-delinquent children.
Many people feared that the 1969 Act was too radical and would make life too easy for the young delinquent.
The increase in juvenile crime throughout the 1970s appeared to confirm the critics' views.
Others felt that the implicit emphasis  on home and family as formative influences on young people denied the importance of sociological explanations of delinquency.
They demanded an even more radical approach to delinquency that would tackle not the individual offender but the wider deprivation and social injustice of which they considered him the product.
In the event, the law and order lobby proved the more powerful of the two approaches.
An inquiry was held into the working of the 1969 Act and a White Paper, entitled simply Young Offenders (Cmnd 8045), was published in 1980 with proposals for ‘strengthening the law relating to juvenile and young offenders in England and Wales’.
For juvenile offenders the White Paper contained proposals for the courts to add a residential care order.
This would apply only to a juvenile already in care of a local authority and then found guilty of a further imprisonable offence, and would be for a fixed period of not more than six months.
Further proposals included the retention of the detention centre, the introduction of a new sentence of youth custody to replace borstal training, and the power for juvenile courts to impose community service orders on offenders aged 16.
The White Paper proposals reflected the magistrates' views that the 1969 act was too soft on young offenders.
The Criminal Justice Act of 1981 implemented the proposals, despite some opposition.
Youth custody is now a single determinate sentence for young offenders and the courts have much greater discretion in ordering the punishment or treatment of offenders.
This is despite research evidence that has shown how ineffective much custodial treatment of young people tends to be.
Basically the 1969 Act, despite the controversy that has surrounded it and the resource problems that have hampered its implementation, must be seen as a notable step forward and one consistent with a renewed general acknowledgement of the importance of the family.
It extended society's consideration for deprived children towards those groups that had previously excited anger rather than compassion and as such it was a progressive and humanitarian measure.
It merits a vigorous defence in the face of developments such as the 1981 Criminal Justice Act, which threatened to encroach on  its humane vision with the clamour of the law and order lobby.
SERVICES FOR OLD PEOPLE
THE PROBLEM OF OLD AGE
Simply to grow old is not in itself a problem.
The urge to survive is fundamental to our nature and inherent in our fight against disease and poverty and in our attempts to control the environment.
In a sense, then, survival into old age is a triumph, but a triumph that brings with it many problems, problems that tend to increase the longer one survives, the greater age one attains.
The problems arise because old age is a period of increasing dependency — materially, physically, socially and emotionally.
If the special needs that arise from these states of dependency are met fully and promptly then the problems will be kept to a minimum and on balance old age will be experienced as a time of contentment.
If they are not met, old age may become a problem both to the individual and to society.
Material dependence arises because the old cannot earn their living and financial arrangements must be made to see that they have an income that is adequate to their needs.
Physical dependence arises because for most people the process of ageing involves a general physical and sometimes mental weakening.
The old are more frequently ill than the rest of the population and more frequently suffer from physical disabilities such as partial loss of hearing or arthritic joints.
Gradually their capacity to care for themselves fully is reduced so that they require help with heavier cleaning jobs or gardening, then help with routine tasks such as shopping and cooking and finally, in some cases, help even with feeding, washing and dressing themselves.
Many of the aged, therefore, need help in the home, or perhaps residential care, and a considerable number will require intensive medical and nursing care at some stage.
These material and physical states of dependency are fairly widely recognized since, for example, increasing frailty is a fairly easily discernible consequence of growing old.
Less readily acknowledged are the social and emotional problems that ageing can bring.
Old people cannot get out so much, for physical or financial reasons, or both.
They have less opportunity to make new friendships and tend to depend for companionship on the continuity of longstanding relationships.
As spouses and relatives and friends of their age move away, or die, old people look more and more to their few surviving relatives and neighbours for affection, friendship and reassurance and can easily become very dependent on a small number of people for social contact.
Moreover, growing old often involves very considerable adjustments for the individual, who has to accept increasing physical dependency and consequent loss of autonomy and status.
Many find it hard to accept a dependent role and fight to assert an independence that they lack the means to substantiate, often, in the process, alienating and exasperating the very people they depend on.
The old have to accept changes in patterns of living and cultural standards that they cannot understand, and cope with rejection by the younger generations, as well as a good deal of sentimentality and shallow stereotyping in private and public references to themselves.
Adjustment to their changing role and position in society can be so painful that some old people fail to achieve it satisfactorily and live at odds with society in bewildered but proud withdrawal.
If these social and emotional needs are to be met, the old must have every facility for preserving their contacts with relatives and friends and possibilities for some compensatory relationships when deeper ties are ultimately broken.
They deserve a more sensitive environment that does not so harshly relegate them en masse to the category of ‘old people’ and does not emphasize, in attitudes and actions, their increasing dependency; many need help, too, in coming to terms with  the process of ageing and the major adjustments it entails — to retirement, to relinquishing their home, etc.
It is a fundamental point about the aged, and one that is applicable to any group of people who need special help, that they will differ very widely in their capacities and in their needs.
Old age begins officially on retirement but the majority of people in their sixties and many in their seventies remain reasonably fit, independent, active and content and in many cases they will remain so until the end of their lives.
For some, though, some of the problems are evident from the point of retirement, or even before, and for very old people, in their eighties and nineties, the chances of considerable dependency are clearly rather high.
Not all of these dependent old people can rely on consistent family care.
So, although many old people cope smoothly with the problems of ageing, others fail in varying degrees to obtain the special help they need.
As a result they suffer from poverty, physical hardship, neglect, sickness and disability, loneliness, humiliation and fear.
Old age becomes something to be dreaded and endured rather than enjoyed by the individual.
In Britain today we tend to consider old age as a social problem.
We know from research and investigations and general observation that many old people are desperately poor and neglected, appallingly isolated and lonely.
At the same time we are worried about the mounting costs of the social services intended to meet the needs of the aged There are several reasons why the problem appears to be particularly acute at the moment and some of the more important ones need stating.
First, the proportion of old people in the population is rising fast.
In 1900 the proportion was 4.7 per cent, in 1950 it was 10.8 per cent and today it is over 18 per cent .
This means that there are more old people needing special help and proportionately fewer people of working age to provide for them.
Old people also live much longer nowadays.
This is one reason why the proportion of over 65s has risen, but it also means that many more old people will grow very old, with much higher chances of becoming very dependent and physically feeble.
Average life expectancy was only 43 years in 1880; it had risen to 62 years in 1939, and by the 1960s it was over 70.
At the same time as the number of old people in the population is rising, several factors are operating that have tended to reduce the ability of the family to cater for the needs of old people, especially their needs for care and companionship.
Prominent among these factors are increased social and geographical mobility consequent upon greatly increased educational opportunity and a rapidly changing economy; the marked trends over recent decades towards smaller families, higher marriage rates and earlier marriage; and the growing numbers of women continuing in or re-entering full-time work.
The greatly increased life expectancy of both men and women today means that the children of many of them may themselves be entering old age when they, the parents, are really in need of care.
A further problem of ageing, which in part follows from a greater life expectancy, relates to retirement.
In the past, this has been seen as most relevant to men, although now that more women work in paid employment it is a problem for both sexes.
However, there is evidence to suggest that women may have fewer problems in adjusting to retirement than men.
Men, if they are still fit on retirement, will have another fifteen years of life ahead of them, whilst women will mostly outlive their husbands and have a further twenty or more years ahead.
Apart from the possible financial hardship of retirement many find it hard to adjust to having little to do.
They are bored at home and yet feel ill at ease in their former places of enjoyment — pubs and sports grounds and so on— and with their former friends if these are still working.
They feel useless being no longer productive workers and yet having little to do at home.
This problem is much worse for those who are forced into premature retirement through redundancy.
The sense of uselessness and the boredom of empty days, the abrupt, often humiliating change of status from worker to ‘old age pensioner’, can lead to severe depression and consequent physical and mental deterioration.
There is a real need here both for a more flexible employment situation, which could absorb older people in less arduous or part-time work if they required it, and for more efforts to prepare people for retirement, helping them to develop time-consuming, absorbing and possibly profitable hobbies in advance of finishing work.
The problem, then, that old age presents is partly inherent in the process of ageing, and partly the consequence of certain current demographic and social trends.
In 1987, 10.4 million people in Great Britain were over retirement age.
The vast majority need pensions to meet their financial needs, almost all will be registered with a doctor and will make use of the health services, and many require special housing or residential accommodation and some degree of help in coping with the problems arising from increasing frailty, social isolation and their dependent role.
Clearly the social policy required to tackle the problem must be comprehensive in scope and its instruments flexible and imaginative in application.
SERVICES FOR OLD PEOPLE
There is no one social service designed to meet all the needs of old people.
Society has accepted responsibility for seeing that their needs are met in a piecemeal fashion, tackling the most obvious needs first — those for financial provision, medical care and residential accommodation.
A considerable part of the total range of need is met through the basic social services of income maintenance, health, housing and personal social services.
In special welfare services for the aged, voluntary organizations play a prominent part.
This fragmentation of concern for the aged is sometimes criticized, but clearly when we are considering a particular group of people , like the aged, rather than a particular problem , like sickness, it would not be possible, or desirable, to provide all that is needed through one statutory service.
The aged, like any other group, have special needs that arise because they are aged, but they share the basic needs of all human beings.
It is quite appropriate that they utilize the health services and income maintenance services which are provided generally, and also utilize the special services Provided particularly for them.
Financial provision
A fundamental need of the aged is for adequate financial provision, since the vast majority are unable to earn their  living.
In endeavouring to meet this need numerous problems are encountered, notably how to find enough money to provide adequately for the increasingly large proportion of the population who are in retirement, and therefore by and large non-productive, and how to define ‘adequate’ in this context.
In Chapter 2 the present social security system was described and it was noted that the bulk of the work of social security is concerned with pensions and benefits for old people.
In principle we accept that people should be helped to provide for their own needs in old age by contributing throughout their working life to a pension scheme.
This method of financing old age is widely practised through the media of private insurance and occupational superannuation as well as that of statutory National Insurance.
Because of this it is particularly important in devising an effective social policy to meet the financial problems of old age to consider both the long-term and the short-term aspects.
We must try to meet the needs of those people who are in retirement now, and try to create an effective scheme whereby those who are working now will be able to retire with financial security in the future.
The effectiveness of retirement pension schemes is greatly threatened by increasing longevity, the problem of keeping pace with the cost of living in an inflationary economic situation, and the problem of rising standards of living which bring new affluence and expectations.
At the present time, the majority of old people claim retirement pensions under the National Insurance scheme.
The basic rate at April 1989 is £43.60 per week for a single person and £69.80 for a couple, but some pensioners are entitled to somewhat higher rates because of graduated contributions or deferred retirement.
Some old people who were not included in the scheme as contributors receive a lower rate of pension.
Many old people receive occupational or private pensions in addition to their basic retirement pension and a large number have personal savings or private incomes of widely varying amounts.
Those old people who are dependent on the retirement pension and who find it does not meet their needs can claim a supplementary pension from income support.
This means that all people over pension age who are not in full-rime work have a statutory right to have their income brought up  to a guaranteed weekly level.
This consists of income support allowances and premiums, which add up to £46.10 for a single person, and £71.85 for a couple, plus the actual cost of rent and rates.
In addition, older pensioners may get a slightly higher premium, marginally increasing their total weekly amount.
Income support is, of course, only paid on test of need, but in assessing a person's means certain forms of income such as disability pensions and a reasonable level of capital are to some extent disregarded.
When the present National Insurance scheme was introduced in 1946 it was hoped that the benefits paid under it would be adequate for subsistence.
This has proved impossible, partly because of the wide variations in need imposed by disparate rents, and partly because of the steady rise in the cost of living.
Accordingly, a substantial number of today's retirement pensioners need to claim assistance and submit to some form of test of need.
Through pride or ignorance many people fail to do this.
A deliberate attempt was made in 1966 to make assistance known and acceptable, when it became known as supplementary benefits.
Now, it is hoped that all who need a supplement to their basic pension obtain it, but there is still evidence that many do not.
In addition to income support many old people can claim housing benefits but there is always anxiety that some of the most needy old people will fail to take advantage of their rights.
As a group, today's old people are still relatively deprived in our society and this must be seen as a major failure in social security policies.
Policy changes in the 1970s moved the provision for people over retirement age towards a wholly wage-related scheme of insurance.
In the years since 1945 occupational pension schemes outside the state scheme flourished, particularly for the higher-income groups.
Attempts to provide a similar scheme related to earnings, but as part of state provision, resulted in the 1975 Social Security Pension Act 1975, which came into operation in 1978.
The main provision was that of State Earnings Related Pensions (SERPs), which was an earnings-related pension scheme provided by earnings-related contributions made by both employees and employers.
Originally the scheme allowed for pensions to be calculated on the best twenty years of earnings, which at least went some  way towards enabling women, who spend some rime out of the labour market caring for dependants, to maximize their future pension.
However, SERPs has become a more marginal system as a result of recent changes in the legislation relating to pensions.
In particular, the 1986 Social Security Act and the Finance Act (Number Two), 1987, have introduced a more complex pension position.
Since 1988 employees can contract out of SERPs and also out of their employer's occupational pension scheme, by choosing to opt for an ‘appropriate personal pension’ instead.
APPs are mostly money purchase schemes, that is, they do not have a guaranteed final pension, unlike most occupational pension schemes, nor are they index-linked up to retirement age, unlike SERPs.
The position is now much more complex for individual employees, for whom the best choice may be one of several options.
In addition, the provisions in some occupational pension schemes and APP schemes for dependants, especially widows, may be very poor.
What does seem certain is that SERPs will as a result of these changes become more of a marginal scheme, whilst the government has offered several ‘sweeteners’ to individuals choosing to leave SERPs for APP-type plans.
The schemes that do exist in the private market for pensions are related to purchasing power — so inequalities in earnings will be reflected in life after retirement, whilst those without the power to buy a pension will become increasingly dependent on the low rates obtainable from state pensions and means tested benefits.
In addition, it seems likely that some, at least , of those who choose to opt out of the state or their employer's scheme may end up dependant on state benefits at a later date, as the benefits from the money purchase schemes are unpredictable for both employee and dependants.
For the present-day old age pensioners, however, the problem of financial insecurity remains.
Retirement benefits are not enough to live on, so nearly 2 million pensioners have to claim income support.
Pensions are essentially low incomes and low incomes are especially vulnerable to the effects of inflation.
Certain costs, particularly fuel costs, fall heavily on old people.
Fuel costs increased dramatically during the mid-1970s and have remained high ever since, and this adversely affects many  old people.
Compared to other social groups, pensioners spend more of their budgets on fuel, partly because they need to heat their homes all day and are less active than younger households, and partly because they often have antiquated and costly heating systems to run.
Some attempts were made to provide specific aid with fuel costs by providing supplementary benefit recipients with a discount or rebate, but these were scrapped under the 1986 Social Security Act, so the problem remains a serious one for many elderly households.
Pensions have increased in real terms over the last twenty years, but not as fast as real personal disposable incomes.
Although they are now regularly increased in November every year, a government pledge to increase the rates in line with the rise in either earnings or prices, whichever was higher, was dropped in 1980.
As a result, the pension rise in November 1980 was effectively reduced and increases in current pensions no longer keep pace with rising costs.
The real value of current state pensions has been eroded, whilst means tested support on which older people increasingly rely has similarly suffered cuts in real value.
At the same time, the effects of inflation, the recession and financial cutbacks in other services in the 1980s have led to increased poverty amongst this vulnerable group in society.
Health services
Old people make considerable use of the full range of services provided under the National Health Service Act.
Even if those who are living in institutions are excluded, it is estimated that half of old people under 75 and about two-thirds of those over 75 are suffering from a long-standing illness in addition to normal minor ailments.
Large numbers of the elderly suffer from some degree of disability or impairment of physical or mental function.
It is not surprising, therefore, that old people make fairly heavy demands on medical care.
General practitioners spend a good proportion of their time with elderly patients and this is acknowledged in the rates of payment for different categories of patients on the GP lists.
Some have adopted a system of routine visiting of all the old people on their lists in order to check that health is  maintained and to ensure that diseases and disabilities are tackled at the onset.
Many GPs cooperate closely with the community health services, which are particularly valuable for the old.
Health visitors call to give advice and help on the problems of increasing infirmity and the management of disability, and encourage the maintenance of adequate standards of hygiene and nutrition.
District nurses can continue treatment at home for elderly people who have been hospitalized or provide long-term treatment and care for those with chronic ailments.
Community psychiatric nurses provide a vital service to the elderly mentally infirm enabling them to carry on living at home through the provision of medication and support.
Despite the general practitioner and domiciliary medical services many old people have to enter hospital for treatment or care.
As old age advances this can become a very disturbing experience and even where the medical problem is not grave the hospitalization itself can accelerate confusion and frailty among old people.
In recent years this has been more widely recognized and both doctors and nurses have increasingly made a specialty of the care of the aged.
Geriatric units are being established and consultant geriatricians appointed.
Efforts are made to rehabilitate patients after treatment to ensure that where possible their hospital stay is temporary.
Nevertheless, a large number of elderly patients do come into hospital with terminal illnesses or chronic diseases, including mental disorders, and they require long-term care.
They do make heavy demands on the resources of the hospital service, so steady efforts are being made to improve the preventive aspects of geriatric care.
However, the 1989 White Paper,Working for Patients , has caused some concern that an unprofitable and expensive service like geriatric provision may be reduced if hospitals and GPs are encouraged to become self-managing budget holders, whose first goal must be to contain costs.
Social care
Under part III of the National Assistance Act of 1948 local authorities have a duty to provide residential accommodation for old people who need care and attention.
This is now  the responsibility of the social services department, but until 1970 it was the job of welfare departments.
Residential care is provided by local authorities for about 105,000 old people in England and Wales.
A further 25,000 are cared for in homes run by voluntary organizations and 78,000 are cared for in private residential care.
In 1948 local authorities had a variety of old premises used for accommodating the elderly, mostly old public assistance institutions.
The aim of the new welfare authorities was to provide homes rather than institutions and so private houses were acquired and converted and then modern purpose-built homes were constructed.
These accommodated about thirty old people, which was originally considered the optimum size, but over the years purpose-built homes grew larger and up to seventy places became quite common.
The bulk of local authority homes are now purpose-built and accommodate thirty to seventy old people.
There are still some larger homes in existence and a small number of old premises used jointly with the health authorities but it is planned to close these eventually.
The ‘ideal’ old people's home has about fifty beds, mostly in single rooms, and accommodates both men and women.
There is usually a large dining room, several lounges and a sheltered garden area.
Accommodation for residents is on the ground floor or well-serviced by lifts.
Staff have separate self-contained accommodation if resident.
The home is situated within easy access of shops and other facilities and in the heart of the residential area from which the old people come.
The furnishings will be modern and colourful and residents will be encouraged to bring small items of their own furniture with them to give individuality and interest to their rooms.
all meals and full care, including night attendance, will be provided and visiting strongly encouraged.
The aim of the staff will be to make people feel as much at home as possible.
Residents pay for their care according to their means and all will have at least a minimum amount of money for personal use.
Naturally homes differ.
Ideal standards are not always achieved.
Many homes are too large to be homely.
Some still have dormitories, lack space for pleasant sitting rooms and have poor staff accommodation.
Some of the converted  premises are isolated and inconvenient to run.
Some of the modem homes are too clinical, impersonal and routinized for comfort.
The quality of the staff, from matrons to cooks, is probably the biggest single factor determining whether a home has a happy atmosphere, and good staff are hard to get for the demanding, albeit rewarding, job of residential care.
Residential staff have tended to become isolated from field staff and their training and pay have lagged behind those of field social workers.
Efforts have been made to improve the training and conditions of employment for residential care staff, in the light of increasing emphasis on community care in the 1970s and 1980s.
However, in the face of increasing restraint on public expenditure, these have not been notably successful.
The provision of homes for old people by local authorities is still for only about twenty places per thousand old people in an area, and many of these will be for very old and frail disabled people.
For this minority, residential care is a vital service.
For others it could be a pleasant existence if places were available and there was room for flexibility and experiment in provision.
When welfare departments were created in 1948, their major concern as regards old people was with residential accommodation.
Gradually this concern was widened to include the provision of a broad range of services for old people who remain, and wish to remain, independent in their own homes.
This wider concern was of course shared with health authorities, voluntary organizations and housing departments, and it is now explicit policy in the unified local authority social services departments.
From 1963, with the publication of the command paper Health and Welfare: the Development of Community Care , local authorities have been encouraged to see as their principal responsibility the provision of services to enable the aged to live independently in the community.
From the 1968 Health Services and Public Health Act they have had the powers to promote the welfare of old people.
Social services departments now have a variety of services available to promote the community care of old people.
Social workers in the area teams visit the elderly to assess their needs and provide such services as seem appropriate and are available.
One of the principal domiciliary services is that of  home helps.
Home helps, often recruited within an area by a home help organizer at area office level, call regularly on old people and provide domestic services such as cleaning.
They also provide a friendly contact, which is extremely valuable for detecting and referring any other needs.
Mobile meals services can be provided or luncheon clubs for the more active old person, where company and entertainment can be obtained as well as a meal.
Telephones can be installed, emergency call-card systems operated and local neighbourly help recruited to reduce the isolation of many old people.
Most authorities now run day centres where old people can obtain care and recreation, and most use their residential homes for temporary admissions where necessary.
Transport is sometimes made available and clubs, holiday schemes, outings and social evenings encouraged.
Many of these services help old people living alone, but some also help old people living with their Families and reduce undue burdens on relatives.
The scope of day and domiciliary care has grown sharply in recent years, although it is still woefully inadequate in relation to the demand for services, particularly the home help service.
Coverage is still uneven between authorities, but most are overburdened.
One response to this and the funding crisis in the early 1980s was to introduce charges for the home help service, up to a weekly maximum, which varied from authority to authority, but was in the region of £2.
In most local authorities, claimants of benefits such as income support are exempt.
Even so, the introduction of charges had the immediate response of reducing demands on the service, although this does not mean that all those who needed help were now able to get it, or that those withdrawing demand did not need help.
In addition, local authorities may have difficulty in knowing which old people need help and of getting help to them in time.
Home helps and domiciliary care of all kinds remain an important, and under-provided, form of care for older people in the community.
Housing and the elderly
Clearly, if old people are to continue to live alone they need not only the support of domiciliary health and social care  services but also suitable premises.
Size, location and quality of housing are important to all people, but clearly the old, with their reduced mobility and increasing frailty, have a special need of decent accommodation.
The sad fact is, however, that in Britain the old have the worst housing of any group.
Higher percentages of the elderly than of the general adult population live in accommodation built before 1919 that is often poorly maintained.
Higher percentages of the old lack fixed baths, indoor WCs and adequate heating arrangements.
There is, therefore, a real and urgent need to improve the housing conditions of the elderly.
Recognition of the importance of housing, especially for community care policies, led to the building of an increasing number of small dwellings by local authorities including one-bedroomed flats and bungalows.
Attempts have also been made to provide sheltered housing — that is, groups of small dwellings with some communal facilities and a warden in attendance.
Sometimes small bungalows have been built in the grounds of residential homes, in other developments they have been linked to a warden's bungalow by means of alarm bells.
Groups of bed-sitters with communal lounge facilities have been tried, and in some places the shared lounge has been available for social facilities for the old people of the neighbourhood.
Housing associations as well as local authorities are involved in the provision of sheltered accommodation.
The essence of good housing for old people is that it should be easy to run (easy to heat, clean and move around in), conveniently situated, afford independence and privacy to the occupant, with opportunity for sociability and the security of regular contact.
Most sheltered housing schemes are extremely successful and together with the domiciliary services allow some old people to retain their independence and their interest in life.
The trouble is that there are just not enough places available at the moment, and in recent years local authorities have been unable to provide more owing to the shortage of funds and the cash limits imposed on local authority expenditure by central government.
With the changes in housing association operation as a result of the 1988 Housing Act, it seems unlikely that these organizations, in the past an important supplier of accommodation for older people, will be able dramatically to  increase their share of provision.
In the owner-occupied and privately rented housing sectors old people do not often have the means or the energy to make use of improvement grants.
They remain very vulnerable in privately rented accommodation as they can often be ignorant of their rights.
Efforts are now being made to ensure that more old people are using housing benefits where these apply, but there is a need for constant vigilance to protect the most vulnerable groups of old people from the worst aspects of bad housing.
The voluntary contribution
Voluntary organizations are particularly active in the care of old people.
They play a large part in the provision of welfare services, especially in running clubs and recreational activities and helping with the provision of meals, and they make a substantial contribution to the demand for residential care.
Too many organizations are involved to list them all, but nationally organized groups such as Red Cross and WRVS are prominent, and were frequently pioneers in the provision of meals services.
The National Old People's Welfare Council, now known as Age Concern, coordinates and encourages the activities of a vast number of local groups concerned with old people's welfare.
These local committees offer, or by coordination and encouragement of local effort, a wide range of services such as visiting, holidays, social clubs and even sheltered workshops for the elderly.
Age Concern acts also as a pressure group on behalf of the elderly, publishing information on their needs and on services available.
The Centre for Policy on Ageing is primarily a research organization funding inquiries into the needs of old people.
Many schemes for housing old people have been developed on a voluntary basis.
They include schemes like that of the Abbeyfield Society which aims, by converting large older-type houses, to provide old people with the personal security and independence of their own room and furnishings, combined with the advantages of the degree of companionship and care that a communal dining room, the provision of main meals and the friendly attention of a resident housekeeper afford.
Another area of voluntary activity is the provision of classes  on preparation for retirement.
These can help many people to adjust more happily to the changes retirement brings about in their lives.
Not only are voluntary organizations active among the aged, the aged are also active in voluntary work.
The relatively young old person is free to contribute a good deal of time, energy and experience to voluntary action, and large numbers take advantage of retirement or reduced family responsibilities to increase their participation.
Many younger old people run clubs for the elderly and help organize meals services.
A very large number help, informally, their neighbours and relatives older than themselves.
This activity is doubly advantageous in that it helps to meet the needs of the more elderly for a variety of services and also helps to give the younger elderly person a sense of usefulness, a strong interest and in some cases a degree of insight and preparation for the inevitable transition to a greater ageing that must be faced.
NEW INITIATIVES
In 1978 the DHSS issued a discussion document entitled A Happier Old Age , which considered the needs of the elderly in society.
Following the response to its various questions a White Paper was published in 1981.
Growing Older (Cmnd 8173) considered the needs of the elderly for financial support and opportunities during retirement, for housing, care and support and health services.
The general message of the paper was that care of the elderly should concern and involve the whole community.
It was a useful review of services but not a profound analysis of problems in this field and it makes for rather bland reading.
That same year also saw the publication by the DHSS of a consultative document on Care in the Community .
This was followed by a circular of the same title which set out proposals to help long-stay hospital patients to return to the community.
Many long-stay patients, it was suggested, particularly those in hospitals for the mentally ill and mentally handicapped, but also many elderly and chronically disabled patients, could move out of hospital if appropriate facilities for their care and  support in the community were made available.
The circular acknowledged that the main burden of providing such care would fall on the local authorities and it aimed to ease this by extending provision for the transfer of NHS financial resources to those local authorities or voluntary bodies that offered to develop community care projects specifically for long-stay hospital patients.
Local authorities have been cooperating with the health authorities in the provision of community care schemes for several years under special arrangements for joint finance.
The ‘Care in the Community’ initiative sought to extend this cooperation to help people who have been hospitalized for long periods.
Since April 1984 health authorities have been able to make continuing payments to local authorities providing social care, and to give grant aid to education and housing departments as well as social services and voluntary organizations.
The alteration in 1983 in DHSS benefit rules that enabled older people living in private residential care to claim their fees from the DHSS brought dramatic increases in the number of private residential homes, and in the number of older people living in them.
However, even with this growth in numbers, the vast majority of the older population live either in their own homes or in those of relatives.
The 1980s saw a number of reports on community care that cited low funding and poor planning and coordination of projects as being responsible for the lack of a developed community care initiative to support all people, including the elderly, in the community in their own homes.
As it is, a large part of the caring that is carried out for older people, both those living at home and those living with relatives, is carried out by women, mostly daughters and daughters-in-law.
The 1988 Griffiths Report,Care in the Community: An Agenda for Action , described once more the problems of community care as being poor planning and control, and poor division of responsibility for different areas of concern.
It recommended a stronger role for local authorities coordinating a range of services provided by the private and voluntary sectors as well as by the local authorities themselves.
After a considerable delay, the government has agreed to implement the Griffiths' recommendations, but in the meantime health  services have remained overburdened and unable to care for many older people, and there is a question mark over the future of geriatric care as a result of the 1989 White Paper on health services.
The personal social service departments of local authorities are similarly stretched, with priority in many areas going to statutory work with children, and more and more older people are living in the community either without support or with help from relatives increasingly burdened by this caring role.
Perhaps more depressing than actual shortages of provision is the tendency to alienate the old in contemporary society.
This occurs when too much provision becomes labelled as especially for old age pensioners.
Administrators of services do need to be careful not to isolate recipients too much.
The old need help but they do not necessarily need a massive range of old people's services.
Clearly, some of the needs now met by social services departments would be better met by the old people themselves if they had the financial means to preserve their own independence.
It is worth remembering that most people cope quite adequately with the practical problems of old age if they have financial security and decent housing, and it is on the provision of these we should concentrate.
Moreover, despite the importance of professional social care, it is families who still play the major part in meeting the social, emotional and general physical needs of the dependent old.
The role of the state in services for old people should be to create conditions that maximize the ability of the individual, families and the community to cope independently.
There are, after all, many aspects of the problem of old age that no formal statutory provision can deal with.
Only families, the community and above all the old people themselves can solve the need to belong, to have a place, meaning and dignity in life.
The role of the social services here is the vital but subordinate one of enabling them to meet this need effectively.
The importance of this enabling approach is, happily, gaining greater recognition.
The role of families and of informal neighbourhood care is much more widely acknowledged and various projects to support the carers and stimulate neighbourhood networks are under way.
Much of this is welcome but  it has to be looked at critically when public expenditure cuts dominate the policy discussions.
Families, which essentially means women, already provide massive, unpaid, largely unrecognized care and it is vital that policies of decentralization and community care do not too readily shift an even greater burden on to both the elderly themselves and their caring relatives.
What is required is a genuine enabling partnership between the formal and informal sectors in which people and their families receive relevant and generous support from income maintenance and the health and social services of their neighbourhood.
THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED
THE PROBLEM
The terms ‘physically disabled’ and ‘physically handicapped’cover people with a wide range of disabilities: the blind and partially sighted, the deaf and hard of hearing, people with congenital deformities, those who have suffered serious injury, those who suffer from crippling diseases such as arthritis, tuberculosis, ‘organic nervous disorders’, and so on.
Clearly the needs of each person, and the problems they present, will differ according to the nature and severity of the disability and according to the individual's personality and social and economic situation.
But all the physically handicapped have one need in common— the need to be helped to overcome their disabilities and live as near normal a life as possible, being a part of, and contributing to, the life of the community.
It is perhaps useful, in considering the problem, to differentiate between a disability and a handicap.
It is possible, within limits, to assess a physical disability.
Blindness can be ascertained, the degree to which a person suffers from loss of hearing can be measured, and the extent to which an injury or disease is physically disabling can be assessed in a fairly precise manner.
But the extent to which a given disability will handicap a person in education, work, social relationships, enjoyment of leisure, etc., will depend on their social as well as their clinical state, and on the timing of the disability.
A person born severely disabled will need a great deal of help in overcoming the effects of the disability, but they will possibly  be able to adjust to it better than the person who has enjoyed perfect health and led a full, normal life and is suddenly injured or crippled by disease.
Someone who has acquired skills in early life for a job involving considerable strength and mobility will be more handicapped in finding work if they become wheelchair-bound than someone similarly afflicted who has qualifications and experience in a field that allows them to do a sedentary job demanding intellectual skills.
Similarly, the person who has a great love of music might find blindness less of a handicap in obtaining pleasure than would the person who had a passion for football.
Various factors will strongly affect the extent to which disability leads to handicap, primarily the ability of the disabled person and their family to cope with disablement.
The family may encourage independence, or they may stifle it; the individual may rise to the challenge, but may equally be overcome with bitterness and despair.
It is still difficult to indicate the size of the problem of physical disability in Britain, as there are no exact records.
At present we have to rely on several sources of information, which sometimes overlap, and which definitely leave great gaps.
We have registers for certain groups of disabled people — those registered with local authorities, those who are listed as disabled with the Department of Employment, records of certain groups receiving treatment or pensions, and so on.
The total picture is incomplete, partly because not everyone who is disabled is necessarily in receipt of a pension or special welfare service and many of those on the disabled persons employment register, for example, include those with mental handicap as well as those with physical disabilities.
A survey carried out by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys between 1985 and 1988 estimated that there were more than 6 million adults in Britain suffering from one or more disability.
OPCS used a scale of 1–10 to measure disability, where a score of 1 was the least severe and 10 the most severe, in terms of level of incapacity and suffering.
The survey estimated that 2.7 million people were in the top five categories, that is, suffering the most severe disabilities.
They also discovered that more women than men  were classified as having a disability, and that the rate of disability and the number of disabilities suffered increased with age.
Many of these disabilities found in the older age group were related to loss of hearing and sight, and increasing mobility disability, related to such problems as rheumatoid arthritis.
Clearly, these categories of disability blur the borderline between what is generally considered as disability and what is considered the increasing frailty of old age.
It proves impossible to keep to rigid categories when examining this issue.
Although it is not possible to give any exact statistics of the physically disabled, it is possible to give some indication of the extent of the problems they face.
We have already noted that these will differ according to the actual disability and according to the individual's circumstances.
This simple fact cannot be overstressed and it accounts, in part, for the continuing lack of precise data on the numbers of physically handicapped in Britain: we do not know exactly how many people are physically disabled because they are not a clear homogeneous group that can be counted.
Nevertheless, we need to consider what problems might arise and make provision accordingly, accepting that such provision should be very flexible if it is to cope with the range of need presented by the disabled.
Some problems are fairly obvious: whether the disability is congenital, or the result of an accident or disease, the maximum amount of medical care available is required, in order to minimize the effects of the disability, or arrest the causative condition.
Advances in medical science have made possible extensive treatment, by medical, surgical and rehabilitative techniques, which can remedy some defects and compensate for others.
Some of the disabled will need, despite medical treatment, intensive care and regular nursing all their lives, others will need steady attention from their doctors even if they are relatively mobile and independent.
For many of those who are disabled from birth or during childhood, special education is obviously necessary.
Clearly the blind, the deaf and the crippled cannot be expected to make do with ordinary educational provision but require specially adapted teaching methods, and in some cases peripatetic  teachers if they are confined to their beds at home.
On leaving school most of the disabled will need help in finding suitable employment; some will need a permanently sheltered working environment; many will need financial assistance as they are unable to earn a living.
The majority of severely handicapped persons need some help in the routine of ordinary living, as travel, shopping, housework, catering and so on are bound to be difficult and sometimes impossible.
Because of their restricted mobility and their sense of difference, many will need assistance in establishing social contacts and suitable leisure activities.
Finally, all the physically disabled, however seriously or slightly they are handicapped in obtaining education, work, financial security and so on, do have one need in common : the need for understanding and acceptance.
For many of the disabled the greatest hardship they suffer is not the frustration and practical problems of lives that are limited by disability but the sense of being in some way segregated from the rest of society.
They feel, and in many cases they are, stigmatized, rejected, objects of disgust or pity in other, normal, people's eyes.
They feel, in a world that tends to cultivate an oversimplified and idealized image of normality, members of an abnormal, deviant group.
This is a very great hardship indeed, and only a very determined effort by society will ensure that the disabled achieve real acceptance and integration.
The disabled may sometimes need help themselves in overcoming feelings of bitterness, despair or resentment towards the rest of society, and help in adjusting to and accepting the consequences of disablement without succumbing to a withdrawn resignation or unnecessary isolation.
PROVISION FOR THE HANDICAPPED
The special needs of different categories of the physically handicapped were recognized first by individual philanthropists and this led to the establishment of numerous national and local voluntary organizations aiming to promote the welfare of the disabled.
Many of these pioneer voluntary bodies still exist, and they have been joined by large numbers of  organizations that have arisen in recent years to tackle the needs of particular groups among the disabled, so that voluntary effort continues to play a major part in meeting the needs of the handicapped.
It is only during this century that statutory services have been developed and they came in a very piecemeal fashion.
For example, some educational provision was made for the handicapped child once the universal state education system showed the need.
Rehabilitation services were boosted by the world wars, which greatly increased the numbers of severely disabled persons needing help in adjusting to their handicaps and finding suitable employment.
After the Second World War the coverage of the needs of the disabled became fairly comprehensive in scope, although there was no attempt to set up a single department or authority to be responsible for their needs.
Instead the various statutory authorities concerned improved their provision, and the voluntary effort was further encouraged.
There was not, however, much discussion on the overall needs of the disabled, and research into how the needs could best be met was minimal.
Only very recently has there been a development of more comprehensive concern for the disabled.
This was precipitated by the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act of 1970.
This Act generally strengthened and added to the welfare powers of the local authorities.
But it had a particularly important clause in section 1, which laid a duty upon the authorities to inform themselves of the numbers of disabled persons in their areas and to make arrangements to meet their needs.
In carrying out this duty, local authorities found themselves attempting to assess the numbers and needs of the disabled on a scale never before attempted.
The Act occasioned a considerable debate about the needs of the disabled and as a result much publicity was given to their cause and many of their problems received greater critical attention.
Particular reforming efforts have been made in the areas of welfare services and of financial provision.
The general position remains one of fragmented concern; years of relative neglect of this group cannot, of course, be easily compensated for by debate and good intentions.
But at least the issue is now more lively and from 1974 the disabled have had a special Minister for the  Disabled, at the Department of Social Security, to champion their cause and coordinate provision for their needs.
Medical provision
All aspects of the National Health Service are involved here.
The maternity and child welfare service contributes by ensuring early diagnosis of problems, such as deafness, through its system of regular medical examinations and the observation of health visitors.
It also plays a prominent part in preventive work through the vaccination and immunization programme designed to give children protection against crippling diseases such as poliomyelitis and the damaging effects that can follow relatively mild diseases such as measles.
General practitioners are available to identify problems and refer them for further investigation, and to cooperate with the hospitals for long-term treatment.
The hospitals play a major part in treating diseases, in dealing with the victims of accidents, and their rehabilitation.
The largest groups of persons registered as suffering from general handicap are those who suffer from organic nervous diseases, which include polio, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and so on.
Arthritis and rheumatism are prominent crippling diseases.
Hospitals provide not only active treatment, by surgery and medicine, but also long-term care of the very severely afflicted, research into the causes and treatment of disabling disease, and the rehabilitation of patients, both those recovering from diseases and those disabled by accident.
Through such techniques as occupational therapy and physiotherapy, and by the inspired use of artificial limbs, walking aids, powered wheelchairs and so on, many severely disabled persons can be helped to adjust physically to their situation, develop compensatory skills and achieve considerable mobility.
Medical rehabilitation units attached to some hospitals specialize in helping disabled patients maximize their potential and overcome their disabilities, and rehabilitation is increasingly seen as an integral part of a full treatment programme.
Under the NHS patients can obtain artificial limbs, wheelchairs, special vehicles and various other aids and appliances, while hearing aids and spectacles are available where necessary, though, ironically, only on a means test.
The community health service provides home nursing, which can b very useful to handicapped persons, and in some areas physiotherapy classes and transport are available.
Educational provision
As was noted in Chapter 4, local education authorities have for a long time had a duty to provide special education for handicapped children.
Under the 1944 Education Act they have had a duty to provide this for numerous categories of children: the blind, partially sighted, deaf, partially hearing, physically handicapped, delicate, maladjusted, epileptic, educationally subnormal, children with speech defects, and the autistic.
By 1987 nearly 140,000 children were receiving special education in England and Wales.
Nearly three-quarters of these children were educated at special schools, often in special classes.
More than half the total number were categorized as educationally subnormal.
Special education has been subject to considerable controversy for many years.
On the one hand, educationalists have argued that segregation of handicapped pupils is wrong and they ought to be taught in ordinary schools, albeit with special lessons and equipment provided, in order that they do not lose touch with ordinary children.
On the other hand, it has been argued that in order to maximize the benefits of special education it should become even more specialized, with schools focusing attention on a particular problem and designed and equipped exclusively with this in mind.
A committee of inquiry was set up in 1974 to consider the whole question of the education of handicapped children and young people and to review existing provision.
The committee, known by its chairman's name as the Warnock Committee, reported in 1978.
Its report, entitled Special Education Needs , contained important recommendations for bringing the education of handicapped pupils into line with that for ordinary children.
The committee urged that the emphasis should henceforth be on the special needs for education of certain groups of children — those with learning difficulties — rather than on various categories of handicap.
The special  educational needs should be met as far as possible within the normal educational system, and parental views should be taken into account in making provision for particular children.
While the Warnock Committee was sitting, the 1976 Education Act established in principle that handicapped children should be educated in ordinary schools wherever practicable.
An Act was passed in 1981 to pursue this aim and establish the new framework for special education suggested by Warnock.
The Act provides for the local education authority to ensure that a child identified as having special educational needs is given education within an ordinary school as long as that is compatible with efficient use of resources and efficient education, both for the child concerned and for other children at the school.
Local authorities have the power to make special educational provision for the under 2s and will have a duty to make such provision for children aged 2–5 and 16–19 as well as for those of compulsory school age.
The Act also provides for the setting up of new procedures for the identification of children with special educational needs and for the establishment of a new definition for the term.
However, although the Education Act 1981 shifted the emphasis in education from handicap to special educational need, based on assessment of curriculum requirement rather than on the child's disability, there has been little progress in the integration of the handicapped in education.
Meanwhile, within the special schools more thought is being given to providing a varied educational experience to meet the needs of pupils who might share a common handicap but whose aptitude, intelligence and aspirations vary widely.
There remains a shortage of specially trained teachers and of real secondary education facilities.
Access to further and higher education has been unduly restricted for handicapped children and this should be improved.
More help should also be available for the parents of younger handicapped children under the new legislation.
The physically handicapped youngster faces severe problems in finding employment.
A report entitled The Handicapped School Leaver , produced in 1964 by the British Council for Rehabilitation of the Disabled (now merged with the Central Council for the Disabled as the Royal Association for Disability  and Rehabilitation), highlighted the problem of this group and urged that more youth employment officers have special training for working with the handicapped.
Handicapped school leavers are frequently behind their peers in educational attainment owing to loss of education through time spent either under treatment or overcoming disabilities affecting learning, and they also have special difficulties in finding suitable employment.
Even where a suitable job is found, a handicapped young person is likely to have difficulties with getting to and from work.
Far too many handicapped young people have been condemned to operate at a lower level of education and achievement than their abilities warrant because of lack of facilities for further and higher education.
Since the report, the local education authorities' career service has generally improved its provision of specialist careers officers for helping the handicapped, but more still needs to be done in this area.
The disabled face much frustration and discrimination in their lives and it is vitally important that they receive the maximum help through education, careers guidance, training and help with obtaining employment so that at least they have a real chance to find and keep satisfactory work.
EMPLOYMENT NEEDS AND SPECIAL PROVISION
A wide range of facilities is available to help the disabled overcome the difficulties they face in finding and keeping suitable work.
These are mainly provided under the Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts of 1944 and 1958 and are run by the Department of Employment.
A disabled person's employment register is kept at local offices of the division, and the disabled can register themselves and obtain the special attention of the disablement resettlement officer (DRO).
It is the DRO's job to find suitable employment for the disabled and this entails building up a knowledge of suitable work available in the locality and of sympathetic employers, as well as discussing the individual disabled person's particular problems and inclinations.
The DRO can follow up a placement to  discuss any problems that may arise between the disabled worker and his employer.
The Acts also provide for a quota scheme, which makes it compulsory for every employer of more than twenty people to take on a quota of at least 3 per cent registered disabled, although few firms adhere to this scheme and monitoring is poor.
Further, certain occupations can be designated as reserved for registered disabled.
At present only two jobs, car park attendants and lift operators, have been so designated.
The DRO may recommend that a disabled person attend a course at an Employment Rehabilitation Centre (ERC).
He will liaise with the medical rehabilitation teams and with the ERCs to know something of the overall picture of the person's employment problem.
The ERCs provide short courses for men and women who need help in regaining their confidence and fitness for work.
They offer no specific training, but they assess a person's capacity and carry out vocational aptitude tests as well as offering a working routine to re-accustom the disabled person to the demands of a normal working day.
The ERCs can, if necessary, be followed by periods of vocational training at training centres and colleges which teach the disabled new skills so that they can obtain work again.
If they cannot immediately find open employment the DRO might find them a place in the government-run sheltered employment scheme which is known as Remploy.
There are currently nearly ninety Remploy factories up and down the country which employ disabled people in productive work that earns them a reasonable wage.
Remploy factories produce a wide range of goods from kitchen furniture to overalls and they also do contract work for other manufacturers.
They are, however, subsidized to some extent, and although the Remploy workers do a full day's work they do not have quite such demands made on them as they would encounter in open employment.
A considerable number of Remploy workers do move on to work in open conditions but many remain semi-permanently in the sheltered environment.
Some local authorities and voluntary organizations also run workshops for disabled people.
The disabled person's employment services are reasonably comprehensive, and the Piercy Report on The Rehabilitation  Training and Resettlement of Disabled Persons (1956) expressed general satisfaction with the scheme.
Nevertheless there is room for improvement and change.
It has been argued that the scheme is geared too closely to the needs of the industrial worker disabled by accident or disease in middle life, who, following full medical care and rehabilitation, needs help in returning to the routine of work, in adjusting to disability and in finding new skills within his or her capacity.
The scheme is less helpful for the person who is handicapped from youth and has no experience of work, and it is not always suitable for those who are unused to and ill-suited for industrial work, for example, those from clerical work or service trades.
In particular, the ERCs fail in some cases to rehabilitate the men and women who pass through them largely because it is not their physical disablement but their attitude that is handicapping them in returning to normal working life, and the ERCs are not really equipped to change these attitudes.
Their routine is quite demanding and in some ways it expects a level of determination on the part of the rehabilitee that would probably be high enough to get him back to work without a course of formal rehabilitation.
Criticism of the retraining schemes is often that they train people for jobs that are not always available to them and they expect too much mobility from people who have further reasons, in their disability, for being reluctant to move from their familiar surroundings.
There has been discussion over whether the DROs should not be better trained, possibly in other social work, in order that they can help the disabled adjust psychologically to their change of status as well as help them in practical ways.
There is, too, a need for a greater awareness of the changing demands on the scheme.
For example, there are today many fewer tuberculosis cases and far more mentally handicapped persons using the services than there were in the 1950s and this means new demands are placed on the staff that they are not always able to meet.
The establishment in 1974 of the Manpower Services Commission to run the public employment services and training services, formerly the responsibility of the Department of Employment, helped to some extent to revitalize the employment services for the disabled — for example, with special  facilities for disabled people on the Training Opportunities Scheme run by MSC.
However, in 1988 the responsibility for the employment of disabled people was returned to the Department of Employment, whilst schemes such as TOPs no longer exist.
Overall, the employment position of the disabled is still far from satisfactory.
Generally mounting unemployment severely affects the disabled in particular.
Unemployment of registered disabled is always at a much higher rate than unemployment generally and so the recession has severely damaged the chances of large numbers of disabled people obtaining work.
And yet it is estimated that two-thirds of companies fail to employ their quota of registered disabled and only two government departments employ 3 per cent disabled.
Local authorities and nationalized industries have an equally bad record of neglect of the disabled.
The Disability Alliance argues that the quota system should be enhanced and properly enforced and the number of sheltered employment opportunities rapidly expanded.
However, it remains a hard task to convince society that much more should be done to create fairer employment opportunities for the disabled.
FINANCIAL PROVISION
Obviously most severely disabled persons are likely to have financial problems as they have either a limited earning capacity or even none at all.
Moreover, disability can itself make extra demands on financial resources because the disabled need extra care and special services.
State financial provision for the disabled is very complex and patchy.
It has operated on the rather inequitable basis of paying different amounts of money or none at all according to the source of disability rather than its extent.
Persons disabled by war or in the armed forces and those disabled at work as a result of injury or prescribed industrial disease have for many years enjoyed reasonable financial provision.
Those normally at work but disabled by non-industrial illness have had a limited cover under National Insurance, and those who have never been in the workforce have very limited special provision and must rely on income  support if they lack resources.
The result of this anomalous position has been that the majority of the disabled have had to suffer great financial hardship.
Only in the last few years have real efforts been made to equalize provision for different groups of the disabled and there is still a long way to go before we can claim to have adequate social security in this area.
Provision for the industrially disabled comes under the 1946 National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act and it is operated alongside the main insurance scheme.
Injury benefit is payable to anyone injured or disabled at work regardless of contributions.
Sickness benefit is payable for up to twenty-eight weeks if a person is incapacitated for work at the rate of£33.20 a week, together with £20.55 for an adult dependant.
If incapacity for work continues thereafter, a person can obtain invalidity benefit at the higher rate of £43.60 plus £26.20 for an adult dependant and £8.95 for each child.
In addition, people who become unfit for work more than five years before pensionable age may receive an invalidity allowance.
People who become disabled as a result of industrial injury or disease may also claim disablement benefit, which is paid in compensation for the disability itself, and is calculated in relation to the assessed level or percentage of disability suffered as a result of employment.
At 100 per cent assessment, the weekly rate of benefit is £71.20.
Additional allowances that can be paid include a constant attendance allowance, exceptionally severe disablement allowance, and reduced earnings supplement, which is paid to those who are unable to work in their normal occupation as a result of industrial accident or disease, and can be claimed either in addition to or separate from disablement benefit, payable where appropriate.
The industrial injuries scheme is reasonably fair and sensible.
It recognizes the basic need of the severely disabled for maintenance and the special needs for nursing care and attendance.
It also takes into account the actual disability and, whether or not it handicaps a person in working, it provides some financial compensation for it.
Similarly the war pension scheme pays out relatively flexible and generous pensions for disability arising from service with the armed forces or wartime civilian casualties.
These schemes are regarded as models that should be extended to those whose disability is congenital or arises  out of non-industrial disease or accident, for whom cover, though recently improved, is still only partial.
Insured workers who are off sick are entitled to draw sickness benefit.
If they remain chronically incapacitated for work they can now claim invalidity benefit at a higher rate.
Under the 1975 Pensions Act, invalidity pensioners will eventually qualify for inflation-proofed earnings-related pensions.
Invalidity benefit is paid according to the usual contribution conditions and dependants' benefits are added where appropriate.
For those who are not in the workforce there are now some non-contributory invalidity benefits.
The severe disablement allowance of £26.20 per week, plus an amount for adult and child dependants, is payable to the chronically sick and disabled who are incapable of work.
The severe disablement allowance replaces the non-contributory invalidity pension and the housewives' non-contributory invalidity pension (HNCIP), which was payable to married women who were unable to take paid work but who did not have sufficient contributions to claim invalidity benefit itself.
To qualify for the HNCIP, a woman had to satisfy stringent conditions regarding her incapacity to carry out normal household duties.
This was deemed to be discriminatory according to the European Directive on payment of benefits, and it was replaced with the severe disablement allowance for all claimants in 1984.
Most of the applicants for the non-contributory disablement allowance are dependent on income support for their income maintenance, and it is automatically deducted from their benefit.
But at least it is a benefit as of right and without means test.
Those who benefit from the non-contributory disablement allowances are allowed to earn up to a prescribed amount, similar to the benefit, without loss of pension.
The introduction of the non-contributory disablement benefits was regarded as an important step towards helping to right the long-standing injustice of the financial provision for the disabled.
Disabled housewives in particular had been totally left out of previous schemes.
This caused considerable hardship because the disablement of a wife and mother, apart from the suffering involved, can lead to financial burdens and/or neglect of home and children.
Most of the above benefits are towards the maintenance of the disabled and their dependants when they cannot earn.
There is now some provision to meet the extra costs of the disability itself.
In 1970 an attendance allowance was introduced, payable to a person in need of substantial care and attention.
This is payable for adults and children over the age of 2.
There is a higher rate for the more severely disabled and a lower rate for those less severely incapacitated.
Claims are submitted to an Attendance Allowance Board.
Currently the rates are £34.90 for the higher allowance and £23.30 for the lower.
Recipients are free to decide how to use the allowance, either as a contribution to general household expenses or to buy extra care.
An invalid care allowance is a benefit for people of working age who are unable to go out to work because they have the care of a severely disabled relative.
The current rate of invalid care allowance is £26.20.
This is deductible from income support, but is worth claiming even by those on income support as recipients are credited with insurance contributions.
Mobility allowance was introduced in 1976 to help disabled people whose walking ability is severely restricted.
It is a weekly non-means-tested cash benefit of £24.40 and it can be spent on any aspect of mobility, from payment for holidays or taxi fares to help with the costs of buying a car.
The allowance is intended to replace the old scheme whereby special invalid trikes or a private car allowance were made available, and that scheme is being phased out.
Linked to the mobility allowance is a voluntary organization called Motability, which helps disabled people make the best use of their allowance to acquire a private car by leasing on hire purchase.
Mobility allowance beneficiaries are entitled, like members of the old vehicle schemes, to exemption from payment of road tax on cars.
War disablement pensions remain payable to those disabled during the wars, and they carry a range of additional allowances similar to those under the industrial injuries scheme.
The financial position of the disabled has improved dramatically in recent years.
There are still many anomalies and too many disabled persons are dependent on income support, but at least the attendance and mobility allowances go some way towards acknowledging the financial burdens of disability.
Children who are disabled cause an extra financial burden to their parents and there have been some moves to acknowledge this.
Following discussion of the settlement of private claims for compensation for thalidomide children, a special fund was set up to help other congenitally handicapped children.
The fund is administered by the Joseph Rowntree Memorial Trust.
Set up in 1972 it was established with £3 million to help parents with the costs of some special provisions.
It is, however, more in the nature of a charitable gesture than a true extension of state responsibility for this area of need.
The financial hardship of the disabled has recently aroused considerable protest, particularly from among the more articulate of the disabled themselves.
A pressure group known as the Disablement Income Group (DIG) was formed to campaign for better provision.
Disappointment with the 1974 proposals led to the formation of the Disability Alliance, a consortium of groups concerned with the disabled, to continue to fight for a better deal.
The ultimate goal of the pressure groups is a universal disability allowance, paid on assessment of disability and not related to age, income, working position or marital status.
This would involve some acceptance by society of compensation to the chronic sick and disabled, not just of a responsibility to maintain them.
It seems unlikely that this will occur in the near future.
Although there are now many benefits available, they all have fairly stringent qualifying conditions.
Vast numbers of people, especially among the elderly, receive no financial recognition of their moderate disability.
Difficulties in defining disability, together with powerful limits on society's generosity towards handicapped groups, seems likely to continue to restrict the scope of financial provision for the disabled for many years to come.
WELFARE AND PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES
Local authorities were made responsible for the welfare of the handicapped under the National Assistance Act of 1948.
Initially they had a duty to promote only the welfare of the blind but from 1951 they had power to promote the welfare of the  deaf and of the general classes of the physically handicapped.
From 1960 this power became a duty.
The services that the authorities developed for the handicapped followed the model already established for the blind.
They included: keeping registers; providing help to the handicapped in overcoming the effects of their disabilities and obtaining any available general, preventive or remedial medical treatment necessary; advice and guidance to handicapped persons on personal problems and also on any relevant statutory or voluntary social services; encouragement of handicapped people to take part in social activities; and arrangements for voluntary visitors.
The services also included practical help by way of aids and adaptations to the homes of the disabled, provision of recreational facilities and travel and holiday schemes.
For the blind, the services offered included the teaching of Braille, and the home teacher of the blind was a specialist social worker who provided this service.
For the deaf, welfare officers had to provide a communication and translation service where necessary.
The pattern of provision was based on a partnership between the local welfare authorities and a wide range of voluntary organizations, many of which acted originally as agents of the local authorities in discharging their responsibilities.
Provision for the blind and deaf was reasonably comprehensive as a result, although often rather isolated, but provision for the heterogeneous general classes of disability was very slight and uneven between authorities.
From the start of welfare provision for the disabled it was recognized that social workers would have a key role to play in putting the handicapped in touch with the provision available.
Since 1959, when the Younghusband Report on Social Workers in the Local Authority Health and Welfare Services appeared, there have been systematic training courses for social workers designed to include the welfare of the disabled in their scope.
Gradually the idea of welfare work for the physically handicapped has become more professional.
Social workers were trained to perceive the psychological as well as the practical problems facing the disabled.
Disablement arouses severe anxieties and strong resentment in people.
Not surprisingly, a disabled person, suddenly threatened by a role change from  head of the family to dependent invalid, can become frustrated and bitter.
Social workers should be able to help people with a disability express their feelings, adjust to new roles, find new sources of strength and generally cope with the psychological impact of disability.
However, the most striking developments in welfare services have been on the delivery side rather than the personal counselling aspect.
As with the elderly, the aim of welfare became the provision of community care.
For the disabled, who by and large do not live in institutions, this meant services to help them become a more effective and integrated part of the community.
Community care services include provision of places in occupation centres, development of transport services, encouragement of self-help groups and voluntary action, the provision of aids, adaptations and holiday schemes, and liaison with other bodies such as health authorities, housing departments and social security offices.
Local authorities gradually developed such services, but the extent of their coverage and the quality of their provision was remarkably uneven.
Some authorities maintained up-to-date registers and a full range of services, even if not enough of each, while others barely acknowledged the need at all.
In 1970 there were two major developments.
Welfare services for the disabled became part of the new local authority social services departments and the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act was passed.
The first meant that people with a disability can now hope to enjoy more generic provision of social work, day care and residential care; a generally extended and localized service; the greater use of home helps and meals services; and the more effective encouragement of community work.
The second meant that local authorities became heavily involved in researching into the numbers of disabled and attempting to assess their needs, and the public became much more aware of the whole problem of disability.
Research findings in this field have often proved depressing reading.
Most local surveys on the prevalence of disability indicated that existing registers were badly understating it.
Surveys of provision have indicated that this still falls short of a desirable level.
In most areas there are simply not the resources to meet the expectations that the 1970 Act raised.
The gap between provision and need is too great to be bridged rapidly and many shortcomings have continued to be revealed by the considerable glare of publicity directed at the local authority services for the handicapped.
More seriously there was, and still is, great confusion about need and demand for service.
The 1970 Act, for example, gave local authorities power to install telephones and television sets in the homes of the disabled, but the social services departments have been bewildered by how to decide on priorities between services and between individuals needing services.
In the absence of explicit rationing devices, various undesirable practices that obscure or delay demand have developed.
As a result there has been bitter criticism of the local authorities and much disappointment among the disabled and their families.
With a more sober view of what is possible, local social services departments are now beginning to plan for the provision of more comprehensive and effective welfare services for the disabled.
It will take time for the resources and expertise to build up, but it is hoped that the will and intention to provide a first-class service now exists.
ACCOMMODATION
The need for accommodation is a real one, as many of the disabled are clearly handicapped in the ordinary housing situation.
At present the local authorities have a duty to provide residential accommodation if this is required for anyone who needs it by reason of age or infirmity.
However, many authorities lack separate provision for the younger disabled, who have to join old people in residential homes.
More separate provision is being provided and many authorities make good use of the facilities made available by voluntary organizations.
As part of the growing concept of community care, spelt out in the 1963 Health and Welfare: the Development of Community Care plans, many authorities have recognized that the physically disabled, like the elderly, usually want to retain their independence and avoid entering homes as long as possible.
Also, when families are providing care for a disabled relative they usually want to continue to do so if this is at all possible.
Local authorities have, therefore, begun to help the disabled in their own homes by providing meals services, domestic help and so on, and in some cases they make arrangements to take the disabled person on holiday to give the other members of the household a break, although all of these services are restricted by cash limitations on local authority expenditure.
A further logical step is to consider the provision of specially adapted housing.
As mentioned earlier, social services departments can and do make adaptations to premises to make life easier for the disabled person.
They can put in ramps instead of stairs, widen doorways, fix rails in bathrooms, lower working surfaces in kitchens, extend tap handles, place electric points within reach, etc. all these things can make life much easier and increase the independence of a disabled person, though clearly it would be simpler in many cases to provide bungalows or flats designed especially for the disabled, in particular those confined to wheelchairs.
Some authorities are now doing this; in others ground-floor accommodation in blocks of flats is reserved by the housing departments for disabled people.
Some areas have made some provision for sheltered housing, that is, specially built flats with some services provided by a warden.
This is an area of provision that needs urgent expansion, since proper living accommodation is essential for those who are restricted in their mobility.
The Department of the Environment issued a circular in 1974,Housing for People who are Physically Handicapped , which gives guidance to local authorities on how to assess the need for special housing and advice on provision over such things as design and siting.
This should have served as an encouragement to the authorities to develop this important aspect of community care.
However, again, the impact of restraint on public sector expenditure and the increasing emphasis on the private housing market have resulted in poor provision overall for this group in society.
Whilst housing associations have in the past provided some, albeit limited, accommodation to enable people with a disability to live independently, the  1988 Housing Act restricts the ability of housing associations to provide this kind of low-cost housing.
THE VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION
Voluntary effort has already been mentioned, but a further comment is required to underline the very large contribution of voluntary agencies in this field.
They cannot all be named, but examples of different types of organizations will indicate the scope of the effort.
In many aspects of work for the disabled the voluntary agencies were pioneers.
Many organizations such as the Royal National Institute for the Blind (RNIB) and that for the deaf (RNID) provide services on a national basis, aiming to promote better understanding of and provision for the needs of the people they represent.
The RNIB produces Braille literature, the talking book library, and educational aids.
It runs specialized homes and schools for the blind, such as a social rehabilitation home for the newly blind, and several training establishments and workshops, and a placement service.
The RNID runs similar services for the deaf, and in both fields there are large numbers of local and several regional welfare organizations that cater more immediately for the welfare of the blind and deaf of their localities.
The Central Council for the Disabled is a coordinating national body that encourages the development of voluntary effort for the disabled, and the British Council for Rehabilitation of the Disabled conducts research into their needs and problems and acts as an information body.
A large number of societies and associations promote the welfare of different groups of disabled people — large societies such as the Spastics Society and small spontaneously formed groups of, for example, muscular dystrophy sufferers.
Some provide extensive facilities and pioneer new methods of treatment, education and care; others are small social clubs meeting in members' houses for companionship and leisure activities.
The range of effort is very great and its contribution extremely important, not least in quickly meeting new needs as they arise — for example, the special needs of thalidomide children.
It was noted at the start of the chapter that not least among the needs of the physically disabled was the need for understanding and true acceptance in society.
The provision of the services already described is important, but this must take place in a society that fully accepts the implications of disability, otherwise the disabled feel they are rejected and discriminated against.
Rejection of the physically disabled is not uncommon, for disfigurement and malformation have been associated with evil in earlier, superstitious times.
Today few people would openly express any repugnance for the disabled, but many probably feel it, and it is implied, for example, in over-solicitous or embarrassed responses to people in wheelchairs.
Many deaf people complain, with some justification, of being treated as stupid simply because they cannot hear, and many crippled people complain of being avoided, or pitied, and rarely accepted for themselves.
There is, therefore, a real need for the development of a more aware and accepting society, since this rejection — obvious, implied or felt by the disabled themselves — is a great handicap in their struggle to feel part of the community and to lead normal lives.
To overcome this discrimination, public education is needed, and less segregation of handicapped people, so that acceptance is increased by widening the concept of normality.
If attitudes are hard to change, it is at least possible to create an environment less hostile to the disabled, for example, by a vigorous campaign to improve access to public buildings.
The extent to which society is prepared to divert resources of money and skilled manpower to the treatment, education and care of the physically handicapped is always a telling indication of the extent to which society accepts them and truly cares about their welfare.
THE MENTALLY DISORDERED
THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL DISORDER
Mental illness and mental handicap are grave social problems.
Any form of mental disorder is a serious problem for the individual , since it can involve great suffering and prevent him or her from living a full and satisfying life.
But the social problem posed by mental disorder is a particularly awkward one: on the one hand, facilities for care and treatment are necessary and on the other, some form of control may be required, because the more serious states of mental illness and mental impairment involve some failure to live a responsible and well ordered life that conforms to the demands of society.
Since control means some infringement of individual liberty, great care has to be taken to ensure that the control is not abused, and also that it does not clash with the other needs for care and treatment.
It would not be appropriate in a book of this kind to go into details over the clinical manifestations and classifications of mental disorder, although the booklist at the end of the chapter contains some introductory reading on the subject.
But some brief description of the nature of mental illness and handicap is necessary before the social implications, with which we are largely concerned, can be fully grasped.
‘Mental handicap’ is the term that has come into general usage to describe a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind.
It replaced the term ‘subnormality’, which itself replaced ‘mental deficiency’ as the formal description of a  wide range of conditions in which some degree of subnormal intelligence is the only common factor.
In some cases of mental handicap there are recognizable clinical abnormalities as well as low intelligence.
Children born with Down's Syndrome, a condition caused by a chromosome abnormality in which those affected show distinctive ‘mongoloid’ features from birth, provide one example; others are cases where the handicap results from disturbances in metabolic or hormonal functioning or from brain damage at birth.
In most of these conditions mental handicap is accompanied by physical handicap, sometimes of extreme severity.
In other cases there are no apparent pathological attributes and no clear clinical causes so mental handicap cannot be deduced from appearance or symptoms but is diagnosed gradually from performance and development in early childhood.
In many of these cases the handicap is only diagnosed on starting school on the basis of educational tests.
Because poor educational performance is related to emotional disturbance and physical handicap and even cultural diversity, the diagnosis of actual low intelligence is not always a precise or accurate process.
There is some evidence that parents of low intelligence tend to produce children of low intelligence but this is not invariably the case and, where it is, it is just as likely to be as a result of environmental deprivation as of heredity.
Although poverty, deprivation and low intelligence tend to go together, it is hard to disentangle cause and effect.
The causation of much mental handicap is, therefore, obscure, and diagnosis of many cases must rest on social and educational grounds rather than on clinical criteria.
Cases range from the severely handicapped person who may be physically helpless and incapable of coherent speech, to the highly acceptable, responsible person, earning a living, looking after themselves, obtaining considerable enjoyment from life and from relationships but generally regarded as not very bright.
The needs of the mentally handicapped vary accordingly.
Some cases are susceptible to medical treatment, some require intensive nursing care, most respond to education and training and a small minority may be so severely impaired that they may be detained in hospital or placed under guardianship.
In most cases of mental handicap, even of severe mental handicap, there is considerable potential for learning and development, although the pace may be slow.
Large numbers of mentally handicapped people are willing and able to lead relatively independent lives if they are given the opportunities, support and encouragement they need.
Mental illness, unlike most mental handicap which usually dates from birth or early years, may occur at any stage of life and may be chronic or acute, mild in form or severe.
Some forms of mental illness are linked to organic disturbances, such as brain tumours; others to physical deterioration such as the senile psychoses.
But most mental illness lacks any clear physical symptoms and is recognizable only from the patient's abnormal behaviour.
This is why some forms of mental illness are confused with criminality — for example, because they are manifest largely by anti-social behaviour.
Some definitions of mental illness beg the question of what constitutes normal behaviour.
It has gradually come to be accepted that there are no clear lines dividing normal and abnormal behaviour, only several continua on which people might be placed that shade very gradually from the recognizably normal to the clearly disturbed.
Mental illness is a very complicated subject, and psychiatry (the study and treatment of it) is not yet well enough developed to permit of an easy, agreed classification.
To oversimplify, the more obvious (not necessarily more serious) illnesses, generally regarded as ‘madness’, are often referred to as psychotic disorders.
These illnesses are manifest by a wide variety of symptoms from paranoid delusions or auditory hallucinations to total withdrawal from normal communication into silence or bizarre, apparently meaningless jargon, and they have in common some degree of loss of contact with reality.
Neuroses, in contrast, are often extreme forms of normal behavioural or emotional patterns, such as depression or anxiety, and the patient usually retains some insight into their condition.
Personality disorders are conditions where the individual's whole personality appears to be permanently warped rather than that they are suffering from some actual illness at any given time.
These distinctions are necessarily very loose and easily blurred when actual diagnosis is attempted.
They do, however, give some indication of  the very broad spectrum of behaviour grouped under mental illness, which tends to confuse public reaction and policy in regard to this problem.
Where the mentally ill person is potentially violent, the social problem is quickly perceived; where they are withdrawn and depressed, the individual agony may be overlooked.
It is not easy to assess the size of the problem that mental disorder poses.
Not only does mental disability vary so widely that it ultimately defies definition, but the extent to which a given mental disability, in so far as it can be measured in clinical terms, handicaps a person will depend not only upon the disability itself but on the patient's social circumstances as well.
This is true of all the special need problems discussed in this book, but particularly so in the case of the mentally ill and handicapped when a breakdown in normal social relationships is often part of the actual disorder.
Some examples might help to clarify this.
If a child is born with some degree of mental impairment and has parents able to handle the situation calmly, without undue guilt or anxiety, creating a relaxed home atmosphere, encouraging the child's full development however slow it is, making use of the best educational facilities available and providing a stable, reassuring, affectionate home, then such a child might well not be severely handicapped by the disability, but grow up relatively independent, sociable and self-confident.
If, on the other hand, a child with a roughly similar basic disability is a cause for acute anxiety to the parents, who either make excessive demands or over-protect, and fail to make use of the available care and educational facilities, rapidly rejecting the child altogether as unrewarding and unmanageable, such a child might find low intelligence a severe handicap.
The same is true of mental illness.
If a person is suffering from a fairly severe mental disorder and has close friends or relatives who sympathize, encourage early treatment and make full rehabilitation possible by providing a tolerant but secure home after hospitalization, then the person has a fair chance of ultimately coping with their illness without it handicapping their general performance in life too severely.
But if a person with a roughly similar disability is socially isolated, or the home environment has actually precipitated or exacerbated the illness, then they will be gravely handicapped  in attempting to return to normal life after a period in hospital.
In fact, social and economic circumstances such as poverty, poor housing or unemployment are highly associated with onset of some forms of mental illness, and serve to act as triggers precipitating episodes of depression, anxiety and, in some cases psychotic illnesses.
Often, however, patients may find social or economic problems accentuated by treatment for psychiatric illness, particularly as an in-patient in hospital.
For example, an individual may lose their job as a result of becoming depressed, a person suffering agoraphobia will be unable to go out to their place of work as usual , and so on .
The relationship between cause and effect in mental illness is complex, but social and economic circumstances play an important role in both precipitating and prolonging difficulties.
Clearly it is not easy to be precise about the numbers of mentally disordered persons who need help, but some figures of those actually receiving care or treatment are a rough guide to the size of the problem.
In 1986 there were about 34,000 beds in mental handicap hospitals and 60,000 beds for psychiatric patients in separate hospitals or wards of general hospitals.
In addition 3,000 mentally handicapped and 200,000 mentally ill people were seen as new out-patients that year.
At the same time, substantial numbers of mentally handicapped and mentally ill persons were receiving some attention from the community services.
However, a great many people with some degree of mental disability were not receiving any formal care or treatment.
The needs of the mentally disordered vary as much as their disabilities.
Treatment is necessary as far as the advance of medical and psychological knowledge permits.
In some cases this will involve hospitalization.
If the disorder is severe the patient may also require full care and, very occasionally, physical control.
In many cases mental disability will prevent a person benefiting from normal education or from earning a living and therefore special education and financial help will be needed, even if care in an institution or home is not actually necessary.
For those who are able to work, special help might be needed in finding suitable employment or creating a sheltered working environment.
However, the needs of the mentally handicapped are perceived differently at different times according to prevailing attitudes towards mental disorder and the extent to which it is understood.
At the start of this century it was generally accepted that the care and control of the mentally ill and subnormal should be a public responsibility.
But little was known of the nature and causation of mental disorder and so provision for treatment was minimal.
Informed opinion considered that care was best provided in hospitals for the mentally ill (the old lunatic asylums) and institutions or colonies for the subnormal.
Total care within a segregated institutional setting was seen as the best answer to the social and individual problems arising from mental disorder.
Today, however, the value of care within the normal community wherever possible tends to be emphasized.
This change of policy, which reflects a growing understanding of the nature of mental disorder, and the development of the social services generally, means that the needs of the mentally ill and the mentally handicapped are perceived in a different light.
The attempt now is to provide care on a community rather than an institutional basis, on the assumption that it is good to retain the mentally disordered within the community as far as possible and help to rehabilitate and reintegrate those who have had to go into hospitals for treatment.
So today the needs of the mentally ill and handicapped are seen as demanding a wide range of facilities: homes, centres, clinics and so forth, served by doctors, nurses, teachers, psychologists, psychotherapists, speech therapists and residential care workers, linked by a body of trained social workers and placed within a tolerant, accepting and truly caring community.
THE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICE
The main provision of mental health care comes jointly under the National Health Service, responsible both for the psychiatric and mental handicap hospitals and for the community health services, and the local authority social services departments.
The local education departments and the Department of Employment also have parts to play, as do many voluntary  organizations concerned with the needs of the mentally ill and handicapped.
Up to the creation of the National Health Service in 1946 responsibility for the mentally ill and subnormal was carried largely by the local authorities, which ran hospitals and institutions for the mentally ill, and organized some care and supervision in the community for the mentally subnormal.
Their powers were laid down by the old Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Acts, which were concerned with the definition, ascertainment and  committal of mentally disordered persons as well as with the administration of the services.
In 1948 the National Health Service took over all the hospitals and institutions as psychiatric and subnormality hospitals under the regional hospital boards, while local health authorities continued the provision of community services.
Meanwhile, in addition to these administrative changes, important developments were taking place within the hospitals as knowledge of mental disorder increased.
More patients received voluntary and out-patient treatment and the social aspects of mental welfare were acknowledged.
It was increasingly apparent that the old laws, which were particularly concerned with the legal procedures for certification of patients, were obsolete in a period when the medical and social concern for mental disorder was of much greater importance.
In 1954 a Royal Commission was set up to investigate and its Report on the Law Relating to Mental Illness and Mental Deficiency , published in 1957, was followed by the 1959 Mental Health Act.
This Act, which was concerned with definitions of mental disorder, the administration of hospital and community services and the procedures for admission and discharge to and from hospital, became the statutory basis of the Mental Health service.
The 1959 Mental Health Act defined mental disorder as: mental illness; arrested or incomplete development of mind; and psychopathic disorder — the last a controversial category further defined as ‘a persistent disorder or disability of mind…which results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct…and requires, or is susceptible to medical treatment’.
Responsibility for the administration of services had been laid down by the National Health Service Act 1946 and the 1959 Act further defined the powers and duties outlined there.
Basically it provided for the care and treatment of  the mentally disordered through the NHS under the central direction of the Minister of Health.
Hospital care remained a central feature of provision but its role was changed.
Regarding the admission and discharge to and from mental hospitals the object of the 1959 Act was to make admission as informal as possible.
Patients could be admitted for care and treatment without any formalities and without liability to detention.
Where compulsory admission was necessary, three types of admission orders were defined.
These orders for observation or treatment were made either on the recommendation of two medical practitioners or, in the case of an emergency order, on the initiative of a relative or friend or a mental welfare officer with the backing of only one doctor.
New Mental Health Tribunals were set up in each health region to deal with any complaints arising from compulsory admission procedures.
At local level the responsibilities for the prevention, care and after-care, set out in the 1946 NHS Act, were emphasized, and shortly after the Act was passed they were made a duty.
Local health authorities were to provide residential accommodation, training, guardianship, mental welfare officers and any other services that might benefit the mentally disordered in the community.
The 1959 Mental Health Act, in essence, laid stress upon informality of treatment and hospital admission and on the development of a community care approach to the mentally disordered.
It has been argued that it did not actually initiate any changes in the mental health field, rather it endorsed the developments that were already taking place within hospitals and in the community.
But it did give considerable encouragement to the growth of services, particularly community services, and to the improvement of public understanding of the problems of mental disorder, and it was, accordingly, widely welcomed.
Despite enthusiasm for the 1959 Act, criticism of its operation developed, particularly during the 1970s.
This reflected in part a widespread criticism of psychiatry as paternalistic and socially controlling and a growing interest in the civil tights of under-privileged groups.
Both the Royal College of psychiatrists and the voluntary organizations MIND (the National Association for Mental Health) and MENCAP (the  Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Adults and Children) became active in pressure for change.
The Butler Committee on Mentally Abnormal Offenders, in producing its report in 1975 on the law and services for this particularly difficult group of patients, made recommendations for changes to the Mental Health Act.
The British Association of Social Workers was also strongly critical of the Act and joined its criticism to that of the other pressure groups.
In response to these demands for change, an interdepartmental committee was set up to consider the criticisms and evaluate the suggestions for alternative procedures.
A consultative document was issued in 1976 and a government White Paper in 1978.
After further argument and discussion, an Act was passed to amend the 1959 Mental Health Act.
Following this Mental Health (Amendment) Act in 1982, a further Mental Health Act was passed in 1983 to bring together, in one statute, the 1959 Act and the 1982 amendment.
THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT 1983
The basic principles of the 1983 consolidating Act remain the same as those of the 1959 Act: to provide treatment and care of the mentally disordered on an informal basis and in the community, wherever possible.
The Act covers mental disorder, i.e. ‘mental illness, arrested or incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorders or any other disorder or disability of mind’.
Mental illness is not further defined.
New terms ‘mental impairment’ and ‘severe mental impairment, are introduced, the latter defined as ‘a state of arrested or incomplete development of mind which includes severe impairment of intelligence and social functioning and is associated with abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the person concerned’.
‘Mental impairment, is similarly defined but involves a less than severe degree of impairment.
Psychopathic disorder is ‘a persistent disorder or disability of mind…which results in abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the person concerned’.
Mental disorder shall not be construed as covering promiscuity, sexual deviancy or dependence on alcohol or drugs.
Compulsory admission to hospital is possible under  certain circumstances and much of the Act, like its predecessor, is concerned with the rights of the minority of patients who require to be detained in hospital or placed under guardianship.
Admission for assessment for twenty-eight days (section 2) is possible where a person is suffering from mental disorder and it is considered that he or she ought to be detained in the interests of his or her own health or safety or with a view to the protection of other persons.
Two medical practitioners, one an ‘approved’ doctor, have to agree and state the grounds for their recommendation.
Application for admission may be by the nearest relative or an approved social worker.
The doctor in charge, the hospital managers or the nearest relative may discharge the patient, who has a right to apply to the Mental Health Review Tribunal within the first fourteen days of detention.
Compulsory admission for treatment (section 3) is possible, but the conditions are now more stringent than formerly and the periods of initial and subsequent detention have been reduced to six months, a further six months and then for one year at a time, and the patients' rights of appeal to the Mental Health Review Tribunal have been strengthened.
Again, applications may be made by the nearest relative or an approved social worker and two medical recommendations are required.
Emergency Admission (section 4) for up to seventy-two hours is possible on the application of the nearest relative or an approved social worker who must have seen the patient personally within the previous twenty-four hours, but it requires only one medical recommendation.
Basically the amended Act seeks to improve the rights of patients and the safeguards against abuse of compulsory powers, though it is also concerned with the issue of protection of staff and public.
Much of the Act was fiercely argued over because of the very real conflicts of opinion that exist in these areas.
In addition to tightening up the compulsory admission and detention procedures, the new Act tries to deal with the difficult issue of consent to treatment.
It used to be considered that, if a patient was compulsorily detained, treatment was then at the  discretion of the psychiatrist in charge of the case because such a person was not always able or willing to give informed consent.
This was challenged and, after various proposals were fought over, the 1983 Act laid down detailed principles about consent and procedures for their application.
Under the relevant sections it states that the patient's informed consent is required before certain designated treatments can be carried out.
If it is not possible to obtain informed consent, the opinion of a second, independent psychiatrist must be obtained, backed by consultation with non-medical members of the clinical team.
Some treatments of special concern require the endorsement of an independent panel as well as the patient's informed consent.
The section concerning treatment requiring both consent and a second opinion refers primarily to psycho-surgery and hormone implantations; that concerning treatment requiring either consent or a second opinion refers primarily to electro-convulsive therapy and to the use of medication after three months regular administration.
Consent means that the patient must be capable of understanding the nature, purpose and likely effects of the proposed treatments.
Mental Health Review Tribunals were set up under the 1959 Act.
There is one tribunal for each NHS region and one for Wales and they contain medical, legal and lay members.
Under the 1983 Act their powers were extended and the rights of patients to make application were increased.
A further development under the Act was the designation of ‘approved social workers’.
Local authorities were given a duty to appoint sufficient numbers of them, which means that social workers must have relevant training in order to demonstrate their appropriate competence in the mental health field.
Finally, the Act established a Mental Health Act Commission with a general protective function for all compulsorily detained patients.
The Commission is multi-disciplinary and it exists to provide independent medical opinions to consent to treatment; to keep the powers of detention under review; to prepare a Code of Practice; and to visit and interview detained patients and investigate individual complaints.
The Mental Health Act 1983 has stirred up a good deal of argument and controversy, which is, arguably, a very good  thing in an area where individual liberty is at such risk.
It has increased the responsibilities of social workers, challenged the authority of psychiatrists, and extended the rights of patients and their relatives.
It has also intensified interest in the role of mental hospitals and increased the overall commitment to the general policy aims of community care and informality of treatment.
HOSPITAL PROVISION
Looking now in more detail at the actual provision of services, hospitals are still, for both psychiatric and mentally handicapped patients, of the utmost importance.
It is still considered necessary to have centres for the active treatment of the mentally disordered and for the long-term care of chronic cases.
The actual form that hospital provision should take is very much a controversial issue.
The present psychiatric services have to work with many large old hospitals that were built during the nineteenth century as lunatic asylums.
These are generally considered unsuitable for modern treatment of the mentally ill, but so long as demand for beds is high it is difficult to do more than try to upgrade and improve them.
However, during the 1950s the introduction of new drugs, popularly known as tranquillizers, brought about a ‘therapeutic revolution’ within the hospitals.
It became possible to control, if not cure, the symptoms of many psychiatric disorders by the use of drugs, and therefore it was possible to discharge patients after fairly short stays in hospital, continuing their drug therapy, in many cases, as out-patients.
This made feasible an open door policy in the hospitals, in the sense both that patients were out quickly and that within the hospital a more relaxed atmosphere could be achieved as drugs controlled the excessive behaviour of severely disturbed patients.
The coming of new and dramatic types of treatment, however, only heightened rather than diminished the controversy over the old hospitals.
Some people argued that it should be possible to run down the existing hospitals almost entirely, replacing them by short-stay psychiatric units at general hospitals and long-term care within the community.
It was certainly true that many of the older hospitals needed running down.
They were often structurally unsound and costly to maintain, hard to staff because of their physical isolation and far too big.
Above all, the hospitals actually impeded the patients' treatment and rehabilitation because they were the object of contempt and fear in the eyes of many people in society — the high walls and isolation symbolizing that the hospitals held society's rejects.
The patients felt stigmatized and ashamed upon entering them.
Moreover, their vast size, around 2,000 patients in many instances, together with their past custodial traditions, tended to produce a form of organization that was rigid and hierarchical and threatening to the patient.
It was argued that a lengthy period within a mental hospital could itself produce symptoms of social disorientation, apathy, loss of initiative and so on, which amounted to institutional neurosis, an illness that could persist long after the original illness had cleared up.
In short there were considerable grounds for arguing that the old hospitals should go.
There was, however, no agreement over what should replace the mental hospital.
Against those who advocated the end of any separate provision for the mentally ill were those who argued that some patients could best be helped by care within specialized institutions provided these were not huge, obsolete in design and rigidly organized.
Some patients truly did require an asylum from the strains of the world.
For their best treatment a place with grounds for walking in, and space to develop occupational therapy, away from the atmosphere prevailing in a well-run general hospital, was probably necessary.
Indeed, some psychiatrists had developed a whole approach to treatment in which the hospital itself, the total environment, was organized therapeutically.
Various names are used, such as administrative therapy, but the technique is most generally referred to as the therapeutic community approach.
It aims to involve all the members of the hospital — doctors, nurses, ancillary staff and the patients themselves — in the healing process.
These ideas, pioneered in this country by Maxwell Jones, among others, were in part the outcome of studying the mental hospital as a social organization.
It was  seen that the traditional system, in which the patients were at the bottom of a communication and status hierarchy and were denied autonomy or participation in the running of the institution, exacerbated the problems many patients had, or produced the characteristic ‘institutionalization’ which was to be deplored.
Further, it was seen that the same institution that was so damaging could be therapeutic if it was organized deliberately to foster social confidence and responsibility in the patients.
In other words, many mentally ill people were defined as ill because of a breakdown in their social relationships; drugs might relieve some of the symptomatic tension but help was needed to remedy the causes by encouraging patients to participate in a community that improved the capacity of all its members — patients and therapists — to relate in a meaningful way to one another.
It is obvious that those doctors who practised the therapeutic community approach had doubts about the complete integration of psychiatric patients into general hospitals, which must perforce be organized and run in a radically different manner.
The more telling critics of those who advocated the end of the mental hospital argued on a more immediately practical basis.
They pointed out that large numbers of patients, especially among the old, were unlikely ever to be really fit to enter normal community life, and that for many others the community care services were still woefully inadequate.
However much one wanted to run down the existing hospitals, demand for beds would keep them open unless patients were quite unscrupulously discharged while still needing considerable care.
It can be seen that the role of the present-day psychiatric hospital is a very controversial issue, one in which official policy is very much involved.
The 1962 Hospital Plan aimed at a reduction in hospital beds for the mentally ill of roughly one half the total, together with a move towards more provision within general hospitals.
After the publication of the plan, numbers were reduced, though not at the anticipated rate and only in the face of strong criticism from some quarters.
Despite the controversy it is becoming increasingly clear that there is no real ground for argument between hospital and community care and that they should complement  rather than rival one another.
A blurring of the distinction between hospital and community medical care was one of the aims of the 1974 reorganization of the health service.
There is a place for psychiatric units at general hospitals, for separate, perhaps isolated, specialized hospitals where a therapeutic community approach can be implemented, and for effective community mental health services.
A flexible array of services is called for that can meet the very varied needs of different groups of the mentally ill.
Meanwhile, the present position is that there are a few small modern psychiatric hospitals, able to make good use of a wide range of therapeutic techniques, some psychiatric units at general hospitals, many doing excellent work with the short-term cases, rather too many old, large institutions and the beginnings of day hospital care and community psychiatry.
Many of the large old psychiatric hospitals have succeeded in making good use of their facilities, in breaking down the whole organization into smaller, semi-autonomous units, and in ensuring generally that the emphasis is on the treatment and rehabilitation of the patients rather than simply on their care and custody.
But some hospitals and some wards of other hospitals have failed to cope with the demands of too many chronic patients, and lack adequate staff, money and enthusiasm to prevent them becoming mere dumping grounds, especially of the psycho-geriatric cases.
Shortages of professional staff are very severe in some places and over-reliance on foreign staff is not always in the patients' best interests in an area where personal communication is so important.
So, despite much that is progressive and encouraging in psychiatric hospital provision, there is still much room for improvement.
A White Paper,Better Services for the Mentally Ill (Cmnd 6233), was published in 1975.
This outlined the familiar and depressing picture of existing services dominated by large, old, isolated hospitals with shortages of staff and amenities and with inadequate day and out-patient psychiatric facilities, and put forward plans for an overall improvement of services.
The training of more specialists and the provision of more day hospital care was duly set out.
Other plans were for the expansion of community care facilities, including support for families caring for a mentally ill relative, and more hostels  and day centres.
Nothing was new in this White Paper: it was emphasized that it provided an outline of a long-term strategy rather than a programme of rapid action, so it was generally regarded as a due statement of concern and good intentions, and little more.
There has been some of the same controversy over the role of the mental handicap hospitals as over the psychiatric hospitals, but on the whole the issue is clearer: they ought to be replaced by smaller units, ranging from hostels and homes to specialist hospital units able to provide intensive nursing for the severely handicapped minority.
The whole idea of large hospitals for the mentally handicapped is indefensible: there is evidence that many patients do not need, and do not receive, treatment, and a hospital routine is wholly damaging to them.
There has been an undercurrent of anxiety about the hospitals for many years and lip service has been paid to the idea of replacing them with community hostels.
But in recent years criticism has become intense.
In 1967, following allegations of ill-treatment of patients, an official inquiry was instituted into the conduct of certain members of the staff at Ely Hospital, Cardiff.
The report of this inquiry found that some ill-treatment of patients had indeed taken place but also it found much to criticize in general: lax standards of nursing, inadequate medical care, poor conditions and bad management.
Other highly critical reports were subsequently published following inquiries into conditions at what were then known as subnormality hospitals.
In all these inquiries the main conclusions were that abuse of patients where it existed was the consequence of acute shortages of staff, overcrowding and lack of facilities for patients and that general neglect pervaded in subnormality hospitals.
As a result of the first inquiry the Hospital Advisory Service (now the Health Advisory Service) was set up in 1969 to visit, assess and criticize hospitals constructively and to help bring about improvements in their general standards.
A further outcome of the scandals was renewed pressure to replace outmoded hospital care by care in the community.
This culminated in the publication of a White Paper in 1971,Better Services for the Mentally Handicapped (Cmnd 4683), and a renewed commitment to community rather than hospital provision.
For both the mentally ill and the mentally handicapped, therefore, official policy favours the extension of community facilities.
However, hospitals cannot be closed down overnight and there is a need for a more positive approach to hospital care.
The condemnation of the large hospitals for the mentally disordered has been well founded and well meant, but it has, to some extent, made the problem worse.
Staff in such hospitals have become increasingly demoralized by criticism and standards have easily declined as a result.
For many mentally ill and handicapped people the hospital is likely to be their sole environment for many years to come.
Hopes for alternative provision must not be allowed to stifle any change or improvement within existing hospitals.
With dedication and enthusiasm from staff at all levels, humane and therapeutic regimes can be developed and the boundaries between hospital and community care broken down.
But there is a need for constant vigilance to avoid abuse and for much greater resources to be channelled to hospitals.
At present not even the minimum standards for food, clothing and accommodation are being met, and the staffing picture is depressing, particularly for the mental handicap hospitals.
Under the DHSS priorities consultative document, issued in 1976, there was provision for the improvement of hospital standards, and it is important that the long-standing neglect of hospital services should be reversed.
The need for constant vigilance and the vulnerability of mental handicap hospitals were underlined in 1978 by the publication of yet another critical report, that of the Committee of Inquiry into Normansfield Hospital.
Staff conflict and industrial action were new features of this depressing case, but the report again underlined the physical shortcomings of the buildings, poor standards of nursing care, and lack of clothing and other facilities for the patients, so typical of earlier reports.
The work of the Hospital Advisory Service relating to mental handicap hospitals was taken over in 1975 by a new body at the DHSS, the Development Team for the Mentally Handicapped.
A National Development Group was established at the same time to advise on policy.
Following the Normansfield Report, the Secretary of State announced that the development  team would henceforth have an inspectorial element added to its advisory service function, and health authorities were to be asked to review their arrangements for monitoring performance at individual hospitals.
It remains to be seen whether such measures will go far to avoid a repetition of the basic abuses, however.
Shortage of resources remains a crucial determinant of standards of care, particularly at long-stay hospitals, and there is little sign that resources will improve much if at all in the next few years.
The particular need for nursing staff in the mental handicap held was the subject of a DHSS Committee of Inquiry.
The Jay Committee reported in 1979 and recommended that nursing staff working with the mentally handicapped should be replaced by holders of a new social work qualification, that numbers of staff should be doubled and care transferred from hospitals to homes.
These were somewhat unrealistic proposals in the light of the existing staffing and resource difficulties already facing the mental health service.
COMMUNITY CARE
It is currently the accepted policy in the mental health field to provide more services in the community for the mentally ill and mentally handicapped.
Provision of community mental health is divided between the health authorities and the local social services departments, so there is no one, coherent, community mental health programme to describe.
Community care is partly a reaction against a policy that overemphasized hospitalization and saw the institution as the answer to most social problems.
It is also a practical answer to the difficulties of continuing to maintain and staff isolated institutions in an age when few people are prepared to make a career in residential work.
More positively, it is the recognition that all people should have the right to live within the community — to contribute to it and benefit from it, and simply to be a part of it, except in very rare circumstances.
The hospitals themselves make a very important contribution to the care of patients in the community.
Most have  out-patient clinics, which enable many patients to be treated while remaining in their own homes.
In some areas day hospitals are run for patients who need considerable care but who can still return home at night.
In others, there are facilities for helping patients to bridge the gap between total hospital care and complete independence in the community.
Hostels or discharge units within the hospital grounds enable some patients to go out to work daily and have a relatively autonomous and responsible life, while retaining some of the security of the hospital environment.
Rehabilitation is fostered by developing workshops at hospitals that aim to give patients confidence in their working ability and experience in social relationships and responsibility.
Psychiatric social workers work with doctors, obtaining reports on the patients' home situation and helping patients retain contact with the outside world.
They can provide a vital link between hospital and community, although many hospital-based social workers have traditionally concentrated on team work within the hospital setting.
Community psychiatric nurses help many patients return home and cope without the need for hospitalization, and their role has developed markedly in recent years as the emphasis has shifted towards the community.
The bulk of community care work is now the responsibility of the local authority social services departments.
They took over the statutory duties and provisions of the old mental health departments.
Social services provision for the mentally disordered is through the full range of social work, day care and residential services.
Social work help is vital in all community care services and can be part of the total treatment programme for the mentally disordered.
Social workers are needed to help the families of mentally handicapped persons as well as the mentally ill or handicapped themselves.
A family with a severely handicapped child will have many problems.
The parents may be tied to the house, they will usually be financially disadvantaged, and the mother is likely to be overworked, trying to cope with the responsibilities of a normal housewife and mother and the special needs of a helpless child.
Moreover, the family may feel very guilty at having produced a handicapped child, over-anxious about the  child's future, worried about their feelings towards the child or the effect on other children in the family.
In both these areas a social worker can help.
They can ensure that the family receives all the practical help available from statutory and voluntary bodies — perhaps the use of a day nursery, better housing and so on— and they can help to reduce the parents' guilt and anxiety and encourage them to be accepting and relaxed and neither reject nor over-protect their handicapped child.
Of particular importance is the social worker's contribution in helping parents make full use of the facilities offered by the mental health services.
Parents may feel suspicious of these, or resentful, and will need help in using them to best advantage.
Similarly, the families of the mentally ill need help in sudden emergencies when they cannot cope with a very disturbed relative, general help in understanding and accepting the nature of the disorder and support if they have to make difficult decisions such as agreeing to the compulsory admission of a severely disturbed relative to hospital.
The strain of caring for a disturbed relative can be considerable and the need for an understanding and reliable friend to talk to and share the anxieties with is often very great.
Social workers can also help the mentally disordered themselves.
For example, they can help handicapped youngsters in the difficult school-leaving period, encourage them to find work, keep an eye on their activities if they are trying to take on too much or are getting into bad company, help them to cope with family relationships and to become as independent and content as possible.
They can help the mentally ill, encouraging them to seek treatment when necessary, supporting them in the trying period after hospitalization, and encouraging their efforts to find work, lodgings and companionship despite their disabilities.
Day care facilities for the mentally handicapped include what used to be known as adult training centres.
These vary considerably in the facilities provided for the handicapped adults.
Some are purpose-built and others are in makeshift premises.
Some are glorified minding places while others attempt to develop social skills, encouraging handicapped people to learn about such things as public transport and the handling of money.
Some concentrate on occupation and are  run as industrial units.
In some cases the day centres genuinely act as training centres, preparing those who attend for eventual independence, while in others the aim is simply to offer a daily change of environment and relief to their families for those too handicapped ever to lead independent lives.
Day centres for the mentally ill are a more recent innovation.
They exhibit similar variations in aims and activities.
Despite variations, however, the day care facilities are enormously important and can make a tremendous difference to the lives of the mentally disordered.
Provision is still far from adequate in this field.
Domiciliary services can help the handicapped and their families, especially when the mental disability is accompanied by physical handicap.
In the area of social help and rehabilitation a variety of clubs can also help both the mentally handicapped and the mentally ill to make social contacts and gain the confidence to reintegrate themselves into society.
Residential provision is extremely important and at present totally inadequate in terms of the extent of the need.
Local authorities have been providing hostels since 1959 but only in very small numbers.
Although they were envisaged as an alternative to full institutional care, they tended to be used by those within the community who had hitherto remained dependent on family or friends.
For the mentally handicapped especially, many hostels were welcomed by relatives who, often at great cost to their freedom and independence, had struggled to keep a close relative out of a stigmatized hospital, but were prepared to see them safely cared for in a local purpose-built home.
So new provision uncovered new need and the numbers actually in hospital did not diminish, particularly among the mentally handicapped.
The 1971 White Paper promised expansion here, but the building programme needed is huge and economy cuts repeatedly reduce it.
Hostels for the mentally ill are needed no less desperately than those for the handicapped.
They have an important part to play in providing care to those discharged after long stays in hospital and also in providing temporary homes and rehabilitation to those trying to re-establish themselves in the community.
There has been much confusion over their exact role for many years, but clearly there is room for a  variety of provision: some rehabilitative, some permanent, some intense therapeutic communities, some experimental homes for disturbed adolescents.
It is good that the demanding job of running hostels for the mentally ill and the mentally handicapped, together with other provision of residential care, should now be recognized as an important aspect of social work, for much needs to be done in this field and many able people need to be recruited for the work.
Day care, residential care and social work support essentially provide care in the community, rather than in large institutions.
But they do not add up to or replace care by the community.
The phrase ‘community care’ has been used since the 1960s, but it has never been too narrowly defined and a variety of activities can be numbered as belonging to a community approach to the care of the mentally disordered.
Ultimately, however, the family (often though not invariably the women of the family) and sometimes the neighbours, friends and relatives of the mentally ill or handicapped person will be there to care and cope, either alone, or with some help from the health service and local authority.
The local ‘community’ as such does not, on the whole, provide a caring response to the mentally disordered — in fact it can often provide a decidedly hostile response to the opening of new hostels or day centres, for example.
The contribution of the informal care sector, particularly the family, is now being acknowledged and some attempts are being made to interweave the informal care and the formal provision more closely together.
The need for constructive partnerships between health authorities and the social services was increasingly recognized in a variety of reports throughout the 1970s and 1980s.
Joint finance has been provided since 1976 to enable local authorities and health authorities, as well as voluntary organizations, to work together to provide facilities for care in the community for different groups, including both the mentally ill and the mentally handicapped.
Whilst the overall sums have been low, and there has also been criticism that the time period for these grants has been too short for the more innovative projects, some success in the movement of mentally handicapped and ill people into the community has been achieved.
The voluntary  sector has become increasingly involved in projects designed to help mentally ill and handicapped people live independent lives, and the latest report on community care, the  Griffiths Report in 1988, took the view that local authorities should stimulate a mixed economy of care in the community.
Thus a range of groups, including both the voluntary sector and the private sector, should be encouraged to provide wide-ranging forms of care for different groups, including the mentally ill and mentally handicapped, with the local authority carrying overall responsibility for provision.
One of the signs of the extent to which community care for both of these groups has become reality is the decline in beds in long-stay hospitals over the past decade.
However, in many instances hospital beds are being lost whilst the corresponding level of support outside the hospital is not being provided.
Many mentally ill and handicapped adults are forced to live in hostels for the homeless, and many more are simply sleeping rough.
Whilst the situation has not reached the endemic proportions of mentally ill people who are homeless in America, the situation of these groups in Britain is serious enough to warrant consideration and a commitment to funding of decent support in the community.
Sadly, at a time of financial constraint in both health authority and local authority spending, such a commitment seems unlikely to be forthcoming.
It is to be hoped that the long-awaited implementation of the Griffiths Report, by the 1990s, will improve provision.
Meanwhile, however, the lack of adequate community care facilities has led to a campaign to save the old mental hospitals.
The National Schizophrenia Fellowship has become so concerned that the severely mentally ill are being neglected that they are arguing against hospital closures.
OTHER SERVICES FOR THE MENTALLY ILL AND HANDICAPPED
Education also has an important role in the mental health field.
It provides special education, as noted in Chapter 4, for educationally subnormal children and for those previously described as ineducable.
In some instances it provides child  guidance clinics, which offer psychiatric and social work help to children who have behaviour problems or manifest symptoms of mental disorder, and to their parents.
It offers special education facilities for children who are maladjusted, usually those referred by the child guidance clinics.
The Department of Employment is responsible for the provision of services under the Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts.
These include keeping registers of the employable disabled, the provision of disablement resettlement officers and the running of Employment Rehabilitation Centres and government training or skill centres.
Most of these services were designed primarily to help the physically disabled, especially those who had been in work but who were unable to continue as a result of a crippling accident or disease.
Since the 1959 Mental Health Act the services have increasingly extended their help to the mentally disabled, where this seems suitable.
Both handicapped and mentally ill persons can be helped in finding and keeping suitable employment in open industry, and given courses of rehabilitation.
Finally, the DSS takes responsibility for meeting the financial needs of the mentally disordered, mainly through the National Insurance and income support schemes.
However, there is still not enough help available at the moment to the families of the mentally disordered despite the costs to them of caring for severely handicapped or disturbed relatives.
THE VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION
Mention must be made, albeit briefly, of the voluntary effort in the field of mental welfare.
The National Association for Mental Health (MIND), founded in 1946 as a result of the amalgamation of several older bodies concerned with the welfare of the mentally ill, is an important coordinating body for research and propaganda.
It aims to disseminate information on the principles of mental health, promote research and aid experimental projects in the field.
It also promotes local associations, and runs training courses and various homes, schools and publications.
MIND has been of enormous importance in widening understanding of the social aspects of the problem  of mental disorder and stimulating progressive work in this held.
The National Society for Mentally Handicapped Children (MENCAP), likewise aims to publicize the needs of the handicapped and encourage better provision for them.
Where statutory provision is inadequate, the society aims to supply aid directly through its local branches.
The Campaign for Mentally Handicapped is another important body that works for better provision and understanding.
Many other bodies are concerned with the mentally ill and handicapped.
The Richmond Fellowship, for example, provides hostels, run as small communities, which offer a secure environment and an opportunity to regain confidence in social relationships and an enthusiasm for living to a limited number of mentally disturbed adults and young people.
The Rudolf Steiner schools are renowned for their fine educational work with the mentally handicapped.
Various colonies exist under voluntary foundation where the mentally handicapped can live useful and happy lives, to some extent sheltered from the outside world but permitted a considerable degree of independence and self-determination.
The National Schizophrenia Fellowship is active in defence of the interests of the group of patients suffering from the baffling disorder of schizophrenia.
Voluntary effort is especially prominent in work with special problem groups — alcoholics and drug addicts, for example— where it both innovates and complements statutory provision.
Disillusionment with traditional psychiatry has led to much interesting experimentation with small communities using new forms of therapy and espousing new philosophies and explanations of mental illness.
Local projects to work with women or members of ethnic minority groups, for example, have adopted new approaches to depression or other illnesses, many involving a self-help element.
Many new and fascinating approaches can be worked out in the voluntary setting and provide a base for constructive criticism of statutory provision and a fund of enthusiasm for change.
In this as in so many fields of social service the voluntary contribution can be great both in a pioneering sense and in the steady provision of research, public education and good facilities.
The problem of mental disorder is a considerable one, both numerically and in the range of needs that it gives rise to.
Partly because the public has been forced into awareness of the grave social problem the mentally disordered can present, the services are relatively well developed.
But much still needs to be done to recruit staff at every level (consultant psychiatrists, mental nurses, social workers, teachers, etc.), to up-grade the hospital and residential facilities, particularly for the chronic cases, and to make available a more flexible range of community services to those individuals or families who are coping with mental illness or handicap without resort to hospital care.
Last, but by no means least, much still needs to be done to improve public attitudes and understanding, both to aid prevention of mental disorder, and to help the mentally handicapped overcome their disabilities and find a tolerable place in society.
Only then could we hope to have both a community mental health programme and meaningful community care.
SOME GENERAL ISSUES
FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES.
Clearly the social services that exist to cope with social problems of various kinds are large organizations.
It follows that they absorb a large part of the national resources in terms of money and man- and womanpower, and that the financing, staffing and administration of them is very complex.
This chapter will draw attention to some of the more obvious financial and administrative implications of the social services.
FINANCIAL AND SOCIAL POLICY
Public expenditure on the social services is considerable: the money spent in recent years has been 40 per cent of Britain's gross domestic product (GDP).
Government expenditure on actual goods and services, excluding cash transfers, is around one-quarter of the GDP.
Social services costs account for over 70 per cent of the amount spent in the public sector.
In 1987/8 total public expenditure for the United Kingdom was over £140,000 million and expenditure on social services, including housing and environmental services, amounted to around £98,000 million.
Collectively the social services are by far the largest item on the analysis of public spending and single services such as social security dominate the list.
Table 12.1 shows a more detailed breakdown of expenditure.
Public expenditure generally, and expenditure on social services in particular, have been growing rapidly in this century.
At the turn of the century an amount equal to only approximately 2.5 per cent of the GDP was spent on social services; by the outbreak of the Second World War the percentage had risen to 11–12 per cent, and since the war it has risen to around 40 per cent .
This trend is sometimes viewed with alarm, but then at the turn of the century social services were virtually non-existent and the social problems of poverty, sickness, squalor, ignorance, child neglect and so on were barely recognized, let alone tackled in any effective manner.
Once the problems are recognized and society accepts some degree of commitment in the battle against social evils then, naturally, public expenditure is bound to rise.
There is nothing inherently wrong in this situation; if we want to build a better society we have to be prepared, collectively, to pay for it.
Nevertheless, a high level of public spending does raise problems, especially when the general economic situation is bad.
The money has to be raised by the government and this means high taxation levels, which are always unpopular.
Moreover, it means a greater proportion of national income  is in the hands of public officials, and care has to be taken to ensure that it is used well.
A demand for a reduction in public expenditure can mean that the weaker services suffer because they lack powerful support groups.
It is argued that the country ‘cannot afford’ such a high level of social service expenditure.
But social services are not a luxury: any complex industrial society must expect to spend a lot on social services.
Although their output cannot be easily measured like the productivity of a factory, nevertheless they are vital to the nation's economy as well as to its stability and happiness.
Education, which is a major item of social service expenditure, is clearly a necessary investment if the nation is to have the trained people who are as necessary to production as raw materials.
Where the services cannot be seen as making an economic contribution, they are clearly improving the quality of life for members of the community, which is presumably the ultimate goal of raising productivity and standards of living anyway.
Where does the money for the social services come from?
Excluding the voluntary contribution element, the public money is raised by taxation and by contributions for specific services, by local rates and by charges for some services.
The bulk of the money is raised by taxation — by taxes on income or taxes on expenditure — and the remainder by rent and interests, etc., or public borrowing.
In 1987, total central government income amounted to £155,308 million, and local authorities, in addition to receiving £23,297 million in grants from central government, raised a further £24,727 million in rates, rent and borrowing.
So total general government income amounted to about £180,000 million.
Of total central government income, only 26 per cent was raised by taxes on personal income.
That proportion has fallen since the mid-1960s.
Taxes on income by corporations, including profits tax, amount to nearly 10 per cent of the total.
Taxes on expenditure, including VAT, amount to 33 per cent of the total, and National Insurance contributions (employers' and employees') amount to 18 per cent of the total.
The borrowing requirement increased rapidly in the period from the 1960s to the early 1980s, but in 1987, as a  result of tight expenditure control, it was down to 2.6 per cent of the total.
Local authority money is made up of around 48 per cent in grants from the government, 35 per cent from rates and 6 per cent from rents, the remainder being from interest, dividends and borrowing.
As we have seen, over two-thirds of public spending goes on the provision of the social services discussed in this book; the rest goes on defence, roads, employment, law and order, and so on.
So the level and type of taxation and the direction of social policy are clearly interconnected.
If the policy is to develop statutory services that are organized and paid for collectively, then public expenditure is likely to rise.
If services are reduced in scope and operate on a more selective basis — that is, serve only certain categories and income groups within the population — then public expenditure could be reduced.
Whether it rises or falls will naturally affect taxation.
Some social economists argue that, while social services such as health and education are clearly necessary, and a sound investment, they need not be financed entirely or even largely by public expenditure.
If more were financed privately then taxation could be reduced and incentives increased accordingly.
Some of the arguments and assumptions used to support this line of thinking are misleading.
It is, for example, often assumed that one sector of the community finances social services, while other sectors benefit from it; that, in effect, social policies contribute to a massive redistribution from rich to poor.
Apart from the arguments for or against such a redistribution, it is clear from the breakdown of taxation given above that this is greatly over-simplified.
Taxes are not raised only or largely from any particular section of the community: everyone is subject to the expenditure taxes (on consumer goods, entertainment and so on), and all the working population pay National Insurance contributions.
Indeed, studies of who pays what and who benefits from the overall redistribution of income involved in the social services have revealed remarkably little difference between the percentages of income left to family units of different income levels after they have paid taxes and received benefits in cash and kind.
Where there is some redistribution of income, as  a result of social policy, it is between families with children and the single and childless.
Families of virtually all income levels get more out of the social services than they pay towards them and towards other public expenditure, although in recent years this advantage has been eroded.
A prior, and misleading, assumption that the levels of direct taxation in Britain were very high has been eroded as levels of direct taxation have progressively been reduced in the 1980s, whilst the rates of indirect taxation — which are paid on goods and services and are therefore not levied according to income but according to expenditure — have increased.
At the same time, the tax threshold — that is, the level at which people begin to pay tax on their income — has decreased, bringing a greater proportion of those on low incomes, into the tax bracket.
Nevertheless, it should be clear from these few facts that the financing of the social services is likely to cause political controversy.
The social services are a large item of expenditure, and the financing of them affects everybody.
They are, accordingly, the object of much heated discussion by economists and politicians as well as by social scientists.
Decisions about them — their expansion, scope, and so on have such important economic implications that they cannot be, and are not, taken simply in the light of our knowledge of social needs.
Social services set out to meet needs, and to solve problems, but they can also be used to bring about changes in the social and economic structure of society.
For example, the social security system exists primarily to prevent poverty.
But it could be used as an instrument to achieve greater equality in the distribution of the nation's resources.
If it becomes a major instrument for redistribution of income then it is involved in the political arguments over equality and social justice as well as in meeting basic need.
So the economic implications of social services can go far beyond the immediate practical ones of financing the current provision.
Social policy is ultimately economic policy and cannot be viewed satisfactorily in isolation.
The economic implications of social policy have now become a central issue in British polities.
There has always been some concern over levels of public spending and taxation, and this has played a part in the arguments about the  scope and direction of social policy that are described in Chapter 13.
However, this concern became a paramount consideration during the 1970s.
The main reason for this was the overall economic situation.
The rate of economic growth in Britain slowed down and for a period was in absolute decline.
Thereafter a continued slow rate of growth was accompanied by high rates of inflation and growing industrial recession and unemployment.
Public expenditure has, as indicated, grown rapidly over the years, largely alongside steady growth in the economy generally.
When the rate of economic growth slowed, that of public expenditure did not.
Accordingly, efforts have been made by successive governments to halt the growth in public spending.
Since costs tend to rise inexorably, attempts to stabilize public spending have essentially meant cuts in actual services.
The discussion of social policy has been increasingly dominated, therefore, by talk of cuts.
The government's annual White Papers on public expenditure, which announce the detailed plans for spending and for expanding or cutting the various services, have become essential reading for students of social policy.
The first dramatic cuts in the rise in public expenditure were announced in 1976.
As the social services account for a substantial part of public spending, cuts affected a wide range of services.
Social security cannot easily be cut, as expenditure there is determined in part by demographic trends, such as rising numbers of old people, and economic trends, such as rising unemployment.
So the main cuts were expected to fall on services such as housing, education, health and personal social services.
In the education field, cuts were justified on the grounds that falling numbers of school-age children could lead to reductions in spending without reductions in standards.
But most cuts have been justified on the slender base that services could be operated more efficiently and economically, and any fall in standards could be averted by careful management and avoidance of waste.
In the personal social services field there has been reference to the need to encourage self-help and voluntary action to keep down the cost of providing professional social care.
Cuts are announced, and enforced, by the central government, but it is most often the local authorities that  have to implement them.
And local authorities have felt understandably confused by demands to improve services and to reduce costs.
As we have seen from the chapters on health, education and other services, there are still many unsolved social problems and unmet needs for residential care, for housing, for better education facilities for children with special needs, for trained staff, etc.
Not surprisingly, bitter campaigns have been mounted against the cuts and closures they have resulted in, by those who work in the services and those whose needs they seek to serve.
In addition to campaigns against cuts, however, there have been vociferous demands for even greater cuts in public expenditure generally and in social services in particular.
The whole question of public spending has become a lively political issue at central and local levels.
The full debate over the relationship of the economy to public spending is complex, and the issues are not easily understood or proven either way.
The debate is characterized by a fair amount of confusion and exaggeration, and there is some attempt to make the welfare state the scapegoat for all the political and economic ills of the nation.
There is only room here to outline the bare facts about cuts and the main lines of argument that surround them.
The background to cuts was set out in the 1976 White paper on public Expenditure (Cmnd 6393): ‘Popular expectations for improved public services and welfare programmes have not been matched by growth in output or by willingness to forgo improvements in private living standards in favour of these programmes.’
Priority, it was argued, should be given to improving industrial investment and increasing productivity and export levels to ensure economic recovery.
Basically that argument was simply that the country could not afford to go on expanding non-productive sectors such as social services.
Since then the argument has hardened into one that actually blames the social services for the economic failure itself.
The argument now is that, in order to finance welfare provision, governments have imposed unjustifiably high levels of taxation, which have hindered investment and reduced productivity, encouraged the brain drain and increased inflation.
The very security of the welfare state, it is claimed, has  destroyed initiative and crippled the entrepreneurial activity on which Britain's former prosperity was based.
By the Public Expenditure White Paper for 1980/1 (Cmnd 7746) the message was plain: ‘Public expenditure is at the heart of Britain's present economic difficulties.’
The undisputed deterioration of the performance of the British economy was largely attributed to increases in taxation, high government borrowing and inflation.
The central objectives of economic policy were, therefore, to reduce inflation by control of the money supply, to restore incentives by reductions in direct taxation, and to stabilize public spending.
These views have not gone unchallenged.
It has been pointed out that high levels of welfare accompany prosperity as cause as well as effect.
In comparative terms, Britain does not have particularly high levels of social spending.
If demographic facts on numbers of old people, school-age children, etc., are taken into account, the resources devoted to services such as health or education do not seem to have increased immoderately.
The validity of some of the figures used can be challenged and different methods of accounting can demonstrate different relationships between growth and spending.
There is no evidence that reductions in public spending, as opposed to private consumption, would lead to increases in investment.
If less money was taken by the public sector it is doubtful whether people would invest in British industry or continue to spend more on foreign consumer goods.
Moreover, the undoubted problems of the British economy need to be explained by other factors ranging from obsolete management and union practices within British industry to the complex influences of patterns of world trade and rising oil prices.
Finally, it is pointed out that if times are indeed bad then, in the name of justice and humanity, more rather than less should be spent on those services in cash and kind that cater for the welfare of those in need.
This would make economic sense in times of unemployment and recession, and would reduce the hardship of those most vulnerable to the impact of inflation.
In practice it has not proved easy to achieve the drastic cuts in spending that are wanted.
Reductions in spending on labour-intensive services increase unemployment and hence  social security costs.
Nevertheless the drive to achieve cuts even at the expense of standards has intensified.
By the 1990s the threat to social services is greater than ever.
To achieve the hoped-for reductions in public spending, the government appears prepared to see dramatic reductions in standards and in scope of provision.
Sadly it is the most vulnerable people who are hurt most by indiscriminate cuts in services, and often the most imaginative and sensitive developments that are axed.
For example, in education it is again pre-school nursery education that has been reduced; community work projects are being axed by hard-pressed social services departments, and pioneering psychiatric rehabilitation services are being closed down.
The government, through a rigorous cash limits approach, is forcing local authorities to carry out most of the unpopular cuts in actual services.
Housing programmes are reduced to dismal levels.
In 1987, the number of new houses added to the total stock was only 212,000, and of this number only 34,000 were in the public sector.
Recent housing legislation has reduced the number of council houses for rent through the sale of local authority housing to both tenants and new landlords, whilst local authorities do not have the finance to provide more housing through new building works.
The accommodation local authorities have left on their lists is poorer-quality stock, and the finance to maintain repairs is limited.
The numbers of those on the waiting lists for housing has grown rapidly, as have the numbers of homeless in Britain.
A report by the Schools' HM Inspectorate early in 1981 indicated that the effect of cuts in education budgets was severe despite falling pupil rolls.
Special education was badly affected, many schools were unable to keep a wide curriculum open and others reported shortages of basic equipment, including textbooks.
Social services departments have been very badly hit as the growing problems of poverty and unemployment add to the pressure of their work, and yet they have had to abandon services and cut back on staffing.
Inevitably it is the preventive services that are most vulnerable to cuts — the playgroups and child-minder schemes, for example.
The financing of social services has now become a major issue of electoral concern.
Inevitably this has meant some  over-simplifying, stereotyping and exaggeration in the claims and counter-claims of the different schools of thought.
It is likely that the arguments about public spending, taxation and economic prosperity will continue throughout the 1990s, and it is important that the facts about the real costs and benefits of welfare are as widely known as possible.
Moreover, the bare facts about costs, cuts and cash limits need to be seen in the context of the larger ideological debate on the role of welfare which will be discussed in the final chapter on problems of policy in the social services.
ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES AND THE MAKING OF SOCIAL POLICY
Like finance, the administration of the social services is a vast topic, which can only be touched on here.
Something of the administrative framework of the social services will have been gleaned from the preceding chapters on particular social problems and the services created in response to them.
Both central and local government are involved in the provision of services.
Central government administers some services directly, such as social security, while others are a local responsibility, exercised under varying degrees of central government control.
We have looked at social problems and services mainly as they exist at the present.
Most studies of social services, however, tend to look at them from the historical or development view.
This is certainly extremely illuminating.
Apart from being a fascinating story, a study of the development of social policy explains much of the present confusion of services, particularly of their administration.
Few things are consistent in the social services: each service tends to be financed differently; the statutory basis, the context of the central/local government relationship and distribution of control, and the underlying social principles all tend to vary from service to service.
The history of social action accounts for this to a considerable extent and all students of social administration must turn to some reading of the development of social policy.
The historical view is noted here because it is particularly relevant to the current administration.
Central administration has been continually adapting itself to the new demands made upon it by the creation of services.
Local administration, as we know it today, was itself the product of social action to a considerable extent.
Local government had to be devised in order to operate local health, welfare and housing policies, and local government today is still very strongly involved in the social service area.
Central government is primarily concerned in the working out of policies, and only partially in the direct administration of services.
The formal expression of a social policy is the legislation that creates services to tackle social problems.
So the National Health Service Act, the Children Act, the National Assistance Act, etc., are statements of policy.
They are passed by Parliament and are subject to debate and discussion, and reflect party political views on the nature of social problems.
They are drafted by permanent government officials who are concerned to seek out expert opinion on the issues in question.
Moreover, in many instances major Acts follow the recommendations of the reports of Royal Commissions or interdepartmental working parties and so forth, which try to discover the facts about a particular problem and seek advice and opinion from all the people concerned.
For example, the 1959 Mental Health Act consolidated prior policy of informality of treatment and community care for the mentally disordered, following the report of the Royal Commission on Mental Illness and Mental Deficiency in 1957.
The Commission was made up of a wide range of eminent people involved in the existing mental health services, and it took evidence from a variety of those involved in the care of this group.
However, in the past few years such a model of enacting legislation after a wide-ranging commission that hears evidence from professionals in the field has not been followed.
Thus the 1986 Social Security Act followed the so-called Fowler Reviews, which had a restricted membership, took only limited evidence (which was not reproduced in the final report) and resulted in a Green Paper that largely  became the 1986 Act.
In 1989 the White Paper on health,Working for Patients , was produced by a review team, the exact membership of which was never made public.
No evidence was called for from the professionals working in the health services, yet this review and White Paper have introduced some of the most radical suggestions for running the health services since the original 1946 Act.
This move towards legislation in the field of social policy that does not proceed from evidence or research by those professionals engaged in the field, but proceeds from the ideology of the political party in power, has doubtless significantly changed not only the structure of the social services but also the role of the legislative process.
The passing of an Act, though, is not the end of policy making.
The actual administration of services authorized by Acts is a process that itself contributes to the making of social policy.
On the whole, Acts, despite their legal precision, are fairly loose guides when it comes actually to setting up the services they authorize, and the decisions made by the administrators of services at central or local level are of great importance in shaping the provision.
It is not always clear who actually makes important decisions.
At both central and local level of government there are elected representatives and professional administrators and other staff.
The balance of power between the Houses of Parliament and the civil service and between the local council and the town hall officials is never clearly defined, and can vary enormously in different areas and functions.
Similarly, it is not easy to generalize about the balance between central and local government when services are administered locally, and that between administrators and professionals within a particular service is equally obscure and variable.
The context of central/local government relationships is of particular interest to the student of social administration, as many of the social services are a local responsibility.
The statutes of Parliament legally determine the shape of local government and the scope of its action.
They impose certain duties — to provide education or residential accommodation, for example— and give local authorities certain powers — to provide other services, such as day nurseries or family  planning.
In many areas of social policy, local authorities have been given permission to provide a service, then, when the need for the service has been clearly demonstrated and resources for it are more widely available, the provision has become mandatory.
For example, local authorities had power to provide a service promoting the welfare of the general classes of the physically handicapped from 1951, and in 1960 the provision of this service became a duty.
Through the statutes, central government can ensure some uniformity and minimum provision in certain areas of social need and encourage flexibility of provision, within certain limits, in others.
In some areas Acts lay down clear central powers of control — the 1944 Education Act, for example— but in others the main statutes merely indicate by a variable form of words that the Ministry or Secretary of State of the central department is in the position of ultimate authority and will provide a general overall guidance.
Some Acts require the local authorities to submit schemes and plans for approval by the central department in order to carry out their powers and duties.
Subsequently the central department can influence events by issuing circulars, guiding, instructing or exhorting the local authorities, and it can carry out inspections, exercise confirmatory and adjudicatory powers and so forth.
But the major instrument of central control is probably finance.
The central government raises much of the money used by local authorities for education, welfare, housing, etc.
Clearly the departments intend to keep a check on how it is spent, and they can even check the local authorities' own financial manoeuvres by the powerful instrument of loan sanction.
Central government, then, exercises considerable power, not only over the services it administers directly, such as social security, but also over those that are the local authorities' own concern, such as education or personal social services.
There has been much anxiety about the role of local government in the last twenty years.
Some critics have considered it to be too weak and idiosyncratic to carry responsibility for major public and social services.
Local responsibility has meant variations in standards, which some regard as scandalous, especially since the bulk of local authority finance comes from central revenue.
Other critics have felt that  local government was a crucial democratic check on central bureaucratic control that needed to be strengthened and given more autonomy and independence and greater say in determining local affairs.
Ironically, public interest in local government in terms of voting levels at local elections and knowledge of local provisions does not indicate a very healthy democratic base.
Nevertheless, local government does have a powerful democratic role as well as an important executive one, and much thought and effort need to be given to the improvement and up-dating of the system to improve its performance.
In the past, major criticisms of local government were directed towards: its financial weakness; the relatively poor calibre of staff for the demanding professional work of modem services; public apathy and lack of interest; the inexcusable variations in local standards of basic provision; and the anomalous division of the country into authorities based on old historical boundaries rather than demographic and economic realities which resulted in a population range of from fewer than 50,000 to over 1 million.
Response to this criticism was a spate of reports and committees culminating in radical reform and reorganization of the system.
The Maud Report on the Management of Local Government published in 1967, and the Mallaby Report on The Staffing of Local Government published in the same year, were both concerned with internal organization.
The Maud Report considered there was urgent need for reform and change within local government.
It recommended, in brief, that council members confine themselves to debating broad issues of social policy, leaving the professionals responsible for the detailed execution; that there should be fewer committees and a management board of about seven council members supported by a corresponding group of chief officers to make most policy decisions on a corporate basis.
Officials should be clearly headed by a chief executive, the chief officer to the management board and head of the small team of officers who should work closely together.
Regarding central/local relations the report urged that local authorities should have greater powers to determine their own structure, organization and policy and should be put in a stronger financial position.
Finally, the Maud Report  made some interesting suggestions for improving the image of local government and its relations with the public.
The Mallaby Report commented in detail on staffing problems and examined ways of improving the quality of staff in local government.
The more fundamental issue of the size and nature of local government was investigated by a Royal Commission which issued its report in 1969.
The Redcliffe-Maud Report proposed radical changes to create a reduced number of unitary authorities, responsible for the provision of all services, to replace the existing pattern of 172 first-tier counties and county boroughs and over 1,200 second-tier district authorities.
These recommendations were not accepted in total, and alternative proposals were put forward in a series of White papers that involved a more complex change.
These proposals became law in 1972 and new councils were elected in 1973, becoming fully operative in England and Wales from April 1974.
Similar proposals were made for Scotland, and implemented at a later stage.
The position in England and Wales is now that in all areas there are two levels of administration, the county and district authority.
There are forty-seven county councils in England and Wales, and these are responsible for the provision of education, personal social services, roads and planning.
The smaller district authorities, of which there are over 400, have responsibility for housing and environmental services, and some developmental control.
In London there are thirty-two London Boroughs, with responsibility for all the major services.
Between 1974 and 1986 there were also metropolitan counties, but these were abolished and their powers passed to metropolitan district authorities.
In London there was the Greater London Council, but this too was abolished in 1986.
The powers of the GLC were passed to the London Boroughs, except in the cases of services that crossed boundaries, such as the fire services, which are managed under joint boards.
Some critics of the inequitable distribution of services and resources and of the poor quality of much local provision have argued that the fault lies not only with local government but with antiquated central government organization.
Some argue for much greater administrative decentralization, to remove  the ‘Whitehall bottleneck’, and urge that central government gives more thought to the formulation of clearly defined policies so that local authorities can be safely left to get on with the job within a clear policy framework.
At present, as indicated, central policy is often very vague and control over detail too meticulous.
So local authorities make their own policies, which sometimes leads to conflict with central government and always to diversity of provision.
Up to a point diversity is good; local government would be useless if it did not permit some variety and flexibility in provision.
Needs vary locally and what suits one area might not be right for another.
The advantages of diversity, however, cannot ever outweigh the need for a uniform minimum standard, which is not the same as rigid uniformity.
At present, diversity all too often means that some areas are simply deficient in provision, particularly for minority groups such as the disabled.
So it is not easy to strike the right balance between over-control by central government and the consequent stifling of local initiative, and too little check on local action resulting in serious neglect of some social needs.
We noted that the major instrument of central control over local activity was financial: local authorities depend on central government for nearly half their income, with most of the rest coming from rates.
The question of local government finance has been the subject of debate for some years.
In 1976 the Layfield Report considered alternative ways of financing local authorities, and concluded that local income tax would be preferable to rates raised on property as a source of income.
At the time, no action was taken, but the 1990s will see a major change in the way in which local finance is collected.
The community charge was introduced by the Local Government Finance Bill of 1988.
It is a universal charge, levied at a flat rate for all individuals over the age of 18 living in the local authority area.
Claimants in receipt of income support, students and others on a low income may claim a rebate (up to 80 per cent of the community charge), but must pay at least 20 per cent themselves.
The community charge was introduced first in Scotland, and was brought in in England and Wales in  1990.
It has been widely criticized as inequitable, because all those who are not exempt pay the same rate, regardless of income.
In addition, it is feared that methods of collecting the community charge by establishing a register of all residents over the age of 18 may result in those who cannot afford the tax not completing their electoral registration forms, as this may alert the authorities to their liability for the community charge (or Poll Tax as it has become known).
Central government money comes in the form of the rate support grant.
This used to work on a complex formula based on the relative wealth of the areas, the structure of their populations, and various indicators of social needs.
In practice, the formula worked roughly along the lines that the more the local authority spent on services, the more it would get.
Such a formula was incompatible in the 1980s with a government determined to limit public expenditure, and a new approach was announced in 1981.
Under new arrangements, local authorities are penalized by loss of grant if they spend too much — that is, more than the government thinks they ought to spend.
The new formula is very complicated, but is based on a notional income figure for each authority — the grant-related poundage (GRP)— which it is assumed will be raised by rates or community charge.
The block grant from central government is calculated as the difference between the GRP and what the authority plans to spend, so long as this expenditure is below a government assessment of what the local authority should spend.
This, the grant-related expenditure (GRE), is calculated on similar levels of service to be provided by all local authorities.
If the authority plans to spend more than this, the block grant is reduced and the extra costs of the expenditure have to be met from other service cuts or higher rates.
With such determined central government measures to control local authority spending, the debate on the proper balance of local autonomy and central direction becomes, sadly, rather academic.
In addition, changes in the delivery and structure of services previously provided by local authorities have done much to further reduce local authority budgets and some of their autonomy over how these services are delivered.
In particular, the moves in education to allow schools to become self-governing has shifted finance normally allocated and controlled by local authorities back to central government, whilst the selling of council houses has reduced both the size of the public housing sector controlled by local authorities and the level of financial control that accompanied this.
In practice, these attempts to control local government expenditure have become a major political issue in the past decade, with some authorities resisting central government controls.
As a result, more extreme measures — rate limitation, or rate capping, as it has become known — have been introduced to curb those authorities that have been determined to provide a high level of public services despite the cost.
Introduced in the Rates Bill 1983, this measure allows the Secretary of State to control permitted expenditure levels in authorities that are seen as having overspent in the past.
Issues of efficiency, of expenditure control on ideological grounds, of the role of local authorities and of their degree of autonomy have been important in the debate.
Rate capping is clearly a political move to limit local authority independence, as was the abolition of the Greater London Council and the six other metropolitan county councils in 1986.
The abolition was widely resisted, and was seen as having more to do with the government's dislike of local policies, particularly those of the GLC, than with questions of how best to manage public administration.
The sheer political motivation of the abolition shocked many people from all sides of the political spectrum, and raised grave doubts about the balance of local/central government relations.
More recent measures to control local government include the Local Government Act, 1988, which, among other things, outlawed what was described as political propaganda on the rates, and prevented councils from including political conditions such as minimum wages in their agreements with private contractors used to provide services.
This Act also included the notorious Clause 28, which prevented councils from supporting the activities of gay rights (including in many instances  AIDS hotlines and counselling services) by outlawing any financial support for activities that were defined  by the Act as promoting homosexuality.
Again, despite widespread opposition from many sections of the community, the clause became part of the final legislation.
This demonstrates not only a worrying return to the homophobia of earlier years, but an increasing desire on the part of central government to control the activities of locally elected government.
However inept or inefficient local government must inevitably appear at times, it does represent a vital element of Britain's constitution and a defence, albeit imperfect perhaps, of democracy and freedom.
The Conservative government of the 1980s has aroused profound anxiety by its policies of centralization and executive control.
It remains to be seen whether the traditional liberties in Britain, including a degree of local autonomy, can be rescued from arbitrary destruction in the name of the economic ideology of monetarism and the operation of the free market.
The protection of the rights of the citizen in the face of such ever-widening government powers must always be considered, whatever the balance of central/local relations may be.
Two points are noted here very briefly.
First, the existence of administrative tribunals operating in the areas of National Insurance, income support, rent assessment and mental health.
These listen to appeals against official decisions by people who dispute the official interpretation of their rights.
Tribunals are an essential check on the powers of officialdom but at the moment they do not work as well as they should to ensure justice in welfare provision.
Too often their proceedings are confusing to the ordinary person and the quality of judgement at such tribunals is reportedly inconsistent.
Their procedures should be made more intelligible and appellants need more support and help in putting their cases.
The other important check on bureaucratic dominance is the provision of a high-level complaints procedure through ombudsmen.
In 1967, a parliamentary commissioner was established to investigate complaints passed on by Members of Parliament about maladministration in government departments.
This was extended later to cover the National Health Service, and as part of local government reform a commission for local administration was established in 1974.
Local commissioners can now accept any complaint from members of the public about maladministration in local government.
These measures are an important extension of consumers' rights and some safeguard of individual liberty.
It can be seen that many issues on the administrative side affect the social services.
Relatively clear ones arise from the structure of central and local government, their internal problems and their relations with one another.
The issues that stem from the nature of administration itself are more complex.
It is becoming increasingly clear that this whole process, defined in one recent study as ‘a set of procedures for uniting those who control the resources necessary for certain tasks (the members of a municipal council or the shareholders in a company for example) with those who use the goods or services produced from these resources (pupils, patients, tenants, customers, etc.) 'i is itself part of policy making.
More attention is therefore being given to it.
In short, it is not enough to discover needs and legislate to meet them; the actual means by which the legislative intentions are put into practice are of equal importance.
In previous centuries needs were recognized reluctantly, if at all, when social problems were of such proportions they could no longer be ignored.
Measures to deal with problems did not always meet the underlying needs: sometimes they ignored them, sometimes they reflected total ignorance of them.
The classic example of this is the Victorian Poor Law which tried to deal with the very obvious social problems of poverty.
It led to high costs and corruption in the administration of relief and social unrest.
But it did not deal with the reasons why people were poor; it did not get down to the underlying needs of the sick, the disabled, the fatherless, and so on.
Today, however, we make a conscious attempt to identify and measure social needs and to evaluate the services that try to meet them.
The attempt is conscious, but it is still imprecise and unsure.
Social administration itself is, as Chapter 1 explained, the academic study of social needs and problems and of social policies and services.
However, both social needs and the range of social policies designed to meet these are constantly changing, whilst social policy itself is not divorced from the economic and political climate in which  it is developed.
It is this complexity that the study of social policy must somehow take account of.
Some formal, institutionalized ways of identifying need have been already indicated.
The government can initiate inquiries by means of Royal Commissions, interdepartmental committees and so on.
It can also carry out research through the Central Statistical Office and the Government Social Survey into a variety of topics.
The government also finances research bodies and institutions, such as the Medical Research Council and the Economic and Social Research Council, which themselves initiate, approve and finance research topics into particular problems.
In addition to this research and inquiry, the government collects, through the various central departments, statistics and information relevant to the social services and attempts some forward planning on this basis.
Collection of statistics, such as the housing returns, has always been part of the central department's work, but the more specific information currently requested that can form part of long-term planning is a relatively recent development.
Outside the governmental research activities major work is carried out by the universities, through departments of social administration and social policy, sociology, applied social science, social medicine and so on.
Research bodies such as the Institute of Community Studies and the Policy Studies Institute also conduct inquiries into both social needs and the working of social policies.
Large numbers of voluntary agencies also have a research function, sponsoring or undertaking research into needs.
The big research foundations such as the Rowntree or Carnegie Trusts are of vital importance in financing much of the work carried out by universities or other organizations.
Finally, a good deal of inquiry is made at a local level by local authorities or local voluntary bodies attempting to assess a particular problem in the immediate area.
 Much of this small-scale inquiry is the result of the curiosity and the anxiety of the people currently working in the social services, whether statutory or voluntary.
Part of the agitation for reform of local government concerned ways of improving this research function.
Most local authorities now have a research and  intelligence unit to collect and analyse information on their areas.
Social services departments have a particular concern to research into needs on a more systematic basis.
Following the establishment of statutory links between the reorganized health authorities and local authorities through the joint consultative committees, there have been some experimental attempts to establish joint social information units so that health and local government can share data collection and analysis.
Research is increasingly concerned with evaluation of services as well as assessment of need.
Elementary evaluation involves collecting data on service provision, but examining the effectiveness and efficiency of services is a more demanding task.
Evaluation is still rudimentary but it is increasingly accepted that with services as massive and costly as those described we must develop techniques for measuring their impact and comparing the success and failure of different approaches.
STAFFING
The growth of the social services to cope with existing social problems has necessitated the development of whole new professions to cope with the work.
The more sophisticated and specialized health care is, the more people, and the more different kinds of people, we need to provide it.
So the medical profession has developed, not only in numbers, but into increasingly numerous specializations.
It is backed by research chemists, biologists, etc., and teams of professional and general ancillary staff such as radiotherapists, as well as by nursing staff.
This growth and specialization mean that more and more people must be found to staff the hospitals, clinics and rehabilitation units, and that they have to be trained.
Training schemes, recognized qualifications, professional institutes, salary negotiating machinery and so on have to be developed.
This is so in every field of social service: we need teachers, social workers, housing managers and town planners, etc., to fill all the posts, and training establishments and programmes to produce the trained people.
At the same  time we need increasing numbers of civil servants and local government officials to administer the services and social science research workers continually to investigate needs and assess the provision.
Staffing becomes ever more complex.
Any change of policy has enormous repercussions on the staffing situation.
For example, the 1959 Mental Health Act indicated the need for much greater expansion of the community care services for the mentally ill and mentally handicapped.
But workers for these services cannot just be recruited from the general population, because they should be trained to do the specialized work with which they are faced.
So, ideally, we need to forecast changes in demand for personnel, particularly highly trained professional personnel, in order to have time to develop and staff more training institutions — medical schools, professional social work departments and so on— and then to recruit suitable trainees and give them the necessary education and training before we try to implement a major change in policy.
In the social work field this was strikingly acknowledged by the Curtis Committee on the care of children, which recommended the setting up of a Central Training Council on Child Care before it published its final report recommending radical changes in the organization of the care of deprived children.
Courses for training both residential and casework staff were organized rapidly so that when the 1948 Children Act came into force some influx of trained staff was anticipated to staff the new children's departments.
But such instances are, unfortunately, rare: usually the need for staff is allowed to reach alarming proportions before steps are taken to boost the recruitment and training programmes.
The need to plan for the staffing as well as the financing of the social services does not apply only to the professionals: we cannot decide to double our output of houses in order to deal with housing shortages and obsolescence without regard to the manpower resources of the building industry as well as to the availability of suitable architects.
Many factors affect the supply of workers to various aspects of the social services.
The numbers involved are large — nearly 1 million people are employed by the National Health Service  alone — and the social services have to compete with industry, trade, other public services and, significant especially with doctors at the moment, the attractions of work abroad.
It is impossible to give a meaningful figure of the total personnel employed in social services, as definitions vary too much, but the social services are now an important sector of employment, and many of the personnel involved require training.
Developments within the social services often mean that more training is needed at the same time as more staff and it is difficult to decide on priorities.
If one wants to increase the output of trained social workers or teachers one can reduce the length of their training and dilute its standard, but this will conflict with the need for more specialized staff for the more specialized needs and problems that better services reveal.
Broad demographic factors can affect particular services sharply.
For example, the change in the sex ratio of recent years has resulted in fewer women remaining single, but single women were heavily relied on in certain social fields, as teachers, social workers, nurses and residential staff; a shortage could have a marked effect on the staffing position in these fields.
Clearly it is vital to recruit more men or take account of the problems facing the married woman who wants to return to work.
However, because salaries are low in many social services as compared to work in industry, many men are put off, and the employment of married women creates problems that society is not yet willing to face — the need for day nursery accommodation, for example(which itself creates a further demand for staff), and for a more relaxed public attitude towards the working mother.
The overall employment situation is, of course, a key factor.
Many social service jobs tend to be filled when unemployment in manufacturing industry increases the attractiveness of the relatively secure job that local government, for example, affords.
But the motives that attract people to work within a social service are as variable as the jobs themselves and generalization is not very useful.
Instead, particular professions try to improve their individual staffing position.
The Mallaby Report on the staffing of local government has already been mentioned.
Other committees have considered the staffing  of different services, and the recruitment and training of, for example, social workers, health visitors, residential care workers, nurses and teachers.
These reports assess the situation for a particular service or type of trained staff and usually make recommendations for improving quality and supply.
The overall position on staffing tends, therefore, to defy much generalization beyond that the social services need a very large number of trained people, and that by and large they fail to get them.
Shortages vary somewhat over the country.
London and the South East tend to have more psychiatrists, teachers, medical social workers, etc., than other regions but shortages of lower-paid staff such as nurses and prison officers, largely because of inflated housing costs.
Some areas, particularly in the North, are very short of staff at all levels and make do with less well-trained people.
Inner-city areas are also often short staffed as a result of difficulties in recruiting staff to work in areas of heavy demand and high workloads where the work is particularly stressful.
Throughout the social services there is a need for more and better training and better distribution and deployment of staff.
The rate at which people can be absorbed into the public social service sector, or are willing and able to enter it, does not depend on the social planners alone, and there is much scope for improvement in our whole approach to manpower and womanpower problems.