

Arbitrage and relaxing the assumptions
Section 5.1 reviews the empirical evidence on the degree to which actual futures prices deviate from the theoretical prices given by the no-arbitrage condition of Chapter 4.
This is followed by a discussion of the available evidence on the speed and degree of the arbitrage response to a violation of the no-arbitrage condition.
Section 5.2 discusses the practicalities of arbitrage transactions.
Finally, the assumptions underlying the derivation of the no-arbitrage condition in Chapter 4 are considered in detail in Section 5.3.
5.1 ARBITRAGE IN PRACTICE
The theory of arbitrage pricing contains a number of predictions about market behaviour.
These include predictions that the no-arbitrage condition should generally apply; when it ceases to apply this should promptly trigger index arbitrage transactions which should rapidly eliminate the deviation from the no-arbitrage condition.
Since their introduction in 1982, there has been a steady flow of empirical studies of index arbitrage; these studies will be considered in this section.
5.1.1 Over- or underpriced futures?
The evidence on the extent to which actual index futures prices depart from the values predicted by the no-arbitrage condition generally supports the view that economically significant departures do exist.
For the S&P500 index from June 1982 to September 1982, the no-arbitrage equation was found by Cornell and French (1983a; 1983b) to overpredict the actual price of index futures contracts, that is, the theoretical (or no-arbitrage) futures price exceeded the actual futures price and so the  future was underpriced.
Kipnis and Tsang (1984b) analysed the S&P500 index for the period from April 1982 to January 1983 and, after allowing for transaction costs, found a considerable number of departures from the no-arbitrage condition, with both over- and underpricing being present.
Overall, they found a greater tendency to underpricing.
A subsequent study by Cornell (1985a) analysed the values of ten S&P500 contracts for the period from April 1982 to September 1983, and found no general pattern of underpricing.
He concluded that the no-arbitrage condition is supported by the empirical evidence, and that the earlier underpricing may be explained by the newness of the market and the inexperience of the participants, or by the tax timing option (see Section 5.3.4) becoming unimportant.
Figlewski (1984b) used data on the S&P500 index for the period from June 1982 to September 1983.
He found underpricing for the first third of his data period, and overpricing for the remainder.
For the entire period he found that, on average, the no-arbitrage condition was approximately correct.
Billingsley and Chance (1988) analysed weekly data for the period from April 1982 to January 1986 for the S&P500 index.
In contrast to the findings of Cornell (1985a) and Figlewski (1984a), they found that from April 1982 to September 1983 there was overpricing, while from October 1983 to January 1986 there was underpricing.
For the entire period, Billingsley and Chance (1988) found overpricing.
Merrick (1987) studied daily data on the S&P500 and NYSE Composite indices.
He also found that, for the period from May 1982 to May 1986, there was underpricing.
Arditti, Ayaydin, Mattu and Rigsbee (1986) argued that, in the initial years of trading, S&P500 index futures were underpriced.
They compared the actual returns on 60 US mutual funds for the three-year period 1982–4 with returns that would have been made if a specified strategy for investing in S&P500 futures had been followed.
This strategy was to devote 20% of the fund to buying futures when they were underpriced by a specified amount, and closing out these futures positions when the futures were overpriced by the same amount.
For all but two of the 60 mutual funds, this strategy increased returns over the three-year period, suggesting that prices deviated from the no-arbitrage condition.
Bhatt and Cakici (1990) considered daily closing prices for the S&P500 from 1982 to 1987.
They found that futures tended to be overpriced, that the average size of the mispricing tended to fall over time, and that the absolute size of the mispricing declined as maturity approached and increased as the dividend yield increased.
This study appears not to have allowed for transactions costs.
MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988) used data on the S&P500 to compute a series of mispricings at 15-minute intervals from April 1982 to June 1987.
They found that, on average, the futures were overpriced  by 0.12% (before allowing for transactions costs).
MacKinlay and Ramaswamy went on to study the behaviour of these mispricings.
They discovered that the first-order autocorrelation of the mispricing series was 0.93, indicating that mispricings tended to persist over periods of the order of a few hours.
However, the first-order autocorrelation of first differences of the mispricing series was -0.23, and this suggests that mispricings tend to be partially reversed within 15 minutes.
The absolute size of the mispricings was found to fall as delivery approached, as illustrated in Fig. 5.1.
This decline in mispricings as delivery approaches is consistent with a fall in dividend and interest rate risk as the time to delivery decreases.
Klemkosky and Lee (1991) studied transactions data on the S&P500 for the period from 1983 to 1987.
They allowed for marking to the market, transactions costs (which differed between institutions and members, and between long and short positions), and for capital gains, income and futures taxes.
This produced a no-arbitrage band which depended on the status and tax position of the arbitrageur.
Klemkosky and Lee looked for a mispricing every ten minutes and found that, even for the arbitrageurs with the largest no-arbitrage band (taxed institutional investors), the no-arbitrage band was violated 5% of the time.
The frequency and degree of overpricing of the future was much larger than for underpricing.
They also found that the frequency and degree of mispricing declined as delivery approached and that, if a trading lag of ten minutes was incorporated, arbitrage remained profitable for all classes of arbitrageur.
Figure 5.1 Mispricings and maturity
Morse (1988) looked for mispricings of S&P500, NYSE Composite and MMI index futures using daily closing prices from 1986 to 1988.
For 1986, each of the three index futures was underpriced, while for 1987 and 1988 only the MMI was significantly underpriced.
He also considered the relationship between mispricings of index futures and mispricings of S&P100 index options, and discovered a contemporaneous correlation between changes in the futures mispricing for each of the three index  futures and changes in the mispricing of the S&P; 100 option.
The MMI was studied by Finnerty and Park (1988a), who found that profitable arbitrage opportunities existed and, while they did not explicitly consider transactions costs, that the arbitrage profits were large enough to cover such costs.
Chung (1991) analysed transactions data for the MMI future and its 20 constituent shares for the period from June 1984 to August 1986.
He used the latest futures and share prices to compute the size of any deviations from the no-arbitrage condition every second.
If a mispricing remained after allowing for one of three different levels of transactions costs, this constituted a signal to engage in arbitrage.
Many previous studies have assumed that it is possible to establish an arbitrage position at the prices used to compute the mispricing.
This is unrealistic, and Chung considered trading lags of 20 seconds, two minutes and five minutes.
The inclusion of such trading lags makes the arbitrage risky, as the mispricing at the time the arbitrage position is established is unknown when the decision to trade is taken.
He found that the number of mispricing signals has declined substantially over time.
Allowance for trading lags led to clear reductions in the average arbitrage profit, and these profits were risky — many of the realised profits were negative.
Over time, these arbitrage profits have become riskier, and their average size has declined.
Chung found that only 7% of the mispricing signals indicated an underpricing of the future, and he interpreted this as evidence against the presence of a tax timing option (see Section 5.3.4), which would lead to an increase in the number of underpricings.
He also investigated the effects of the uptick rule when the future is underpriced, and found that arbitrage involving short positions in shares was less profitable and much riskier than arbitrage with a long share position.
He concluded that the uptick rule is a serious constraint to arbitraging futures underpricings.
Cakici, Harpaz and Yagil (1990) used daily closing prices for the VLCI for the period from 1982 to 1987 to test the Eytan and Harpaz (1986) no-arbitrage condition for geometric index futures.
They estimated y (the extra term that appears in the no-arbitrage condition of a geometric index discussed in Section 5.2.9), using the returns for the most recent 20 days, and found the resulting estimate was reasonably stable over time at an annual rate of 5.77%.
For all years, except 1987, VLCI futures were overpriced.
Although they did not allow for transactions costs directly, Cakici, Harpaz and Yagil concluded that some of the deviations were sufficiently large to represent profitable arbitrage opportunities.
Using daily data for the FT-SE 100 for the period from June 1984 to June 1988, Yadav and Pope (1990) examined proportionate mispricings, that is, the mispricing divided by the current spot price.
They found that the average gross proportionate mispricing fell from an underpricing of  0.5% before Big Bang, to an underpricing of 0.2% after Big Bang.
They also found that proportionate mispricings persisted over time, with a first-order serial correlation coefficient of 0.80 for proportionate mispricings computed using closing prices.
When they allowed for four different levels of transactions costs, they concluded that many potential opportunities for profitable arbitrage remained.
The introduction of a trading lag of half a day reduced, but did not eliminate, these arbitrage profits.
They also found that the absolute proportionate mispricings declined as time to delivery fell.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) analysed hourly data on the FT-SE 100 from April 1986 to March 1990.
They found there were frequent proportionate mispricings in excess of transactions costs, and the average size of the proportionate mispricings did not drop over this four year period.
Some contracts were, on average, overpriced; while for others the average price was too low.
Overall, there was no clear pattern of over or underpricing.
The proportionate mispricings for the next near contract were larger than those for the near contract, which is consistent with arbitrage being riskier for longer maturities.
The near and next near contracts were generally mispriced in the same direction, and by a roughly similar amount.
The direction of the mispricing tended to persist over time, while the absolute value of the proportionate mispricing declined as delivery approached.
Strickland and Xu (1992) studied hourly data on the FT-SE 100 from January 1988 to December 1990.
The no-arbitrage condition allowed for the effect of stock exchange accounts in delaying the payment for shares.
After subtracting transactions costs of 0.5%, the future was overpriced 6% of the time, and underpriced for 46% of the observations.
Hence, arbitrage opportunities were common, particularly underpricings.
Like Yadav and Pope (1992b), they found that the absolute value of the proportionate mispricing declined as delivery approached.
Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno (1989a; 1990a) studied deviations from the no-arbitrage condition for trading in two Japanese indices: the Nikkei Stock Average (traded on Simex) and the Osaka 50 Kabusaki index traded on the OSE.
Using daily data for the period from June 1987 to June 1988 (272 observations), after allowing for transactions costs of 0.5–1%, they found a substantial degree of underpricing for Nikkei Stock Average futures: 42% of the time there was an underpricing in excess of the estimated transaction costs.
Overpricing (after allowing for transaction costs) was found only 3% of the time.
For Osaka 50 Kabusaki index futures, there was overpricing (after allowing for transactions costs) 40% of the time, and underpricing (after allowing for transactions costs) 27% of the time.
The magnitude of the deviations from the no-arbitrage price fell over time for both indices.
By the end of the data period the average of the absolute proportionate deviations was down to  0.6% for the Osaka 50 Kabusaki, and 0.5% for the Nikkei Stock Average.
Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno went on to analyse further the deviations from the no-arbitrage price.
They found strong positive autocorrelation for lags of up to four days in the deviations (before transactions costs) for both indices.
This suggests that, rather then being promptly eliminated by arbitrage, the mispricings (before transactions costs) tended to persist for a number of days.
Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno (1989b; 1990a) studied daily closing prices on the Nikkei Stock Average and the corresponding future traded on Simex from September 1986 to June 1988 (442 observations).
The mispricings were predominantly negative, that is, futures were underpriced, and their size declined over time.
Allowing for 1% transactions costs led to a big reduction in the number of mispricings, with few overpricings.
They found a strong positive first-order correlation in the mispricings of around 0.80 (as did Yadav and Pope, 1990, for the UK).
Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno (199Ob) used daily closing prices for the period from September 1988 to September 1989 on the Nikkei Stock Average (traded on both the OSE and Simex) and Topix to look for arbitrage opportunities.
After allowing for transactions costs of 0.5%, they concluded that until early in 1989 there was clear evidence that all three futures were overpriced.
However, in the spring of 1989 the Japanese Ministry of Finance relaxed some of the restrictions on arbitrage, and from then onwards the mispricings declined substantially, so that there were very few arbitrage opportunities by the end of the data period.
Lim (1992a and 1992b) analysed the Nikkei Stock Average and the corresponding future traded on Simex.
For 20 days spread over 1988 and 1989 he compared spot and futures returns for five-minute periods.
After allowing for transactions costs, he concluded that very few arbitrage opportunities remained.
However, this conclusion is unreliable as it appears to be based on the daily average mispricing, rather than individual mispricings.
For both spot and futures returns, there was no significant autocorrelation, suggesting that stale prices were not a problem for the index.
There was a high (over 0.80) first-order positive autocorrelation in the mispricings, while the fourth-order autocorrelation was still significantly positive (at about 0.40).
This implies that mispricings (although not necessarily arbitrage opportunities) tended to persist for over 20 minutes.
Mispricings of Hang Seng index futures were studied by Yau, Schneeweis and Yung (1990) using daily closing prices from 1986 to 1988 (638 days).
Allowing for transactions costs, futures were overpriced in the period before the October 1987 crash, while after the crash there were few mispricings.
Puttonen and Martikainen (1991) considered daily closing prices of the Finnish FOX index from 1988 to  1990.
Allowing for transactions costs, they found that most of the mispricings were underpricings.
Stulz, Wasserfallen and Stucki (1990) studied daily data on Swiss Market Index futures traded on an OTC market run by the Leu Bank from January to October 1989.
The largest mispricing of 1.3% was barely sufficient to cover transactions costs, and so they concluded that the no-arbitrage condition was not violated.
Twite (1991a) studied daily mispricings of the Australian All Ordinaries index from 1983 to 1988.
The no-arbitrage condition allowed for both taxes and transactions costs.
With no additional transactions costs for short selling, a substantial number of mispricings existed.
If an extra 5% had to be paid for short selling shares, most of the underpricings disappeared.
The absolute size of the mispricing declined as delivery approached.
Although the studies of US index futures by Bhatt and Cakici (1990), Billingsley and Chance (1988), Cornell (1985a), Cornell and French (1983a; 1983b), Figlewski (1984a; 1984b), Merrick (1987) and Morse (1988) ignored transactions costs, some of the deviations from the theoretical prices were sufficiently large to cast doubt on the conclusion of Cornell (1985a) that the no-arbitrage condition is supported by the evidence.
The relevant question is not whether the average deviation from the no-arbitrage condition is significantly different from zero, but whether there are sometimes deviations from the no-arbitrage condition that are large enough to cover transactions costs.
Those studies of the S&P500 which have allowed for transactions costs (Arditti, Ayaydin, Mattu and Rigsbee, 1986; Klemkosky and Lee, 1991; Kipnis and Tsang, 1984b) have also found evidence of arbitrage opportunities.
Therefore, the evidence supports the view that, over the periods studied, profitable arbitrage opportunities existed for the S&P500.
However, the study of the MMI by Chung (1991) found evidence that by 1986 the arbitrage opportunities had been largely eliminated.
The results for British, Japanese, Finnish, Australian and Hong Kong index futures, which allowed for transactions costs, suggest that arbitrage opportunities also existed in these markets.
Some of the more recent studies, which have been able to use a longer data set, have found evidence that the absolute size of mispricings has declined over time.
However, Schwarz and Laatsch (1991) have questioned whether there has been a steady improvement in efficiency, and suggest that efficiency fluctuates over time.
All of the studies which have looked at the effect of maturity on mispricings (Bhatt and Cakici, 1990; Klemkosky and Lee, 1991; MacKinlay and Ramaswamy, 1988; Twite, 1991a; Strickland and Xu, 1992; Yadav and Pope, 1990; 1992b) have found that mispricings tend to decline in size and frequency as delivery approaches.
The suggested explanations for the existence of arbitrage opportunities can be divided into two groups.
1.
While the empirical tests reveal an arbitrage opportunity, this cannot be profitably exploited due to the use of stale prices in the computation of the index, the use of non-synchronous closing prices, inadequate allowance for transactions costs, regulatory restrictions (such as the US uptick restriction on short selling shares, which limits arbitrage aimed at removing an underpricing of futures contracts), time lags in trading the portfolio of shares corresponding to the index, the presence of arbitrage risk (the arbitrage transaction is not riskless due to uncertain dividends, uncertain interest rates, failure to unwind the share position at the EDSP, and so on) or because the model used to compute the no-arbitrage prices is incorrect.
2.
There are real arbitrage opportunities and these remain because of institutional inertia, the inexperience of traders in a new market, or because of an insufficient volume of arbitrage transactions to move prices to their no-arbitrage levels, possibly due to an inadequate supply of arbitrage capital.
Twite (1991b) tested two of these possible causes of mispricings using daily closing prices for the Australian All Ordinaries index between 1983 and 1988.
He rejected stale prices as a cause, but found some support for arbitrage risk as an explanation of mispricing.
The presence of restrictions on short selling shares encourages the underpricing of index futures, but the US evidence has not found that underpricing is the dominant form of mispricing.
The studies of US index futures by Arditti, Ayaydin, Mattu and Rigsbee (1986), Cornell and French (1983a; 1983b), Kipnis and Tsang (1984b), Merrick (1987) and Morse (1988) found a predominance of underpricing; while Bhatt and Cakici (1990), Billingsley and Chance (1988), Cakici, Harpaz and Yagil (1990), Chung (1991), Klemkosky and Lee (1991) and MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988) found a predominance of overpricing.
Of the non-US studies, Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno (1989a; 1989b), Strickland and Xu (1992) and Yadav and Pope (1990) found underpricing, while Yau, Schneeweis and Yung (1990) found overpricing.
These mixed results suggest that short selling restrictions are not the main cause of mispricings.
In Section 5.3.6, the effects on arbitrage of difficulties in short selling are considered further.
5.1.2 Speed of the arbitrage response
If futures are mispriced, this will lead to arbitrage transactions, and these will tend to remove the initial mispricing by pushing the spot and futures prices back into line.
This suggest that mispricings can be used to predict subsequent price movements.
Swinnerton, Curcio and Bennett (1988) used transactions data on the S&P500 for 1986, and found that the mispricing was a modest predictor of movements in the spot price over the next five minutes, particularly when futures were  overpriced.
Furbush (1989) used data for five-minute intervals on the S&P500 index for 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 October 1987 — the period of the stock market crash and the few days just before.
He examined whether a mispricing triggered index arbitrage transactions within a few minutes.
He regressed the volume of programmes trades classified as index arbitrage, where positive values indicate buying shares and negative values denote selling shares, on the actual futures price less the no-arbitrage futures price.
(Programme trading is the simultaneous trading of a basket of shares as part of a plan or strategy.
The NYSE definition requires the simultaneous trading of at least 15 stocks with a total value of over $1 million.)
Using data for concurrent five-minute periods, he found that for 14, 15, 16 and the morning of 19 October, there was a highly significant positive relationship between the volume of index arbitrage and the size of the mispricing.
Lagging the mispricing variable by five minutes weakened this relationship, suggesting that the primary reaction of arbitrageurs to an arbitrage opportunity occurs within five minutes.
Pope and Yadav (1992) used hourly data for the FT-SE 100 from 1986 to 1988 to investigate the speed with which a mispricing is reversed.
They found that the main response occurs with the first hour.
5.1.3 Arbitrage and reducing the mispricing
Furbush (1989) also studied the extent to which arbitrage activity reduces the size of the initial mispricing.
This was done by regressing the change in the mispricing of the S&P500 index on the current and lagged values of the volume of programme trades classified as index arbitrage.
The data was for five-minute intervals on 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 October 1987.
The results were not clear-cut, but generally supported the view that index arbitrage reduces the size of the mispricing within about 15 minutes.
The reduction in the mispricing can be disaggregated into two components: movements in the price of the futures contract, and movements in the prices of the underlying shares.
Furbush tested these different responses by separately regressing the change in the futures price and changes in the index on current and lagged values of the volume of programme trades classified as index arbitrage.
The results were mixed, and this may be due to the presence of another powerful factor (the 1987 stock market crash) during the data period.
The general levels of futures and spot prices tend to move together, and this effect was particularly marked in October 1987 when there were large downward price movements.
Therefore, any small, equilibrating, and opposite movements in the spot and futures prices may have been swamped by the very strong positive correlation between these two prices induced by the crash.
A study by Harris, Sofianos and Shapiro (1990) of programme trading on the NYSE in June 1989 found evidence that programme trading occurs when the basis (the difference between the futures and spot prices; see Chapter 6) is wide, and that the programme trading is followed by the basis closing to its usual level within about 15 minutes.
This is consistent with the earlier conclusion by Furbush (1989) that arbitrage reduces the mispricing in 15 minutes.
This is also the conclusion reached by MacKinlay and Ramaswamy (1988).
5.2 SOME PRACTICALITIES OF ARBITRAGE TRANSACTIONS
5.2.1 The arbitrage portfolio
Even if it were possible to use all the shares in the index in an arbitrage transaction, for instance when F > (S -D)(1 + r)and short selling shares is not required, arbitrageurs often choose to use an alternative approach.
This is to construct a much smaller portfolio (say, 15–100 shares, rather than 500 or 1700 shares) which is designed to track the full index, that is to say, an arbitrage portfolio.
This has a number of advantages.
Restrictions on short selling particular shares can be circumvented by excluding them from the arbitrage portfolio, and the small number of transactions required both lowers transactions costs and increases the speed of the arbitrage transaction.
The disadvantage of using an arbitrage portfolio is that the arbitrage transaction is no longer risk-free because at delivery the value of the arbitrage portfolio may differ from that of the index.
This will result in an unpredictable profit or loss, in addition to the certain arbitrage profit that motivated the trade.
The popularity of arbitrage portfolios suggests that the advantages more than compensate for the risk that the value of the arbitrage portfolio will deviate from the index at delivery.
Arbitrage is easier for interest rate or currency futures markets than for index futures because, in these other markets, the underlying asset can be purchased or sold in a single transaction.
For market indices based on a small number of shares, such as the MMI with only 20 shares, arbitrage using all the shares in the index is much easier than for indices like the NYSE Composite, which comprises about 1700 shares.
A futures contract is traded on the FTA in an index called the Dutch Top 5 which consists of just five shares (Akzo, KLM, Royal Dutch Shell, Philips, and Unilever).
This suggests that the size of the departures from the no-arbitrage condition will be a positive function of the number of shares in the index.
Arbitrage restores the no-arbitrage condition by increasing the demand for the underpriced asset and increasing the supply of the overpriced asset.
However, if the arbitrage portfolios tend to contain roughly the same subset of shares, there will be little direct pressure on the prices of the remaining constituents of the index.
This may lead to a  distortion in relative prices as between the shares used in the arbitrage process and other shares.
It is also possible that the shares chosen for inclusion in the arbitrage portfolio are those which have a high price elasticity.
The choice of such shares will increase the profits of the arbitrageurs, as the adverse price movement (which helps to restore the no-arbitrage condition) will be minimized.
To the extent that a two-tier market in shares develops — index shares and the rest — traders may seek to exploit any perceived price differential between the two groups by trading shares, and this will tend to restore price relativities.
5.2.2 Arbitrage in the UK
In the UK in 1989 under 1% of the shares traded on the UK stock market were part of an index arbitrage transaction, while the corresponding figure for the NYSE for the period from July to December 1989 was about 5% (Quality of Markets Unit, 1989).
Index arbitrage in the UK has been hampered in the past by the lack of a mechanism (such as DOT in the USA) to speed up the process of trading a basket of shares, the requirement to pay stamp duty and insufficient liquidity to cope with large arbitrage trades without an adverse price movement (Price, 1988).
In 1989 index arbitrage in the UK was conducted by a very small number of financial institutions (about six) on their own account, with only three or four institutions engaging in index arbitrage on a regular basis.
These arbitrageurs are also market makers in a large proportion of the shares in the FT-SE 100 index, and so they can buy and sell shares ‘in-house’ to and from the firm's own market makers.
As market makers they have a number of important advantages.
They (and charities) avoid paying stamp duty of 0.5% (1% prior to Big Bang) on purchases of shares which are sold within seven days.
In 1993, stamp duty will be abolished when TAURUS and rolling settlement is introduced.
Market makers (and some members of the merged LIFFE/LTOM exchange) also have special stock borrowing privileges which permit taking a short position in shares.
Since the share trades are ‘in-house’, the commission charges on dealing in the shares are notional.
Therefore, these market makers have considerably lower transactions costs than other potential arbitrageurs.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) considered the suggestion that, when the index is rising, market makers will run down their holdings of the shares in which they make a market, and when the index is falling they will increase their holding of such shares.
Arbitrageurs who are also market makers in many of the index stocks, tend to buy and sell shares ‘inhouse’.
When the market making arm of the company has run down its holdings, in-house arbitrage of overpricings (which involves ‘buying’ shares from the market maker) will be possible only to a limited degree.
Conversely, when the market making arm has increased its holdings, in-house arbitrage of underpricings (which involves ‘selling’ shares to the market maker) may be unattractive.
Similar difficulties will be faced by arbitrageurs who are not also market makers.
This implies that futures will tend to be overpriced in a rising market and underpriced in a falling market.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) used hourly data for the FT-SE 100 index from 1986 to 1990 to examine whether there was a connection in the UK between index returns and mispricings.
They found a significant positive relationship, as predicted, but concluded that it was not of economic significance.
There has been effectively no involvement on the part of UK funds in index arbitrage.
This is for a number of reasons.
First, there is the issue of taxation.
Before July 1990 authorized unit trusts, pension funds, and investment trusts were exempt from capital gains tax on futures transactions for investment purposes, but were thought liable to pay tax on any trading income (Redhead, 1990).
The fear of being deemed to be trading (rather than investing) in futures contracts, and so liable to taxation is thought to have deterred such institutions from using them as part of their investment strategy.
To clarify this situation,all futures trades (investment and trading) conducted after 26 July 1990 by pension funds and authorized unit trusts were exempted from taxation; and this has encouraged these institutions to participate in futures markets to a greater extent than previously.
Second, until the abolition of stamp duty in 1993, institutions must pay a tax of 0.5% when they buy shares (for instance, as part of an arbitrage transaction), while market makers do not have to pay this tax.
Third, the rules governing the investment policy of a fund may prohibit the use of futures contracts, so preventing the fund from engaging in arbitrage.
Fourth, the fund may lack the accounting systems and performance measurement techniques to incorporate futures, so discouraging their use.
Finally, the management of the fund may be unfamiliar with futures trading, and be cautious about engaging in arbitrage transactions.
The changes to the taxation of futures and the abolition of stamp duty do not mean that pension funds and unit trusts will become major participants in index arbitrage; and market makers will remain well placed to execute index arbitrage transactions.
5.2.3 Computer trading
To discover arbitrage possibilities in the FT-SE 100 index it is necessary to keep track of the prices of the 100 shares in the index i.e. £S, as well as the present value of the expected dividends before delivery for each of these 100 shares, i.e. £D, for each of the three available delivery dates.
In addition, the price of the futures contract, i.e. £F, for the three delivery dates, the cost of borrowing funds (r ) for the three periods and the transactions costs must also be considered.
Since the analysis of this data must be performed in real time, traders use computers.
As well as searching for arbitrage opportunities, computers can also be used to initiate programme trades.
In the USA, shares can be traded on the NYSE via computer orders to the exchange's DOT system.
This sends such orders electronically and simultaneously to many market makers, and so speeds up taking a position in the shares of many different companies.
Harris, Sofianos and Shapiro (1990) estimated the time lag in June 1989 between the submission of a programme trade and the shares being purchased on the NYSE at two or three minutes.
In the UK brokers can execute smaller trades using the SEAQ Automatic Execution Facility (SAEF) at the best price available on SEAQ.
5.2.4 Programme trading
Programme trading is the simultaneous trading of a basket of shares as part of a strategy or plan, and it pre-dates trading using computers.
The most important form of programme trading is the buying and selling of shares as part of index arbitrage.
Harris, Sofianos and Shapiro (1990) found that, during June 1989, the average programme trade on the NYSE was valued at $9 million and involved shares in 177 different companies.
Other forms of programme trading include portfolio insurance.
Programme trading has attracted much criticism, especially after the stock market collapses in October 1987 and October 1989.
Although the profit per contract is small, because riskless profits are available, a very large volume of transactions will be initiated, and this is claimed to destabilize financial markets (see Chapter 13).
A number of studies (see, for instance, Furbush, 1989), have found little evidence to substantiate the claim that programme trading was a major factor in the 1987 stock market crash.
5.3 THE ASSUMPTIONS USED IN DERIVING THE NO-ARBITRAGE CONDITION
The assumptions used in Chapter 4 will be analysed from two viewpoints.
First, if an assumption is dropped, can a different no-arbitrage condition be derived?
If it can, then the assumption concerned is a simplifying assumption, and gross violations of the assumption can be encompassed by a more general formula.
Second, to what extent is the assumption met in reality, and how large is the effect of violation on the validity of the no-arbitrage condition?
If the effects are large, and a more general no-arbitrage condition relaxing the assumption cannot be  derived, then the validity of the no-arbitrage condition is conditional on the relevant assumption.
5.3.1 No marking to the market
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition relates to a forward rather than a futures contract as marking to the market is ignored.
Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) have shown that, if riskless interest rates are certain (and the other assumptions listed in Chapter 4 apply), despite the presence of marking to the market for futures contracts, futures and forward contracts have an identical price.
Appendix 5.
A contains a proof of this result.
Thus, if the no-marking-to-the-market assumption is replaced with an assumption that riskless interest rates are certain, the no-arbitrage condition in Chapter 4 for futures prices still applies.
In Section 5.3.3 it is shown that the assumption of a riskless interest rate can also be relaxed.
5.3.2 Single riskless interest rate
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition requires that the risk-free borrowing and lending rates are equal.
That the arbitrageur can lend money at the riskless rate of interest appears sensible, but it is more questionable to assume that he or she can borrow at the riskless rate (although if the marginal arbitrageur is a large financial institution, the assumption may be reasonable).
The justification for this assumption is that the arbitrage transaction is riskless, and so repayment is guaranteed.
However, in reality all the assumptions which underlie riskless arbitrage will not be met, and so there will always be some risk.
The derivation of a no-arbitrage condition relies on the use of the capital market to move the cash flows arising from the arbitrage transaction through time so that they are non-zero in all time periods, and positive at least once.
If the capital market is imperfect such that the lending rate exceeds the borrowing rate, the results of the arbitrage argument may vary, depending on whether cash is being moved forwards in time at the lending rate, or backwards in time at the borrowing rate.
In this situation, whether an arbitrage transaction is attractive or not depends on the time preferences of the arbitrageur, and it is not possible to state a general no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.3 Constant riskless interest rate
If there is no marking to the market, variations in the riskless interest rate have no effect on the no-arbitrage condition.
This is because the  arbitrageur locks in the interest rate when the arbitrage position is initiated, and subsequent variations are irrelevant.
However, since marking to the market is a universal feature of futures contracts, the simultaneous relaxation of both the no-marking-to-the-market and the constant riskless interest rate assumptions will be examined.
In the presence of marking to the market, provided the changes in the riskless interest rate are known with certainty, while the proof becomes more complicated, the no-arbitrage condition remains valid.
Levy (1989) and Flesaker (1991) have shown that assuming the changes in the riskless interest rate are known (and that contracts are divisible; Polakoff, 1991), is equivalent to assuming that each day the traders know the next day's risk-free interest rate with certainty.
While interest rates until delivery are not known with certainty, the risk-free rate for the following day can be predicted with considerable accuracy.
This implies that any differences between forward and futures prices will be inconsequential.
An obvious way to examine whether marking to the market in the presence of stochastic interest rates leads to a difference between futures and forward prices, is to compare actual futures and forward prices for the same asset.
However, this approach encounters two problems.
First, for many assets (such as stock market indices) there is either a futures market or a forward market, but not both, and so a direct comparison is not possible.
Second, if a difference is found this may be due to a range of factors besides marking to the market with stochastic interest rates, such as default risk, liquidity, and regulation.
(See Chapter 2 for a list of differences between futures and forward markets.)
Therefore, a simple comparison of the futures and forward prices of those assets where trading exists in both is not an adequate test.
However, an alternative method for investigating this problem, which overcomes both of these difficulties, has been provided by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981).
They derived the theoretical result that positive (negative) correlation between the risk-free interest rate and percentage changes in futures prices implies that the futures price is greater (smaller) than the forward price.
Given the validity of this theoretical result, the size and direction of this correlation for existing futures can be used to draw inferences about the effect of marking to the market on futures prices.
However, there are problems in determining the proportion of any price differential that is due to marking to the market and stochastic interest rates.
There have been a number of empirical studies of various assets where both futures and forward markets exist.
These are largely based on the idea that the correlation of changes in spot and futures prices with interest rates differs between commodities, and so the importance of marking to the market will also differ.
Studies of commodities other than index futures are summarized in Appendix 5.
B, and generally confirm the theory of Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981).
There have been five studies of the effects of marking to the market on index futures, of which only one (Twite, 1990b) has used the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross results.
Twite (199Ob) examined daily values of the Australian All Ordinaries index between 1983 and 1986 and found a significantly positive correlation between futures returns and the riskless rate of interest.
This implies that forward prices exceeded futures prices, that is, that marking to the market and stochastic interest rates reduced the futures price.
Twite concluded that there is limited support for marking to the market having an effect on futures prices.
A study of the MMI by Chang, Loo and Chang (1990) analysed the difference between futures and forward prices using a test which differs from those proposed by Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981).
Since no forward contract exists on the MMI, they used a synthetic forward contract based on MMI call and put options.
Using daily data for the period from October 1984 to September 1985, they found that the covariance between the riskless rate of interest and the rate of return on the spot asset had a statistically significant positive effect on the futures price.
This test supports the view that marking to market with stochastic interest rates can have a small but measurable effect on futures prices.
Cakici and Chatterjee (1991) examined daily closing prices for the S&P500 from 1982 to 1987, and compared the mispricings calculated using a no-arbitrage condition which allowed for stochastic interest rates and one which did not.
The model with stochastic interest rates assumed that interest rates followed a mean-reverting process, and that the correlation between changes in interest rates and changes in spot prices was zero (which is questionable).
The mispricings for 1986 and 1987 were significantly larger when no allowance was made for stochastic interest rates, but there was no difference for the period from 1982 to 1985.
A simulation analysis, in which the correlation between changes in interest rates and changes in spot prices was not constrained to be zero, found that stochastic interest rates only affected the no-arbitrage price when strong mean-reverting movements were expected.
Such movements were expected when the current interest rate was well above or below its long-run mean, and there was a high degree of reversion each time period.
They concluded that the importance of allowing for stochastic interest rates varies over time, depending on whether or not large changes in interest rates are expected.
Modest (1984) also made use of a no-arbitrage condition to test the effects of marking to the market in the presence of stochastic interest rates on the prices of index futures.
He used stochastic simulation to examine the no-arbitrage price of the S&P500, and found there to be little effect.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) investigated the effects of marking to the market on the profits from arbitrage positions held unchanged until  delivery.
Using daily data on the FT-SE 100, the effects were usually small, with a mean of 0.014% of the spot price.
Thus, the average effect of marking to the market was an additional profit of about £8 per contract.
The consequences for arbitrage risk were also generally small, and 88% of the cases fell within the range 0.1% to -0.1% (that is an extra profit or loss of about £60 per contract).
However, there were a few outliers with values of over 0.4%, and so marking to the market occasionally had an important effect on arbitrage profits.
It appears that the effect of marking to the market with stochastic interest rates is generally rather small, can vary as between futures (depending on the sensitivity of their price to movements in interest rates) and may also vary over time for the same future.
Polakoff and Diz (1992) have argued that the assumption that futures contracts are divisible, which underlies the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross model, is unrealistic.
They demonstrate that when futures are indivisible, even if movements in futures prices can be predicted and interest rates are constant (and so there is zero correlation between futures prices and interest rates), futures and forward prices will differ.
Thus the Cox, Ingersoll and Ross result is changed, and forward and futures prices will differ, even when there is zero correlation between futures prices and interest rates.
Polakoff and Diz have also shown that indivisibility will induce autocorrelation in futures-forward price differences.
They studied sterling, Deutschmark, yen and Swiss franc futures-forward price differences and found evidence of autocorrelation, which they interpreted as being caused by futures contract indivisibility.
Such autocorrelation may invalidate the significance tests in the previous empirical studies of the futures-forward price differential.
Empirically, the assumption of constant interest rates has usually been found to be an acceptable approximation.
Therefore, while Cornell and French (1983a; 1983b) have derived a generalized no-arbitrage condition for the case when interest rates are stochastic and there is marking to the market, it is of little practical interest.
If the effects of marking to the market are thought to be substantial, these can be reduced by tailing the futures position used in the arbitrage.
A change in the futures price generates an immediate payment or receipt of variation margin, which must be borrowed or invested until delivery.
Therefore, a change in the futures price now of ΔF leads to a cash flow of ΔF (1 + r)at delivery, where r is the riskless interest rate between now and delivery.
(If this interest rate is constant (or fully predictable) marking to the market will have no effect, and tailing is unnecessary.)
To allow for tail risk, the number of futures contracts used in the arbitrage is reduced to  times the initial number of contracts.
Each day the value of r declines, and so the futures position should be recomputed each day.
Example .
Consider the Roy Hobbs example from Chapter 4.
He used a short position of 1905 contracts in his arbitrage.
If he wishes to tail his position, he will hold only 1905 × () = 1860 contracts at the start of his arbitrage.
When there is only one month before delivery, the riskless interest rate until delivery is 0.80%, and so the tailed futures position is 1905 × () = 1890 contracts.
On the day the arbitrage position is established, the price of FT-SE 100 futures rises from £53 000 to £53 500.
Subsequently,(and unrealistically) the futures price is unchanged, so that the delivery price is also £53 500.
Without tailing his futures position, Roy must bear the additional cost of financing the payment of variation margin of (53 500 -— 53 000) × 1905 = £952 500 for the next three months, that is, £952 500 × 0.02411 = £22 965.
If he tails his position, the cost of financing the payment of variation margin falls to (53 500 -53 000) × 1905 × 0.02411 × () = £22 424.
Tailing also has an effect on Roy's losses from holding a short futures position when the index rises.
He is holding 1905 -1860 = 45 fewer contracts than otherwise, and this reduces his loss by 45 × 500 = £22 500.
Subsequently, he steadily increases his short position in futures, so that at delivery he has 1905 contracts.
This example shows that tailing has more than prevented the loss of £22 424 from meeting variation margin payments.
Tailing is discussed further in Section 10.10, in the context of hedging.
5.3.4 No taxes
The no-arbitrage condition requires that the overall profit from trading shares, debt and futures as part of an arbitrage transaction is zero.
In the USA, until 1986, all gains and losses on futures contracts were taxed at the long-term rate of tax, while gains and losses on shares held for less than six months were taxed at the higher short-term rate.
In consequence, while the gross gains and losses on the futures contracts and shares in an arbitrage transaction were equal, the net gains and losses were not,(Schwarz, Hill and Schneeweis, 1986, pp. 105–6).
Thus, while the gross profit on an arbitrage transaction may be zero, because of differential taxation of the profits and losses on futures and shares, the net profit may be positive or negative.
It is possible to generalize the no-arbitrage condition to allow for taxation effects.
As well as differential tax rates, the timing of tax payments may also differ.
The ‘tax timing option’ is available for shares but not futures in the USA and UK.
With daily marking to the market, the capital gains and losses on an index futures contract are realized every day and the owner has no discretion over their timing, that is, shifting capital gains and losses between tax years.
For shares, capital gains and losses are only recognized when the share is sold, and this is directly under the owner's control.
For this tax timing option for shares to be valuable, the  marginal tax payer must not be tax exempt (e.g. not be a pension fund), and must be capable of holding the shares into the next tax period (e.g. not be an arbitrageur or market maker).
Thus the presence of a valuable tax timing option is an empirical tissue.
Cornell and French (1983a and 1983b) included different income and capital gains taxes on futures and shares in their no-arbitrage condition, incorporated the tax timing option and also allowed for stochastic interest rates.
They found that allowing for the tax timing option (as well as stochastic interest rates and different income and capital gains tax rates) in the no-arbitrage condition resulted in the no-arbitrage prices of the S&P500 moving much closer to the actual prices for the period June 1982 to September 1982 than if no such adjustments were made to the no-arbitrage condition.
However, a later study by Cornell (1985a) found that the mispricing for the S&P500 was no longer present, and he concluded that the tax timing option had become unimportant.
If the tax timing option is valuable, its value will increase as index volatility increases.
Since a valuable tax timing option increases the value of the spot (relative to the future), an increase in spot volatility will lead to futures becoming underpriced (relative to the theoretical futures price which ignores the tax timing option), i.e. there will be a negative relationship between the mispricing and spot volatility.
However, using hourly data for the FT-SE 100 from 1986 to 1990, Yadav and Pope (1992b) found a positive relationship between mispricings and spot volatility (measured using the implied volatility from FT-SE 100 option prices).
Hence, for the UK, the tax timing option appears to be of no value.
There is also the question of the taxation of dividends on the shares in the index.
While the recipient of dividends may be taxed, those who have sold shares short (and must therefore pay dividends to the buyer) may not receive an equivalent payment, or tax credit.
Even if they do, the timing of the tax payments by the recipient of dividends may differ from that of the tax payments to those making dividend payments.
In this case the present value of the dividends will differ, depending on whether they are being received or paid, and the no-arbitrage condition becomes a no-arbitrage band:(S -D p )(1+r) <or= F <or= (S -D R )(1+r), where D R  is the present value of dividends received, and D p  is the present value of dividends paid on shares sold short.
This band only exists if D p  >D R  .
5.3.5 Certain dividends
FT-SE 100 futures have a maximum life of nine months, and most of the volume occurs in the last four months of the contract's life.
Given the short period to maturity, there may be little remaining dividend uncertainty.
For example, in the UK the average period between the ex dividend date and payment of the dividend is fifty three days, while the  dividend is announced a few weeks before the ex dividend date (Yadav and Pope, 1992b).
Yadav and Pope (1990) investigated the assumption that the dividends on the shares in the index during the arbitrage period are known.
They found that a 50% variation in dividends led to only a 0.3% change in the theoretical futures price of the FT-SE 100 index.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) examined the effects of two different sources of dividend risk; the size of the dividend, and the payment date.
Dividends were estimated using last year's dividend plus 0% or 20%, and the resulting error in the proportionate mispricing was usually under 0.1%.
They also found that an error of eight weeks in the date of payment led to an average error in the proportionate mispricing of only 0.01%.
Hence, the theoretical futures price is highly insensitive to the estimate of dividends used in the calculation and the dividend certainty assumption is innocuous.
If it is necessary to make allowance for uncertain dividends, Cornell and French (1983b) have derived the corresponding no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.6 No transactions costs
In reality arbitrageurs will incur transactions costs.
Some estimates of the round-trip transactions costs involved in stock index arbitrage are set out in Table 5.1.
It is possible to modify the no-arbitrage condition to cover the case in which transaction costs are present (Modest and Sundaresan, 1983; Klemkosky and Lee, 1991).
Instead of an equality, a no-arbitrage band emerges within which the prices of the spot and future can move without creating index arbitrage opportunities.
This band is:
where C SL is the transactions cost of being long in the spot index (buying shares in the index); C FN is the transactions cost of being short in the future (selling a future); C SN is the transactions cost of being short in the spot index (selling short every share in the index); and C FL is the transactions cost of being long in the future (buying a future).
It is likely the transactions costs of being short differ from those of being long, that is, C SL C SN and C FN C FL .
If all the transactions costs are zero, this condition collapses back to the previous no-arbitrage equality.
This no-arbitrage band is illustrated in Fig. 5.2.
Provided the futures price lies somewhere within this band, no arbitrage opportunities exist.
Table 5.1 Round trip transactions costs for index futures arbitrage
Figure 5.2 No-arbitrage band due to transactions costs
So far arbitrage has been considered as the equilibrating mechanism.
This process generates three sets of round-trip transactions costs: buying and selling the futures; buying and selling the underlying shares; and buying and selling bonds.
Elton, Gruber and Rentzler (1984) identify two additional ways in which the spot and futures prices may be brought back into line — swaps and trade-the-cheapest.
Kawaller (1991) has also identified similar mechanisms.
While arbitrage is open to any investor, these two alternatives strategies, which will now be explained, are open to only a limited number of investors.
First, an investor who holds a long position in shares which are overpriced can sell them and buy the relatively underpriced index future (a swap or stock replacement).
(Such investors have been called substituters ; see Gammill and Marsh, 1988.)
This will generate lower transactions costs than arbitrage as it requires only one sale of shares and one purchase of futures — assuming that the investor would have closed out his or her long position in shares at the delivery date anyway, or is content to roll over the long futures position until they would otherwise have sold their share portfolio.
It should prove attractive to investors who, for other reasons, wish to have an investment in the market index.
This strategy will be profitable until the sum of the transactions costs of selling the existing share portfolio and buying the index future  (including the roll-over costs, if any) exceeds the deviation from the no-arbitrage condition.
Example .
Freeman Lowell holds a portfolio of shares corresponding to ten FT-SE 100 futures.
He aims to hold these shares for another year.
The riskless interest rate for the life of the far contract is 5%, while the present value of the dividends on the portfolio during this period is £8570.
The current value of the portfolio of shares is £580 000, and so the no-arbitrage price of the far contract is (58 000 -857) 1.05 = £60 000.
The current market price of the far contract is only £58 000.
Freeman sold the share portfolio for £580 000 and bought ten FT-SE 100 futures at a price of £58 000 each.
The profit at delivery before transactions costs and relative to continuing to hold the portfolio of shares, was 10 [(S -D) × (1 + r)-F ]= £20 000.
Given that the alternative strategy is to continue to hold the portfolio of shares, this profit is independent of the value of the index at delivery, and so is riskless.
At delivery, he bought another ten index futures for delivery at the end of the year, when he would otherwise have liquidated his share portfolio.
The transactions costs were to sell the portfolio of shares, and to buy ten index futures (twice).
Second, investors who have decided they wish to take an open position in the market index must choose between using shares or futures (Kawaller, 1987).
Presumably, they will choose the cheapest method and this will tend to alter the relative prices of shares and futures towards conforming with the no-arbitrage condition, that is, they will trade-the-cheapest.
Similarly, those who wish to end an open position in the market can do so, initially, by taking an offsetting position in the other asset (futures or shares), as well as by liquidating their position directly.
Again, they are presumed to choose the most advantageous alternative, and this will tend to restore the no-arbitrage condition.
Of course, this process is still subject to transactions costs.
But these may be just the cost of buying (selling) either a future or the underlying shares.
The deviations from the no-arbitrage condition that cannot be removed in this way should not exceed the difference in transactions costs between the alternative strategies, e.g. trading futures or the underlying shares.
Example .
Loraine Baines owns a portfolio of shares corresponding to 20 FT-SE 100 futures, which she decides to sell.
The data is the same as in the Freeman Lowell example, that is,S = £58 000,D = £857,r = 5% and the no-arbitrage price of the future is £60 000.
The only difference is that the actual futures price is £62 000.
Instead of selling the share portfolio now for £1 160 000, she opens a short position of 20 FT-SE 100 contracts.
At delivery the shares are sold to give a profit (relative to that obtained by immediately selling the portfolio of shares) before transactions costs of  20 [F -(S -D)(1 + r)]= £40 000.
This profit is independent of the value of the share portfolio at delivery.
The additional transactions costs were only for selling 20 index futures.
Thus the no-arbitrage condition can be tested with respect to three alternative trading strategies: arbitrage, swaps and trade-the-cheapest.
Assuming the no-arbitrage condition is correct in the absence of transactions costs, these transactions costs set upper and lower bounds on the departures from this condition that can occur in a competitive market.
The weakest test of conformity with the no-arbitrage condition uses the bounds set by the transactions costs of arbitrage.
Since this strategy generates riskless profits and is open to anyone, it should always be met.
The swap strategy provides a more demanding test as the transactions costs will be lower.
However, it is only open to those who already hold the overpriced asset and so relies on this group of investors trading sufficient assets to move the relative prices of the shares in the index and index futures back into line.
Finally, the trade-the-cheapest strategy provides the tightest bounds on the deviations from the no-arbitrage condition in the absence of transactions costs, as the relevant transactions costs are the difference between those for buying (or selling) futures and the underlying shares.
Provided a sufficiently large flow of investors are taking new positions in the market, this trade-the-cheapest strategy will effectively restore the no-arbitrage condition.
Pope and Yadav (1992) argued that potential arbitrageurs can be divided into groups, each with a different level of arbitrage transactions costs.
Every group has a limited amount of money available for arbitrage transactions (possible due to self-imposed position limits).
In this case, the supply of arbitrage services is a step function, with a large increase in arbitrage supply occurring when the mispricing is just large enough to cover the transactions costs of a new group of arbitrageurs.
Pope and Yadav tested this model using hourly data on the FT-SE 100 for the period from February 1986 to June 1988, and found about two or three steps (or transactions cost thresholds) ranging between 0.1% and 1.6%.
In consequence they accepted the hypothesis of a step function for the supply of arbitrage services.
Yadav and Pope (1992c) considered two data sets: 15-minute observations on the S&P500 from June 1983 to June 1987 (the data used by Mackinlay and Ramaswamy, 1988), and hourly data on the FT-SE 100 between April 1986 and March 1990.
Mispricings were defined as the natural logarithm of the actual futures price minus the natural logarithm of the no-arbitrage futures price.
They found that, for both the UK and the USA, the change in the mispricing depended on the level of the mispricing in the previous period.
If the previous mispricing was positive (the future was overpriced), then the change in the mispricing  tended to be negative (the overpricing declined), and vice versa.
Thus, mispricings were a mean reverting process.
This mean reversion effect became stronger in both countries as delivery approached, and this is consistent with arbitrage becoming less costly and less risky as maturity declines.
Yadav and Pope then divided the mispricings by size into one of 5 categories and found that the mean reversion effect was strongest in the USA and UK when the absolute value of the mispricing in the previous period was largest.
This supports the results of Pope and Yadav (1992) that there are a number of groups of arbitrageur, each facing different transactions costs.
Rubinstein (1989) has pointed out that the introduction of trading in baskets of shares (e.g. the shares in the S&P500 index or the Index Participation Units (TIPs) in the Toronto 35 index) such as index participations, will lower the transactions costs of index arbitrage, so narrowing the no-arbitrage band.
If index futures were subject to physical delivery, as was the Osaka 50 Kabusaki, the transactions costs (and increase in trading volume) of liquidating the arbitrage portfolio at delivery would be saved (Stoll, 1987).
Some transactions costs differ between traders, and the relevant transactions costs in each case are those faced by the marginal trader, for instance market makers in shares.
5.3.7 No initial margin
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition can be generalized to include the case where initial margin payments are required.
Provided the margin payments earn interest at the risk-free rate, the resulting no-arbitrage condition is unaltered.
This is illustrated in the earlier examples of arbitrage by Roy Hobbs and Scarlet O'Hara in Chapter 4.
For FT-SE 100 futures, clearing house members can choose to meet their initial margin obligations by depositing UK Treasury bills or bank guarantees with the clearing house (Bassett, 1987).
Interest is paid on cash deposits over £50 000.
In the UK, investors generally do not receive interest from their brokers on the balance in their margin accounts.
5.3.8 No continuous compounding
Each of the ways of expressing the no-arbitrage condition considered in Chapter 4 allows for compound growth, but not for continuous compounding.
It is possible to modify these various statements of the no-arbitrage condition to allow for continuous compounding.
Various ways in which this can be done are set out in Appendix 5.
C, in which it is shown that the introduction of continuous compounding leads to more complicated no-arbitrage conditions than otherwise.
Therefore, although  statements of the no-arbitrage condition which use continuous compounding are common in the academic literature, they are not used in this book, which will use F = (S -D)(1 + r).
5.3.9 Arithmetic index
The arbitrage arguments used in Chapter 4 were based on the idea that, by holding a portfolio of the shares in the index with the same weights as the index, the price of this portfolio must converge at delivery to that of the index future.
This applies for any weighting system (market weights, price weights, equal weights), as long as the index is an arithmetic average or total.
Thus, it is possible to construct an index-replicating portfolio for arithmetic market-weighted indices and for price-weighted indices, such as the Nikkei Stock Average and the MMI.
However, the construction of a fixed index-replicating portfolio is not possible for a geometric index.
It is a property of geometric indices that they understate the price rises and overstate the absolute size of a price falls of a portfolio of shares (see Chapter 1).
Hence, it is not possible to replicate the movements in a geometric index with an unchanging portfolio of shares.
While most of the indices on which index futures are traded are arithmetic indices (for example, S&P500, NYSE and FT-SE 100), from 1982 to 1988 futures on a geometric index, the VLCI, were traded on the Kansas City Board of Trade.
From 21 March 1988, this future was replaced by one on the Value Line Arithmetic index, which is the arithmetic equivalent of the VLCI.
Modest and Sundaresan (1983) have shown that the no-arbitrage condition for futures on a geometric index is different from that for an arithmetic index.
For the zero transaction costs case it is an inequality,F <or= (S -D)(l + r).
Therefore, it is not possible to use this condition to argue that a future is underpriced, only that it is overpriced.
This makes it difficult for traders to recognize arbitrage possibilities involving a future on a geometric index when the future is underpriced, and may account for the replacement of the geometric VLCI future by its arithmetic equivalent.
Eytan and Harpaz (1986) derived a no-arbitrage condition for geometric indices covering both under- and over-pricing.
If the no-arbitrage condition for an arithmetic future is written as F = Se  (see Appendix 5.
B), the corresponding condition for a geometric index is F = Se  , where π is the continuously compounded interest rate,w is the continuous dividend rate and h is the time in years until delivery.
The geometric no-arbitrage condition contains an extra term (y ) which is half the difference between the average of the variances of the instantaneous returns on the shares in the index () and the variance of the  instantaneous return on the index (), that is,y = () /2.
The term y must be positive, and so the no-arbitrage price for futures on a geometric index is lower than for the corresponding arithmetic index.
This is illustrated in Fig. 5.3.
While there is an exact no-arbitrage price for futures on geometric indices, it requires the calculation of y , and this may be difficult and may cause the arbitrage to be risky.
Figure 5.3 The no-arbitrage price for geometric index futures
5.3.10 Current prices
Many market indices are computed using the most recent transaction price for each share.
However, this may not be the price that would prevail if the share were traded now.
Clearly, an arbitrageur will be concerned with the prices at which he or she could trade now, rather than with historic prices.
If the index is computed using ‘stale’ prices, it is possible that the no-arbitrage condition appears to be violated, although if current prices were used in computing the index there would be no violation.
This problem is of considerable empirical importance when testing the no-arbitrage condition.
Even if the index is computed using midquotes, there will be a short lag in computing and disseminating the index, and there may also a short lag before market makers adjust their price quotations.
Therefore, mispricing in the UK may be due, in part, to such lags.
There is also likely to be trading lag, and this is discussed as part of the simultaneous trading assumption later in this chapter.
5.3.11 Short selling
When F < (S -D)(1 + r), arbitrage requires short selling all the shares in the index.
The UK allows short selling after a downward price  movement (Bank of England, 1988).
However, only UK market makers in shares and certain members of the merged LIFFE/LTOM exchange can borrow UK shares, that is, engage in short selling.
Short selling is banned in Hong Kong (Yau, Schneeweis and Yung, 1990), Finland (Martikainen and Puttonen, 1992) and Norway (Bradbery, 1992), while short selling shares was banned in Australia until the mid-1980s (Bowers and Twite, 1985) and in Sweden until August 1991.
In the US a share can only be sold short if its last price movement was upwards (an uptick).
This condition is unlikely to be met for all the shares in an index, particularly those indices based on many shares, such as the S&P500, the Value Line Arithmetic and the NYSE Composite.
For such widely based indices, it is often not possible to short sell the index.
However, if the arbitrageur already holds a long position in those shares which cannot be sold short, short selling these shares can be replaced by the liquidation of some or all of the arbitrageur's existing long positions.
This restricts arbitrage requiring the short selling of shares to those traders who initially hold long positions in many of the shares in the relevant index, such as large market makers or institutional investors.
If the underlying asset cannot be sold short, or the arbitrageur does not hold stocks which can be sold, arbitrage for the case when the futures price is relatively low is not possible and the no-arbitrage condition becomes F <or= (S -D)(1 + r).
Some arbitrageurs may be prepared to short sell only some of the shares in the index.
While this may overcome restrictions, such as the US uptick rule, the performance of the arbitrage portfolio is not guaranteed to replicate the index perfectly, and so the arbitrage is no longer riskless.
Following the 1987 stock market crash, the NYSE introduced Rule 80a on 1 August 1990.
When the NYSE moves down (up) by more than 50 points, selling (buying) shares — not just short selling — as part of an index arbitrage transaction can be executed only if the last price movement was up (down).
This rule in effect, disconnects the spot and futures markets when there are large price movements.
Miller (1992) reports that, when Rule 80a is operative, arbitrage volume drops by over one third.
However, there is no evidence that this leads to a delinking of spot and futures prices.
Kuserk, Locke and Sayers (1992) conducted an event study of the 14 days when rule 80a was operative in August, September and October 1990 using transactions data for S&P500 futures.
They failed to find evidence that the operation of rule 80a delinked the spot and futures markets, although the operation of this rule led to a slight increase in futures price volatility and a minor reduction in the liquidity of the futures market.
Thus, while rule 80a does not appear to have caused serious damage to the spot and futures markets, it does not seem to have fulfilled its objective of promoting market stabilization.
The UK has a system of stock exchange accounts, each of which lasts for two (occasionally three) weeks.
Transactions during an account are all settled on the same day: the second Monday following the end of the account.
This means that short selling shares for any period within a stock exchange account does not require stock borrowing.
Therefore, the arbitrage of underpricings (which requires short selling shares) is opened up during the stock exchange account which includes the delivery date to traders who cannot usually short sell.
This provides an opportunity to test the effect on arbitrage of the short selling difficulties which otherwise exist.
Yadav and Pope (1992b) examined hourly data on the FT-SE 100 from 1986 to 1990.
They compared the average mispricing in the near contract during the stock exchange account which included the delivery date, with that in the next near contract for the same period, and with that for the near contract in previous stock exchange accounts.
They found the average proportionate mispricing was very significantly larger in the stock exchange account which included the contract's delivery date, than otherwise.
This result strongly supports the hypothesis that underpricing (i.e. negative mispricings) have been reduced for the near contract during the stock exchange account which includes the delivery date.
This implies that short selling difficulties have led to a widening of the no-arbitrage band by permitting greater underpricings.
5.3.12 Proceeds of short sales
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition assumed that all the proceeds of selling shares short are immediately available to the vendor.
However, this is unlikely to be the case.
Payment of some (say, half) of the proceeds may be delayed until the vendor has completed his or her side of the bargain and delivered the relevant shares.
Arbitrage involving buying shares is unaffected, and so the no-arbitrage condition that F <or= (S -D)(1 + r)remains valid.
However, arbitrage transactions involving taking a short position in shares (that is, when F < (S -D)(1 + r)) are altered (Brenner, Subrahmanyam and Uno, 1990a).
If only a proportion f of the short sales proceeds is paid immediately, with the remainder being paid at the delivery date of the futures contract, the terminal value of the cash flows from arbitrage involving short selling shares is reduced to S (1 + rf)-D (1 + r), and the no-arbitrage bound for this situation is altered to F >or= S (1 + rf)-D (1 + r).
The no-arbitrage band is (S -D)(1 + r)-Sr (l -f) >or= F >or= (S -D)(1 + r), which can be rewritten as S (1 + rf)-D (1 + r) <or= F <or= (S -D)(1 + r), and which collapses back to the no-arbitrage equality when f = 1 .
The width of this band depends not only on f , but also on the spot price and the riskless interest rate.
Thus, as the  futures price rises, the band will tend to grow wider; this is illustrated in Fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.4 No-arbitrage band with a delay in the receipt of short sales receipts
Example .
The current value of the FT-SE 100 index is 2400, while the current price of one FT-SE 100 index future for delivery in six months is £60 550.
The present value of dividends on the shares in the index during the next six months is £1000, and the riskless rate of interest for six months is 5%.
Therefore the no-arbitrage price of the future is (S -D)(1 + r)= (2400 × 25 -1000) × 1.05 = £61 950.
Hence, the price of a future is £1400 too low.
Lee Winters, manageress of the Corbrige Fund, is considering engaging in index arbitrage, but has discovered that she will initially receive only half of the proceeds from short selling shares, that is,f = 0.5.
In this case her no-arbitrage futures price is S (1 + fr)-D (1 + r)= (2400 × 25 × 1.025)-(1000 × 1.05) = £60 450.
Since the futures price is currently £100 above this level, there is no arbitrage opportunity for Lee, even though the current futures price is 1400 below the no-arbitrage value.
5.3.13 Simultaneous trading
It has been assumed that, if an arbitrage opportunity arises, it is immediately possible to trade index futures and the corresponding basket of shares.
Trading a basket of 100 or more shares may take some time, and during this period prices may move from those at which the arbitrage transaction was initiated, and the futures position established.
Another way in which the simultaneous creation of the arbitrage position in both the spot and futures markets may not occur is when only one of these markets is open, in which case the no-arbitrage condition is undefined, and arbitrage transactions are impossible.
A related problem is that many empirical studies use closing prices and, if the closing times differ between the spot and futures markets, the closing prices from the spot  and futures markets will not be directly comparable and need not obey the no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.14 No delivery price risk
Since index futures use cash settlement, riskless arbitrage requires that, if a long (short) position has been taken in shares they must be sold (bought) at the delivery price of the corresponding index future, which is z in the Warren Cox, Roy Hobbs, Montgomery Brewster and the Scarlet O'Hara examples in Chapter 4.
The arbitrage profit is independent of the price at which the shares are sold (bought), provided this is the delivery price of the future used for the arbitrage.
Therefore, arbitrage can lead to the sale or purchase of very large blocks of shares, irrespective of the price, in the few minutes when the delivery price is determined.
This is argued to have a potentially destabilizing effect on the stock market.
This problem is amplified if other financial instruments also expire at the same time.
For example, until 1987 the USA had a ‘triple witching hour’ four times per year.
At this time the S&P500 index future, options on the S&P500 index and options on futures on the S&P500 index all expired.
Because this was thought to increase volatility, in June 1987 the expiry times were altered to avoid this triple witching hour (Stoll and Whaley, 1991; see also Chapter 13 for further discussion of the triple witching hour and expiration volatility).
For the FT-SE 100, arbitrageurs cannot guarantee they will be able to trade the shares in the index at the delivery price.
This is because the EDSP is the average value of the index over a 20-minute period, and the prices used in computing the index are the midprices of the quotations, not the last traded prices.
5.3.15 No changes in the definition of the index
It is possible that, during the life of an arbitrage transaction, there is a change in the way the index is computed, for instance the identity of the shares in the index is altered, the mechanics of the index computation are changed or the weights attached to the shares in the–index computation are revised.
There is a steady stream of deletions and additions to the shares comprising the FT-SE 100 index.
For example, during the three years 1987, 1988 and 1989, there were 34 changes in the constituents of the FT-SE 100 index (Robertson, 1990).
During the 11-year period 1973–83, there were 228 changes in the composition of the S&P500 index (Harris and Gurel, 1986), although for the ten-year period 1980–9 there were only eight changes in the constituents of the Nikkei Stock Average.
From time to time a subtle change may be made to the details of the computation of the index.
If the market value weights used in the index are based on current market prices, then every time the price of any share in the index changes this will change all the weights.
This price change will produce a matching change in the weights of an arbitrage portfolio.
If there is a change in the definition of the index during the life of an arbitrage transaction, the portfolio of shares (long or short) must be immediately adjusted to reflect the new definition of the index.
If not, the arbitrage is no longer riskless.
Example .
Consider an index that contains the 100 largest publicly quoted UK companies.
On 1 July the value of the index was 2400.0 and the current price of a future for delivery in six months was 62 000.
The present value of dividends on the shares in the index over the next six months was £1500.
The risk-free rate of interest was 5% for the six months, and the futures delivery price was the index multiplied by £25.
Therefore, ignoring transactions costs and taxation, an arbitrage profit of £547.60 per futures contract was available by selling futures and buying shares.
Mary Poppins, manageress of the Cramlington Fund, sold an index future, and purchased the basket of shares in the index costing £60 000 in exactly the same proportions as used in computing the index.
If the computation of the index is unchanged until delivery Mary need do nothing until delivery.
However, after three months the UK government privatized the telephone industry, and it was decided that this newly quoted company, British Telecommunications, should be included in the index with a weight of 0.10.
At the same time Metal Bashers Ltd, a company with a weight of 0.005, was removed from the index to keep the total number of companies at 100.
Therefore the weight of each of the other 99 shares fell from an average of 1.005% to 0.909%.
To maintain her riskless arbitrage, Mary was instantly required to sell her holding in Metal Bashers Ltd, buy shares in British Telecommunications to bring her holding up to 10% of her portfolio and sell part of her holding in each of the other 99 companies to reduce their average weight in her portfolio to 0.909%.
5.3.16 Perfect asset divisibility
In order to construct an arbitrage transaction where the number of futures exactly offsets the basket of shares in the index, it is necessary to be able to hold shares or futures in fractional quantities, which is not possible.
This indivisibility problem will tend to be smaller if each futures contract has a small nominal value, and the total value of the arbitrage transaction is very large.
Example .
Sarah J. Connor, an employee of the Cullercoats Bank, is considering an arbitrage transaction in either the maxi VL index future  or the mini VL index future.
Maxi futures on the VL index are currently priced at £65 000, while the price of mini futures on the VL index is, by definition, one fifth of the maxi VL price, £13 000.
The current value of the basket of shares corresponding to one futures contract is £60 000 for the maxi VL, and £12 000 for the mini VL.
There are 1000 companies in the VL index, each of which is currently priced at £2.75 per share.
Sarah can engage in an arbitrage transaction worth a maximum of either £105 000 or £5 million.
There are four arbitrage possibilities open to her involving:(a) the maxi VL index and £5 million;(b) the maxi VL index and £105 000;(c) the mini VL index and £5 million;(d) the mini VL index and £105 000.
These are summarized in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2 Example of the effects of asset indivisibility
The last line of the above table shows the extent to which indivisibilities have caused an imbalance between the value of futures and shares in the arbitrage transaction.
As can be seen, these are all fairly small, and in practice the lack of asset divisibility is not a major problem, although it does mean that a completely riskless arbitrage transaction may be impossible.
The transactions costs for trading round lots of shares (e. g. one hundred shares) may be lower than for odds lots.
This was not considered in the above example, and will increase the costs of arbitraging an index which contains many companies.
The Toronto 35 index uses modified market value weights, so that the number of shares in each company required to form the arbitrage portfolio is rounded to the nearest hundred.
This will reduce the costs of arbitraging this index as the trading of odd lots of shares is never required.
5.3.17 No price effect
This assumption is that the price of assets are unaffected by the arbitrage transactions.
The markets for the major index futures and the shares included in such an index are usually highly liquid, and so there is likely to be little adverse price movement for all but the largest arbitrage transactions.
Harris, Sofianos and Shapiro (1990) estimated that the price  effect of an average programme trade on the NYSE in June 1989 of $9 million was only 0.0225%.
However, the aggregate effect of arbitrage will be to bring the prices of shares and an index future on those shares into some no-arbitrage relationship.
5.3.18 Shares are paid for immediately
The purchaser of shares usually receives a short period of interest-free credit due to settlement lag.
In some markets, for example the UK or France, this can amount to three or four weeks.
This delayed cash flow will alter the net present value of an arbitrage transaction which involves buying shares.
The effect of settlement lag can be represented by reducing the risk-free rate used for the spot price from r to rg , and the no-arbitrage bound for buying shares and selling futures becomes .
If there are also delays in the receipt of the proceeds from short selling shares (considered earlier in this chapter), assuming f <or= g , the full no-arbitrage band becomes .
Note that this no-arbitrage band will lie below the no-arbitrage price given by .
A computer spreadsheet supplied by LIFFE (1991), which computes the FT-SE Eurotrack 100 no-arbitrage futures price, offers the facility to allow for settlement lag, while Yadav and Pope (1992a, 1992b) allowed for settlement lag in their calculation of FT-SE 100 no-arbitrage prices.
5.3.19 Capital gains or losses are paid at delivery
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition in Chapter 4 relied upon the payment of the capital gains or losses on the shares and futures contracts at delivery.
If marking to the market exists, this condition is not met for futures, and has been discussed above in connection with the no-marking-to-market assumption.
The assumption will normally be met for long positions in shares, but for short positions the potential losses are infinite and, if there has been a substantial rise in the index, a short seller may be required to put up additional funds before delivery.
This premature cash flow will have to be financed, so altering the net present value of the arbitrage transaction.
5.3.20 No risk of default
If a person trading futures contracts fears that the contract will not be honoured, he or she will require a default premium (Bailey and Ng, 1991).
This will tend to reduce the price that a trader is prepared to pay for a long position, and increase the price required for a short position.
Although the regulatory systems for futures markets have generally  prevented defaults, the probability of a default must always exist to some small (and variable) degree.
Thus, the omission of a default premium from the no-arbitrage condition is probably of little consequence for futures traded on established and well-regulated exchanges.
5.3.21 Zero value of voting and other rights
Owning a long position in an index future enables the trader to participate in price changes of the shares in the index.
However, he or she is not legally the owner of any shares and so does not receive dividends, and cannot vote.
The lack of dividends is reflected in the no-arbitrage condition, while the absence of voting rights is not.
When the trader owns a small proportion of the voting shares the lack of voting rights may be an insignificant loss but, as the proportion of the company's shares held by the trader rises, the voting rights start to become valuable.
Since it is the larger companies that are included in stock indices (and the smaller the company the lower its weight), the omission of a value for the voting rights is probably not important, except possibly for the Value Line Arithmetic index, which is an equally weighted index covering some 1700 companies.
The owners also get various benefits such as copies of the annual report and accounts, the right to attend, speak and propose motions at the annual general meeting, shareholder discounts on the firm's product, and so on.
The value of these rights is not included in the no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.22 Immoral investments
By buying an index future, the arbitrageur has indirectly invested in all the shares in the index.
Some of the shares in the index may be objectionable on moral grounds to the customers (or potential customers) of institutional investors such as pension funds, investment trusts and insurance companies.
It is possible that such customers will not be concerned by an indirect holding via an index future (Martin, 1988; Luskin, 1987, pp. 343 4).
This possible benefit of index futures (which is likely to be very small) is ignored by the no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.23 Costless storage
Apart from financing costs, which are included in the no-arbitrage condition, it is assumed the underlying asset, the shares which comprise the index, can be stored costlessly and does not depreciate with storage.
While this would be a restrictive assumption for many commodity futures, such as live cattle or frozen concentrated orange juice, this appears to be a reasonable assumption for shares.
Therefore, there is no need to include such holding costs in the no-arbitrage condition.
5.3.24 Independence of the index
The derivation of the no-arbitrage condition for futures prices assumes that the value of the index is given.
Hemler and Longstaff (1991) relaxed this assumption, and constructed a general equilibrium model in which the index, the volatility of returns on the index, the price of the index future and the (stochastic) risk-free rate of interest are determined simultaneously.
This continuous time model finds that the price of index futures depends on the volatility of returns on the index, as well as on the spot price, dividend yield, the risk-free rate of interest and the time to delivery.
One implication of this general equilibrium model is that market volatility is added to stochastic interest rates as an additional reason for being unable to specify the direction of the relationship between forward and futures prices, as discussed in Section 5.3.3.
Hemler and Longstaff derived a number of empirical predictions of their general equilibrium model that differ from those of the no-arbitrage model.
Using monthly data on the NYSE Composite for the period from January 1983 to November 1987, these predictions were tested.
They fitted the regression equation , where  is the volatility of returns on the index,r t  is the riskless interest rate, α, β, and γ are parameters, and Ε t is a disturbance term.
The no-arbitrage model predicts that α = γ = 0, and β = Γ (where Γ is the maturity of the contract, measured in years), while the general equilibrium model predicts that β>γ, β>0, β>Γ, γdoes not equal 0 and α does not equal 0.
Their empirical results largely supported the predictions of the general equilibrium model, rather than those of the no-arbitrage model.
Thus, α and γ were significantly different from zero, while β>Γ.
The need to include stock market volatility in the pricing equation for index futures may account for the apparent mispricings indicated by the no-arbitrage condition, particularly when the market is volatile, when the general equilibrium model would not indicate a mispricing.
To test this possibility, Hemler and Longstaff computed mispricings for the period from January 1986 to November 1987 using both models, and compared the results.
When October 1987 is included, the general equilibrium pricing model produces smaller mispricings, which is consistent with the need to allow for market volatility.
However, when the October 1987 observation is removed, this conclusion is reversed, which suggests that, except in highly volatile periods, the no-arbitrage model is preferable.
5.4 CONCLUSIONS
Arbitrage opportunities have been found in all the markets so far tested.
A number of explanations for these results are available, but it is not yet clear which explanations are correct.
A consideration of the assumptions underlying the no-arbitrage condition found that many are valid, or that the  deviations are of little empirical consequence.
For the remaining assumptions, it was possible to generalize the no-arbitrage condition.
Behaviour of the prices of stock index futures
Various price relationships will be investigated in this chapter.
First, the difference between the current spot and future prices (the basis) will be studied.
Then, the difference between the current prices of two futures contracts (spreads) will be analysed.
6.1 THE BASIS
The basis is defined as the current price of a future minus the spot price of the underlying asset, that is,F -S .
(It is sometimes defined, in the reverse manner, as S -F .)
Given the no-arbitrage condition derived in Chapter 4, the basis is determined by two factors of opposite sign.
Thus,F = (S -D)(1 + r)can be rearranged as F -S = Sr -D (1 + r), and the basis is equal to the difference between two terms,Sr and D (1 + r).
These two terms which determine the basis will now be considered.
Futures contracts do not require any carrying costs, for instance the loss of interest on money invested in margins, and so the futures price is higher than the spot price by Sr , the interest foregone by tying up £ S in the stock market.
Holding the shares in the index also gives the right to dividends, making the spot price higher than the futures price by the present value of the dividends (D ), plus the interest on this sum (Dr ).
Since both Sr and D (1 + r)will be positive, the basis for a stock index can be positive or negative, depending on the relative magnitudes of D (1 + r ) and Sr .
Asset pricing theory leads to the expectation that the arithmetic returns on the market index (capital gains plus dividends) will exceed the risk-free rate of interest.
It is also generally true that the risk-free rate exceeds the rate of dividends on the market index (d ).
If this is the case, and it can easily be investigated empirically, the restated no-arbitrage condition F = S (1 + r -d)gives the result that the basis for a stock index is positive, that is,F > S (Figlewski, 1984b).
Example .
Dr Michael Burgess wishes to disaggregate the basis for the outstanding FT-SE 100 contracts into two parts: the dividend effect (D (1 + r)) and the foregone interest effect (Sr ).
The current value of the FT-SE 100 index is 2500, while the present value of dividends on shares corresponding to one FT-SE 100 index future is £1000 for the June contract, £1500 for the September contract and £2500 for the December contract.
The riskless rate of interest for the period to delivery is 3% for the June contract, 6% for the September contract and 9% for the December contract.
In which case, Table 6.1 can be computed by Dr Burgess.
In this example, the forgone interest exceeds the dividends forgone, and the basis for each contract is positive.
Table 6.1 Components of the basis for the example
6.1.1 Basis speculation
A trader may have a view, not about future movements in the level of the futures or spot prices, but about relative movements in these prices, that is, the basis.
He or she may choose to speculate on movements in the basis.
Since F -S = Sr -D (1 + r), changes in the basis can be caused by movements in S ,D and r .
Partially differentiating this equation with respect to each of these variables gives:
 ta;:(F -S) /δS = r >0
 ta;(F -S) /δD = -(1 + r)<0
 ta;(F -S) /δr = S -D -(1 + r)(δD/δr)>0
It has been implicitly assumed above that  ta; S/δD = 0 , which accords with the Miller and Modigliani (1961) result that the share price is unaffected by dividend policy.
The trading implications of these partial derivatives are that if the spot price or the risk-free interest rate is expected to rise,F -S grows bigger (that is, the basis weakens) and, if F > S , the basis will widen; while if dividends are expected to rise,F -S gets smaller (the basis strengthens) and, if F > S , the basis will narrow.
Note that when a share goes ex dividend this should have no effect on the price of the index future because both S and D will fall by the same amount (the present value of the dividend).
However, the basis will weaken when a share in the index goes ex dividend because the futures price is unaffected, while the spot price falls (Schwarz, 1991).
Example .
Bash Brannigan, manager of the Dunston Fund, formed the view that dividends on equities were about to rise and so the excess of the no-arbitrage price of an index future (F ) over the spot price of the shares in the index (S ) would reduce, that is, the basis will narrow.
On 4 July the FT-SE 100 index stood at 2400 while the risk-free interest rate for the period to the end of March (r ) was 8%, and the present value of the dividends on the shares in the index (D ) was £1500.
The price of the March index future was equal to the no-arbitrage value of (2400 × 25 -1500) × 1.08 = £63180.
Thus the basis was £63180 -60000 = £3180.
He had no views about the direction of movement of spot or futures prices.
If the present value of the dividend stream (D ) rose to £2500, while at the same time the value of the index fell by x points, with no-arbitrage futures price would be [(2400 -x) × £25 -£2500]× 1.08 = £62100 -27 x , and the basis would become 62 000 -27 x -60 000 + 25 x = 2100 — 2 x .
If this happens the basis will fall by 3180 -(2100 -2 x ) = £1080 + 2 x , Provided the index does not unexpectedly rise by more than  = 540 points (23%), a most unlikely event, Bash Brannigan will make a profit from speculating on the basis.
So he sold ten futures in the index and bought the corresponding basket of shares.
When the estimate of D changed to £2500 and the index fell to 2000, he liquidated his positions in futures and shares.
He made a loss of £100 000 from his long position in shares, but this was more than offset by his profit of £118 000 from his short futures position.
Thus, overall, he made a gross profit of 10 (1080 + 2 × 400) = £18 800.
The above analysis assumes the basis is affected by only S ,D and r .
However, if the assumptions underlying the derivation of the no-arbitrage condition are not met, other factors may also cause changes in the basis.
For example, the presence of transactions costs may mean that the basis can change within the appropriate no-arbitrage band, while changes in taxation may also affect the basis.
See Chapter 5 for a discussion of the assumptions underlying the derivation of the no-arbitrage condition.
6.1.2 Basis and maturity
The approach of delivery has a predictable effect on the absolute size of the basis.
As delivery approaches,r (the riskless rate of interest for the remaining life of the future) tends to zero, as does D (the present value of the dividends payable).
In consequence, the basis tends to zero, irrespective of whether it is positive or negative.
At delivery F = S , because a future for immediate delivery is equivalent to the spot, and the basis is zero.
This convergence is illustrated in Fig. 6.1.
Example.
Table 6.2 shows calculations of the basis using the data from the numerical example in Table 2.4 of Chapter 2 for the FT-SE 100 index future for the 5 and 6 September 1989.
The basis is positive (apart from the September contract on 5 September), as expected.
The shorter the time to delivery, the smaller the absolute size of the basis, as expected.
Figure 6.1 Convergence of the basis
Table 6.2 Values of the basis for the example
Hemler and Longstaff (1991) have developed a general equilibrium model for pricing index futures, in which the futures price depends on stock market volatility (see Chapter 5.3.24).
One implication of this model is that, because market volatility and the riskless interest rate are assumed over time to revert towards their mean values, no clear statements can be made about movements in the basis.
Indeed, it is possible for the basis to change sign several times during the life of a contract.
6.1.3 Basis risk
Basis risk means variations in the numerical value of the basis, that is, variations in F -S .
The relative magnitude of fluctuations in the basis (F -S ), the futures price (F ) and the spot price (S ) is a matter of considerable importance for some users of futures, such as hedgers (see Chapter 10).
The variance of the difference between two numbers (F and  S ), which we can denote  , is equal to the variance of F ,, plus the variance of S ,, minus twice the covariance between F and S ,, or .
If the basis risk, is to be smaller than the risk of the spot () and the future (), there must be a substantial positive correlation between the spot and futures prices.
For example, if the futures and spot prices have an equal variance, that is ,, and the correlation between movements in the spot and futures prices is zero, = O, then  and the basis risk, that is , variance of F -S , is twice that of either the spot price or the futures price.
However, a zero correlation is unlikely and, if the correlation between the spot and futures prices is 0.8 (), then the variance of the basis is only 40% of that of either the spot or futures prices, that is,().
This illustrates the general property that basis risk is usually considerably smaller than the risk attached to either the spot or future alone.
Arbitrage, by confining spot and futures prices to a no-arbitrage band, increases the correlation between these two prices; this has been formally proved by Lien (1992).
Figure 6.2 Convergence of basis risk
As delivery approaches, the basis converges to zero.
Therefore it is plausible to expect that the basis risk will also fall to zero as delivery approaches, as illustrated in Fig. 6.2.
Castelino and Francis (1982) prove this result for the case considered by Samuelson (1965); see Appendix 8.
A for details of Samuelson's model.
The intuition is that, as delivery approaches, the future slowly turns into the spot.
The arrival of new information is more likely to affect spot and futures prices in the same way (so reducing basis risk) if it arrives closer to delivery instead of further away.
Castelino and Francis carried out an empirical study of the relationship between basis risk and maturity.
They measured basis risk as the variance of the values of F -S within a month.
Using US data on wheat, soyabeans, soyabean meal and soyabean oil, they found that, as expected, basis risk declines as delivery approaches.
6.1.4 Information, adjustment speed and price discovery
In Chapter 4 a no-arbitrage equation was derived for the relationship between the spot and futures prices of a market index.
In a dynamic world, the relevant information set underlying this no-arbitrage condition is continually changing, leading to continuous movement in the no-arbitrage spot and futures prices.
One of the important roles attributed to futures markets is that of ‘price discovery’, that is, the futures market reflects new information before the spot market.
The creation of a futures market will attract investors to trade the future who did not already trade the spot (Cox, 1976).
For example, investors might be attracted by the advantages of a highly liquid market, low transactions costs, easily available short positions, low margins and rapid execution.
The information held by these new investors about the expected spot price at the futures delivery date will be revealed in the futures price.
This additional information is then available to traders in the spot market.
Therefore, the introduction of futures will increase the amount of information reflected in the spot price.
Grossman (1977) constructed a different model in which there are informed and uninformed traders.
The spot price reveals only part of the information possessed by informed traders because the spot price is also influenced by random disturbances.
In these circumstances, a futures market may convey some more of the information possessed by the informed traders to the uninformed.
The result is the same as for Cox, that is, that the introduction of a futures market increases the amount of information reflected in the spot price.
A laboratory study of Californian students by Forsythe, Palfrey and Plott (1984) found that the introduction of a futures market increased the speed with which information was reflected in the spot price.
Clearly, given the large amount of data already impounded in share prices, and that few well-informed investors will be induced to trade index futures who did not already trade shares, the increase in information reflected in share prices is likely to be small.
There is also the problem that the futures market price reflects a market index, while equity traders deal in individual shares (Miller, 1990a).
Thus, the futures price reflects predominantly market-wide information, while each share price reflects information specific to that company, as well as systematic (or marketwide) factors.
Cooper and Mello (1990) present a model in which the introduction of a market in index futures causes share prices to be less, rather than more, informative.
They argue that the creation of a market in index futures diverts volume that is not primarily based on information about a specific company away from the stock market, and so the remaining trades in shares are more information-based than before.
This causes the  market makers in shares to widen their bid-ask spreads, to protect themselves in their dealings with better-informed traders.
Because of this increase in transactions costs, the profits from exploiting company-specific information in the stock market decline.
This leads to a fall in the amount of company-specific information collected, and a decline in stock market volume.
Thus, share prices reflect less information than before the introduction of index futures.
This argument ignores a number of factors that will tend to operate in the opposite direction.
For example, index arbitrage will create a substantial increase in uninformed share trading, the holders of shares (for instance , market makers) can hedge some of the risk via index futures, and index futures permit the revelation of bad news (of a general nature) by adopting a short position.
Green (1986) has argued that, in the absence of a market in index futures, traders without an initial long position in shares cannot reveal any bad news they may possess about share returns because short selling shares is difficult.
If there is a market in index futures, such traders can take a short position by selling futures, thereby impounding their information about bad news into the futures price.
Ultimately, the effect of the introduction of index futures on the information content of share prices is an empirical matter.
There do not appear to have been any empirical studies which have looked for an increase in the amount of information reflected in share prices as a result of the commencement of trading in index futures (except in so far as volatility reflects information; see Chapter 13).
Because of the ease of trading in futures, index futures may reflect new information faster than spot markets (that is, they provide a leading indicator of share price movements).
There are a number of reasons for expecting the prices of index futures to adjust faster than the spot price, i.e. the market index.
First, when new information is received, traders can choose whether to exploit this knowledge in the futures or spot markets.
For information that affects the share price of only a few companies (unsystematic information), traders will probably choose to buy or sell individual shares (or their options) rather than index futures because the movement in the index will be very much smaller than that in the share prices of the affected companies.
However, traders may prefer to use the futures market to exploit information which relates to the economy in general(systematic information) rather than to particular companies.
This is because trading futures has the advantages of a highly liquid market, low transactions costs, easily available short positions, low margins and rapid execution.
Therefore, the futures price will respond first to information of a general nature, while information specific to a few companies will have little impact on the index or the futures price.
Index arbitrage will then generate subsequent movements in the spot price to bring the spot and futures markets into line.
Second, even if traders choose to trade mainly in the spot market, there is likely to be a delay in the response of the spot market to the arrival of information of a general nature.
If a new piece of information arrives which is bullish, traders will immediately bid up the price of futures, so the next trade should fully reflect the new information.
For the spot price (that is, the index) to respond fully, if the index is computed from actual rather than quoted prices, there must be a trade in every share in the index, and then the index must be recomputed.
This suggests some delay in the response of the index (spot price) to new information due to the ‘stale prices’ effect.
In the UK the FT-SE 100 index is based on quotations from SEAQ rather than transactions prices, and so the index is likely to be a more accurate reflection of the current state of the equity market.
Finally, since short selling shares may be difficult, e.g. due to the uptick rule in the USA, bad news may be reflected first in the futures market, and only later in the stock market.
The index and the future differ in respect of the times at which they value the basket of shares in the index, and this can be a source of additional information.
A stock index represents the market's estimate of the present value of the subsequent cash flows expected from the constituent companies, while the current price of a futures contract on an index for delivery at time T represents the market's estimate of the present value at time T of the subsequent cash flows.
Therefore the new information contained in the price of a futures contract, over and above that contained in the current spot price, is the value of the cash flows from owning the index between now and time T (Carlton, 1984).
The results of a number of studies of the leads and lags between spot and futures prices will be considered to see if the theoretical prediction that futures prices lead spot prices is supported and, if so, to see how long is the lag before spot prices catch up with futures prices.
Kawaller, Koch and Koch (1987; 1988) examined the S&P500 index for leads and lags between the spot and futures prices using transactions data for a two-year period (1984–5).
They found that, in general, these two prices move very closely together.
However, they did find some evidence that the price of index futures leads the spot price (S&P500 index) by some 20–45 minutes.
Herbst, McCormack and West (1987) analysed price changes over ten-second periods to examine the lead-lag relationship between the spot and futures markets for both the S&P500 and VLCI indices.
They found that, for each index, the futures market led the spot market by a few minutes.
For the S&P500 the lead was between zero and eight minutes, with an average of 0.7 minutes.
For VLCI, the lead was up to 16 minutes, with an average of 0.9 minutes.
Furbush (1989) studied movements in the spot and futures prices of the S&P500 index over five-minute periods in October 1987.
He regressed the change in the spot price on the change in the futures price for the previous five-minute period and found a positive and highly significant relationship.
This is consistent with the  results of Herbst, McCormack and West.
Kutner and Sweeney (1991) studied minute-by-minute data for the S&P500 between August and December 1987.
After pre-whitening the series of spot and futures prices, they looked for Granger causality (see Chapter 8) between these series.
They found that futures prices led spot prices by about 20 minutes.
Stoll and Whaley (199Ob) analysed returns (logarithm of the price relative) over five-minute intervals for the S&P500 and MMI index futures and indices over the period from 1982 to 1987.
They fitted an autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model to the share price data and the indices to remove the effects of bid-ask bounce (in the absence of new information, the transaction prices for a security will fluctuate between the bid and the ask prices, depending on whether the trade was initiated by a buyer or a seller) and infrequent trading (or stale prices).
Therefore, any remaining lead of the futures price over the spot price is due to either new information being reflected first in the futures market (price discovery), or to recording and reporting lags for the index.
They found that, while the main relationship is contemporaneous, the returns on the S&P500 and MMI futures lead those on the underlying index by about five minutes, and attribute this to a price discovery role for index futures.
Cheung and Ng (1990) analysed fifteen minute returns for the S&P500 from June 1983 to June 1987.
They made allowance for a stale price effect in the index (by including a first order moving average process), and used a GARCH (1,1) model to control for autocorrelation in the variance of the disturbances.
They found that futures returns led spot returns by at least fifteen minutes, although there was also a strong contemporaneous correlation between spot and futures returns.
Chan, Chan and Karolyi (1991) fitted a bivariate GARCH model to the S&P500 from 1984 to 1989.
Using returns computed over five-minute intervals, they found that futures returns led spot returns by about five minutes.
For each change in the value of the MMI, Finnerty and Park (1987) regressed the natural logarithm of S t  /S t  -1;on the immediately preceding natural logarithm of F t  /F t  -l , where S t  is the spot value of the index at time t and F t  is the value of the future on the MM.I at time t .
The futures price changes used in this study were argued to precede the spot price changes by roughly one minute, although this has been disputed (Gordon, Moriarty and Tosini, 1987, and Herbst and Maberly, 1987).
Finnerty and Park concluded that futures prices lead the spot market by about one minute, although the size of this effect is small.
These results are supported by those of Laatsch and Schwarz (1988).
They used minute-to-minute data to fit a simultaneous equations model of the determination of spot and futures prices for the MMI.
Using data for the near and next-near futures contracts for the period from July 1984 to September 1986, they found clear support that futures prices lead spot prices by one minute.
The only other lag for which they tested was 24 hours, and there was no clear lead-lag relationship in this case.
Schwarz and Laatsch (1991) again used a simultaneous equations model, and  applied it to data for the MMI from 1985 to 1988.
They measured price changes over periods of one week, one day, five minutes and one minute, and concluded that the relationship between spot and futures prices has varied over time.
Initially, the spot market led futures but, by the end of the data period, the futures market led the spot.
Using transactions data for the MMI for 1986, Swinnerton, Curcio and Bennett (1988) found that the change in futures prices over the last five minutes had some predictive power for the change in the index over the next five minutes.
Ng (1987) used daily data for the period 1981–6 on the near contract for the S&P500 and VLCI indices and five currencies to look for Granger causality between spot and futures prices.
She found that, for both the stock indices and four of the five currencies, the futures price led the spot price by one day, the only lag considered.
However, the correlations between current changes in the spot price and lagged changes in the futures price were low.
Chan (1992) considered transactions data on the twenty shares in the MMI for two periods: August 1984 to June 1985, and January 1987 to September 1987.
He also used transactions data on MMI futures for the same periods.
For spot and futures returns over five-minute periods, he found evidence that futures returns led spot returns by up to fifteen minutes.
Chan then tested various explanations for this result.
Adjusting for stale prices reduced, but did not eliminate, the lead by futures prices; while restrictions on short selling shares were rejected as an explanation.
Market-wide information appeared to be a cause of futures prices leading spot prices.
Finally, there was no evidence that the lead-lag relationship was affected by the relative intensity of trading in the futures and spot markets.
Abhyankar (1992) analysed hourly returns and innovations in returns (the residuals from fitting an AR(2) model to returns) for the FT-SE 100 from April 1986 to March 1990.
Using GARCH, he found that futures returns and innovations in returns led spot returns and innovations in returns by one hour.
This lead was strengthened by higher spot transactions costs (measured by the drop in transactions costs post Big Bang) as the incentive to trade futures rather than shares is increased, by bad news (measured as the lower quartile of returns) as short selling shares is difficult, by high spot volatility and by high spot volume.
Twite (1991b) studied daily closing prices for the Australian All Ordinaries index from 1983 to 1988, and found that, while the strongest relationship between spot and futures returns was contemporaneous, there was also evidence that futures returns led spot returns by one day.
Lim (1992a and 1992b) studied the Nikkei Stock Average (Simex) on twenty days in 1988 and 1989.
For price changes over five minutes, he found no evidence from cross correlations that futures prices led spot prices, or that spot prices led futures prices.
For most of the observations, Nikkei futures were traded in Japan, as well as Singapore, and the volume in the Japanese market was much larger than for Simex.
Thus, prices on Simex may not have had a measurable effect on the index.
Studies of wheat, corn, orange juice and live and feeder cattle by Garbade and Silber (1983a), Covey and Bessler (1992), Oellermann and Farris (1985) and Oellermann, Brorsen and Farris (1989) found that futures prices led spot prices; while for oats and copper, there was no clear leader.
For crude oil, Quan (1992) found that the spot price led the futures price by over a month, and this unusual result was attributed to the dominance of the spot market for oil.
If new information leads to a move in the futures price before the spot price, the basis will change prior to a change in the spot price.
Zeckhauser and Niederhoffer (1983a) examined the rank correlations between the basis and the change in the spot price over the next one and three days for the S&P500 and VLCI indices.
They found evidence of a positive relationship between the basis and subsequent changes in the spot price for both indices.
This provides evidence that rises (falls) in the futures price precede rises (falls) in the spot price by one to three days.
Zeckhauser and Niederhoffer (1983b) also found that the basis for the VLCI could be used to predict movements in the spot price over the next three days.
For index futures there is clear evidence that the futures price leads the spot price by a few minutes, while for lags of a day the evidence is much weaker.
Such lags may be consistent with an absence of arbitrage opportunities if they are caused by traders choosing to exploit information in the futures market, and/or a delay in the response of the calculated index (stale prices).
For the UK, the lag may be shorter, because of the method used to compute the index.
On the other hand, the lag may be longer because of the rather small amount of index arbitrage undertaken in the UK.
6.1.5 The basis and the October 1987 crash
There is much casual evidence that, during the stock market crash in October 1987, the futures market crashed first and then dragged the spot market down.
The basis (futures price less the spot price) was larger than usual and, in the USA on 19 October became negative (that is, the futures price was well below the value of the index).
However, a number of empirical studies of the basis in the USA during the 1987 crash have found that the futures market did not drag the stock market down.
Bassett, France and Pliska (1989) studied the basis of the MMI on Monday 19 October 1987 using minute-to-minute data.
They found that much of the large negative basis in the first one and a half hours of trading was due to the use of stale prices from Friday 16 October in computing the index.
Subsequently, the futures price led the spot price by five to ten minutes and, at a time of rapid price movements, this resulted in a large negative basis.
Harris (1989a) and Moriarty, Gordon, Kuserk and Wang (1990) studied the basis of the S&P500 during the  crash and also found that the large negative basis was substantially reduced when allowance was made for stale prices, and that the futures price led the spot price by a few minutes (even after allowing for the stale prices effect).
The widening of the basis during the crash, over and above that accounted for by stale prices, is attributed to restrictions and delays in the trading of shares.
These conclusions have been confirmed in a more extensive study by Kleidon and Whaley (1992).
It is generally agreed that up to about 11 a.m. on Monday 19 October 1987 the large negative basis was caused by the delayed opening of many shares, that is, non-trading.
The problem is to explain the subsequent large negative basis when almost all shares were open for trading.
Kleidon and Whaley considered two different explanations for the delinkage of spot and futures markets during the 1987 crash.
The first of these is the view of Blume, MacKinlay and Terker (1989) that the spot market, particularly shares in the S&P500 index, suffered from illiquidity in the face of very high volumes, and this led to an excessive fall in their prices (see Section 13.3 for further discussion of this study).
An alternative explanation is that non-S&P500 shares reflected information more slowly than S&P500 shares.
This may have been due to the long delays in the submission and execution of spot trades caused by the overloading of the NYSE order routing system.
These delays were longer for non-S&P500 shares.
When trades were finally executed they did not fully reflect the information then available.
Thus the prices were stale, not because the transaction took place some time ago (non-trading), but because the price was based on out of date information.
Using five-minute returns for the period from 1 to 15 October 1987, they concluded that the negative basis after 11 a.m. on Monday 19 October was primarily due to stale prices, particularly physical delays in the processing of spot transactions, and not to illiquidity.
6.1.6 Leads and lags between markets
Index futures are traded around the world, in North America, Europe and the Far East.
If one market is dominant, returns for that market will lead those for other markets.
Becker, Finnerty and Tucker (1990) investigated this question using opening and closing prices for the S&P500 (Chicago), the FT-SE 100 (London) and the Nikkei Stock Average (Singapore) index futures from 1983 to 1989.
Apart from a short overlap between the end of trading in London and the start of trading in Chicago, the futures markets studied do not trade simultaneously.
If a piece of information arrives during trading in Japan, it will be reflected in the closing value of the Nikkei Stock Average, will then be incorporated into the value of the FT-SE 100 when London opens, and subsequently into the value of the S&P500 when Chicago starts trading.
Thus, the returns during trading on each market are likely to lead the closed market returns for the other markets, and this is what Becker, Finnerty and Tucker found, except that the Nikkei Stock Average did not lead the FT-SE 100.
They went on to consider whether the return during trading on one market leads the return during trading on the other markets.
They found a significant negative correlation between returns during trading for the S&P500 and the subsequent returns during trading for the Nikkei Stock Average.
However, this relationship was not economically significant (see Chapter 9 for a discussion of economic significance).
Martikainen and Puttonen (1992) examined the correlations between returns on the stock markets of the UK, USA and the world (the FT Actuaries World index), and returns on the Finnish FOX index and FOX index futures.
They used daily data from May 1988 to March 1990, and found a significant positive correlation between the returns on FOX index futures and the current and lagged returns on the UK stock market.
For the USA (whose stock markets open roughly when the Helsinki Stock Exchange closes) and the world index, there was a significant positive correlation with returns on FOX index futures only for lagged values of US and world index returns.
There were no significant correlations between Finnish stock returns and current or lagged stock returns for the UK, USA or the world.
These results suggest that (allowing for the differences in trading hours between markets), information from foreign stock markets is reflected in the Finnish index futures market within a few hours, but not in the underlying spot market.
6.1.7 Leads and lags in price volatility
As well as leads and lags in the level of prices, there may also be leads and lags in price volatility.
Bhattacharya, Ramjee and Ramjee (1986) have investigated whether any leads and lags exist between the price volatility of futures and spot prices.
They used daily bid and ask data for the US government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) spot and futures markets for the period from December 1979 to December 1982.
Price volatility for each week was measured as the square root of the average of daily squared price changes.
It was found that changes in volatility in the futures market led changes in volatility in the spot market by up to 15 weeks.
This relationship, while  statistically significant, was not strong.
Kawaller, Koch and Koch (1990) have considered this question.
They used transactions data on the S&P500 for the years 1984–6, and measured volatility as the natural logarithm of the variance of the minute-to-minute price changes.
They used a Granger causality test to examine whether futures volatility leads spot volatility, or vice versa, and concluded that there is no systematic pattern.
Cheung and Ng (1990) used fifteen-minute returns on the S&P500 for four years.
Allowing for stale prices and GARCH effects, they found that the volatility of futures returns led that of spot returns by fifteen minutes.
There was also some evidence that spot volatility led futures volatility by fifteen minutes.
Chan, Chan and Karolyi (1991) used a bivariate GARCH model to study the relationship between five-minute returns for the S&P500 between 1984 and 1989.
They found evidence of strong intermarket volatility linkages.
Information that arrives in either market can be used to predict subsequent volatility rises in both the spot and future markets.
These studies suggest that, for indices, future volatility leads spot volatility and vice versa.
Finally, Abhyankar (1992) considered hourly returns and innovations in returns for the FT-SE 100 between April 1986 and March 1990.
Using GARCH and EGARCH, he found no evidence of systematic patterns of leads and lags in returns volatility, although when bad news arrived there was a suggestion that futures volatility led spot volatility.
6.2 SPREAD TRADING
Spread trading involves the simultaneous purchase of one future and the sale of another.
Each of the elements of a spread is called a leg.
Spreads are designed to take advantage of anticipated changes in the relative prices of two futures.
Spreads in futures are also called straddles although, in the context of traded options, ‘straddle’ has a different meaning.
Spreads can be divided into intracommodity spreads and intercommodity spreads.
Intracommodity spreads involve different contracts of the same future, for example selling the December 1989 future and buying the March 1990 future in the FT-SE 100 index on LIFFE.
This is also called a time spread, a horizontal spread, an intermonth spread, an interdelivery spread or a calendar spread.
Intercommodity spreads can be subdivided into: intermarket spreads where the two futures in the spread are traded on different exchanges, for instance LIFFE and the CME; and spreads consisting of different futures traded on the same exchange, such as the FT-SE 100 index future and the long gilt future, both traded on LIFFE.
Spreads have a number of features which are attractive to some traders (Schwager, 1984, pp. 492–3).
While each individual futures position may be highly risky, holding both long and short positions in the same or similar assets means that most of these risks cancel out because of the strong negative correlation in the profits from the two positions.
Therefore spreads are usually less risky than a position in a single futures contract.
A consequence of the lower risk is that many futures exchanges require lower margins for spreads than for single positions.
The initial margin for an intracommodity spread in FT-SE 100 index futures was £100 in 1990 (raised to £400 by April 1992), compared with a margin of about £2500 (£3000 in April 1992) for a single (speculative) position.
This is because the expected daily losses are much smaller since the variation margin payments on the long and short futures contracts are likely to be offsetting.
Spreads may be expected by some traders, such as those who have views on subsequent movements in  relative spot and futures prices but not price levels, to have a superior risk-return performance to single positions in futures.
6.2.1 Intracommodity spreads
For traders who want a low-risk futures position, an intracommodity spread may be attractive.
Example .
On 5 September Harry Palmer, manager of the Earley Fund, took an intracommodity spread on the FT-SE 100 index.
The two legs of the intracommodity spread were to sell September for £60 500, and buy March for £61650.
The price difference was £1150.
The following day, when the price difference had widened to £2125, Harry liquidated his intracommodity spread.
This was accomplished by the trades of buying September for £59900, and selling March for £62025.
The result was a profit (ignoring transaction costs) of 2125 -1150 = £975, with an initial margin of only £100.
The determinants of the profit on an intracommodity spread will now be considered.
Let F F  be the current price of the far contract,F N  be the current price of the near contract, and define the spread basis as π = F F  -F N  .
It is assumed that each futures contract is priced according to the no-arbitrage condition, that is,F = (S -D) × (l+r).
Then the near contract price is F N  = (S -D N )(1 + r N ), and the price of the far contract is F F  = (S -D F )(1 + r F ), where the N subscripts on D and r denote the dividends and riskless interest rate for the near contract, and the F subscripts indicate the far contract.
Letting (1 + r F ) = (1 + r N  ) × (1 + r ') and D F  = D N  + d' , then F F  = (S -D N  -d' ) × (1 + r N  ) × (1 + r ').
Therefore, the no-arbitrage condition for an intracommodity spread, expressed in terms of the spread basis, is π = (1 + r N :)[(S -D N  -d') r' -d' (1 + r' )]
Partially differentiating this equation with respect to each of the variables gives the marginal effect of changes in that variable on the spread basis (π).
It will be assumed that the trader is long in the far contract and short in the near contract (a bull spread).
(The inequalities below are reversed for a bear spread, that is, if the trader is long in the near contract and short in the far contract.)
An increase in the spot price of the index (S ) will tend to increase π, while an increase in dividends (for either the near or far contracts) will  tend to reduce π.
An increase in the risk-free rate of interest for the period after the delivery of the near contract and before the delivery of the far contract (r ') will increase π.
The direction of the effect of an increase in r N  on π is not clear-cut.
If r' > d/ S -D F  -d' -(1 + r N )(ta;DN/  δr N ), π increases, while if r' < d'/ S -D F  -d' -(1 + r N )(δD N  /δr N ), π decreases.
The trading implications of this analysis are as follows: if the spot price is expected to rise, buy the far contract and sell the near contract; if dividends on the index for the period after the near contract is delivered are expected to rise, or if the dividends on the near contract are expected to rise, sell the far contract and buy the near contract; if the risk-free rate of interest for the period between the delivery of the near and far contracts is expected to rise, buy the far contract and sell the near contract; and the implications of a change in r N  depend on the value of r' .
Normal and inverted markets
Since intracommodity spreads are concerned with the relative prices of different delivery months for the same future, the pattern of prices for  different delivery months is of interest to a spread trader.
A normal market occurs when the current prices of contracts for different delivery months are higher, the more distant the delivery month.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6.3.
An inverted market exists when the opposite occurs, that is, the current price is lower, the more distant the delivery month.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6.4.
Figure 6.3 A normal market
Figure 6.4 An inverted market
Butterfly spread
A special form of intracommodity spread is called a butterfly spread .
This is a combination of two spreads, one a bull spread and the other a bear spread.
Such a spreading strategy is useful when the price of the middle contract is out of line with the prices of the near and far contracts, and the trader is not able to predict whether the adjustment will be primarily in the price of the middle contract, or in the prices of the near and far contracts.
Example .
The prices of the FT-SE 100 index futures are March £60 000, June £62 500 and September £63 000.
Stanley Ford, manager of the Elswick Fund, notices that the price of the June contract looks high relative to March and September.
He is uncertain whether the June price will fall or the March and September prices will rise, and decides to open a butterfly spread.
Any movement to correct the overpricing of the June contract will lead to the difference between the June and March futures prices (Fl-FM) falling, and that between the September and June futures prices (Fs-F,)increasing.
Thus Stanley opens a bear spread for March and June and a bull spread for June and September.
This is done by buying one March contract and selling one June contract, and buying one September contract and selling one June contract.
Futures prices adjust to March £60 500, June £61 500 and September £62 500.
Stanley's profit on the June-March bear spread is £1500, while his profit on the September-June bull spread is £500, making a total gross profit of £2000.
Volatility and the ‘length’ of the intracommodity spread
As the delivery dates of the two contracts in the spread get further apart the correlation in their price movements will become weaker, and the volatility of the spread basis will increase.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6.5.
Given the Samuelson (1965) model, Castelino and Vora (1984) prove this result.
They then subject this hypothesis to an empirical test using US data on wheat, corn, soyabeans, soyabean meal, soyabean oil and copper.
Intracommodity spread volatility was measured by the variance of the daily differences between the logarithms of the price relatives of the two contracts.
They found that intracommodity spread volatility increases as intracommodity spread length increases.
Figure 6.5 Intracommodity spread volatility and the length of the spread
6.2.2 Intercommodity spreads
These spreads are attractive to traders who have views on the relative movement of the prices of two different futures, but are unable to forecast movements in the price level of either future.
Such traders may be able to forecast changes in the relative spot price of the underlying assets, the present value of the dividends on the shares in the index or the relevant risk-free interest rates.
The determinants of the profit on an intercommodity spread will now be analysed.
If F L  is the price of the index future in which a long position is taken, while F s  is the price of the index future in which a short position is adopted, the intercommodity spread basis is F L  -F s  = (S L  -D L )(1 + r L )-(S s  -D s )(1 + r S ).
If the two contracts have an equal maturity, then r L  = r S  and the spread basis becomes F L  -F s  = (S L  -DsubL;-S s  + D s )(1 + r).
The effect of a change in the relative spot prices, the present value of dividends and the risk-free interest rate on the spread basis is given by partially differentiating this equation with respect to (S L  -S s ),D L  ,D s  and r to get: The effect of an increase in the difference in the spot prices or an increase in the dividends on the asset in which a short futures position has been taken is (given F L  > F s  ) a widening of the difference between the prices of the underlying assets.
If the dividends on the long asset increase, assuming F L  > F s  , there will be a narrowing of the price difference between the underlying assets.
The direction of the effect of a change in the risk-free interest rate depends on the relative sizes of the relevant coefficients.
6.2.3 Spread ratios
The discussion so far has implicitly assumed that both the long and the short legs of the spread involve an equal number of contracts.
However, this need not be the case, and there are situations in which a spread with a different number of contracts in each leg may be preferable.
The ratio between the number of contracts in the two legs of a spread can be termed ‘the spread ratio’(denoted p ), and has so far been unity.
Let the spread ratio be defined as p = (number of contracts in the short leg) /(number of contracts in the long leg) = N s  /N 1  .
An obvious case for a spread ratio other than unity occurs with an intercommodity spread.
Since the legs are in different futures, the size and price of the contracts will differ.
In this case, buying and selling an equal number of contracts for each leg may lead to an unbalanced spread.
Thus, even if the relative prices of the two legs are unchanged, the spread trader will record a gain or loss when the level of futures prices changes.
To avoid this, the trader must buy and sell different numbers of contracts in each future, so that the two legs are of equal value.
In this case, the spread ratio equals the price of the future in which a long position is taken (F l  ), divided by the price of the future in which a short position is taken (F s  ), that is,p = F l  /F s  .
(This is because equalizing the value of the long and short positions requires that N 1  F 1  = N s  F s  , and so p = N s  /N 1  = F l  /F s  ).
Example .
Lois Lane, manageress of the Fenham Fund, has no views about the general level of futures prices for the commodities she is considering trading, but does have a view about relative price movements, in that she expects the price of kryptonite futures to rise relative to that of phlogiston futures.
She wishes to initiate a spread by going long in kryptonite futures (currently priced at £50 000 each for one ton for delivery in 12 months) and short in phlogiston futures (currently priced at £10 000 each for 1000 lbs for delivery in 12 months).
Lois is considering two alternative strategies:(a) buy and sell an equal number of contracts in each commodity, for instance ten contracts with a spread ratio of unity;(b) buy and sell an equal value of contracts in each commodity, for instance 10 in kryptonite and 50 in phlogiston, with a spread ratio of 5.
If the futures prices for both commodities fall by 10%, the first strategy will result in Lois  losing [10 × (50 000 × 0.10 -10 000 × 0.10)]= £40 000, while the latter strategy will produce zero profit because it is unaffected by changes in the general level of prices,(10 × 50 000 × 0.10 -(50 × 10 000 × 0.10) = 0).
Lois will only make a profit or loss under the second strategy when there are changes in relative prices.
This example assumes that the prices of kryptonite and phlogiston futures respond by equal proportionate amounts to a change in the general level of market prices, and this may not be the case.
For example, when the market index rises by 10%, kryptonite futures prices may  increase by 20% (a ratio of 2), while the price of phlogiston futures may increase by only 5% (a ratio of a half).
(For a discussion of models of the relationship between changes in the market index and the price of an asset, see Chapter 7.)
The spread ratio can be adjusted to allow for this differential response to a change in the level of market prices.
Let  = β 1 /β s where β 1 and β s are the ratios of changes in the prices of the long and short positions, respectively, to the change in the market index; then the adjusted spread ratio is p =  F 1  /F s  or (F 1  β 1  ) /(F s  β B  s ).
In effect, measures the change in the price of the long position (kryptonite), divided by the change in the price of the short position (phlogiston).
The question of measuring the response of the futures market to changes in the rate of return on the market portfolio will be considered further in Chapter 7.
Example .
Continuing with the Lois Lane example, suppose that she still expects the price of kryptonite futures to rise relative to that of phlogiston futures (ignoring the effects of any general price movements on their relative prices), and she has no views about general price movements.
Given that an increase in general prices of 10% causes a 20% rise in the price of kryptonite futures and only a 5% rise in the price of phlogiston futures, the spread ratio which ensures that Lois is unaffected by the differential response of kryptonite and phlogiston futures prices to changes in the general level of prices is (F 1  β 1  ) /(F s  β s  ) = (50 × 2) /(10 × 0.5) = 20.
Let the general price level fall by 10%, leading to a fall in the price of kryptonite futures of 20% and of phlogiston futures of 5%.
Lois will make a loss on her long position in kryptonite futures of 10 × 50 000 × 0.20 = £100 000, and a profit on her short position in phlogiston futures of 200 × 10 000 × 0.05 = £100 000.
Thus, she is protected against general movements in prices, and will only be affected by movements in the relative prices of kryptonite and phlogiston futures, over and above those caused by general price movements.
In Chapter 4 it was demonstrated that spot and debt can be used to replicate a futures contract.
A weighted spread, that is, a spread with a spread ratio other than unity, in two index futures can be used to create a new synthetic index future.
An intercommodity spread between two index futures, where the shares in one index are a subset of the shares in the other index, represents a futures contract on the shares that are in one index but not the other.
Example .
Hub Smith, manager of the Gosforth Fund, wishes to create an index future in smaller US companies.
The S&P500 index, which covers most of the largest 500 firms quoted on the NYSE, accounts for roughly 80% of the market value of all shares quoted on the NYSE.
(It will be assumed in this example that the S&P500 index covers only large shares quoted on the NYSE, although in actuality the S&P500 index includes some over-the-counter shares.)
The NYSE Composite index covers all  shares (about 1700) quoted on the NYSE.
The current cost of one S&P500 index future is 360 × $500 = $180 000, while one NYSE Composite index future costs 200 × $500 = $100 000.
Hub Smith buys nine NYSE contracts and sells four S&P500 contracts, both with the same delivery date, giving a spread ratio of 0.444.
The net effect of these transactions is to establish a long position of $180 000 in a synthetic index future which comprises the thousand smaller shares quoted on the NYSE which are not in the S&P500 index.
In effect, each NYSE Composite index futures contract costing $100 000 comprises two parts: $80 000 of the S&P500 index, and $20 000 of the shares of the 1200 smaller companies.
So, nine NYSE contracts gives 9 × $80 000 = $720 000 of the S&P500 index future, which can be offset by selling four futures in the S&P500 index, since 4 × $180 000 = $720 000.
This leaves a net position of 9 × $20 000 = $180 000 long in a synthetic index future of the smaller companies quoted on the NYSE.
In the above example, the weighting used was 0.444 S&P500 contracts for every one NYSE contract.
The general value of this ratio is given by pF 1  /F s  , where F s  is the current price of one S&P500 index future ($180 000),F l  is the current price of one NYSE Composite index future ($100 000), and p is the proportion of the market value of the shares quoted on the NYSE that is accounted for by companies in the S&P500 index (0.80).
With only one domestic index futures contract for the London Stock Exchange (the FT-SE 100), the creation of synthetic index futures contracts for the UK is not yet possible.
However, by combining the FT-SE 100 (UK shares) and the FT-SE Eurotrack 100 (non-UK European shares) it was possible to create a synthetic index future which covered all of Europe.
The above discussion has shown that an intercommodity spread requires the choice of a spread ratio, and that the choice of this ratio depends on the purpose of the spread.
For example, the spread ratio may be unity, the ratio of the contract values, the ratio of contract values adjusted for responsiveness to the general level of market prices, or the ratio of contract values weighted by some factor such as p .
If the trader is concerned about the effects of marking to the market on a spread (intracommodity or intercommodity), he or she may consider tailing the spread.
Tailing a futures position means that it is reduced by multiplying the initial position by  each day, where r is the riskless interest rate over the period to delivery.
If both futures involved in the spread have the same delivery date, they will each be multiplied by , and the spread ratio is unaffected by tailing.
6.2.4 Empirical studies of spreads
Billingsley and Chance (1988) used the no-arbitrage condition for an individual future to give a no-arbitrage condition for an intracommodity spread by differencing the no-arbitrage conditions for the constituent  futures contracts.
Weekly data on the S&P500 index future for the period from April 1982 to January 1986 was used.
They found that, after allowing for transactions costs of about 1%, the no-arbitrage condition for intracommodity spreads was met.
They also considered intercommodity spreads between the S&P500 and NYSE index futures on contracts of the same maturity using weekly data for the period from September 1983 to January 1986.
Again, they found that, after allowing for transactions costs, the no-arbitrage condition for an intercommodity spread was met.
Therefore, the relative prices of index futures appear to be set in accordance with the no-arbitrage condition, adjusted for transaction costs.
Twite (1991a) tested the no-arbitrage condition for intracommodity spreads using the Australian All Ordinaries index.
He found some mispricings in excess of transactions costs.
Yadav and Pope (1992d) studied hourly data on the near and middle FT-SE 100 futures contracts for the period from April 1986 to March 1990.
When the spread basis was sufficiently non-zero to cover the estimated transactions costs, simulated spread arbitrage transactions were initiated.
Where the middle contract was overpriced, relative to the near contract, one middle contract was sold and one near contract purchased.
At the delivery of the near contract, the index basket of shares was bought and held until the delivery of the middle contract.
The long and short positions in this arbitrage process were reversed when the initial mispricing was an underpriced middle contract.
Spread arbitrage profits were found, although there was little benefit to be gained by unwinding early, and hence risky spread arbitrage was unattractive.
The relaxation of short selling restrictions just before delivery had a powerful effect, while the tax timing option had no value.
Finally, the spread mispricings were mean reverting.
These results are consistent with the previous studies of the FT-SE 100 by Yadav and Pope of mispricings between spot and futures prices.
The data from the CFTC (1991) indicates that in the USA only about 1% of the open positions in index futures are spreads, while the corresponding figure for the FT-SE 100 is probably lower.
Therefore, spreads are of little importance for index futures, and this may explain why there have been only three empirical studies of the pricing of spreads in index futures.
6.3 CONCLUSIONS
The basis is the difference between the current futures and spot prices, and the behaviour of this difference was studied in this chapter.
Among other things, it was found that index futures prices lead spot prices by a few minutes in the USA.
Spreads involve the difference in the current prices of two futures contracts, and it was shown how an intercommodity spread between two index futures can be used to create a synthetic index future.
Returns and the risk premium
This chapter will focus on the definition and nature of the rate of return concept for index futures.
After discussing the problem of defining the return on a futures position, the distribution of futures returns is considered.
Next, the issue of whether the return on a futures contract includes a risk premium is examined.
In this context, capital market theory is used to derive an expression for the risk premium of index futures.
Finally, a mean-variance model of the demand and supply of futures, which can be used to give an equation for the risk premium, is considered.
7.1 DEFINITION OF RETURNS
The theoretical and empirical analysis of stock markets is based on the use of a rate of return to measure the benefits from holding an asset during a specified period.
If a rate of return could also be defined for futures markets, futures could then be treated as an additional asset in portfolio and capital market theories, and the concept and tests of market efficiency could also be extended, in a straightforward manner, to futures markets.
Unfortunately, there are difficulties in defining rates of return on futures.
7.1.1 The problem
The arithmetic return on a futures contract might be expressed as the change in the price of the future during the period (F t  +1;-F t  ), divided by the initial investment (I t  ).
However, there are problems in defining ‘returns’ on futures because the definition of the sum invested (I t  ) is problematic.
One possible definition of I 1  is the initial margin payment, which might be about 4% of the price of the future (Bear, 1972; Brooks and Hand, 1988; Francis, 1991; Gressis, Vlahos and Philippatos, 1984; Levy, 1987; Niederhoffer and Zeckhauser, 1980; Panton and Joy, 1978; Robichek, Cohn and Pringle, 1972; Schrock, 1971; Turner, Houston and Shepherd, 1992; Yau, Savanayana and Schneeweis, 1990), while Lukac, Brorsen and Irwin (1988a; 1988b) and Marshall and Herbst (1992) defined the investment as the initial margin plus the funds set aside to cover subsequent margin payments.
However, there are a number of problems with this approach.
As Dusak (1973) and others have pointed out, the initial margin is not an investment, but a good-faith deposit.
This is illustrated by the way in which the initial margin payments do not flow from the buyer to the seller of a futures contract.
Instead, both buyer and seller pay an initial margin, and these payments are held by the clearing house.
If, nevertheless, the initial margin is used as I 1  , the arithmetic return becomes (F t  +1;-F t ) /F t  m , where m is the proportion of the futures price that must be paid as an initial margin.
The absolute values of these returns are about 25 times () as large as the returns on the underlying shares, while the variance of these returns is about 625 times () as large as the variance of returns on the underlying shares.
Another definition of I t  is the initial value of the shares corresponding to one futures contract (that is,S t  ), so that arithmetic returns are calculated as (F t  +1;-F t ) /S t  (Figlewski and Kon, 1982).
As with the purchase of a share, the maximum loss that can be suffered by anyone who buys a futures contract is the initial price of the asset (S t  ), since negative share prices are not possible.
This definition of the sum invested has the advantage of producing returns that are roughly similar in size and dispersion to the returns on the underlying shares.
However, at the time the futures contract is purchased there is no cash payment of S t  .
Dusak (1973) has suggested interpreting (F t  +1;-F t ) /S t  , as the excess return, that is, the risk premium, rather than as an ordinary rate of return (see section 7.3.3).
(Because it obviates the need to collect the spot as well as the futures prices,S t  has been replaced in some empirical work by F t  ; see, for example, Dusak, 1973).
Following Dusak (1973), Bodie and Rosansky (1980) also used (F t  +1;-F t ) /F t  as a measure of excess returns.
(A similar position has been adopted by Taylor and Tari, 1989, and Taylor, 1992).
In addition, they defined a rate of return concept for direct comparison with the rate of return on shares.
This was (F t  +1;-F t ) /F t  , plus the interest at the risk-free rate (r ) on the average price of the futures contract during the period, that is,r (F t  +1; + F t ) /2F t  , to give [F t  +1;(2 + r)-F t  (2 -r)]/2F t  as the measure of return on a future.
Example .
Jack Napier, manager of the Hazlerigg Fund, purchased one FT-SE 100 future for £65 000, when the spot value of the index was 2500, and paid an initial margin of £2500.
He also set aside £3000 to cover margin calls (denoted by C ).
A month later he closed out his long position when the futures price had risen to £66 300.
The riskless interest  rate during this month was 1%.
Jack wishes to know the return on this investment.
Four possible answers to this question may be given 
Black (1976) took the view that, since the initial margin is not an investment and there is no payment (receipt) of S t  , the sum invested is zero.
In consequence, it is not possible to define a rate of return on a futures contract, and some other type of analysis must be used which does not require the use of the sum invested.
While the logic of Black's view has been widely accepted, in practice many empirical studies have used some form of rate of return, although they may have given it another name.
7.1.2 Practical solutions
All the proposed solutions to the problem of defining a measure of the benefits per time period from owning a futures contract are open to objections.
However, if the benefits from futures are to be analysed, some definition must be chosen.
Most authors have usually opted to study either price changes (F t  +1;-F t  ) or the change in the logarithm of prices (ln F t  +1;-ln F t  ), which can be rewritten as the logarithm of the price relative, that is, ln (F t  +1; /F t  ).
The advantages and disadvantages of these two measures will now be considered.
The analysis of price changes has the advantage of avoiding the need to define the sum invested.
However, price changes are a scale-dependent measure.
The market index tends to rise over time, and this will cause the size and hence the variance of price changes to rise over time.
Thus, a time trend and heteroscedasticity may be present in price change data.
The change in the logarithm of prices has the advantage of being scale-independent.
Although the value of the market index will tend to increase over time, this will not cause the size and variance of this measure to rise.
However, the usual arithmetic return is (F t  +1;-F t ) /F t  , and so the price relative is equal to one plus the arithmetic return.
Hence, the use of the change in the logarithm of prices implicitly assumes that F t  is the sum invested.
Example .
Using the data from the Jack Napier example, the returns can be computed as ln (F t  +1; /F t  ) = ln( ); = 0.0198, or 1.98%.
If the conclusions from empirical studies employing different measures of return were the same, the definition of returns would not be an important issue.
Yau, Savanayana and Schneeweis (1990) compared the  results of forming portfolios of spot and futures (US Treasury bonds) when three different returns measures were used (price change, percentage price change, and return on the initial margin).
The three returns measures gave very different results for risk-minimizing hedging (see Chapter 10) and when forming mean-variance efficient portfolios.
And so, at least for Treasury bonds, the definition of returns does matter.
A related problem is that some empirical studies convert the price changes or returns on separate futures contracts into a single time series by linking together the prices of consecutive futures contracts.
This requires choosing the time to switch from the near to the next near contract, and  how to adjust for any differences in price level between the near and the next near contracts.
Ma, Mercer and Walker (1992) found that the way in which the price series are linked can have unpredictable effects on the conclusions of empirical studies.
They examined the sensitivity of the mean, variance and serial correlation of price changes and returns for the S&P500, and four other futures.
They also analysed the effects on the day of the week effect (see Chapter 9 for a discussion of this anomaly).
Six alternative ways of linking together the daily prices between 1982 and 1989 were used, and some substantial differences in the results were observed.
Thus, the linking procedure adopted may affect the conclusions reached.
Since no procedure for linking price series is obviously superior, methodologies which avoid the need to link price series are preferable.
7.2 DISTRIBUTION OF PRICE CHANGES OR RETURNS
The way in which returns are defined can have important consequences for the distribution of returns.
Thus, if the investment is defined as the initial margin, the variance of the resulting returns will be several hundred times larger than if the spot price is used as the investment.
The nature of the distribution of futures price changes (or returns) is of interest for a number of reasons.
First, parametric significance tests of hypotheses involving price changes (or returns) rely on the variable concerned following some tabulated distribution such as the normal distribution.
Second, it is sometimes of interest to know if price changes (or returns) have a symmetric or skewed distribution (a skewed distribution, for example, would mean that the risk of margin calls differs between long and short positions).
Third, the nature of the distribution of price changes (or returns) may provide evidence concerning the nature of the stochastic process generating futures prices.
There are theoretical reasons, based on either the arrival rate of new information or the imposition of a minimum price movement, for expecting the distribution of price changes (or returns) to be non-normal.
Price changes (or returns) can be viewed as caused by the arrival of information  Over some period of time the price change (or return) is the sum of a large number of random effects.
If these effects have stationary, independent, and identical distributions with finite variance then, by the application of the central limit theorem, the distribution of price changes (or returns) will have a normal distribution.
This idea has been used in developing the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis, which is summarized in Appendix 7.
A. This argues that, since information arrives at an uneven rate, the observed distribution of futures price changes (or returns) will be a mixture of a number of normal distributions, and this observed distribution will be leptokurtic .
A normal distribution has a kurtosis measure of 3, and a leptokurtic distribution occurs when the kurtosis is well over 3.
For certain symmetric distributions, leptokurtosis is associated with a sharp peak at the mean value and with fat tails, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1.
Figure 7.1 Leptokurtic distribution of futures price changes
There is an alternative explanation for the leptokurtosis of futures prices.
Gottlieb and Kalay (1985) and Ball (1988) have demonstrated that the imposition of minimum price fluctuations (the tick size) induces leptokurtosis in the distribution of price changes, particularly when the  changes are measured over short time intervals.
See Chapter 12 for a discussion of the effects of minimum price fluctuations.
There have been only three studies of the distribution of returns for index futures.
Twite (199Oa; 1990c) analysed four years of daily closing price data on futures on the Australian Stock Exchange All Ordinaries Share Price Index, computing returns as the natural logarithm of the price relatives.
He found the distribution of returns was non-normal, with leptokurtosis and positive skewness.
Chan, Chan and Karolyi (1991) found that the distribution of returns over five-minute intervals for S&P500 futures from 1984 to 1989 was leptokurtic with fat tails.
Stulz, Wasserfallen and Stucki (1990) considered daily returns on Swiss Market     Index futures traded on an OTC market run by the Leu Bank.
They found evidence of significant leptokurtosis.
Table 7.1 Empirical studies of the distribution of futures price changes and returns
The results of various empirical studies of the distribution of futures price changes (or returns) which did not study index futures are summarized in Table 7.1.
Unless otherwise specified, the futures contracts reported are for the USA.
These studies have been classified into those which supported normality and those which did not.
The latter group has been divided into those which reported a leptokurtic distribution, and those which just reported non-normality.
The studies reported in this table did not control for maturity or seasonality effects in the distribution, that is, they studied the distribution of futures price changes or returns across all seasons of the year and for a variety of contract maturities (maturity effects on the distribution are discussed in Chapter 8, while seasonality effects are considered in Chapter 9).
Apart from Lee and Leuthold (1983; 1986) and Ackert and Hunter (1990), the studies summarized in Table 7.1 strongly support the view that the distribution of futures returns or price changes is non-normal, with a sharp peak at the mean and with fat tails.
Murphy (1987) also investigated the distribution of the returns on 15 futures for a common maturity and month of the year.
He found the distributions were less leptokurtic and more normal.
However, when So (1987) allowed for maturity in five currency futures, the return distributions remained non-normal.
These results indicate that index futures appear to conform to a general pattern of leptokurtosis.
The more difficult question to answer is whether these leptokurtic distributions arise because futures price changes (or returns) are normally distributed, but the variance changes over time, thus supporting the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis, or are drawn from a stable Pareto distribution.
The stable Pareto distribution has this fat-tailed shape when the value of one of its four parameters, the characteristic exponent, is less than 2, which is the value of the characteristic exponent for a normal distribution.
For share prices the evidence supports the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis (Hall, Brorsen, and Irwin, 1989).
The studies of futures by Clark (1973), Tauchen and Pitts (1983), Helms and Martell (1985), and Hall, Brorsen, and Irwin (1989) found evidence supporting the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis, while the study by Hudson, Leuthold, and Sarassoro (1987) did not.
Gribbin, Harris and Lau (1992) concluded that futures price changes for 13 US futures did not follow a stable Pareto distribution.
7.3 THE RISK PREMIUM
A long-standing issue in futures markets is whether the return includes a premium for risk bearing, that is, what is the nature of the relationship between the current futures price and the expected price of the  underlying asset at delivery?
There is a substantial literature on the existence of a risk premium in commodity markets; for a summary see Kamara (1984), Leuthold, Junkus and Cordier (1989, PP 108–13) and Teweles and Jones (1987, PP 109–16 and 308–24).
In contrast, very little has been written on the presence of a risk premium for index futures.
Elsewhere in this book, empirical evidence for commodity futures has been used to supplement that for index futures.
However, in the case of the risk premium, the differences between commodity and index futures are sufficiently large that the results for commodity futures are not very informative about index futures.
For example, the available evidence suggests that commodity futures are subject to little systematic risk, while index futures have roughly the same systematic risk as the market portfolio, which is the portfolio of all shares in the market held in proportion to their market capitalization.
Since, as will be argued below, the risk premium depends of the value of beta, an analysis of the risk premium for commodity futures would not be a good guide for index futures.
Therefore, the large number of empirical studies of the risk premium in commodity markets will not be considered.
7.3.1 The expected spot price
Since at delivery (time T ) the price of a futures contract (F T  ) must equal the spot price (S T  ), this suggests a relationship between the current (time t ) futures price (F t  ) and the spot price at delivery (S T  ).
In the absence of transactions costs for trading futures and assuming no risk aversion or preference, the current price of a futures contract for delivery at time T in a competitive market will equal today's expectation of the spot price at time T , that is,F t  = E (S T ).
If this were not the case and F t  < E (S T ), a trader who bought a futures contract now and held it to delivery would, on average, make a profit of E (S T )-F t  .
Similarly, if F t  > E (S T )a trader who sold a futures contract now and held it to delivery would expect to make a profit of F t  -E (S T ).
This result has implications for the current value of the basis.
In Chapter 6, the determinants of the basis were shown to be S t  r and D (l + r), rather than expectations of the spot price at delivery.
However, if risk-neutral investors are not to be able to make profits from speculating on the stock market (and assuming that the no-arbitrage condition also applies), it is required that E (S T ) = F t  = (S t  -D)(l + r), and so F t  -S t  = E (S T )-S t  .
Thus, the current basis is equal to the expected increase in the spot price by delivery.
7.3.2 Backwardation, normal backwardation and contango
Although the terms backwardation ,normal backwardation and contango are particularly relevant to commodity futures, they are also applicable to index futures.
The terms were defined by Keynes (1930), and used by Hicks (1946, p. 138), as follows.
Backwardation occurs when S t  > F t  (the basis is negative), while contango occurs when F t  > S t  (the basis is positive).
Normal backwardation occurs when the expected spot price at delivery (time T ) exceeds the current futures price (time t ), that is,E (S T ) > F t  .
Thus, the above condition that F t  = E (S T  ) is violated when normal backwardation exists.
These definitions by Keynes of backwardation and normal backwardation are illustrated in Fig. 7.2.
Figure 7.2 Backwardation and normal backwardation
Backwardation or contango can be calculated using current market prices, while normal backwardation requires the use of the expected delivery price, which is not directly observable.
Subsequently, other authors have used the terms ‘backwardation’, ‘contango’ and ‘normal backwardation’ in ways other than as defined by Keynes, which has led to some confusion.
7.3.3 The risk premium for index futures
The aim of this subsection is to use capital market theory to obtain an expression for the risk premium of an index future.
The view of Keynes (1930), Hicks (1946) and Houthakker (1968) is that the usual situation for a futures market is one of normal backwardation, that is,F t  < E (S T ).
This is explained by relaxing the previous assumption of risk neutrality.
If there were not an expectation that the spot price at delivery will be higher than the current price of the futures contract, it is argued that the number of those who wish to hold a short position (for instance, producers of the underlying physical asset hedging their risks) would exceed the number who wish to hold a long position in the futures contract (for instance , speculators).
In order to increase the demand for long positions there has to be the expectation of a profit from holding the futures contract, that is, a risk premium of E (S T )-F t  .
However, the presence  or absence of a risk premium in any futures market is ultimately an empirical matter.
Figure 7.3 The usual relationship between spot and futures prices
Kipnis and Tsang (1984a) argued that the usual relationship between spot and futures prices during the life of a futures contract is as shown in Fig. 7.3.
It can be seen from this figure that the contango is measured by F t  -S t  , while the normal backwardation (E (S T )-F t  ) represents the risk premium, that is, the profit required to compensate traders for assuming the risk of fluctuations in the spot price at delivery.
There is a very considerable literature on the risk premium in stock markets.
This will be used to analyse the issue of a risk premium for index futures, and to derive an expression for the risk premium for an index future.
The CAPM (Sharpe, 1970), splits the total risk from owning an asset into two components: systematic (or market) risk and unsystematic (or non-market) risk.
Systematic risk is associated with movements in the market as a whole, while unsystematic risk is due to events which affect only one or a few assets, not the entire market.
An important aspect of the CAPM is the security market line.
Given various assumptions, the security market line requires a linear relationship between the systematic risk of an asset and its expected return.
This linear relationship can be stated as E (R i ) = r + [E (R M )-r]β i  , where E (R j )is the expected return on the asset, E (R M ) is the expected return on the market portfolio (usually proxied by a stock market index) and r is the risk-free interest rate.
The systematic risk of the i th asset is measured by  where  represents the variance of returns on the market portfolio.
Therefore, given the risk of the market portfolio (), systematic risk is determined by the β i coefficient, which quantifies the extent to which returns on the asset are correlated with those of the market, that is, β i = Cov (R i , R M  ) /Var (R M  ).
Thus, β i is the correlation  between R i  and R M  multiplied by the standard deviation of R M  and divided by the standard deviation of R i  .
The security market line is illustrated in Fig. 7.4.
Unsystematic risk can be avoided by holding a well-diversified portfolio so that, by definition, the unsystematic risk of its components cancels out.
Therefore, there is no reward, in terms of additional return, for bearing the unsystematic risk of assets and the only type of risk that matters in markets dominated by well-diversified investors is systematic risk, measured by beta.
Figure 7.4 The security market line
The security market line is usually stated in terms of rates of return but, as discussed in Section 7.1, the notion of a rate of return for futures has proved problematic.
The requirement to define a rate of return on futures can be avoided because the security market line can be expressed in terms of price levels using the procedures proposed by Black (1976) and Duffie (1989), which are contained in Appendix 7.
B. Black obtains the result that E (F t  +l;-F t ) = [E (R M )-r]β i  , where β i  = cov[ (F t  +l;-F t ), R M ], while Duffie obtains E (F T  -F t ) = [E (E T )-, where  = Cov (E T  F T  ) /Var (E T  ),E T  is aggregate terminal wealth and F t M is the price at time t of a futures contract on aggregate terminal wealth.
The security market line was also restated by Dusak (1973).
She pointed out that since, in equilibrium, futures and spot prices are related by a no-arbitrage condition, the existence of a risk premium can be investigated using either spot or futures prices.
Ignoring dividends, she restated the security market line in terms of spot prices as [E (S t  +1;)-S t  (1 + r)]/S t  = [E (R M )-r]β i  , where β i is the beta value of the asset  underlying the future, with respect to the market portfolio.
(If the present value of dividends,D , is included, then [E (S t  +l;)-(S t  -D)(l + r)]/S t  = [E (R M )-r]β i  .
She then used a no-arbitrage condition to introduce future prices.
Setting F t  = S t  (l + r),(which becomes F t  = (S t  -D)(l + r)if dividends are included), and recognizing that at delivery S r  = F T  , she derived [E (F t  +1;)-F t ]/S t  = [E (R M )-r]β i  , which is unchanged if dividends are included.
(Figlewski and Kon, 1982, implicitly assumed that β i  = 1.)
She then argued that [E (R M )-r], β i  is the risk premium per unit of the underlying asset, and that this can be measured using either spot prices,[E (S t  +1;)-S (1 + r)]/S t  , or futures prices,[E (F t  +1;)-F t ]/S t  .
Dusak opted for using futures prices, and approximated excess returns,[E (F t  +1;)-F t ]/S f  , by [E (F t  +1;)-F t ]/F t  in her empirical work as this avoided having to collect the spot prices.
Dusak's result is in terms of the futures price today (time t ) and the futures price tomorrow (time t + 1), while the risk premium is usually discussed in terms of the expected delivery price (S T  ).
Therefore, the analysis will be repeated for the specific case of the return on an index future between now and delivery.
Consider a portfolio which consists of a short position of one index future, and a long position in the basket of shares corresponding to one index future.
If the assumptions used in Chapter 4 when deriving the no-arbitrage condition apply, the expected return on this portfolio between now (time t ) and delivery (time T ) is given by E (R p ) = [E (S T )-S t  + D (l + r)]/S t  -[E (S T )-F t ]/S t  .
Notice that the investment in this portfolio is taken to be S t  , which implies zero additional investment in the future.
This equation can be rearranged so that the term E (S T )disappears, giving E (R p ) = [F t  -S t  + D (l + r)]/S t  .
If the no-arbitrage condition applies at time t , that is,F t  = (S t  -D)(l + r), the expected return on the portfolio is equal to the risk-free rate, that is E (R p ) = r (Grant, 1982b).
This result is not surprising since the portfolio is perfectly hedged, that is, riskless,(see Chapter 10 for a discussion of hedging).
The expected return on the basket of shares in the index is given by E (R 1 ) = [E (S T )-S t  + D (l + r)]/S t  , and so E (R p ) = E (R 1 )-[E (S T )-F t ]/S t  .
The basket of shares in the index is seldom identical to the market portfolio and so the basket of shares corresponding to the index may have a beta value (with respect to the market portfolio) that differs from unity.
Thus E (R I ) = r + [E (R M )-r]β F  , where R l  is the return on the shares in the index, and F is the beta value of the portfolio of shares in the index, with respect to the market portfolio.
It follows that E (S T ) = S t  [E (R M )-r]β F  + F t  .
Provided β F  > 0,E (S t ) > F t  , normal backwardation exists for index futures, and the risk premium is given by S t  [E (R M )-r]β F  .
This result can be rewritten as:
[E (S T )-F t ]/S t  = [E (R M )-r]β F  .
which is equivalent to the result derived by Dusak (1973) when the time period ends at time T (delivery).
If β F  is unity, then E (R M )-r = [E (S T )-F t ]/S t  and the normal backwardation (or risk premium) per basket of shares is equal to the excess return on the market.
If the no-arbitrage condition applies, the beta value for the index portfolio with respect to the market portfolio (β F  ) is also the beta value of the future with respect to the market portfolio.
Example .
On 1 January the value of the FT-SE 100 index was 2600, while the arbitrage-free price of a September FT-SE 100 future was £66 000.
The riskless interest rate for the period until the end of September was 6%, while the expected return on the market for this period was 10%.
Vicki Vale, manageress of the Heaton Fund, estimates the value of β F  for this period to be 0.9.
She wishes to know the estimate of the expected value of the FT-SE 100 index at the end of September that is implicit in these figures.
This is given by E (S T )= 2600 × 25 × 0.9 × (0.10 -0.04) + 66 000 = £69 510.
The conclusions produced by this theoretical analysis might be tested empirically by fitting the equation S T  = α + β 1  S 1  (R M  -r) β F  + β 2  F t  + Ε t  to historical data.
Using the actual values of S T  and R M  rather than their expectations assumes that these expectations are unbiased and that, on average, the actual values are equal to their expected values.
The hypothesis to be tested is that α = 0 and β 1 = β 2 = 1.
7.4 MEAN-VARIANCE MODEL OF THE DEMAND FOR AND SUPPLY OF FUTURES CONTRACTS
It is possible to use a mean-variance approach to formulate a model of the demand and supply of futures in terms of price changes rather than rates of return.
This avoids the problems of defining returns for futures contracts.
In Appendix 7.
C it is shown that the demand for futures can be split into speculative and hedging components, and that it is rational for a risk-averse trader to speculate and hedge simultaneously in the same future.
This model is also used to derive a theoretical expression for the risk premium.
However, the coefficients of this model are unknown, and so it cannot be used in the empirical investigation of the risk premium.
This model anticipates the discussion of hedging in Chapter 10 where, in general, traders are simultaneously motivated by risk reduction and profit maximization.
7.5 CONCLUSIONS
While the definition of a rate of return for a future creates conceptual problems, the practical solution is to use either price changes or the  logarithm of the price relatives.
The distribution of price changes or returns has often been found to be leptokurtic.
Capital market theory implies that, for index futures, there is a risk premium.
Maturity, price volatility and volume
This chapter considers the pairwise relationships between three measures of trading activity over a short period of time, such as one day, for a particular futures contract.
The three measures are price volatility ,the maturity of the futures contract (the length of time remaining until delivery of contract), and the volume of trading in the futures contract.
For each of the three pairwise relationships (see Fig. 8.1), the theoretical predictions about the nature of the relationship will be examined, and then the empirical studies testing these theories will be considered.
Many of the empirical studies considered in this chapter use data from futures contracts other than stock indices.
This is because there are only a small number of directly relevant empirical studies, and it is hoped that the results from studies of other futures contracts will shed light on the nature of these relationships for index futures.
It should be noted that the maturity variable differs between the contracts traded at any moment in time.
For example, on 1 May 1991 three different FT-SE 100 index futures contracts were traded: June 1991, September 1991 and December 1991.
While the price volatility and volume variables for transactions on 1 May 1991 could be defined with respect to all the contracts outstanding  on that day, if their relationship with maturity is to be analysed, it is necessary to disaggregate the volume and volatility data into subsets with a common maturity value.
This implies splitting up the data for each time period (each day, say), into that relating to the individual outstanding futures contracts.
Figure 8.1 Pairwise relationships between maturity, volatility and volume
8.1 MEASUREMENT OF THE VARIABLES
In order to test the rival theories, it is necessary to define maturity, volume and price volatility in ways that can be measured.
The definitions of maturity and volume are relatively straightforward.
8.1.1 Maturity
If daily data is available, maturity is the number of calendar days remaining until delivery of the futures contract takes place.
It would also be possible to use the number of trading days remaining, but this has not been done by researchers.
The use of calendar rather than trading time may be because interest accrues in calendar time, and information arrives during non-trading periods (although possibly at a slower rate than in trading time).
With transactions data the possibility exists of shortening the time period used (to hours, say), and measuring maturity by the number of hours to delivery.
8.1.2 Volume
Volume is usually measured as the total number of contracts traded during the specified time period.
Some other measures of volume used in empirical studies are: the value of contracts traded (Telser and Higinbotham, 1977); the level of open interest (Grammatikos and Saunders, 1986); the level of open interest multiplied by the price (Telser and Higinbotham, 1977); and the number of contracts traded in all the outstanding delivery months, not just the delivery month whose prices are being used (Cornell, 1981; Martell and Wolf, 1987).
8.1.3 Price volatility
The measurement of price volatility is a considerably more difficult task, and a wide range of measurement procedures have been employed.
Some of the definitions used, together with the names of those authors using each definition are as follows:
1.
the daily variance of the natural logarithms of future prices, that is, ln F t  (Grammatikos and Saunders, 1986; Chamberlain, 1989; Board and Sutcliffe. 1990);
2.
the squared values of the natural logarithms of the daily price relatives, that is,(Grammatikos and Saunders, 1986; Twite, 1990c; Board and Sutcliffe, 1990);
3.
the absolute value of the logarithm of today's closing price divided by yesterday's closing price,(Rutledge, 1976; Merrick, 1987; Twite, 1990c; Board and Sutcliffe, 1990);
4.
the absolute value of the daily percentage change in the closing prices,(Rutledge, 1979);
5.
the daily price change squared, that is,(Tauchen and Pitts, 1983; Board and Sutcliffe, 1990);
6.
the absolute values of the daily price changes,(Karpoff, 1987; Board and Sutcliffe, 1990);
7.
the price range over the period of interest denoted,(Segall, 1956; Garcia, Leuthold and Zapata, 1986; Martell and Wolf, 1987; Board and Sutcliffe, 1990);
8.
the proportionate price range,(Segall, 1956);
9.
the standard deviation of the logarithms of the daily price relatives between day t and delivery (T ), converted to a monthly equivalent, that is, where t = 1,…,
T (Park and Sears, 1985);
10.
the instantaneous variance of the percentage changes in futures prices implicit in the price of options on the futures contract (Park and Sears, 1985; Ball and Torous, 1986; Han and Misra, 1990; Sherrick, Irwin and Forster, 1992);
11.
the 0.28 to 0.72 interfractile range of the daily returns, computed as  (K.D. Miller, 1979);
12.
the variance of the natural logarithm of the daily price relatives computed using data for a number of days, that is,(Anderson, 1985; Barnhill, Jordan and Seale, 1987; Cornell, 1981; Kenyon, Kling, Jordan, Seale and McCabe, 1987; Milonas, 1986b);
13.
the standard deviation of the daily rate of change in the closing prices for the most recent 20 days (Martell and Wolf, 1987);
14.
the variances estimated by fitting a GARCH model to futures returns (Najand and Yung, 1991).
The definition of price volatility employed in any particular study depends on the frequency of the available observations (transactions data, closing prices, and so on) and the length of period for which the volatilities are to be computed, for example , days or months.
However, there may still be a choice between different estimation methods; for example, the first six methods mentioned above use daily closing prices to estimate the daily variance.
The definition of price volatility is often taken as the variance of the natural logarithm of the daily price relatives.
This has the advantage that, as the level of prices alters over time, the variance of the logarithm of the price relatives is more likely to be  stationary than is the variance of the alternatives.
Many studies have used daily closing prices.
This data is vulnerable to the effects of daily price limits, with the recorded price being a disequilibrium price constrained by the limit.
This will lead to an underestimate of the variance.
If only daily data is available, the volatility estimates rely on a small number of observations.
For example, if an estimate of the volatility for each day is required, the sample size is 1.
To overcome this problem, Parkinson (1980) devised an estimator of the variance of price changes (ΔX) that uses the high and low prices during the time period from t -1 to t .
This is Var(X) = 0.361 (X high -X low )er2 .
Parkinson suggested that, since the natural logarithm of prices is normally distributed, his formula applies to ln F t  rather than to F t  , and his variance estimator for the logarithms of futures price changes (log returns) in .
Garman and Klass (1980) developed Parkinson's work by considering an additional piece of information — the closing price — when estimating the variance.
Given that the only available pieces of information are the high, low and closing prices, they derived the minimum variance unbiased estimator of Var (ln ΔF t ), which is more efficient than the Parkinson estimator.
The equation for this new estimator is .
With minimal loss of efficiency, the Garman and Klass estimator can be approximated by  which is the weighted average of the Parkinson estimator and the ‘classical’ estimator.
Garman and Klass defined the classical estimator of  as , which is equivalent to applying the formula  where ,(the mean of ), and n = 1.
The Parkinson and Garman and Klass estimators of volatility have been used in a number of the empirical studies considered below, e.g. Grammatikos and Saunders (1986), Chamberlain (1989), Board and Sutcliffe (1990) and Serletis (1992).
They rely on assuming that the logarithm of futures prices follows a random walk, and that futures prices are continuously generated and recorded.
Since futures prices are not generated continuously (i.e. there are time gaps between transactions), and prices move in discrete steps (i.e. the tick size), these estimators are biased downwards.
Garman and Klass provided a table of factors to adjust upwards the values of their estimator which requires knowing the number of transactions per time period.
When the number of transactions per period is 500 their estimator understates the true variance by about 11%.
As the number of transactions per time period falls the understatement increases; for example, for ten transactions per time period the understatement is about 49%.
Beckers (1983) used daily data on 208 US shares for 7.25 years (1973–80) to test the performance of the Parkinson and classical estimators and, since it is the weighted sum of these two estimators, the Garman and Klass estimator.
The relationship between these two estimators was found to be unstable across shares and over time, suggesting that the fixed weighting scheme used in the Garman and Klass estimator may not be optimal in reality.
Beckers showed that a linear combination of past and present values of the Parkinson and classical estimators produced superior estimates of the present and future values of (ln ΔF t )er2 .
These estimates of the value of the classical estimator can then be used in the Garman and Klass estimator.
Whether these results for shares are applicable to index futures contracts is an open question.
Wiggins (1992) studied the performance of modified versions of the Parkinson and Garman and Klass estimators using data for S&P500 futures from 1982 to 1989.
S&P500 futures were chosen for investigation because they are frequently traded and have a small tick size (relative to daily price movements), and so the assumption that prices are continuous is approximately correct (when the futures market is open).
He concluded that both these estimators exhibited little downward bias, and were much more efficient than the classical estimator in estimating the close to close volatility for the next period.
8.2 PRICE VOLATILITY AND MATURITY
A negative (or positive) relationship between volatility and maturity has implications for margin setting and hedging strategy.
The desired margin size is a positive function of the volatility of futures prices.
Therefore, if volatility rises as delivery approaches, margins are also required to increase as delivery approaches.
As volatility increases the cash balances held by traders to cover margin calls will also rise (see Chapter 12).
Exchanges may wish to alter any daily price limits as volatility changes.
In addition, there are implications for hedging.
If the volatility of futures prices rises as delivery approaches, the correlation between spot and futures prices will tend to decline.
In consequence, the hedging strategy must be adjusted (see Chapter 10).
If traders are risk-averse, as volatility increases, the size of any risk premium will also tend to increase.
Finally, since volatility is one of the factors determining the price of an option, an understanding of the determinants of futures price volatility helps in pricing options on the future.
8.2.1 The theory
Samuelson (1965) has argued that, as the delivery date of a futures contract approaches, the volatility of its price will increase, that is, volatility is a negative function of the time to deliver (or maturity).
The positive relationship between volatility and time is illustrated in Fig. 8.2.
This figure can be redrawn with the maturity on the horizontal axis to show the negative relationship between volatility and maturity.
The intuition behind this result is that, when there is a long time to the delivery date, there is still much time for new information to affect the delivery price, and therefore any single piece of information is relatively unimportant.
However, when delivery is about to take place there is little time for further information to arrive, and so the information that does appear is relatively important.
In Appendix 8.
A there is an example demonstrating Samuelson's hypothesis.
However, Samuelson's argument is not conclusive.
It relies on the assumptions that the current futures price is an unbiased estimate of the spot price at delivery and that spot prices follow a first-order autoregressive process (Kamara, 1982; Ball and Torous, 1986).
In Chapter 7 it was argued that, for index  futures, the expected value of the spot price at delivery will exceed the current futures price, that is, there will be a risk premium.
Therefore Samuelson's argument does not apply to index futures.
Rutledge (1976) has presented an alternative example (see Appendix 8.
B) in which futures price volatility decreases as the delivery date approaches.
Therefore, the relationship between volatility and maturity is an empirical issue (Anderson and Danthine, 1983).
Figure 8.2 Positive relationship between price volatility and time
Figure 8.3 Negative relationship between price volatility and maturity
Another theory explaining changes in futures price volatility is the ‘state variables’ hypothesis (Anderson and Danthine, 1983).
This argues that the volatility of futures prices will be relatively high during periods when substantial amounts of uncertainty over the levels of demand or supply for the underlying asset are resolved.
This theory is not in conflict with the Samuelson hypothesis, and both may be correct, that is to say, volatility is explained by a number of separate factors such as maturity and uncertainty resolution.
Hemler and Longstaff (1991) used a general equilibrium model to derive a pricing equation for futures prices (see Chapter 5.3.24).
If their model is correct, the variance of futures returns may increase or decrease as the delivery date approaches.
If the covariances between changes in the index and changes in interest rates, and between changes in the index and changes in the volatility of stock exchange returns, are zero, then the volatility of futures price changes will fall as delivery approaches, which is the opposite of the Samuelson hypothesis.
8.2.2 Empirical studies
The studies that have examined the relationship between price volatility and maturity for index futures will now be summarized.
Park and Sears (1985) used daily closing prices of futures contracts and call options on the NYSE Composite and S&P500 indices.
The data period was from January to June 1983.
An important feature of this study was the use of the daily prices of call options on the outstanding contracts for each index to calculate the implicit market estimates of the subsequent price volatility for each of the outstanding contracts.
The purchase of a call option on a futures contract gives the owner the right to acquire a long position in the futures contract at a set price (the exercise or striking price) during (or at the end of) a specified time period.
The pricing model for options on futures contracts developed by Black (1976) contains the variance of the percentage changes in futures prices as a parameter.
Given that the market price of the option is known, the equation can be solved to give the implied estimate of this variance.
This is an ex ante estimate of the variance and reflects the market's expectations, while previous studies used an ex post estimate based on past price movements.
Using data for each of the individual futures contracts, Park and Sears used regression (allowing for autocorrelation) to fit the equation  where V  is the implicit variance and M : is the number of days to delivery.
The estimated equations were: where the figures in brackets are t -values, and an asterisk denotes significance at the 1% level.
These results show a significant positive effect of maturity on volatility, and this contradicts the Samuelson hypothesis of a negative effect.
These contrary results using implied volatilities may be due to the form of option pricing model used, or they may reveal a difference between ex ante and ex post prices in measuring price volatility.
Park and Sears compared these results with those obtained using a different estimate of daily price volatility.
This was the standard deviation of the logarithms of the daily price relatives between day t and delivery (T ), converted to a monthly equivalent (ninth in the list in Section 8.1.3).
Thus, the estimated variance for day i was computed using the price relatives for every day between then and delivery.
When there were less than 30 days to delivery, no further daily volatility estimates were computed.
Instead of measuring volatility for a sequence of non-overlapping periods (days, say), as have previous authors, Park and Sears calculated volatility for the remaining period to delivery.
For both indices, they found significant positive correlation between the daily measures of volatility based on options prices and on the actual daily price relatives.
This indicates that, using an alternative measure of volatility, the positive relationship between maturity and volatility remained, and the second measure of volatility also resulted in contradiction of the Samuelson hypothesis.
Chamberlain (1989) used daily data on the high and low prices of the FT-SE 100 index futures contracts ending between March 1985 and March 1986.
Volatility was defined as the variance of the natural logarithm of the daily closing prices, Var (ln ΔF t ), and estimated using Parkinson's equation.
Unlike previous studies, Chamberlain did not pool the observations for the separate contracts on each commodity.
For each individual contract he fitted the regression equation  where V t is the estimated variance for day t and M t  is a time dummy representing maturity.
While the values of α (which represents an estimate of the volatility of the spot market), were expected to be positive, in general they were not significantly different from zero.
According to the Samuelson hypothesis, the values of β were expected  to be negative.
However, for Chamberlain's data, this was generally not the case.
The estimated equations of the two FT-SE 100 index futures contracts studied were as follows: where the figures in brackets are the t -statistics, and an asterisk denotes significance at the 1% level.
These equations show that the results for FT-SE 100 index futures were mixed.
The results for the June 1985 contract were in accordance with the expectations of a positive α and a negative β, but those for the March 1985 contract indicate no relationship.
Han and Misra (1990) studied daily data on the S&P500 index for the period from June 1987 to June 1988.
Daily implied volatility estimates were made from the closing prices of options on index futures.
Because there are up to seven outstanding maturities at any one time, the total number of observations was over 2000.
Observations for the last six days before maturity were dropped, as was the period around the October 1987 stock market crash.
They regressed each of the daily implied standard deviations (ta;t ) on the number of days to maturity (M t  ), fitting the equation .
The results are summarized in Table 8.1.
They concluded that volatility is a positive function of maturity, in contraction of the Samuelson hypothesis, particularly after the stock market crash in October 1987.
Table 8.1 Han and Misra's estimates of beta
Twite (1990c) studied daily closing prices for the Australian All Ordinaries index between February 1983 and December 1986.
The daily volatility of futures prices (V t  ) was measured in two alternative ways: the absolute value of the daily return, and the square of the daily return.
Spot and futures returns were computed as the natural logarithm of the  daily price relatives.
He fitted a regression equation (expressed in terms of first differences) of the form  where W t  is the daily variance of returns on the index, measured in the same way as V t  and M t  is maturity.
Twite found that, for both measures of volatility, β 1 was significantly positive, that is, maturity had a positive effect on futures volatility, in contradiction of the Samuelson hypothesis.
He also found, as expected, that spot volatility had a very powerful positive effect on futures volatility.
When he split the data into two sub periods, he found that β 1 was only significantly positive during the first subperiod, that is, that the maturity effect is not stable over time.
Board and Sutcliffe (1990) studied transactions data for the FT-SE 100 index for the period from May 1984 to July 1989.
The daily volatility was estimated in six different ways: Garman-Klass estimate Var .
The data for each of 20 futures contracts maturing during the data period was analysed separately.
Studies to be discussed in Section 8.3 have found a positive relationship between volatility and volume, and the ‘causality’ studies discussed in Section 8.4 do not rule out the possibility that, on some occasions, changes in volume ‘cause’changes in volatility.
This implies that allowance must be made for the effects of changes in volume on price volatility when studying the volatility-maturity relationship.
This was done by regressing the natural logarithm of volatility on maturity (M t  ), a weekend dummy (D t  ) and a proxy for the rate of information arrival .
Three variants of the regression equation were tried: one included spot volatility as the information arrival proxy, the second included futures volume as the proxy, and the third omitted an information arrival proxy entirely.
Only when volatility was measured by the Garman and Klass method or the daily range was there clear evidence that maturity has a negative effect on volatility.
For the other volatility measures the Samuelson hypothesis was not supported when the rate of information arrival was proxied by volume.
However, when spot volatility was used as the proxy, there was some evidence of a maturity effect.
The proxy for the rate of information arrival (volume or spot volatility) had a positive effect on all measures of volatility, as predicted, particularly when spot volatility was used as the proxy.
The weekend was associated with an increase in volatility, in accordance with expectations.
These results suggest that the use of spot volatility as the proxy reveals a clearer maturity effect than when volume is used as the proxy.
When the information proxy was omitted from the equation the number of significant negative maturity effects increased for all measures of  volatility, particularly Garman and Klass and the daily range.
This suggests that, when explaining volatility, the inclusion of a proxy for the rate of information arrival affects the estimation of the coefficient on maturity.
When analysed by time period there was some evidence that, for the regressions including a proxy for information (futures or spot volatility), the overall negative maturity effect on volatility was weaker for contracts maturing after the stock market crash in October 1987.
This is consistent with the results of Han and Misra (1990).
When the information proxy was dropped, the difference between the pre- and post-crash results disappeared.
Sherrick, Irwin and Forster (1992) used the prices of S&P500 futures options to compute the implied volatility of the price of S&P500 futures.
Using transactions data from January 1984 to September 1988, the following regression equation was separately estimated for each of ten futures contracts: where V  is the implied standard deviation of futures prices at time t ,M t  is the number of days to maturity,F t  is the futures prices at time t and Ε is a disturbance term.
The level of futures price was included to control for the possibility that, as the futures price rises, its variance also rises.
All the regressions found that β was positive and highly significant.
This provides a contradiction of the Samuelson hypothesis.
The estimation procedure allowed for a switch of regime in the parameters α, β and  and such a switch was found for each contract about fifty days before expiration.
In every case the estimate of β was markedly higher for the period closer to delivery, i.e. volatility declines at a faster rate in the fifty days just before delivery.
A number of empirical studies of the volatility-maturity relationship for futures, other than index futures, are summarized in Table 8.2.
For each study, the conclusions on each future studied have been categorized into support for Samuelson, contradiction of Samuelson, and no relationship between price volatility and maturity.
These studies of other futures show that the relationship between price volatility and maturity is not clear-cut.
They are split between either finding no relationship, or in finding support for the Samuelson hypothesis of a negative relationship between price volatility and maturity.
In a few cases (gold, corn, wheat, oats and soyabeans) the direct opposite of the Samuelson hypothesis has been found, that is, a positive relationship between price volatility and maturity.
However, for each of the commodities for which a contradiction of the Samuelson hypothesis has been found, another study has found evidence that the commodity supports the hypothesis.
Overall, the results suggest a weak negative relationship between price volatility and maturity, with the conclusions influenced by the sample period and method of analysis.
Table 8.2 Empirical studies of the volatility-maturity relationship
8.2.3 Conclusions
Of the six studies of the application of the Samuelson hypothesis to index futures, Park and Sears (1985), Sherrick, Irwin and Forster (1992) and Han and Misra (1990)(using implied volatilities), and Twite (1990c)(using historic closing prices to estimate volatility) found evidence contradicting the Samuelson hypothesis.
Chamberlain (1989)(using a simplified version of Garman and Klass) found some limited support for the Samuelson hypothesis.
He examined only two FT-SE index futures contracts, March 1985 and June 1985, and a significant maturity effect was found for only the June 1985 contract.
Board and Sutcliffe (1990) found clear evidence supporting the Samuelson hypothesis for index futures, but this  occurred only when the high and low prices were used in the volatility measure.
Since studies of the volatility-maturity relationship for other assets have found much more support for the Samuelson hypothesis (even when the high and low prices are not used in measuring volatility), this suggests there is something different about the volatility-maturity relationship for index futures.
The available evidence does not provide clear support for the Samuelson hypothesis for index futures, and the studies using implied volatility suggest that volatility declines as delivery approaches.
8.3 PRICE VOLATILITY AND VOLUME
8.3.1 The theory
There are a number of theoretical models of asset markets which lead to predictions about the relationship between volume and volatility.
The leading theories are the ‘mixture-of-distributions hypothesis’ and the ‘sequential information arrival’model.
These theories predict a positive relationship between daily volume and volatility, as illustrated in Fig. 8.4.
Mixture-of-Distributions hypothesis 
Figure 8.4 Positive relationship between price volatility and volume
This is based on a distinction between price changes over equal periods of calendar time, and over an equal number of information arrivals, termed event time .
It relies on the idea that the passage of time by itself does not cause prices to change, and futures prices only change when information arrives.
Since the arrival of information cannot be directly observed, it may be proxied by the observance of the trading activity stimulated by the information arrival.
Therefore it is hypothesized that, rather than evolving at a constant speed in calendar time, futures prices evolve at a constant speed in event time.
In the language of Clark (1973), futures prices are a subordinated stochastic process, where the directing process (also called the mixing or conditioning variable) is information arrival.
The implications of the mixture of distributions hypothesis for the distribution of price changes calculated over equal periods of calendar time were considered in Chapter 7.
The predictions for the relationship between volume and volatility will now be considered.
There are three important papers in the application of the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis to futures prices, and these will be considered in turn.
Clark (1973) assumed that, given the arrival of information, the values of the consequential price change and volume of trading are distributed independently from each other, and that each variable is independently and identically distributed over a series of information arrivals.
It is also assumed that the number of arrivals of information per time period varies.
If information arrived at a constant rate in calendar time, the approaches using calendar time and event time would be identical.
Some of the implications of this model are as follows (Harris, 1987):
1.
Provided the number of information arrivals is sufficiently large, the central limit theorem can be used to argue for normality in the distributions of price changes (over a given number of information arrivals), and volume (over a given number of information arrivals).
(The mixture of distributions hypothesis is sometimes called the ‘mixture-of-normals hypothesis’ when the subordinated stochastic process and the directing process are assumed to have a normal or lognormal distribution.)
2.
For a given number of information arrivals, there is zero correlation between volatility and volume.
For example, if the number of transactions is used as a proxy for the arrival of information, there should be zero correlation between volatility and volume computed using transactions data.
3.
For a given time period, there is a positive correlation between volatility and volume.
This is because both are positive functions of the rate of arrival of information during the time period.
4.
There will be leptokurtosis in the distribution of price changes computed over equal time periods (see Chapter 7).
Tauchen and Pitts (1983) developed a model in which average daily volume and the variance of daily price changes are positive functions of the daily flow of information, the extent to which traders disagree and the number of traders.
For a fixed number of traders, they derived the result that the covariance of squared daily price changes and daily volume is a positive function of the variance of the directing or mixing variable, and this relationship is expected to have a heteroscedastic disturbance term.
They stated that their model can be viewed as an amplification of Clark (1973).
Epps and Epps (1976) presented a theoretical model of the determination of the equilibrium asset price following the release of a piece of information.
Both volume and the absolute value of the change in price are assumed to be a positive function of the amount of disagreement between traders.
Assuming the new equilibrium price is instantly established, they derived an expression for the change in price between transactions.
This led to the derivation of an expression for the relationship between the variance of transaction-to-transaction changes in the logarithm of price,, and transaction volume, Vol i , that is,.
Hence, a positive relationship between volume and price volatility for transactions data is predicted based on both being positive functions of the amount of disagreement among traders.
This also implies a positive relationship between volume and volatility for fixed intervals of time, as argued by Clark (1973).
Sequential information arrival Copeland (1976) developed a simple model of the effects of the arrival of a single piece of information on price and volume.
The key assumption of his model is that the information is received by one trader at a time, and each recipient trades on the basis of this information before it becomes known to anyone else.
Thus, Copeland postulates a sequence of temporary market equilibria, ending when every trader is aware of the information.
If the information increases the demand for long positions in the asset by some traders, and decreases the demand for a long position by others, the adjustment path will depend on the sequence in which optimists and pessimists receive the information.
Hence, the dynamics of the market reaction are probabilistic, depending on the actual sequence in which optimists and pessimists receive the information.
Using computer simulations, Copeland showed there will be a positive correlation between price volatility, as measured by the absolute value of price changes, /Δ P /, and volume.
He also demonstrated that volume is a positive function of the logarithm of the number of traders, and a positive function of the logarithm of the strength of the information, that is, the size of the shift in a trader's demand curve.
In addition, Copeland  argued that, if the information is simultaneously received by all traders, there will be a negative correlation between volume and the absolute value of price changes.
Thus, it is the sequential rather than the simultaneous arrival of information that leads to the prediction of a positive relationship between volume and volatility.
The Clark version of the mixture-of-distributions hypothesis and the sequential information arrival model provide complementary theoretical arguments for a positive relationship between price volatility and volume.
As Karpoff (1987) pointed out, these models of the relationship between volume and volatility assume a symmetric effect for price increases and price decreases.
While this assumption is questionable for shares due to short selling difficulties, it is more acceptable for futures contracts.
8.3.2 The evidence
There are two studies of the volatility-volume relationship for index futures.
Kawaller, Koch and Koch (1990) used transactions data on S&P500 index futures for the period from 1984 to 1986.
For minute-to-minute data, they computed the natural logarithm of the variance of price changes for each day.
Using a simultaneous equations model, they regressed this measure of volatility on its own lagged values, lagged values of the volatility of the spot value of the S&P500 index, three volume measures, a maturity variable and day-of-the week dummies.
Among other things, they found that the daily volume of trading in the S&P500 futures contract had a significantly positive effect on the volatility of the corresponding future, as predicted.
There was no maturity effect, but this finding is not in conflict with the Samuelson hypothesis because the test was conducted using transactions data.
There was no day-of-the-week effect.
The data used by Board and Sutcliffe (1990) is described above in Section 8.2.2.
Board and Sutcliffe used Pearson partial correlation coefficients for each of the 20 contracts, with maturity and the weekend dummy held constant, to examine the degree of daily comovement in volume and volatility (measured in six different ways).
On average, a small positive correlation between these variables was found, and (excluding Garman and Klass) this was significantly positive for over half of the 20 contracts.
The Garman and Klass volatility estimator had a lower correlation than the other volatility measures, but was still generally positive.
Thus, the hypothesis of a positive association between volatility and volume was supported, even when the effects of maturity and weekends were removed.
A number of empirical studies of the volatility-volume relationship based on studies of futures other than index futures is summarized in  Table 8.3.
The only study not to find a clear positive relationship between volume and volatility is the cross-section study of 25 futures by Telser and Higinbotham (1977).
All the time-series studies have found a clear positive relationship, although Malliaris and Urrutia (1991b) also found some commodities with no relationship.
Therefore, the evidence supports a positive connection between volume and volatility for a particular commodity, although another commodity may have a general level of volatility that is higher and a volume that is lower.
Table 8.3 Empirical studies of the volatility-volume relationship
8.4 ‘CAUSALITY’ BETWEEN PRICE VOLATILITY AND VOLUME
8.4.1 The theory
A number of studies have investigated whether any ‘causal’ relationship can be established between volume and volatility.
Some theoretical papers suggest that changes in both volatility and volume are caused by the arrival of new (private) information, and that there is no causative  relationship between volume and volatility.
This is illustrated in Fig. 8.5 which shows both volume and volatility being caused by the arrival of new information.
Figure 8.5 New information driving volume and volatility
Causality is Granger causality, which is based on the idea that, if past values of the variable × improve predictions of the current value of variable Y , relative to predictions made using just the past values of Y , while past values of Y cannot improve on the predictions of the current value of X made using past values of X ,X ‘causes’Y , in the special sense that X leads Y .
There are five possibilities:X ‘causes’Y , and Y does not ‘cause’X ;Y ‘causes’X , and X does not ‘cause’Y ;X ‘causes’Y , and Y ‘causes’X ;X does not ‘cause’Y , and Y does not ‘cause’X ; and X and Y are contemporaneously related (Sims test only).
There are two main tests for the presence of ‘causal’ relationships, the Granger test and the Sims test, and they examine the leads and lags between the variables concerned.
8.4.2 The evidence
Some of the studies of futures other than index futures are summarized in Table 8.4.
This shows the percentage of times that each study found volume to be ‘causing’ volatility or volatility to be ‘causing’volume.
As can be seen, the dominant finding is a lack of ‘causality’.
The only study of ‘causality’ for index futures is by Merrick (1987).
He used daily data for the spot and futures prices of the S&P500 and NYSE Composite indices for the period from 1982 to 1986.
Data was only recorded for the near contract, excluding the delivery month, because volume was low in the deferred contracts and in the near contract during the delivery month.
This left 526 observations for the S&P500, and 479 observations for the NYSE Composite.
Volatility for futures prices was measured as the square root of the absolute value of the natural logarithm of the daily price relatives, multiplied by 252, that is,.
Volume was measured as the logarithm of the number of futures contracts traded each day in the near contract.
Merrick  also considered the absolute deviations from the no-arbitrage price, where  is the futures price actually observed, and F t  is the no-arbitrage futures price calculated from , but with continuous compounding.
Table 8.4 Empirical studies of volatility-volume ‘causality'
He used the following general equation to test for ‘causality’: where t is a time dummy,Z is another variable that may ‘cause’ or be ‘caused’by Y ,t , is a disturbance term and a ,b ,c ,d i  ,e i  and f -i;are the coefficients to be estimated.
This equation can be used to investigate whether X ‘causes’Y (given the values of Z , if Z is included in the regression), and whether Z ‘causes’Y (given the values of X , if X is included in the regression).
When the Z variables were included in the equation, Merrick called it a test of conditional ‘causality’, while if the current values of X (and Z ) were included in the equation, Merrick termed it a test of instantaneous ‘causality’.
Linear and quadratic time trends were included to control for the upward trend in volume.
The following tests were conducted for each index, both with and without the current values of X and Z included in the regression equation:
1.
Volatility is ‘caused’ by A , or volume, or A given volume, or volume given A .
2.
A is ‘caused’ by volume, or volatility, or volume given volatility, or volatility given volume.
3.
Volume is ‘caused’ by A , or volatility, or A given volatility, or volatility given A .
Merrick found evidence for both indices that the logarithm of volume was ‘caused’ by volatility, but not by deviations from the no-arbitrage condition.
The values of A t  were ‘caused’ by volatility and not volume for both indices.
There was evidence of volume ‘causing’ volatility in the NYSE Composite, but not in the S&P500.
However, the instantaneous ‘causality’ tests revealed a strong contemporaneous relationship between volatility and both volume and A t  .
This study found evidence for the S&P500 and the NYSE Composite index futures that volume is ‘caused’ by volatility, that arbitrage opportunities are ‘caused’by volatility, and that volatility is ‘caused’by volume for the NYSE Composite but not the S&P500.
8.4.3 Conclusions
The results of these studies are not clear-cut.
While Merrick (1987) found evidence of strong ‘causality’ for index futures, the studies for a wide range of other futures did not find strong ‘causality’in either direction between volume and volatility.
A lack of ‘causality’ accords with the view that both volatility and volume are caused by the arrival of information.
8.5 VOLUME AND MATURITY
8.5.1 The theory
If price volatility increases as delivery approaches, and price volatility increases as volume increases, it is implied that volume increases as delivery approaches.
This is illustrated in Fig. 8.6.
It can also be restated as a negative relationship between volume and maturity (Fig. 8.7).
It is  also possible to construct an independent argument for a negative relationship between volume and maturity.
In Section 12.7 there is a discussion of a number of factors which favour the use of short maturity contracts (dividend risk, interest rate risk and mispricing risk) for hedging, so leading to a rise in volume as delivery approaches.
Figure 8.6 Positive relationship between volume and time
Figure 8.7 Negative relationship between volume and maturity
8.5.2 The evidence
A study by Grammatikos and Saunders (1986) of the maturity-volume relationship for Deutschmarks, Swiss francs, sterling, Canadian dollars and yen found strong negative relationships.
Chamberlain (1989) studied this relationship for eurodollars and UK futures in US dollars and found it to be positive, contrary to expectations.
Chamberlain pointed out that the relationship between maturity and volume was not monotonic, with volume initially increasing, and then decreasing as delivery became imminent, and this may have been responsible for the positive relationship.
The data included the days just before delivery when, for most futures (but not index futures), volume falls sharply.
There have been two studies of the maturity-volume relationship for index futures.
The data used by Chamberlain (1989) has already been described in Section 8.2.2.
Volume was measured separately for each outstanding futures contract by the number of contracts traded during the day.
Chamberlain fitted the following regression equation separately to the observations for each futures contract: where Vol t represents the volume for day t , and M t  is the maturity on day t .
For the FT-SE 100 the relationship between volume and maturity appeared negative, as expected.
The estimated regression equations for the two FTSE 100 index futures contracts studied were as follows: where the figures in brackets are the t -statistics, and an asterisk denotes significance at the 1% level.
The data used by Board and Sutcliffe (1990) has been described above in Sections 8.2.2 and 8.3.2.
Board and Sutcliffe regressed the natural logarithm of daily volume on maturity (M t  -;), a weekend dummy (D t  ) and a proxy for the rate of information arrival .
Information arrival was proxied by daily futures and spot volatility estimated in one of the six different ways.
There was strong support for maturity having a negative effect on volume, that is, volume rises as delivery approaches.
There was also some evidence that the rate of information arrival (as proxied by futures or spot volatility) had a positive effect on volume, particularly when volatility was estimated using the daily range.
The weekend had no effect on volume.
These conclusions were the same for all the volatility measures and for spot and futures volatility.
8.5.3 Conclusions
There have been only a few empirical studies of the relationship between volume and maturity.
Only one of these studies attempted to control for the possible effects of changes in price volatility on volume, even though two of these studies (and others) found some evidence of a positive relationship between volatility and volume.
Grammatikos and Saunders (1986) and Board and Sutcliffe (1990) concluded that there was a negative relationship between volume and maturity, while Chamberlain concluded that maturity and volume are largely independent.
However, for the FT-SE 100 Chamberlain's results favour a negative relationship between maturity and volume.
An inspection of the data on various index futures reveals a strong negative relationship between volume and maturity, that is, most of the trading is in the near contract.
Therefore, it is likely that subsequent empirical studies will confirm this negative relationship for index futures.
Table 8.5 Numerical example of the variance of the spot price
Figure 8.9 Variance of futures price changes over time
Figure 8.10 Variance of futures price changes over time
Table 8.7 Numerical example of the variance of futures price changes