

2
‘Good morning, Sister Duval.’
Irina had changed into her white coat.
She never wore it with ordinary patients.
It intimidated them.
She liked to project herself more as a friend than a doctor.
‘Good morning,’ the sister said.
Her tone was hostile.
‘Here are the night staff's notes on Monsieur Brückner.
As you instructed, we gave no sedatives.
He became seriously agitated.
We had to call in male nurses to restrain him.
I couldn't take the responsibility for what was happening.
At six a.m.
I called in Doctor Minden and he sedated the patient.’
She was a very experienced psychiatric nurse and Doctor Volkov's callousness verged on deliberate cruelty.
The unfortunate man had suffered such violent panic attacks that he tried to throw himself out of the window.
She saw the Russian flush angrily.
‘Doctor Minden had no right to interfere with my treatment programme,’ she snapped.
‘I shall take this up with him.
You should have called me, Sister!’
The sister said, ‘I'm sorry’, in a chilly voice.
‘I'll see my patient now,’ Irina said.
‘We're not to be disturbed.’
He was unconscious; his pallor was frightening and he'd bitten through his lower lip.
He was strapped down to his bed and as Irina stood watching him he stirred, the eyelids fluttered open for  a second and then closed tight.
There was nothing she could do till the sedative wore off.
She had cancelled all other appointments.
The morning was free.
She'd slept very badly.
She felt tired and low spirited.
And frustrated because Brückner was out of her reach for some hours.
Volkov had been asleep when she came home.
The dinner with the Schmidts hadn't been a success.
It was her fault; she had been tense and ill at ease.
Volkov worried her.
She sensed he was pretending to be asleep when she got in to bed.
How many times had she reached out to him, trying to rouse the passion they used to share?
And been rejected.
In the end she had subdued her body as she disciplined her emotions.
Sex had brought them together, bound them through the difficult and dangerous years when he was actively opposing the authorities.
Sex and a strong maternal instinct made her love him.
There was no child at her breast, but a vulnerable, misguided husband who was doomed unless she took control.
They might still have come together in spite of what she had done.
If it hadn't been for Müller.
She sat in her bright office and thought of Müller coming to the apartment that day.
He often visited her in the early months, talking as if the passive figure in the background wasn't there.
It hadn't mattered what he said.
Dimitri Volkov was in a fog of mental apathy and confusion.
Müller had said to her once, ‘How can you live with him like that?
Why don't you just keep him in the clinic?’ and shrugged her angry retort aside.
And then, that fatal day when he came early.
She hadn't time to get Volkov out of the room.
He had been off drugs for three months.
Müller in high spirits, boasting, ‘I've got a client for you Irina.
French diplomat.
Likes little boys.
Doesn't fancy anything over six years old.
He's got a big job in the French Foreign Ministry.
Centre will love this one!’
And he'd laughed out loud, talking through her, ignoring her frantic attempts to stop him.
It had been too late.
He had seen the signals too late.
He had stared at Dimitri Volkov and grimaced.
‘What's the matter?
He wouldn't know if it was Christmas or Easter.’
That was how Volkov had discovered the real implications of his release.
His wife had been put in place as a Soviet agent.
Centre was Moscow Centre, the heart of Soviet Intelligence.
They had financed the clinic and prepared the set-up in Geneva especially to make use of her talent.
A unique talent, honed and polished in the Lenin Institute, where brainwashing was a fine art.
Müller had brazened it out.
He'd tried to bluff and bully his way out of his terrible mistake, but Volkov wouldn't be intimidated.
He was physically frail, but mentally clear.
He had got up and faced them both.
He'd said to Müller, ‘You do it for money.
You'd have sold Christ for dollars,’ and turned his back on the German.
‘You fool,’ Irina remembered shouting in desperation at him.
‘You big mouth!
Get out!
Get out of here!’
She sat for a while, the inevitable cigarette burning out in the ashtray.
She had tried to explain, to make excuses, but he wouldn't listen.
His contempt shrivelled them on her tongue.
She had burst into tears.
He was so soft-hearted, he hated anyone to cry.
But he recoiled in disgust when she came near him.
He had actually held up his hands as if to ward off something evil.
‘If I'd know what you were, I'd have killed myself in the Lubianka.’
He'd locked himself in their room and drunk himself insensible.
He hadn't denounced her.
Irina had waited, gambling that he wouldn't turn her in.
For the next four years he had lived in his private hell, and his silence had condemned her to live in it with him.
But last night he had been different.
It wasn't brandy bravado that spoke.
She knew that too well.
She was reminded of the man she had seen fight the invincible power of the KGB and refuse to back away.
For only a moment, hardly discernable, except to a trained eye, the old Dimitri Volkov had shown himself.
Her telephone rang.
She was startled back in to the present.
It was the ward sister.
‘Your patient, Monsieur Brückner, is awake.’
‘Thank you,’ Irina said.
‘I'll come right away.’
Brückner was sitting up in a chair.
He was gaunt and hollow-eyed; his voice trembled.
Irina sat behind him, a disembodied  voice asking questions through the drugged haze that was his mind.
‘Why did you spare the two children, Adolph?’
‘I didn't want Boris to kill them.’
‘That was a good thing you did.
A kind thing.
I'm proud of you for doing that.
Did Boris like killing people?’
‘He didn't care.
If it suited him, he'd kill them.’
‘Were you together for long?’
‘About a year.
We were a team.
We fought at Kiev together.
He was decorated.
He only laughed.
‘They can stuff the Iron Cross,’ he said.
‘The one I've got is going to make me rich!’‘
‘The cross he stole from the woman?’
‘Yes.
He was always talking about it.
He was going to sell it to some Jew.
That's why he joined the Einsatz Commando.’
‘The SS extermination squad?’
‘They were wiping out all the Jews they could find.
He thought he'd find a rich one and sell him the cross for a good price.
Then shoot him.
He thought it was a great joke.’
‘Did you join with him?’ the quiet voice asked him.
‘No.
I was a soldier.
They were murderers.
The Ukrainians hated the Jews as much as we did.
A lot of them joined the SS.
We got drunk together the night before Boris left.
He got the cross out and showed it to me.
He kissed it.
‘There's my beauty,’ he said.’
With what I'll get for it, I'll live like a prince!
All the girls I want, all the drink.
You'll make a few roubles out of that clock, old lad.
But I'm going to be rich!’‘
‘When did you see him again?’
‘I never saw him.
I was wounded and sent back home.
I was put on light duties.
My leg was very bad.’
‘So you never found out what happened to him?’
She went on probing.
‘No.
I didn't even think about him.
I wanted to forget.
I never told anyone about what it was like.
I kept the clock and the calendar.
I didn't want to sell them.
They were beautiful.
I wanted to make money, so I could have more things like them.’
‘And you did,’ she encouraged him.
‘You worked hard after the war.
You made a lot of money and became a powerful man, didn't you, Adolph?
You're well respected.
You have a lovely  wife and three nice children.
And a fine art collection.
So long as nobody knows how it started.’
She had inserted the point of the knife.
He didn't seem to notice.
‘That's the irony,’ he muttered.
‘If it wasn't for the desk set I wouldn't have got interested in Russian art.
I'll never forget the day I saw it.
I couldn't believe it.
There it was.
Boris's cross!
The medieval treasure lost during the Revolution.’
She said sharply, ‘What was lost?
What are you talking about?’
‘The holy Cross of St Vladimir.
Priceless.
Thirteenth-century gold and jewels.
It was the same.
It was the cross Boris stole.
And he'd taken it.
Without knowing what he'd got.
I could have wept thinking what I'd missed.
I made enquiries.
I tried to find it.
I'd have paid anything.’
‘What did you find out?’
‘Someone had taken it to a French jeweller after the war and tried to sell it.
The jeweller said the jewels weren't rubies.
They were spinels.
He offered very little, so the man didn't sell.’
‘Was the man Boris?’
‘No way of knowing.
The jeweller was vague.
He said the man was a foreigner.
He wouldn't part with the cross.
If that fool had known what it was, he'd have given him the money!’
Brückner wiped the saliva from his mouth.
‘To think of it — what a treasure I missed!
With such a history!
I found out all about it.
It's in all the reference books.
The Bolsheviks never found it.
It disappeared from the cathedral at Kiev.
The White armies would have beaten the Reds if they'd got that cross.’
Irina didn't move, she didn't interrupt.
He was ranting now, venting his frustration.
‘When I think of that marvellous treasure being hawked around for sale…
I went back to that idiot, the jeweller who turned it down.
I kept asking him questions.
What did the man look like?
Couldn't he try and describe him?
He couldn't.
I told him what Boris looked like.
He didn't think it was the same man.
I could have strangled him.
He was my only link with the cross.
I put detectives on it; they found nothing.
I even advertised in the art magazines.
I was careful, very careful.’
He looked sly.
‘I didn't want the Russians on my track if they knew what I was looking  for — just think what it would mean if it turned up now?
Just think — that'd put Gorbachev in trouble!
There'd be a blood bath.’
He cackled wildly.
He was becoming very agitated.
Irina interrupted him.
‘You were mistaken,’ she said firmly.
‘It wasn't a treasure.
The jeweller would have known.
You've imagined it, Adolph.
It's not what you think.’
He croaked at her, trying to raise his voice.
‘I held it.
I counted the stones.
It's unique!
There's not another cross like it in the world.
Don't you know I'm an expert on that period?
Just because of that cross.
I've spent all these years thinking about it, wondering how it got in to that house.
Like the Fabergé.’
Sweat was running down his face.
‘If Boris had known they weren't rubies, he'd have taken that instead.’
He leaned back exhausted.
‘He couldn't have sold it to a Jew.
All the Jews were killed.
Perhaps he was killed.
Perhaps it was stolen from him.
I'll never know.
I'll never find it now.’
‘No,’ Irina said quietly.
‘You never will.
But you couldn't have shown it to anyone, could you?
You couldn't have risked people finding out you'd stolen it from a woman you'd raped during the Russian campaign.
Fabergé pieces were on sale.
You could lie about them.
But not a holy Russian cross.
The only one in the world.
People would have found out you were a thief and a rapist who'd let a woman and child be butchered in cold blood.
No wonder you got headaches, living with a crime like that for all these years.
No wonder you were driving yourself mad.
You wanted to kill yourself last night, didn't you?’
He had sunk again, and his eyes were full of tears.
‘Yes.’
It was a mumble.
‘And you will kill yourself if I don't help you.
You know you can trust me, don't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘You're safe, so long as nobody else finds out.
And you won't have headaches any more because you saved the other child and the baby.
That was a good thing to do, Adolph.
Boris did the killing.
But other people wouldn't care about that.
They'd think you were as bad.’
He was crying.
‘I was punished.
I am sterile.
I was punished.’
‘That's enough for today,’ Irina got up.
‘You'll have a sleep  now.
We'll talk again tomorrow.
You'll feel better.
Much better.
Get up.’
She wouldn't help him; he was weak and unsteady, but she wouldn't take his arm or guide him to the bed.
She let him stumble and fall to his knees.
For a moment he looked at her with lucidity.
‘You hate me,’ he said.
Irina pressed the bell for the nurse.
‘I'm helping you,’ she said.
‘You hate yourself.’
Müller arrived at Geneva Airport just after eleven in the morning.
He wandered down the Rue du Rhône, admiring the window displays.
It was a rich city, comfortable and self-confident.
He stopped to inspect the latest Piaget watches and was tempted to buy one for Susan.
She loved jewellery.
She had done a lot towards making that sale to the Americans.
She deserved a present.
They had two boys, both at college in America.
He didn't want his sons to grow up in Germany.
They were not going to be involved in what he did.
Their lives lay with the capitalist world he had hated so bitterly in his own youth.
He didn't hate it now.
He accepted it, enjoyed what it had to offer and lived his secret life because he loved it.
He loved the game for its own sake.
If it had ever been necessary he could just as happily have switched sides.
He decided to be generous and went in to the shop.
He bought a gold Piaget with a diamond-set face, had it gift-wrapped and went out to find a cab and go to meet Irina.
He was on the pavement, waiting, when he saw Volkov on the opposite side of the road.
The same familiar figure, untidily dressed, with too-long hair and a hang-dog look about him.
Then he saw the girl.
She was beside him and she had taken his arm as they waited on the pavement across the road.
Müller stared hard.
She was young, in her late twenties, very blonde and pretty.
‘I'll be damned,’ he said to himself ‘I wonder what Irina would think of that!’
He turned away, not wanting Dimitri Volkov to see him.
He was in luck because a cab drew up alongside him  and a man got out.
He jumped in and set off for his rendezvous with Volkov's wife.
Müller grimaced at the thought of her.
He had grown out of fanaticism.
He despised the single-mindedness of people like Irina Volkova.
They were blinkered by their own convictions.
Often they did their cause more harm than good.
Even more important to Müller, they harmed others more flexible than themselves.
He didn't like her.
She was a type he found threatening.
But he had despised her husband from the beginning.
A fiery orator, and self-styled leader of the persecuted and oppressed, consumed with a reckless urge to sacrifice himself for his ideals.
Müller hadn't admired him for it, even when he was a thorn in the Soviet government's side.
He thought Volkov was a fool.
There was no place in Müller's scale of values for a loser.
He had long since abandoned heroics.
They were all losers; the Jewish refusniks, the intellectual dissidents, the scattered Christians asking to be eaten by the KGB lions.
All the men and women of conscience who had confronted the invincible system.
The jails, the labour camps and the asylums were full of them.
They were building railways and digging roads in the frozen wastes of Siberia.
They had changed nothing.
Change had come in spite of them, that was the irony.
Change was a mass movement; it owed nothing to the puny efforts of the individual.
Gorbachev and the new era in Russia was the result of the great pendulum swing of economics.
Inequity and deprivation had brought Marxism to birth.
The same forces were calling for freedom and democracy.
What people wanted was food in the shops and a slice of the materialist cake they saw being gobbled in the West.
Few things surprised Müller; he had lived through the trauma of Germany's defeat and the painful reconstruction of a shattered and divided people.
He had come out of it successful, respected and secretly wealthy.
But the sight of Dimitri Volkov with a woman gave him pause.
It was no chance acquaintance.
They were isolated from the crowd, their arms linked, the woman gazing up in to his face.
Volkov had been written off for the last five years.
He was drowning himself in booze and self-pity.
He posed no threat to anyone.
He was the last man in the world with the  guts to deceive his wife.
But even in that brief glimpse, Müller was certain that he was deceiving her.
She should be told, of course.
He should mention it, alert her in their mutual interest.
But he disliked her enough to postpone it.
What harm would come if she were being fooled for a change?
He had never forgiven her for reporting his indiscretion in front of her husband.
Even though the husband had made no use of it.
She had rounded on him without mercy.
If his controller had taken her seriously, he might have been in real trouble.
No, he decided.
Let Volkov cheat on her.
A little adultery now and then was harmless.
As harmless as the man himself.
And Müller could play that particular ace if and when Irina Volkov needed a slap in the face.
‘Tell me about yourself, Lucy.
I want to know about you.’
She smiled at him.
They were together, sitting in the sunshine on the balcony of her apartment.
They had made love that morning and it was better than the day before.
‘I've told you all there is,’ she said.
‘The only interesting thing about me is finding you.’
He had a strand of her hair in his fingers; he played with it, twisting it round until it curled.
‘You have lovely hair,’ he said.
‘Tell me about your father then.
How did he get to England?
And your mother?’
He was happy; he had lost the familiar feeling of dread and despair.
The elation, the excitement and the wonderful afterglow of making love to her had left him in a mood of carefree tenderness.
The sun was shining and they were warm on the pretty little balcony with its boxes of flowers.
He was in the mood for confidences.
He wanted to extend their intimacy, to hear about her childhood, her family.
He wanted to imagine her growing up.
‘My father was in a camp at the end of the war,’ Lucy said.
‘He'd been taken back to Germany for slave labour.
His parents were shot.
The camp was run by the British and one of the officers had taken an interest in him.’
The same officer who had let him say goodbye to his friend Boris, but she didn't tell him that.
‘He got my father to England after the war, gave him a job  and helped him to get settled.
My father became naturalized, but he was always a Ukrainian.
My mother was Irish; she died when I was seven, but I remember her very well.
She was so pretty.
My father brought me up.
Major Hope left him the business when he died; he'd lost his only son through drugs, I think, and he more or less adopted my father.
They were very close.’
He held her hand.
‘I'll take care of you now,’ he said gently.
‘Your father taught you to speak Russian?’
‘He taught me everything,’ she said.
‘He'd had so little education, but he loved books and believed learning was the key to living.
And to being free.
That's why you meant so much to him.
He'd lost his freedom, his parents…
He was beaten and half-starved…
But he never gave in.
Like you, Dimitri.
‘He wrote letters to politicians, to Church leaders.
He got up petitions and raised money when you were arrested.
And he gave me a picture of you to put in my room.
Every Sunday we went to Mass and prayed you'd be released.
I wish he'd lived long enough to meet you.’
‘I didn't deserve anyone's prayers.’
Volkov said slowly.
‘I don't deserve you.
What are we going to do, Lucy?
This can't go on forever.’
‘No,’ she said.
‘It can't.
But we have a little time left.
We've got today and we're going to be happy together.
The sun's gone in, and you look cold.
Come inside and I'll warm you.’
In the evening they went walking, hand in hand, as if it were the first love for each of them.
‘How long must I wait,’ he said suddenly, ‘till you tell me why we are here together?’
‘Not very long, I think,’ Lucy answered.
‘I never thought I'd love you, you know that?
I imagined meeting you, talking to you, but nothing like this.
I'd built up a picture of you, like the one my father cut out and gave me, but it's nothing like you, Dimitri.
You can't fall in love with heroes.
You trust me, don't you?’
‘I trust you,’ he answered.
‘My life is in your hands, Lucy.
And your life in mine.
It frightens me.’
She stopped and they faced each other.
‘Your wife won't find out about us,’ she said.
‘But if she does, it won't matter because  we will be out of her reach.
I'm going to say goodbye, Dimitri, my love.
It's getting late and you should go home.
I don't worry about that any more.
I know you won't drink.
I know she can't hurt you.
I won't come to the flower shop tomorrow.
I'll wait at the apartment.’
He bent and kissed her.
She gasped as he opened her lips.
He held her tightly.
‘I'll come to you tomorrow,’ he said.
Irina was early.
They met in the cocktail bar of the Richemond.
There was an old Intelligence adage which held that if you want to hide something, put it on public view.
If two subversives want to meet and pass unnoticed, then do it in the smartest, most exclusive hotel in Geneva.
She waited irritably, smoking, checking her watch.
He came into the bar without any sign of being flustered.
He walked up to the table, smiled, pulled out a chair and sat down.
‘Irina,’ Müller said.
‘What can I get for you?’
‘You're late,’ she said icily.
‘I have afternoon appointments.’
‘So have I,’ he retorted.
‘I'm going to waste my time visiting two dealers, both of whom will try to sell me items I don't want — and one of which I know is a nineteenth-century fake.
But I had to have an excuse to see you, so I'm not complaining.
I shall have a Kir.
The same for you?’
‘I hate liqueur in wine,’ she said.
‘A glass of Moselle will do.
Now, can we be serious?’
‘You're always serious,’ Müller remarked.
‘How is our friend Adolph?
Have you discovered why he has his headaches?’
She was a very cool, self-composed woman, who seldom showed her feelings.
Except on that one occasion when she lost her temper and shouted at him like a fishwife in front of her husband.
He would never forget that.
Now he saw anger in her eyes and a faint flush of colour in her cheeks.
‘Rape and murder,’ she said.
‘It's taken a long time for the guilt to surface.’
Müller raised his brows and pursed his lips in a tiny whistle.
‘Adolph?
My God!
Tell me about it.’
‘He and a Ukrainian Nazi attacked and killed a woman during the Russian campaign.
He stole the Fabergé desk set from her.
That's why he lied about it.
That's not the important point.
The Ukrainian stole a cross.
Does St Vladimir's Cross mean anything to you?’
He set his glass down on the table.
‘It does indeed.
What are you saying?’
‘In a minute,’ she leaned towards him.
‘What do you know about it?’
‘It was an early thirteenth-century gold cross which vanished from Kiev during the Revolution.
Most likely the Bolsheviks destroyed it.
With all due respect, my dear Irina, they were a lot of barbarians in those early days.’
Then he frowned.
‘You're not suggesting there's a connection with it and this cross Adolph told you about.
That would be impossible!’
She said quietly.
‘It was a humble farmhouse.
They were country people.
But they had a Tsarist treasure hidden there — that desk set.
He told me about the cross.
He ranted and raved because he found out years afterwards what it was the other swine had taken.
He's a world expert on Russian art, isn't he?’
Müller said, ‘He likes to think he is.
I've told him so anyway.
So?’
‘He swore it was the genuine cross.
He tried to find it after the war.
He thinks the Ukrainian probably was killed and someone stole it from him and got it to Europe.’
She paused.
He didn't interrupt her.
‘He used his resources to try and trace it and he came up with a French jeweller who'd been offered it about twenty-five years ago.
He wouldn't pay good money because it was set with spinels instead of rubies, so the man took it back.’
Müller said slowly, ‘It would be spinels.
There weren't any rubies of large size in that period.
And that was all?
He got no further?’
‘No,’ Irina said.
‘He knew its significance.
He said he didn't want the Russians getting on to him, so he had to be very discreet.
But he came to a dead end with that jeweller.’
‘What exactly is its significance?’
Müller asked.
‘I assume you mean political?’
‘Political disaster, if the wrong people got hold of it,’ she  retorted.
‘Brückner knew how dangerous it was.
He said it this afternoon.’
‘And you want me to make enquiries?’
‘I want you to tell our friends at home.
This is too big a responsibility for us to take on our own.
It must go to the top.
At once.’
‘You don't think you're being alarmist,’ he suggested.
‘It's very unlikely that it survived the Civil War in 1919, and even less likely that it was looted during the war and brought out of Russia in one piece.
Personally, I don't believe the story.’
He shrugged.
‘No doubt there was some cross or ornament they found when they robbed that poor creature, and Adolph had made a fantasy out of it.
He's half-mad anyway, from what you tell me.
I'll pass it on, but I must add my own disclaimer.
I don't want to look a fool.’
Irina got up.
‘I have to see my evening patients,’ she said.
‘As for looking a fool, I wouldn't play this down if I were you.
I have an instinct that he's right.’
Müller summoned the waiter for the bill.
He got up, bent briefly over her hand.
It was a charming display of good manners by a suave middle-aged man to an attractive woman.
‘I have a great respect for female intuition,’ he said.
‘But I never suspected you relied on it.
My contact is in Berlin at the moment,’ he added.
‘It wouldn't be wise to communicate with him in the usual way while he's there.’
Irina looked at him.
‘You can fly there yourself.
If you don't, I'll make contact.’
She turned and walked away.
Müller sat down again and ordered another Kir.
He had time to spare before his appointments.
She meant what she said.
If he didn't go to Berlin, she'd pre-empt him.
She believed in Adolph's fairy story.
But then she would, he thought, sipping the delicate drink.
Superstition was embedded in the Russian psyche.
Not even the dehumanizing process of Soviet medical training could eradicate the myths and legends of a thousand years of Russian Christianity.
A brand of religion peculiar to the country and its people, where saints and miracles were part of everyday life and idiots were revered as the children of God.
Part of Irina Volkova would believe in a cross that might cause  people to rise up and start a counter-revolution.
Being Russian she knew it was possible…
After seventy years of atheism, religion was re-emerging in the Soviet Union.
When official attitudes relaxed, the Easter services had been packed with worshippers.
And not just the babushkas, mumbling their prayers, but with young men and women.
Perhaps Irina was right to be alarmed.
He finished the glass of Kir and decided that he had better see his controller in person.
He travelled all over Europe on buying trips.
He wouldn't be suspected.
He paid and left for his first call at a dealer's house in the Place du Bourg-de-Four.
He planned to catch the 6 pm flight back to Munich.
And then go on to Berlin the next day.
Irina had cooked dinner; she noticed that Volkov refused wine.
‘What's the matter?’ she asked him.
‘Aren't you feeling well?’
He said, ‘I've decided to give up drink.’
On an impulse she reached over and touched his hand.
‘I'm so glad, darling.
I'll help you.
It won't be easy.’
He pulled his hand away.
‘No, thank you,’ he said.
‘I'm never taking medicine from you again.
I'll manage.’
She said, ‘Why?
After all this time, when I begged and begged you to cut down, why suddenly say you're going to stop?’
‘I'm taking your advice,’ he answered.
‘I'm pulling myself together.
That's what you keep telling me to do, isn't it?’
‘Yes, yes, of course.
But why do you have to be so hostile?’
‘How's your patient?’
She saw the contempt in his eyes.
She bit her lip; he knew the mannerism well.
It signified that he had hurt her.
‘He's recovering,’ she said.
‘I don't want to talk about it.
There's a play on television.
I want to watch it.’
They didn't sit together.
He avoided contact with her even more these days, she noticed.
She tried to concentrate on the screen, but she kept looking at him.
Watching him.
He made her uneasy.
‘What have you got there?’ she asked.
He was eating something out of a box.
‘Chocolate,’ Volkov answered.
‘You would need sweet things,’ Irina said.
‘It'll help if you feel a craving.’
He stared at the screen.
She knew he hadn't been paying any attention to the play.
‘I don't feel a craving,’ he said.
‘And I don't want advice from you.
I thought you wanted to watch this nonsense?’
She got up.
She switched the set off.
‘I'm going to bed,’ she said.
‘I've been miserable with you for five years, Dimitri.
I don't know why I don't throw you out on to the street!’
‘Because you love me,’ he said coolly.
‘You said so not long ago.
‘I love you, Dimitri.
I betrayed your trust and I betray sick, helpless people who come to me for help, because I love you.’‘
‘Don't count on it,’ she said slowly.
‘I'm only human.
There's a limit to what I can endure.’
‘Unlike your patients.’
He didn't turn round when he heard the door bang.
He switched the set back on, changing the channel to a news programme.
It was so long since he had taken an interest in anything.
Years of self-induced coma.
An abdication from life and from reality.
Sexless, motiveless, enmeshed in guilt for the crimes of someone else.
He knew she would cry when she was alone.
He had seen her weep when he turned away, chilled into impotence at her touch.
He had made her suffer and further imprisoned himself by doing so.
Courage was what he needed.
The courage to leave her and beg public forgiveness for his desertion of his cause and his friends.
Love, his terrible wife called her obsession with him.
But love was what he felt for the stranger who'd thrust herself upon him.
Not just the love for her body, for the softness and the scent of her, but for the person inside that body.
The spirit that believed in him and would dare anything in its innocence.
She had made him come alive in heart and mind.
He sat forward and concentrated on the interview being screened.
A first-floor office had been made available to Müller's controller in the new Soviet Embassy in Berlin.
From the windows he had  a clear view of the Brandenburg Gate.
So much had changed in the city.
The wall was long gone, the divided city was united like the country.
Germany was one.
Viktor Rakovsky had made a sketch of the scene; he would finish it later.
His speciality was water colours.
He had exhibited in Moscow under a pseudonym and been pleased with the critical reaction.
The painting of St Basil's Cathedral was highly praised.
He preferred not to think that everyone knew the artist had painted his best-known work from the window overlooking Dzerjhinsky Square.
He had chosen his stepfather Lepkin's old office when he made his permanent headquarters in Moscow.
He had a photograph of him enlarged and framed in silver gilt on his desk.
There was another photograph, the same size and framed identically.
It showed the famous partisan leader, Ivan Zakob, wearing the medals bestowed on him by Stalin.
The two men that Viktor loved.
There was no picture of his mother or his murdered brother Stefan.
His childish drawings of them were in his bedroom, the only visible  memento of their lives.
Rakovsky was thinking of them as he sat there in the borrowed office in Berlin.
It was late afternoon and the sky was turning red outside.
He remembered the vivid sunsets of his boyhood and the way the sun would hang like a crimson ball above the edge of the trees surrounding their house and then plunge out of sight as if it had been dropped in a moment of carelessness.
He had been frightened until Ivan explained to him that the sun went to bed like everyone else and would be up and shining for them in the morning.
Ivan was a fanciful fellow, and he loved to tell the boys stories.
Who would have thought he could turn into a hero — leading his partisans against the Germans.
Ivan had become a legend, a symbol of all the other Ivans who died on the battlefields and fought village by village and street by street to drive the invader out of Russia.
He had stood for them all, when he was made a hero of the Soviet Union by Stalin himself.
Ivan was old and dying, but he lived in Rakovsky's handsome dacha and his days were comfortable.
Rakovsky called him Little Father and Ivan called him son.
There was a report on the desk in front of Rakovsky.
His agent, Peter Müller, had prepared it and left it in one of the embassy ‘letter boxes’ for collection.
It was in the sleeve of a classical album which Rakovsky's junior secretary had picked up from one of Berlin's best-known music shop on the Tiergarten.
The words leapt at Rakovsky off the page.
The words of a man confessing under duress, from drugs and a long festering guilt.
Rakovsky could see it all.
The house in the woods.
His mother screaming as she was raped; his brother bursting from their hiding place to run in and try to save her.
Sweat broke out over his body.
He couldn't go on reading.
He had a bottle of Scotch whisky in his office; he poured a half  tumblerful and drank it down.
Now he saw the missing details in his nightmare.
His brother lying on the floor with his skull crushed.
His mother stretched mute and bleeding on the bed.
The sound of shots as her ravager murdered her.
And then the moment when the cupboard door opened and he looked up in terror at the German soldier staring down at him.
He was still stifling his baby sister's cries.
Then the door closed.
He heard the roar of the motorcycle being started up and then fading until it was silent.
A long silence afterwards.
He hadn't dared to move.
He was trembling with shock.
He was in the dark.
At last he let the baby cry.
He was afraid she might suffocate.
He didn't open the cupboard door till he heard Ivan's voice calling when he came in.
Then Ivan's terrible cry of anguish from the bedroom.
Ivan had gathered Viktor and the baby Valeria in his arms; tears were streaming down his face.
He heard his own voice saying over and over, ‘Germans.
Germans did it.’
Ivan had held him back from the bedroom by force.
They had dug the grave together.
He remembered how deep it was and how hard it was to break the earth.
He hadn't seen their bodies.
Ivan had wrapped them together in the curtains his mother had made for the sitting room, and laid them in the bottom of the grave.
Even so, Viktor had seen the red stain spreading amongst the bright colours of the makeshift shroud.
They didn't get the train to Moscow.
The terminal at Kharkov had been bombed.
There were no trains and the roads were under constant air attack.
The days afterwards were blurred in his memory.
He was in shock.
He screamed if Ivan left him alone, even for a few minutes.
They journeyed into the countryside, sleeping under the trees, eating what Ivan could trap or shoot.
When the partisans found them, they gave Valeria to one of the women to look after, but he stayed with Ivan.
The camp in the forest was their home.
It moved as the Germans advanced.
They lived like nomads, ambushing, killing the enemy, moving on.
Some of them were captured.
Viktor had seen their bodies swinging from a gallows in a little hamlet after the Red Army had retaken it.
He had been given a rifle and Ivan taught him how to shoot.
He'd said, ‘You're a man now.
You're old enough to kill Germans.’
They never took prisoners.
They lined them up and shot them.
The first time Viktor saw an execution, he vomited.
Then he remembered his mother and Stefan and made himself go back and look up at the bodies till he didn't mind any more.
Ivan had understood.
Ivan was beside him when he shot his first German.
He was ten years old.
‘Now you'll sleep better, he had told him.
‘Your mother is smiling on you from heaven.’
Viktor drank more whisky.
He had lived through the war with the partisans.
He had learned to accept death.
His little sister had sickened and died before her second birthday.
There were no drugs in the camp.
A lot of the children died.
He had seen horrors committed by the enemy, and horrors that were the doing of his comrades-in-arms.
Lepkin had been captured during the Battle for Smolensk.
He had been denounced as NKVD by one of his own men and executed.
Viktor was twelve when the war ended and by that time he had forgotten how to cry.
Now he sat and stared out at the Brandenburg Gate, lit by the bloody glow of a German sunset and saw it through a mist of tears.
After thirty years, he could come face to face with the soldier who had spared his life.
And raped and robbed his mother.
Lepkin's gift to her was on display in the German's Munich mansion.
Viktor had sketched the green enamel and the twinkling  diamonds in the tattered book he'd taken with him from the charnel house that had been his home.
Ivan had given it to him, with the wooden doll he'd made for Valeria.
They'd buried the doll with her in the forest.
And he'd drawn and coloured the cross that he'd seen on his mother's bed.
The cross she spoke of with hatred, as if she feared it.
Her ravisher and murderer had stolen it.
Müller had ended his report: ‘If the cross Brückner describes could possibly be the genuine Relic from Kiev Cathedral it could present a serious threat to Soviet stability in the Ukraine.’
Rape and murder, wartime looting — a dark stain on the past of a very important German industrialist.
Such incidents were not unique.
It was the cross that had prompted Müller's journey to Berlin, and the rarely used ‘urgent’ signal he'd sent to the embassy.
And he was right.
The threat was incalculable.
Rakovsky forced himself to be calm, to consider the wider implications.
The great Soviet Empire was only just holding together; if a group of Ukrainian nationalists were to raise St Vladimir's Cross as a rallying point, the most important state within the Union would erupt into rebellion against Moscow.
Müller was not only a very good agent, but an old partner.
He had asked for an urgent meeting with Rakovsky to discuss the report and get instructions.
They hadn't seen each other for a long time.
Both had been comparatively junior when their association started.
Rakovsky was embarking on his career as a diplomatic spy, moving under different names and jobs from one Western embassy to the next.
He had personally recruited the antique dealer.
Over the years they had worked well and closely together until the political situation in Russia underwent the first dramatic changes.
It was time for Rakovsky to leave the field and work in Moscow.
Another reason was his beloved Ivan.
Terminal cancer was diagnosed.
But Rakovsky kept one or two special agents under his control.
He wouldn't relinquish Peter Müller to anyone else.
The light was fading; lamps were aglow in the streets and the shop windows were lit invitingly, tempting the late shoppers.
There was a reception at the Italian Embassy; he was expected as a  special guest.
A dinner and the theatre afterwards, arranged by his own ambassador to entertain the trade delegation he was leading.
Trade interested him now, as other intelligence spheres had done in harder days.
Industrial espionage was high on the list of Soviet priorities.
They were starved of the technical skills of Western manufacturing industries.
The best brains and resources had gone into military research and development until Gorbachev came to power.
Rakovsky drank another whisky.
He would go to the Italians.
He would attend the dinner and the theatre.
He would smile and talk engagingly and hide his feelings.
And then, when he was alone, he would get drunk enough to sleep without dreaming of his mother screaming.
Müller was a little early for the rendezvous.
Rakovsky was visiting a Russian arts and crafts shop selling embroidery, pottery and lacquer work.
Müller arrived ahead of him by twenty minutes and waited in the private room at the back.
He thought the goods on display were crude and tasteless; but sometimes it was possible to find a little gem amongst the mass-produced dross.
One small lacquer box had caught his eye.
It was the work of an original craftsman.
He asked to buy it.
His wife liked little trinkets for her dressing table.
He was surprised at how much Rakovsky had aged when he came in.
They hadn't seen each other for so long.
They shook hands and then embraced like old friends.
He had aged, Müller decided, noticing the puffy skin under his eyes.
He looked as if he had hardly slept.
They drank tea together and Müller went over the report with him.
Rakovsky was quiet, which was unlike him.
He let Müller talk while he listened.
He was not only older, but subdued.
Müller said suddenly, ‘You don't seem well, Viktor.
Is anything wrong?’
‘It's been a heavy schedule,’ Rakovsky said.
‘Too many parties every evening.
Peter, I've decided to go to Geneva.
I'm going to see this man, Brückner, and check his story for myself.
I'll make the travel arrangements.
What you must do is tell Irina to keep him in the clinic till I can come.
And not to lean on him too  heavily.
I know her methods.
They don't leave much at the end.
I want to talk to him myself.’
Müller hid his surprise.
Rakovsky had never visited the clinic.
He knew Irina very well from her Moscow days.
He had been instrumental in getting Volkov released so she could take up her appointment in Geneva.
But he had left the running of the operation to Müller.
‘Of course I'll tell her.’
‘And Volkov?
Still drinking?’
Müller shrugged.
‘Still drinking.
She leads a hell of a life with him.
And he's cheating, which is interesting.’
Rakovsky glanced up at him.
‘You mean with a woman?
How do you know?’
‘I saw them together, by chance.
Young, very pretty.
They looked like lovers to me.
Irina doesn't know.
I saw no reason to tell her.
She might do something stupid.
She's still obsessed with him.’
‘It was her one weakness,’ Rakovsky remarked.
‘Everyone warned her; her father, all his friends, but she would marry him.
Her own career was at risk.
Even her loyalty came under suspicion because of his activities.
I remember her coming to see me and begging me to help when he was arrested.
She was crying.
She was an attractive woman, but I never thought she had a human feeling in her.
To me she was just a brain, a scientific machine in a bedworthy body.
She'd have agreed to anything to save his life and get him out.
And this is how he's showing gratitude.
Well!’
He paused, then he offered Müller another glass of tea.
Müller declined.
He didn't like Russian tea.
‘Perhaps we'd better find out about the woman.
Just routine, Peter, but we don't want that drunken fool getting into mischief.
And we don't want Irina upset.
She's much too valuable.’
He finished his tea and stood up.
He shook hands with Müller.
‘You were right to bring this to me direct,’ he said.
‘I'm going home at the end of the week and I'll make arrangements to go to Geneva as soon as possible.
And I'll authorize another payment for you.
Look after yourself, my friend.’
‘And you, Viktor.
I'll go out the back way.’
‘My love,’ Lucy said.
‘He wants to speak to you.’
Volkov hesitated.
‘Go on,’ she urged.
‘He's waiting.’
He took the receiver from her.
She had dialled the number in London.
‘Mischa is my father's oldest friend,’ she said.
‘He worked so hard for you, getting signatures, writing to the newspapers.’
She had described Mischa to him, and his wife and his children.
How they worked for the dissidents, raised money, edited a Ukrainian language broadsheet.
Now he was going to talk to the man himself.
Lucy watched him; she came and stroked his hair with tenderness to give encouragement.
‘I love you,’ she whispered, and then left him to speak.
He had changed so much in the time they'd spent together.
He was still hesitant, still uncertain.
His hands shook and he was suffering, but he didn't drink.
Mother, mistress, friend, Lucy filled whatever role he needed, when he needed it.
Her little apartment had become their home, where she cooked for him and they shared all the daylight hours together.
He went back to prison at night.
They were his words and as soon as he said them, she knew she had won him to freedom.
Mischa was the next step.
Mischa knew what to say.
Lucy had primed him carefully.
She went out of the room while he spoke on the telephone.
There was a fine line to walk between protecting him and urging him to self-reliance.
If she crossed it, he regressed.
When she came back he had finished speaking.
There was a little colour in his face and a brightness in his eye.
He drew her close and kissed her gently.
‘You were talking for a long time,’ she said.
‘He reminded me of so many things I'd half-forgotten.
The way we used to fight at home; our little victories.
I never realized how the world was watching us.
That was the worst thing they did to you in prison.
They said it every day.
‘Nobody even knows you're here.
Nobody cares whether you're alive or dead.
You're just a number.
You'll be a number till the day you die.’
It used to frighten me.
I kept saying my own name so I wouldn't forget it.
Your friend told me they held vigils outside the Soviet embassies  all over the world when I was arrested and when Sakharov went on hunger strike.
Lucy, how could I have abandoned people like that?’
‘You mustn't say that,’ she said quickly.
‘All that is in the past; you're not to think about it.
You've come back to lead them.’
He looked at her solemnly.
‘How can I lead them, Lucy?
History's overtaken me.
I've been left behind.’
She stood up and looked down at him.
‘When my father was at the camp at Spittal, another Ukrainian looked after him.
He'd joined the SS.
He'd done some dreadful things, but my father was only a boy and this man took care of him.
He was sent back to be shot by the Red Army.’
She paused for a moment.
‘Do you want me to go on?’
He nodded.
‘Before he was taken away, this man gave my father something he'd stolen during the war.
He thought it was valuable and my father could sell it.
He knew he was going to die.
But my father kept it.
Then, when my mother was so ill, he did try and sell it to get money for treatment for her.
He told me that.
He said, ‘The hand of God saved me, Lucy.’
The jeweller didn't know what it was my father showed him.
He saw an old paste cross and he wouldn't offer any money for it.’
She slipped to the floor and knelt beside him.
‘My father came back with the cross; his friend, Major Hope, paid for my mother's treatment.
‘Before he died, he showed it to me.
He'd kept it hidden for fifty years.
He'd tried to sell the Holy Relic, St Vladimir's Cross.
And what's why I came to Geneva.
To find you and give it to you.‘
She couldn't help herself; she burst into tears.
He raised her up and held her.
‘No, my darling,’ he said very gently.
‘That was destroyed.
Everyone knows the Reds destroyed it.’
‘I have it,’ she said.
‘In my house.
It's the Relic.
I can prove it to you.’
He left her early.
He took one of the water buses that ferried  across the lake.
He needed to be alone.
She understood and accepted it.
When he left her she was very pale and quiet.
‘I'll be back,’ he promised.
‘Just give me a little time to take it in.’
She had shown him the book where it was illustrated.
And he had the article written a few years ago about the missing Tsarist treasures.
It featured another illustration, large and faithfully depicted.
The delicate gold filigree, the massive red gems.
Paste, the jeweller had said, refusing to buy the cross .
Missing from the cathedral at Kiev since 1919.
It was a learned article; it went into details about the workmanship, the size and influence of Byzantine art on the beautiful object specially commissioned by Vladimir to mark his conversion from paganism.
And the writer hadn't spared the legends, because it explained the Bolshevik obsession with the Relic.
If the White armies could claim it, the Civil War might go in their favour.
The Reds spread the rumours of its destruction, but there was no evidence to support this.
There was evidence that despite torture and execution, the clergy at the cathedral had managed to conceal it.
There was no evidence of its destruction .
Volkov had the article in his pocket, the pages scissored out of a famous art magazine.
They were creased and folded, a little frayed at the edges.
He looked at the cross.
Besides the colour reproduction, there was an old scale drawing, and an enlarged section of a painting of the last Tsar's coronation, with the Relic in his right hand.
Lucy had said simply to him, ‘It's the real cross.
This is the photograph my father took.
Compare them.
The scale is right, the goldwork is identical.
No one ever copied that cross; it would have been blasphemous.’
He put the pages back in his pocket.
There was a restaurant on board the ferry.
All he had to do was get up and walk a few steps and he could escape it all.
He could be what his gaolers had told him he was.
A number.
No identity, no name, just a set of numerals.
Numbers didn't have responsibilities.
They weren't presented with ancient symbols of faith with powers to topple a tyranny.
They weren't challenged to do anything.
They hardly existed.
Prisoner 36672.
That's who he  was.
Five digits.
One brandy would make him in to a number.
His hands trembled.
Sweat broke out all over his body, chilling him.
One brandy.
Then two and afterwards he'd lose count.
He wouldn't remember his number even.
He got up and went to the restaurant.
He put money down.
The waitress said, ‘What can I get you?’
She had very pale blue eyes.
Not the same limpid colour as Lucy's eyes, but pale and blue.
He said, ‘A glass of mineral water, please.
I'm thirsty.’
He had been gone for a long time.
The little clock in the sitting room struck the hour.
It could have been the span of her whole life.
She paced up and down; she went backwards and forwards to the windows, stepping on to the little balcony where they sat together in the afternoon sun, peering down the street.
There was no sign of him.
Other men walked along, passed underneath.
But not Volkov.
Volkov had gone away to think.
Or to escape!
To step backwards into the limbo of the last five years.
If he drank, he would be lost for ever…
She almost cried out in desperation and self-blame.
She'd acted too soon, burdened him before he was ready.
She went into the bedroom and gave way to a burst of weeping.
She heard the clock strike again.
She washed her face and went wearily back to look out for him, but she was losing hope.
She was leaning by the window, watching the first clouds creeping up from the horizon to challenge the sun, when the door opened.
She heard her name.
‘Lucy?’
She turned and saw him.
He walked towards her.
He was steady, sober.
She ran into his arms.
‘I took the water bus,’ he said.
‘That's why I was so long.
Were you worried?
Did you think I wouldn't come back?’
Lucy held tight to him, ‘No,’ she lied.
‘I knew you would.’
He didn't contradict her.
In her place, he would have doubted, too.
Then she managed to smile up at him.
‘That's not true,’ she said.
‘But thank God you did.’
Later, he said.
‘I'm not going home tonight.’
‘You must.
What will your wife think?
Darling, you mustn't be reckless.
You said she was dangerous.’
‘Dangerous to you,’ he corrected.
‘But she doesn't know about you.
I've stayed out before.
I went to sleep at an all-night cinema once.
I don't want to leave you tonight.
We've got so much to think about.
Will you let me stay?’
Lucy drew him down to her.
‘Kiss me,’ she said.
Irina hung up in exasperation.
She had been trying the apartment since seven o'clock.
She had an emergency patient to attend to.
A rich Italian suffering severe post-natal depression had been brought in by ambulance, having tried to kill her six-week-old son, and then taken an overdose.
The family were following on in a state of high Latin hysteria.
Irina didn't know when or if, she would get home that night.
There was no answer to her calls.
He was either out and hadn't switched on the answering machine or he was tormenting her by ignoring the telephone.
He sometimes did that.
She wondered whether he'd started drinking again.
She hadn't taken him seriously when he said he was giving up.
Even though he'd never said it before.
Miracle cures for alcoholism didn't happen.
He'd slip.
It was inevitable.
And he'd been more unkind than usual in this odd period of sobriety.
That was a common symptom, but she didn't welcome it.
Mute, drunken dislike was easier than the cold hatred of the last few weeks.
She put her unhappiness aside.
She had a seriously ill patient to contend with and she'd just had a telephone message to say that Brückner's wife wanted to come up and visit him.
She'd deal with that in the morning.
Müller's instructions were clear.
Keep him quiet, but don't disorientate him.
Viktor Rakovsky wanted to talk to him.
A most significant departure for someone so senior to involve himself personally.
She had been right about the importance of Brückner's story.
Right to overrule Müller's judgement.
No doubt he had claimed the credit for himself.
She would let Rakovsky know the truth.
I hate Müller , she thought.
He ruined my happiness.
If it wasn't for him, I'd have talked Dimitri round.
We'd be living together like in the old days .
Her internal phone rang.
The patient was recovering consciousness.
Her mother was being treated for shock by one of the junior physicians and the husband was creating hell.
Could she please come down and deal with the situation?
Irina hurried out.
She forgot to call the apartment again, and decided by two in the morning that she might as well stay at the clinic for what was left of the night.
Volkov had woken early.
He was restless and excited.
Lucy watched him in wonder.
‘I nearly had a drink yesterday on that boat,’ he told her.
‘I went to the restaurant and put the money down for a large brandy.
Then I thought of you.
It was easy then, my darling.
I can't believe how easy it was.
It's over.
I know I'll never drink again!’
‘You've got to get away from here,’ she insisted.
‘We can go to England.
Mischa will organize meetings.
He has contacts inside the Ukraine.
We can't plan anything till you're safe and out of their reach.’
Volkov said, ‘I disappear and then I reappear very publicly.
I do all the things I didn't do the first time.
I give interviews.
I hold a Press conference.
I've thought it out already.
I draw so much attention to myself that they won't dare touch me.’
‘We shouldn't waste time,’ Lucy said.
‘We should get away from Switzerland.’
He was bold and confident, almost euphoric.
Suddenly she was afraid.
Afraid for him and for herself.
And the fear was growing as he made his plans.
She came up and put her arms round him.
‘We could leave here tomorrow.
Why don't we?
Why don't we just go to the airport and get on a plane?’
He shook his head.
‘We can't travel together,’ he said.
‘And there is a practical problem — I have to find my passport.’
He frowned.
‘It may be out of date.
It may have been renewed.
I wouldn't remember.
Irina took care of everything.
I was just a piece of luggage to be labelled and sent wherever they wanted.
You speak to Mischa.
Ask him if he could help with papers.
Say I'm sure it won't be necessary, but just as a precaution.
Meet me  at seven at the St Honoré.
We'll hide ourselves in a corner and celebrate!’
He hugged her tight.
‘I feel like Lazarus,’ he said.
‘Out of the tomb and into the sunshine!
How much I love you, Lucy!
Seven o'clock — at our cafe.’
Then he was gone and she watched him striding away down the street.
Now he was a traveller with a destination.
This was the Dimitri Volkov the world had watched in admiration.
But the fear stayed with her, its cold hand on her heart.
The big Illuyshin jet made a smooth landing at Sheremetov airport.
Viktor watched the descent over the city he loved.
He was glad to be home.
He had always felt the same elation at the end of his long tours abroad.
When he came back to Russia he shed his aliases.
He was himself.
The official Zil, with his driver, was there to meet him.
There were no airport formalities for him and the rest of his delegation.
It was a warm evening and the air was sweet.
He opened the window after they turned in to the country.
His dacha was in the woods on the banks of the Moscova river.
He loved Moscow, but he didn't like living there.
His dacha was home to him.
The forest and the lapping water of the great river were a balm to the spirit.
His housekeeper came out to greet him.
He kept his mistress in an apartment in Moscow.
He never brought women to the dacha .
He made his way to the upper floor.
He opened the door of a big airy room with views down to the great river itself.
The old man sitting in his chair by the window turned round and smiled at him.
Ivan!
Cancer had eaten in to him, but he was still alive.
A wraith with bright eyes in his gaunt face.
He was too feeble to leave his room now, but Viktor had the window specially made so he could sit and watch the river.
Viktor embraced him.
The body was a skeleton wrapped in a winding sheet of clothes, but the eyes were bright and the smile was glad.
‘How have you been, Little Father?’
‘Well, son, well.
And you?’
Viktor offered him a drink.
A very small drink, since he had  only half a stomach.
In the old days Ivan could swallow a bottle of vodka and keep his legs.
‘I want to show you this,’ Viktor said.
He put an exercise book on the old man's lap.
The cover was faded from bright red to pink.
It was creased and frayed.
He turned the pages.
The childish drawing of rabbits sitting under the trees among the spring daffodils; his sketch of Ivan on the sled, of Lepkin dozing in his chair by the stove.
The cat with yellow eyes crouched in the long grass in pursuit of a bird.
The old man nodded.
‘Your drawings,’ he said.
‘You could have been an artist.’
‘A bad one,’ Viktor answered.
‘Anyway it wasn't a time for painting pictures, Little Father.’
The sketch was from memory, but he had an eye for detail.
He had drawn the cross he'd seen so briefly, and coloured the stones red and the setting yellow.
Ivan looked at it and didn't speak.
‘I can't remember why I drew that,’ Viktor prompted.
‘It belonged to your father,’ the old man said at last.
‘To Lepkin?’
‘No, your real father.
The minister Rakovsky.
I think he gave it to Lepkin as a bribe.’
‘How do you know?’
Viktor asked gently.
‘I saw him look at it in the car when we were driving to the  Lubianka .
It was tied up in a parcel.
I saw him in the driving mirror.
I thought, he's got something valuable there.
He's in trouble; he's going to buy someone with that cross.
It was full of red jewels.
He didn't know I could see him.
I saw a lot of things, but I never let on.
It was safer to look stupid.’
‘You're a fox, Little Father,’ Viktor said.
The light was fading.
Clouds were creeping up over the edges of the trees and the river's surface was turning black.
His father had given the cross to Lepkin.
A bribe, Ivan had said.
Viktor watched the darkness spreading.
Lepkin had saved Rakovsky's family.
He'd married the widow and been a father to Rakovsky's children.
Rakovsky had bought their lives with that cross.
He took the drawing book and said, ‘I have work to do.
I'll come up later and say goodnight.
Is there anything you want, Little Father?’
‘Some tea,’ the old man murmured.
‘And that stuff that stops the pain.’
‘I'll send the nurse,’ Viktor promised.
Viktor had dinner alone.
He went up to see Ivan and found him asleep.
‘He was uncomfortable, comrade Rakovsky,’ the nurse explained.
‘I increased the dose as you instructed.
He drank some tea and then he slept.’
No pain, no sorrow, no cloud to blur the sunset of his life .
That was his decree for the man he loved best in the world.
‘Watch him tonight,’ he instructed.
‘Call me if he wakes or he asks for me.’
The next morning he was assured by the nurse that Ivan had slept peacefully and eaten a little breakfast.
He was in good spirits.
There was no immediate danger.
Viktor went in to his Kremlin office.
The necessary papers were provided for him, the travelling arranged, and by noon he was on an Aeroflot plane to Geneva.
He was met at the airport.
He travelled on a Polish passport.
His occupation was given as manufacturer of industrial components.
He went unnoticed through Swiss immigration.
Poles were travelling freely these days, seeking business, and Western commercial and technical expertise.
He spoke perfect Polish.
Also excellent German and fluent English.
He had learned his languages at the highly sophisticated KGB school in Leningrad.
He had been recruited on the strength of his life with the partisans.
He was the kind of material Stalin's Intelligence services needed in the Cold War.
The taxi took him through the city and up into the countryside beyond the lake, where the  Amner clinic commanded its famous views.
He was shown up to Irina's office immediately.
He hadn't seen her for five years.
She had changed.
She was slimmer, more sophisticated.
He noticed the artful make-up, the elegant hair style.
A very good-looking woman.
He was fond of women; he enjoyed their company and he liked making love.
He wondered whether she had taken a lover during the last five years.
Then he remembered that it was Volkov who was being unfaithful.
They shook hands.
They were on first-name terms.
He and her father were friends.
‘It's good to see you, Irina.
You're looking very well.
Swiss air suits you.’
‘Thank you.
You look well too, Viktor.
Please sit down.
Can I get you a drink?
It's not too early?’
He smiled.
‘It's never too early.
But I won't have anything.
How is your husband?’
She shrugged slightly.
‘The same.
He's never recovered from Müller's visit.’
She still held that grudge, he noted.
Müller, beware , he thought.
He said, ‘That was a long time ago.
Müller wasn't to know he'd come off your medication.
And I haven't come all this way to listen to the same complaint, Irina.
You've made it officially and it's been noted.
I want to see Adolph Brückner.
How is he?’
‘I've kept his sedation to a minimum.
And I haven't advanced his re-education since I got your message.
His family are agitating to get him home.
I'm glad you've come; it was getting difficult to stall them.’
‘So far he's responded well?’ he asked.
‘Well enough.
The trouble is, he hates himself.
There's a strong suicidal tendency.
That's why I've decided to let his wife and children come and see him.
He needs motivation.
I can advance the programme; that's no problem.
He's already highly suggestible.’
Rakovsky listened to the cool voice describing the intensive hypnosis and subliminal suggestion that would distort Brückner's mentality.
Visual images flashed on and off at fractions of a second to imprint themselves on the subconscious mind.
Images of guilt, of fear, of the excruciating headaches he had inflicted on himself which only the doctor could hold in check.
Obedience and trust.
The treatment hammered them into the defenceless mind.
Trust in the doctor.
Obedience to the doctor.
‘I'm glad you've come,’ Irina said again.
‘I insisted that Müller contact you at once.
He thought it was a fantasy.
I had such difficulty persuading him to take Brückner's story seriously.
I had to practically draft the report myself!’
Oh yes , Rakovsky noted,Müller had better beware .
He said, ‘I'd like to see him now.’
‘Of course.
He's had some medication.
He'll be pliable.’
They went down in the lift.
Irina spoke to the nurse on duty in the corridor.
‘I have a visitor for Monsieur Brückner.’
He stood back while she approached the bed.
Fifty years had passed.
The man lying there was in his seventies.
He was white haired, with dull eyes and a slack mouth; saliva dribbled from one corner.
‘Wake him up!’
Rakovsky commanded.
Irina bent over and shook him.
She shook him hard.
‘Adolph!
Adolph, pay attention!’
He focused on her, he mumbled something.
Viktor came to the edge of the bed.
‘He can see you,’ she whispered.
‘He's sedated, but he might recognize you.’
‘It won't matter,’ was the answer.
‘I'm going to question him.
Tell him he's got to answer me.
Go on, tell him!’
Irina glanced quickly at Rakovsky.
There was a terrible rage in him, she could feel it like an electric charge in the room.
She raised her voice to the tone of command that meant, obey me or you will suffer for it.
‘My friend is going to ask some questions.
You'll answer them, Adolph.
You tell him everything he wants to know.
You understand me?’
‘I understand.’
The voice was tremulous.
Viktor Rakovsky came very dose to him.
He loomed over the prostrate man in the bed.
‘Tell me about the cross that was stolen,’ he said.
‘Describe it to me.’
‘It was gold.
Very old workmanship.
With big red stones.
It was so beautiful.’
‘How many stones?’
‘Seven.
Boris counted them.
Three in the traverse and four in the body.
He kept saying he'd be rich.’
Rakovsky's hands were clenched in to fists.
 Irina thought he was near to striking the old man.
She had begun to feel uneasy.
This was no ordinary interrogation.
‘How big was the cross?’
‘Bigger than my hand.
He let me hold it once.
It felt so light.’
The description fitted exactly.
Filigree goldwork, seven red spinels.
The right measurement.
He leaned closer, nearer to Brückner.
Brückner was watching him with wide, frightened eyes.
‘What happened to the man you call Boris?
Tell me!’
‘I don't know.
He was SS.
I heard they'd all been killed.
The Reds never took SS prisoners.’
‘No,’ Viktor said.
‘They didn't.
You raped the woman in the house, didn't you?’
Irina protested.
‘Please, you mustn't talk about that.
You don't know what harm it could do now.’
She came and caught Rakovsky's arm.
He thrust her away.
He seized Brückner by the jacket of his pyjamas.
He heaved him upright.
‘You raped her, didn't you?
You held her down for the other one.
Didn't you?’
‘Yes.’
It was a quavering cry.
‘Yes.’
‘You raped my mother and you're going to die for it.
You understand me?
You hear me?
You're going to die for what you did to her.’
Behind him, Irina gasped.
He didn't hear her.
‘You should have shot me.
I was the boy hiding in the cupboard, gagging my little sister so she wouldn't cry out.
You made a mistake.
You didn't kill me.
Now you're going to be punished.
You're going to die!’
Brückner screamed.
It was a thin sound of rising terror.
Viktor turned to Irina.
She was filling a syringe.
She paused for a moment, staring at him.
‘Is it true?
You were there ?’
‘It's true,’ Rakovsky said.
‘What are you giving him?’
Brückner was moaning, tossing to and fro.
‘I'm going to knock him out,’ she said.
‘I don't want that busybody nurse coming in if she hears him.’
Viktor stepped away from the bed.
He laid a hand upon her arm.
It gripped so tightly it hurt.
‘I meant what I said.
Give him a lethal injection.
That is an order.
I'll wait in your office.’
He didn't look back.
He walked out of the room and closed the door.
He went up in the lift and sat down in Irina's pleasant office.
He wiped sweat from his forehead.
Now he would sleep as peacefully as his mother and brother in their unmarked grave in the woods.
The time passed.
He was calm.
He waited.
At last the door opened and Irina came in.
She was very pale.
He stood up.
‘Is he dead?’
‘Yes.
Why did you make me do that?
I've never killed a patient.’
He dismissed the protest.
‘Don't be a hypocrite.
You destroy their minds.
This is cleaner.’
She sat down.
She gripped her hands together.
‘I feel very shocked,’ she said.
‘I've killed in cold blood.
You must excuse me.’
‘You'll get over it,’ Viktor said.
‘You did your duty, Irina.
I gave the order.
You obeyed it.
That's all.
How did you explain it?’
‘Cardiac failure.
I overdosed him and then rang for emergency resuscitation.
I knew it couldn't work.
They went on and on trying.
I'll have to call his wife,’ she said.
‘I have to make a full report.
There'll be an inquest.’
‘But they won't find anything?’
‘Nothing.
Not a trace.
He had a heart attack.
I gave him digitalis.
His heart couldn't stand the shock.’
He could see she was recovering her composure.
He said, ‘You were serving your country.
Times are dangerous for us all.
One life is nothing compared to the survival of our system.
He'd lived fifty years too long.
Remember that.
I'm staying at the Hôtel d'Angleterre.
Get through to Müller and tell him to contact me there.
I'll be in Geneva for only two days.
There's a lot of work to be done.
If the cross still exists, we have to find it.’
‘It was so kind of you to come with me, Peter.’
Eloise Brückner's eyes filled with tears.
Müller shook his head.
‘My dear,’ he said.
‘It's the least I could do.
It's been so sudden, such a terrible shock!’
The children were with her.
They were white-faced and dumb.
‘I couldn't have managed without you,’ she insisted.
‘All those dreadful arrangements to make and that inquest.
Oh, I'll be so glad to get home!’
Müller knew that her grief was quite genuine.
It had been a happy marriage, in spite of the difference in their ages.
It had shocked him, too, when he heard of Adolph Brückner's sudden death.
Irina had been brisk when she called with the news and told him to telephone Rakovsky at his hotel.
She hadn't wanted to discuss what had happened.
A heart attack, she said, and rang off before he could ask questions.
It was unlike her to miss a heart condition in a special patient.
They weren't any use to Moscow dead.
He was sorry for Eloise, but a rich and attractive widow of forty wouldn't grieve alone for long.
She wiped her eyes with a lace handkerchief and he caught the drift of her exotic scent.
He had toyed with the fantasy of sleeping with her; the rich smell aroused him.
He had never dared do more than imagine it while Brückner was alive.
Now — why not?
A shoulder to cry on.
He put his arm around her.
She didn't resist.
‘Some of Adolph's cousins are coming for the funeral,’ she said.
‘I don't know them.
I think they're only coming in case there's any money for them.’
Müller said gently, ‘Adolph left everything to you and the children.
He told me.
Don't worry about them.
Susan and I will be there to support you.’
‘I know,’ she murmured.
‘I'm so grateful to you.
We're not going to be late, are we?
I couldn't bear it if we missed the flight.’
She had begun to panic about things like tickets and timetables.
For twenty years all these details had been arranged for her.
It was a symptom of widowhood.
‘Plenty of time,’ he reassured her.
‘Just relax, my dear.
Let me take care of you and the children.’
Her luggage was packed.
They waited in her suite at the Richemond for the hire car to take them to the airport.
When reception rang through Müller answered it.
It was not the car.
There was a lady asking to see Madame Brückner.
He looked over to Eloise.
‘Someone's downstairs.
You're not expecting anyone?’
‘No, no.
I don't want to see anyone.’
The receptionist sounded apologetic.
The lady was very insistent.
Could she speak to Madame Brückner?
Just for a few minutes?
It was very important.
Müller said, ‘I'm afraid not, just get rid of her.
Oh it has.
Very well.
We'll come down.’
He hung up.
‘The car's here.
They're coming up for the luggage.’
They went down in the lift and crossed the big reception hall.
A woman moved quickly and caught up with Eloise.
Eloise stopped.
The woman said, ‘Madame Brückner?
Please excuse me.
I saw you at the clinic.
I've got to talk to you.
It's about your husband.
I was the sister on his corridor.’
They didn't catch the flight.
She was in her mid-forties, neatly dressed with a quiet air of authority.
She spoke calmly enough.
She had insisted on seeing Eloise Brückner alone.
Müller had smelled trouble the moment she said who she was.
He'd tried to hurry Eloise away, to sidetrack the woman standing in their path.
But he was overruled.
Eloise Brückner wasn't going without hearing what the sister who had nursed her husband had to say.
They all turned back and went up to the suite.
‘My name is Beatrice Duval.
Your husband was admitted to my corridor.
Let me say first, I've been nursing psychiatric patients for more than twenty years and I know what I'm talking about.
I've never experienced a case like this.’
‘Why?
What do you mean?’
Eloise stared at her.
‘The way Doctor Volkov treated him was nothing less than sadistic.
I'm sorry, this isn't going to be easy for you, but I've got to say it.
It was deliberate cruelty.
And it's been on my conscience ever since.’
‘Cruelty?
How?
I don't believe you!’
‘I've nothing to gain,’ Beatrice Duval said.
‘I expect I'll lose my job for telling you.
But it's preyed on my mind.
The doctor wouldn't allow sedatives, or painkillers when he had those dreadful headaches.
She put him through the most intensive analysis with nothing to help him afterwards.
‘It's a wonder he didn't go mad.
He suffered such terrible symptoms he tried to kill himself.
He had to be tied down.
In the end I got another doctor to sedate the poor man.
She was off duty and I didn't call her.
She had me moved to another patient after that.’
‘My God,’ Eloise said.
‘My God, it's like a nightmare.’
‘It was a nightmare for him,’ the sister said.
‘I don't know why she did it, Madame Brückner.
If he hadn't died of that heart attack, he'd have been a mental wreck.’
‘You're sure?
You're sure this is true?’
Eloise was standing now.
The scented handkerchief that had roused Müller's lust was tearing in her hands.
‘As God's my witness.
I asked the nurse on duty about the day he died.
She said the doctor and another man, a visitor, were in his room.
She told me she heard him scream.
A few minutes later she came rushing out saying he'd collapsed.
I say she brought on that heart attack!’
Eloise said at last, ‘I'm going back home and I'll contact my lawyers.
They'll want to see you and take a statement.
All expenses will be paid, you won't be out of pocket.
You will come, won't you?
You won't change your mind?’
‘I won't.
I wouldn't have come if I wasn't prepared to tell the truth.
What will you do?’
‘If we prove mistreatment, they'll bring criminal charges.
I've got the best lawyers in Germany.
I'm very, very grateful to you.
You're still working there?’
‘Yes.
I've been there since it opened.
It's a very good place.
It was just that one case.
I hadn't worked with her before.’
‘Give me your private address and telephone number,’ Eloise said.
‘Don't talk about it to anyone else.
Wait till you hear from me.
It'll be very soon.’
She went to the door of the suite.
Her eyes filled up.
‘Thank God you told me.’ she said.
‘I won't let her get away with this, I promise you.
My poor darling Adolph.’
She turned away.
When the door closed after her visitor she broke down in tears.
‘I wouldn't believe a word of it!’
Müller insisted.
‘The woman's got a grudge.
She's probably trying to get money out of you.’
‘No,’ Eloise countered.
‘She said herself she could lose her job.
I believe her, Peter.
I don't want to, but I do.
Something dreadful happened to Adolph and I'm going to find out what it was!’
‘It's nonsense,’ he said.
‘Doctor Volkova is a famous psychiatrist.
That nurse didn't understand what she was doing.
He was getting better.
You were going to take him home very soon!
For God's sake, Eloise be careful.
If you defame the clinic or the doctor you could be sued for a fortune!’
She looked up at him.
‘You needn't worry because you recommended her, Peter,’ she said.
‘I'm not blaming you.
I know you were trying to help.’
He hadn't expected that.
He backtracked.
‘My dear!
I'm not thinking of myself.
I'm thinking of you.’
‘I'm thinking of my husband,’ she said slowly.
‘I'm going to follow it up.
I can't forget what she said.
He tried to kill himself.
He was tied down.
If that's medical treatment, it ought to be stopped!
I'm not frightened of anything that doctor or her clinic can do to me.
If she hurt Adolph she'll face criminal charges.
And who was the visitor she took in there the day he died?
She told me no one was allowed to see him.
I want answers.
I want to know why my husband was heard screaming.’
My Christ, Müller said to himself.
If I go on defending Irina, I'm going to lose out.
He moved closer to Eloise Brückner.
He said seriously, ‘You're right.
I was only trying to spare you.
Of course, this must be investigated.
I'll come to the lawyers with you, if you like.
Adolph was my friend, and I do feel responsible.
I did recommend the clinic.
I'm with you every step of the way.’
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘Thank you, Peter.
Now for God's sake let's go to the airport and get on the next flight home.’
She looked round her at the luxurious suite and shuddered.
‘I can't wait to get away from this awful place.’
The flight to Munich took just two hours.
They ran into bad weather and the turbulence upset the youngest Brückner child.
She was frightened and she was sick.
Müller made soothing noises while Eloise moved seats to comfort her and then he settled back to plan what he must do.
By the time they had risen above the storm, there was a slight smile on his lips, as if he were thinking pleasant thoughts.
And they were pleasant.
Now it was his turn.
Irina had put a black mark against him with Rakovsky.
Fortunately, Viktor valued him and they had a long association before he ever worked with Irina.
Otherwise he might have been in serious trouble.
He wasn't going to warn Irina.
He was going to report direct to Rakovsky in Moscow.
She was about to be investigated and charged with malpractice towards a patient.
Under Swiss law she would get a long prison sentence.
She'd exceeded her brief with Adolph Brückner and the operation through the clinic would have to be closed down.
That, he decided, would put an end to Irina's career, if not to Irina.
He was very solicitous to the Brückner family when they landed, paying particular attention to the sickly daughter clinging to her mother's arm.
He would end up in bed with Eloise; he was hot with excitement at the thought of it.
And he would somehow persuade her to part with the Fabergé desk set.
Rakovsky wanted that.
Steal it if necessary.
But get it.
It belongs in Russia .
No Irina Volkova to goad him with her arrogance and her interference.
An affair with this lovely woman who was so rich and inviting, and Viktor's brief to him, track down the cross.
Use any means, spend whatever is necessary.
Find it if it exists, or prove it if it doesn't.
I'll make sure your reward will be in proportion to the value of your information.
It was a glittering prospect and gave him the courage to brush his hand against Eloise's breast as he kissed her goodbye.
‘We'll go to the lawyers,’ he said.
‘We'll see it through together.
Now sleep well, my dear.
I'll call you in the morning.’
Eloise's daughter frowned.
When he'd gone she said, ‘Mummy, I don't like that man.’
‘Now, darling, you mustn't say that.
He's been so kind.’
Viktor Rakovsky was in conference when the message came.
He couldn't leave, duty came first.
His self-discipline had been forged and tempered by years of training.
He glanced briefly at the written note, put it aside and went on with the meeting.
His concentration was equal to his self-control.
The last item on the  agenda was the renewed activities of anti-Soviet groups in Europe and the North American continent.
Not just the normal fundraising and propaganda through the media.
After the uproar created by Nicholas Tolstoy over the Cossack repatriations, the fringe groups had been taken very seriously.
Their leaders covered a wide spectrum.
Free Ukrainians, Catholics, Orthodox Christians, Liberal Socialists, even the anomaly of a tiny White Russian remnant hoping for the restoration of the monarchy.
They were moving, these disparate community leaders; visas and travel arrangements were reported and the rendezvous was in Europe.
The KGB had penetrated all these organizations over the years, but the purpose and the location of this summit was kept secret.
In the days of Andropov, the solution would have been easy.
Selected targets would have been eliminated.
The rest would have understood the warning, and the plot, whatever its form, would have fizzled out, as so many had done over the years.
But not now.
Now the KGB itself was subject to scrutiny, to accountability.
The murder of anti-Soviet activists abroad would stir up fierce controversy at home.
The old powers and the impenetrable secrecy that protected them had been  breached by the new liberties.
It was ironic to Victor and the colleagues sitting round the table that morning that Gorbachev had been the KGB choice as leader.
Other, more subtle methods had to be employed.
Rakovsky suggested that one of his protégés, an able and dedicated counter-espionage officer, should take over the activist case files and plan the Soviet response.
At thirty-five, Leon Gusev had reached colonel's rank on account of his excellent work with agitators in the Baltic Republics.
He had scored notable successes in Estonia and Latvia.
It was agreed and at last the meeting ended.
Viktor made the announcement.
Ivan Zakob, the father of the partisans in the great patriotic war, was dying.
His name and his exploits were part of every Russian child's curriculum.
He was a hero who had become a legend.
Every man there expressed his sympathy.
They were genuinely moved by the news.
Viktor reached his dacha before noon.
The nurse was waiting.
Victor raced up the stairs and the doctor opened the door to Ivan's bedroom.
‘He's still conscious,’ he said.
‘He's been asking for you.’
Viktor sat by the bedside.
He held the frail hand.
‘I waited for you, my son,’ the weak voice whispered.
‘I wouldn't go till you came.’
‘I'm with you, Little Father,’ Victor said.
‘I won't leave you.’
‘You've been a good son to me,’ the old man said.
‘We fought together and we suffered together.
I want to tell you something.’
‘Tell me,’ Victor bent close to him.
‘I loved your mother.
There was no harm meant, but I loved her.‘
‘I know you did,’ Victor answered.
‘I found one of the men who killed her, Little Father.
He was punished.’
Ivan's eyes opened; he gazed up at Rakovsky.
‘Too many dead,’ he said.
‘Too much pain.
It's time to forgive, my son.
I want to die in peace.
I want you to live in peace.
Remember that.
I'd like a priest to bless me.’
‘I'll send for one,’ Viktor promised.
‘Then I'll wait,’ the old man murmured and closed his eyes.
The priest was young and flustered; a number of churches in the district were open for services.
Viktor stood while he blessed the dying man and anointed him.
The priest intoned the prayers in a nervous voice, pulling at his beard.
It was a privilege to send such a hero on his way to heaven.
He summoned his courage and said so to the grim-faced man before he left the sick room.
He knew he was a very important Party official.
‘Thank you, Father,’ Viktor said.
‘It's been a comfort to him.’
He came to the bedside.
The priest had gone, but he had left the smell of scented oils behind him.
Viktor knelt beside the bed and bowed his head.
‘Don't cry, my son.
I'm happy now.
I'm not afraid to go.
Maybe I'll see your mother…and Stefan.’
He died so quickly that Viktor didn't know he'd gone.
The silence told him.
When he laid his hand against the old man's waxen cheek it was already cold.
He got up and did what Ivan would have wished him to do.
He opened all the windows to give the spirit easy exit.
Volkov looked round the apartment.
There was no smell of Balkan tobacco.
It was Irina's signature.
Whenever she was at home, he smelled her cigarettes.
He went in to their bedroom.
The bed hadn't been slept in.
He knew because his pyjamas were exactly where he'd left them, dropped on the end of the coverlet.
Untidy!
She hated untidiness.
Making a mess was one of his little rebellions against her.
How trivial and demeaning it seemed to him now.
How low he'd sunk through his own choosing.
There were no messages on the machine.
He'd forgotten to switch it on.
She hadn't been home and she hadn't been able to call in.
That would have infuriated her.
When that happened it meant he was drunk, sprawled out on the sofa if he hadn't been able to reach the bed.
He went to the window, made sure her car wasn't coming, or turning into the communal garage.
Then he started looking.
He opened the drawers in her dressing table.
They were full of makeup, boxes of this and pots of that; a case with her expensive jewellery, all the pieces meticulously fitted in to their places.
He opened everything, searched, put everything back.
He'd learned to be very tidy when he was in prison.
If the straw mattress was an inch out of line with the plank bed base, his food was reduced by one meal.
A few drops of urine on the floor by his slop pail merited a scientifically aimed punch at his kidneys from the guard.
He had thrown his clothes on the floor, spilled his food, deliberately kicked over the stinking pail in the first weeks and suffered terribly for his defiance.
Searching for his passport, he paused, remembering it all.
The battles he won at such a cost to his health that he couldn't help but lose the war in the end.
The pain of coughing and the blood that frothed up in his sputum.
The cold, that  cruellest of all tortures.
And the smell of those cigarettes in his tormentor's office, where he stood barefoot and shivering for hours on end.
He paused and suddenly tears welled up.
He felt weak and overwhelmed.
No passport in her private drawers.
He forced himself to search the wardrobe, the chests full of her clothes.
He went to the kitchen and found nothing but food and neatly arranged cooking knives and spoons, hanging like guardsmen from their hooks in perfect rows.
There was a desk in the sitting room.
She never locked it.
He'd gone through the drawers once, looking for something — he couldn't remember what, but there was nothing personal in that desk.
Writing paper, envelopes, address book, a list of numbers where Irina could be contacted, paper clips, stamps, an India rubber, a packet of rubber bands, a stick of unused red sealing wax.
He opened and shut the drawers and the flap and found what he expected.
Nothing!
She must keep her documentation at the clinic.
He sat down and wiped his brow.
It was wet with sweat.
The sweat of old memories, buried horrors, miserable lonely fears.
No alcohol to dull the nerves; no soothing glow to warm the chill of despair into a muddled kind of peace.
Anger instead.
Anger was making him sweat.
Not anger for what he had suffered, but a deep and terrible rage for what had been inflicted upon others.
Friends, colleagues in the movement who'd never left their bitter cells, or spent their lives in labour camps till they died of exhaustion.
He had no  passport , but that wasn't going to stop him.
He'd been offered a second chance of salvation.
The girl who found him that day by the lake was sent by destiny, by fate, the atheists' substitute for God.
The Holy Relic passed down by who-knows-what route out of Russia, given to an orphan in an Austrian prison camp.
Into Lucy's keeping, so she could give it to him and with it, he could challenge the system that had tormented him and millions of the innocent.
And win.
The front door opened.
He saw his wife come in to the room.
It was strange, but his hatred was purged.
He looked at her and saw a stranger, who had never been anything else.
‘You're up early?
I tried to ring last night to say I wouldn't be home, but the machine wasn't on.’
She looked very tired, he noticed; pinched and pale.
He felt nothing.
He wasn't glad.
‘I do wish you'd remember,’ she said irritably.
‘It's not such a lot to ask!
God, I'm exhausted.
I think I'll go to bed and get some sleep.’
‘Did you have a crisis?’ he asked her.
The passport must be in the clinic.
But it wasn't going to stop him.
‘Yes.
Attempted suicide.
God save me from Italians!
They had the place in an uproar.’
‘It wasn't your special patient then?’
She stiffened, anticipating an attack.
‘No.’
‘Is he still there?’
Volkov said it casually.
She was caught off guard.
‘No, he isn't.
He had a heart attack.
He died.’
She was on her way to the bedroom, slipping out of her jacket.
Volkov said quietly.
‘He was lucky.
Are you off duty for the day now?’
She stopped at the door.
‘Why?
What do you care?
You're never at home these days anyway.’
‘I don't care,’ he answered.
‘I don't stay around here because I get bored.
That might make me drink.
I go out and about and keep busy.
You ought to be pleased.’
She sighed.
She was tired and her spirits were low.
‘I'm not pleased,’ she said.
‘I don't care either!
I'm going to bed.’
She went in and closed the door.
He waited.
She had left her handbag on the chair.
He waited for a full half an hour by his watch before he opened it.
‘What are we going to do?
You can't go near that place!’
Lucy leaned towards him.
‘Dimitri, you mustn't!’
He said, ‘It's the only way.
My darling, you're not to worry, I'll be careful, I promise you.
Now, drink your wine.
This is our celebration, remember?’
He smiled and reached out for her hand.
‘It's no good complaining now.
You were the one who made me brave.’
He turned her hand upward and kissed the inside of the soft palm.
‘When we're ready to leave I'll go to the clinic, get my passport out of the desk and meet you at the airport.
Simple!’
 Irina's passion for neatness had labelled the key in her handbag.
‘Office, drawer.
Doc.’
‘If she misses the key out of her bag,’ Lucy protested.
Nothing could shake his calm or give him pause.
He only laughed at her fears.
‘She won't,’ he countered.
‘Because I've got this.’
He put an envelope on the table and slid a rough white square out of it.
‘I'll have another key made with this,’ he said.
‘Candle wax, Lucy.
You melt it and take an impression.’
‘Oh, darling, why don't we just try Mischa?
Please?
I can't bear it if you take any risks now!’
‘Life is a risk,’ he said.
‘Every time you cross the road, get in a car, climb a ladder!
The risks are all ahead and I don't give a damn!
We're going to succeed, you and I. How strange it all is!
If I believed in anything, I'd say it was part of a divine plan.’
‘My father was convinced of it,’ she said.
They had chosen a table out of view in the cafe he called ‘their cafe’.
The waiter who'd tried to pick her up that first morning wasn't on duty.
It was warm and there were flowers in a little silver vase with candles lit for them.
He'd ordered champagne for her.
He was flushed and happy and he hadn't let go of her hand since they'd sat down.
‘You look so beautiful,’ he whispered.
‘When we're back home I want to marry you.’
‘Home?’ she questioned.
‘In Russia,’ he said.
‘I can't wait to show it to you.
I want to drink tea with you at the Samoyovska Hotel in Kiev, and vodka with you in the evening in a place where they used to play gypsy music when I was a student.
If it's still there.’
‘It'll be there,’ Lucy said.
He leaned close to her.
‘Nobody's looking.
Kiss me.
Ah, that's better.
Again, sweetheart.
I love the taste of you.
Why don't we get under the table and make love?’
‘You're crazy.’
Lucy protested.
‘In that cafe where the gypsies were, we used to do that.
When we were very drunk.
I was wild in those days.’
‘You're wild now,’ she said.
By the end of their dinner she was imbued with his optimism.
He talked of the future; he made light of the present and its difficulties until Lucy lost sight of them too.
They went home, walking the streets with their arms around each other.
They walked slowly and clumsily, her head resting on his shoulder.
The  private detective following them cursed when they stopped and kissed in the middle of the street.
By the next morning he had a full report on Dimitri Volkov and his lover, ready for despatch to Peter Müller in Munich.
3
Leon Gusev was a Muscovite by birth.
He had been born in one of the hideous concrete blocks of flats erected after the Great Patriotic War.
His father was an engineer and his mother worked for a minor official in the Ministry of Post and Communications.
He was an only son; his mother's old father and his aunt lived with them.
The flat had three rooms.
He shared his parents' bedroom and the old man and his widowed daughter slept in the other room with a blanket on a line dividing them.
Leon was clever as a boy; he was a dull-looking child, hampered by short sight.
He had a squat body of surprising strength and quick fists which deterred bullies.
Once the glasses came off, they ran away.
He had a mind that delighted in problems.
Mathematics fascinated him.
He seemed destined for a career as an engineer like his father, but with much brighter prospects.
But human puzzles intrigued him more.
He graduated from Moscow University with degrees in psychology and political science and joined the internal security.
As compensation for his lack of height and pebble glasses, he was gifted with a charming smile and a friendly manner.
He wooed and married one of the prettiest secretaries in the office on Dzerjhinsky Square.
Promotion came rapidly once he caught Viktor Rakovsky's attention.
He joined Rakovsky's select team of young Intelligence operatives.
He saw service in the Baltic Republics and earned a special commendation for his analysis of the situation among the ethnic groups.
He had a pleasant apartment on the outskirts of Moscow with his young wife and baby daughter, and hoped to achieve a small dacha .
He was a dedicated follower of the new political initiative begun by Gorbachev.
He believed in reform and modernization.
He also shared Rakovsky's dread of the Soviet Union becoming fragmented by the Republics' achieving independence.
A loose federation meant weakness.
They couldn't contemplate such a situation with a united Germany and their allies in the Eastern bloc in chaotic pursuit of democracy.
His colonel's insignia was still bright and new; he was very proud of it.
Now he had been given an assignment that demanded intuitive analysis to a sensitive degree.
The anti-Soviet activists abroad were planning to strike a blow.
Discovery and prevention were the methods available.
The old strong-arm KGB response was not an option.
Gusev sensed that his dacha and further promotion was in the balance.
He immersed himself in his work.
Every file, every data sheet on the exiles and  émigrés  who'd caused trouble over the past thirty years was computerized and collated for him.
He noted the dead as well as the living.
The dead had children who might carry on their work.
In the very recent past, an English-based organization of so-called ‘Free Ukrainians’ had led a worldwide campaign on behalf of the gaoled dissident, Dimitri Volkov.
The organizer and prime motivator was of Ukrainian birth, though a naturalized British citizen, Yuri Varienski.
He had died early that year.
He had one child, a daughter, who had a Jersey-based interior-decorating business.
Independent income from her father's estate.
The name Lucy Warren went in to the computer at Moscow Centre, along with hundreds of other names on the periphery of the various movements.
Even a seventeen-year-old schoolboy in a French lycée was documented because his father and grandfather were involved in exposing the executions of the Cossacks after Yalta.
Gusev likened himself to an industrious spider, sitting at the heart of a complicated web, pulling a thread here, tightening one there, until finally he began to see a pattern.
There was no pattern as yet.
KGB agents among the various groups had no information beyond rumours of some kind of summit meeting between the leaders.
Their destination was being kept so secret it emphasized its importance.
Activities in Canada and America were even more alarming.
There were powerful and vociferous organizations of anti-Communist Russians in both countries, backed by considerable funds.
The venue of this gathering must be Europe.
But its location and its purpose was Gusev's first priority.
There must, he rationalized, there must be a unifying factor to bring so many divergents together.
Something that bonded them closer than a shared hatred for Communism and the Soviet Union.
If he could identify that…
There were many rumours.
He didn't dismiss the wildest of them.
Not even the fantasy that one of the Tsar's descendents was preparing to come out and offer himself as a leader within Russia itself, defying the authorities to arrest him and prove that they hadn't changed after all.
The theme of a leader kept recurring.
Check and triple check the likely candidates.
More lists, long computer analyses of each individual — background, ethnic origins, age, record, previous political activities.
The web spread and became more entangled.
Gusev recommended night and day surveillance by expert watchers on the heads of the organization and their families.
Moscow Centre had facilities in all the countries concerned.
Manpower was a problem, but he felt this deserved top priority.
An agent was despatched from London to Jersey to check on the dead activist Varienski's daughter.
His report that she had left the island, and had not been seen or heard of since, went into the computer bank with hundreds of similar reports and remained on file.
Gusev knew from experience that sooner or later something would emerge and give the vital clue.
It always did.
Either by accident, or carelessness, or simply luck.
And he believed that luck was the reward of diligence.
‘It's late, honey,’ Susan Müller said.
‘Aren't you coming to bed?’
Peter Müller yawned and stretched.
He smiled at his wife.
‘I'll just finish these accounts,’ he said.
‘I won't be long.
Don't go to sleep.’
‘I won't,’ she promised.
He kept the smile on his lips till she had closed the door.
The accounts were his coded report for Rakovsky.
With a new and important addition from the Swiss detective agency.
Eloise had conferred with Brückner's lawyers that morning.
Müller had gone with her.
The lawyers were cautious in their attitude to the nursing sister's story.
He could see they regarded Eloise as overreacting.
‘Naturally’, they said to her, ‘she was shocked’.
The senior partner explained patiently that the nurse herself might have suspect motives in accusing the doctor of malpractice.
Her reputation and experience would have to be investigated very carefully.
Their case would stand or fall on her reliability.
Müller was surprised by Eloise's resistance.
He'd always thought of her as pliable, sexy, more of an ornament than a partner for a man like  Adolph Brückner.
Now he saw another side of her.
She was determined.
She possessed power and she knew how to exercise it.
She had silenced them all.
‘I believe this woman.
I believe my husband was badly treated.
I don't want arguments, gentlemen.
I want this matter investigated.
I want you to bring the nurse down here and let her tell you what she told me.
Then, I want the best legal advice you can get for me.
Good morning.’
It made her more fascinating to Müller.
If he wanted the elegant clotheshorse, even more did he desire to strip and possess the woman of character.
He had spent so much time with Eloise that he felt he must make love to his wife that night, however tired he felt.
That tiredness disappeared when he got his detective's report on Volkov and his girlfriend.
He rewrote his original report for Viktor Rakovsky, incorporating the results of investigating the affair.
Brückner's widow was determined to pursue Irina through the courts.
And Irina's husband, Dimitri Volkov, was involved in a passionate relationship with a woman of Russian descent, the  daughter of a well-known anti-Soviet activist who'd recently died, Yuri Warren, alias Yuri Varienski.
His admirable Swiss detectives had checked up on her with the central police register of foreigners, and then elicited the information from the police in Jersey.
Her reputation was confirmed as impeccable.
In the course of establishing this, the agency had extracted the other information about her background.
Müller urgently advised the recall of both Volkovs to the safe confines of the Soviet Union.
Lucy took the call.
Volkov had gone out.
He liked to buy their food; he even enjoyed cooking it sometimes, and was putting on a little weight.
He seemed to take pleasure in the simplest things, like touring the delicatessens in search of a special cheese, or taking the water bus across the lake and just mingling with the tourists.
She was waiting for him to come back when the telephone rang.
It could only be Mischa.
No one else knew where she was.
He spoke in Russian.
‘Are you alone?’
‘Yes.
Is anything wrong?’
‘No.
No, everything is good.
The meeting is in two weeks.
The twenty-seventh.
In London at the Makoff Galleries.
There's an exhibition of pre-Revolutionary photographs and memorabilia.
It's a perfect cover.
But is he ready?
Is he strong enough?’
Lucy turned round as the door opened.
Volkov was surprised by the brilliance of her smile and the heightened colour in her cheeks.
‘Ask him yourself,’ she said.
She gave the telephone to Volkov.
‘It's Mischa,’ she said.
‘They've set the date!’
She watched him, listening to the one-sided conversation.
There was no hesitation.
He spoke calmly and with authority.
‘I shall be there,’ he said.
‘I'll be happy to address them.
No.
That won't be necessary.
I'll be with Lucy.’
He turned and looked at her.
‘As soon as possible,’ he went on.
He hung up and he held out his arms.
‘I told you it would happen,’ he said.
‘Now we're ready to go.
In two weeks I shall be speaking to the people who worked for me and campaigned and raised money when I  thought I was as good as dead and buried.
I'm going to make the speech of my life.
A new Russia will be born in the Ukraine!’
They held each other close.
Then he said, ‘I must get that key cut today.
If it goes well, we'll be on your island by the end of next week.
And you can show me the cross.
I dreamt of it last night.’
Lucy didn't look at him.
She was pale now instead of flushed.
The key.
He had to get into his wife's office, open the desk and trust that his passport was inside.
That was when the idea came to her.
‘Darling,’ she said.
‘Why don't I take that wax and get it done for you?
Please let me.
I know a little place not too far from here.
Please.’
Lucy drove in to the centre of the city before she found a locksmith near the Chemin de la Tourelle.
The man looked at her suspiciously, the piece of hard white wax in his fingers.
‘You want a key cut from this, Madame?’
‘Two keys,’ Lucy said.
She forced herself to smile at him.
‘It's a bet,’ she said.
‘My friends said I couldn't get it done from a wax impression.
I said I could.
I do hope you can do it for me?’
‘I could,’ he said, ‘but I won't.
No responsible locksmith would make a key from a wax impression, I'm sorry.’
He turned his back.
At the rear of the shop his young assistant looked up from his work and grimaced at Lucy.
‘It's an impression of my own key.’
Lucy insisted.
‘I told you — it's a bet — nothing illegal.’
‘I'm sorry, Madame.’
The locksmith cut her short.
‘Jean if anyone wants me, I'll be back in a minute.’
He went out through a door in the back.
The assistant grinned at Lucy.
‘Gone to make pee-pee,’ he said.
‘Quick.
Let's have a look.’
He took the wax from her and examined carefully.
‘This is good.
Very clear, I can make two keys for you.
Come back tomorrow, after five.
He's gone then.
50 francs?’
‘That sounds fair enough.’
Said Lucy.
‘And I win my bet.’
Two keys.
She drove home slowly.
One key for Dimitri.
And one for herself.
Müller's decoded report was given a yellow sticker.
It arrived via the diplomatic bag on Saturday morning.
Viktor Rakovsky had left for his dacha .
A courier was despatched on the strength of that yellow signal.
Blue was urgent, yellow was most urgent.
He was fond of fishing.
When he wasn't sketching or painting as a relaxation, Viktor took a rod and line down to the banks of the Moscova and fished for the grey roach that lurked in the sluggish water.
Mostly he threw them back.
They weren't edible and the two cats at the dacha couldn't eat too many of them.
Viktor kept cats.
The cat with the yellow eyes had disappeared into the forest the day the Germans came.
He remembered pleading with his mother to take the little creature on the train to Moscow and safety.
He loved cats.
He laid his tackle aside and opened Müller's report.
He didn't fish that day.
He went back to his office and summoned Gusev.
Gusev's family didn't see him for the rest of the weekend.
The banks of computers were busy, and together Viktor and Gusev read the long print-outs and the cross-references and the counterchecks on the information.
At the end, Rakovsky opened a bottle of his favourite Scotch whisky and offered a drink to the young colonel.
It was a great mark of favour.
Rakovsky listened to Gusev's summary.
‘The daughter of Yuri Varienski disappeared after her father's death.
She reappeared, according to this, in Geneva, where she has made contact with Dimitri Volkov and became his mistress.
For the last five years Volkov has been drinking himself to death.
He had ceased to be a problem to us.
This is the first woman he's been connected with in all that time.
He's taken no part in politics since his release.
Suddenly he becomes involved with someone whose father was an active anti-Soviet right up till his death.
I think, comrade, that we must conclude that she has seduced Volkov in order to use him politically.
The surveillance team,’ he glanced down checking something.
‘The Swiss surveillance team employed by our agent doesn't mention seeing him drunk at any time.
His behaviour is sober and normal.
That is remarkable, given his alcoholic addiction.’
‘Very remarkable,’ Viktor said slowly.
He was thinking while he listened to the logical thought processes of Leon Gusev.
Irina  had killed Brückner on his orders.
Only Irina knew that he was responsible for the collapse of Moscow Centre's operation at the clinic.
If Brückner had lived, there wouldn't have been a complaint made to the widow.
If he'd let his mother's violator escape punishment…
Müller said she and Volkov must be recalled.
Ironic, he thought, that Müller had plunged the knife in to her back instead of the other way round.
She must be brought home, before any further investigations were made by Eloise Brückner's lawyers.
She couldn't be charged with anything once she was out of reach.
But Volkov's infidelity was more important than Irina's blunder.
Volkov was not drinking.
Gusev deduced that Volkov was in love with a woman who'd been sent to entrap him for political purposes, so Gusev deduced.
He paid full attention again.
‘Varienski was the originator of the London-based ‘Free Ukrainians’.
The ‘Free Ukrainians’ are in close contact with Catholic  émigrés  in Europe and the United States.
They are a significant part of the dissident organizations we have been monitoring.
As we know, they are suddenly very active.’
He cleared his throat.
‘Excuse me, comrade,’ and took a sip of whisky.
He didn't like it.
‘It seems to me that we are missing the key factor.
The common denominator between them all.
Is it possible that Volkov is this factor?’
He waited for Viktor's response.
There wasn't one.
He just nodded and said, ‘Go on.
Take it further.’
‘Why should Dimitri Volkov, after five years of obscurity, become valuable to any anti-Soviet organization?
That question has to be asked.
The answer lies in his birthplace in the Ukraine and the reputation he enjoyed among dissidents and refusniks before his arrest and during his imprisonment.’
Viktor interrupted.
‘I know all that.
I know how dangerous he was.
Go on,’ he said again.
‘He could be used as a figurehead.
But a figurehead for what?’
Gusev enquired and answered his own question.
‘For a full-scale political movement outside the Soviet Union.
What purpose would that serve?
I can't see the exiles and  émigrés  banding together and achieving anything of importance but limited media coverage.’
Gusev paused; he frowned.
Viktor thought,The keys are clicking in to place in that computer brain of his.
I can almost hear them .
‘His real use would be inside the Soviet Union.
Here, he could be exploited by elements already working against the central government.
Which brings us back to the Ukraine, where Volkov was born.
If there is a link and I believe there is, then that's where we must look.
That's where we'll find the heart of this conspiracy.
In our present circumstances, we couldn't do anything to stop him returning here and openly declaring himself.
And he'd have huge popular support.
I'm not suggesting he'd last long,’ Gusev continued.
‘Once the Ukraine demanded independence he could drop out of sight.
There are plenty of others who'd come forward.
I don't have to name them!’
‘No,’ Viktor muttered.
‘You don't.
You may have found your missing factor.
We can't take any chances.
We bring Volkov home.
Once here, we can make sure he gets inside the brandy bottle and stays there.’
Leon Gusev said, ‘I'd like to investigate a little deeper.
I'd like to run some cross-checks on Varienski.
Before you take any action.
Will you give me forty-eight hours?’
Viktor looked up at him.
‘I know you, Leon.
There's a bee buzzing between your ears, isn't there?
What is it?’
‘There's more to this than Volkov and the girl.’
‘We both agree he has a limited potential, but he could be used to detonate a big political explosion.
Isn't that enough?’
‘It should be,’ Gusev said thoughtfully.
‘It should be, Comrade, but I still feel there's something we've missed.
Let me research Yuri Varienski.
Right down to the time he was born.’
He smiled at Rakovsky in his friendly way.
‘If there's nothing to find, I won't find it.
If there is, we'll still have Volkov back in Russia.’
Viktor stood up.
‘I'll make sure of that,’ he said.
Müller flew to London.
He was popular in the trade.
He was amusing and knowledgeable, and he'd made no enemies.
He started with the top dealer who specialized in Fabergé and Russian works of art.
He called on Wartski in Conduit Street.
Collectors from all over the world went to the firm for advice and to buy  the exquisite objects fashioned for the Imperial family and the old nobility.
If a collector had acquired the ancient cross, Wartski's experts might have heard of it through the dealers' grapevine.
An hour later, after admiring some of the rare and beautiful pieces in the shop, Müller left, having learned nothing.
He was advised to consult Eckstein, who also specialized in Russian and Eastern European art.
He had perfected a glib story.
He had a client who thought he had missed a fabulous bargain when he refused to buy a paste cross from an impoverished Russian aristocrat.
This client was not only obsessional, but extremely rich.
Müller had offered to help in the hope of persuading him to invest in something less fantastic.
Heads were nodded in sympathy.
Clients like that were not uncommon among the super rich.
It irked them unbearably to let something slip through their fingers.
But they had to be humoured before they could be diverted from the unobtainable to the treasure that was actually for sale.
From the best in the business he worked his way down.
He went from the reputable experts to the shadier middlemen, who traded in dubious goods, and from them to those who traded in anything without asking where it came from.
Shops and dealers who specialized in old paste, in decorative objects, phoney icons and faked religious relics.
He made two calls to contacts who sold to a private collector in New York.
The collector was a woman.
She hoarded like a magpie.
The house in Long Island was referred to as Xanadu in the specialized trade that supplied her.
It was crammed from the cellars to the roof space with furniture, pictures, sculptures, jewellery and objets d'art .
They were never displayed.
Her criterion for any purchase was that it was the only example of its kind.
Then she bought whatever it was and paid their price without worrying too much about the provenance.
She was the kind of acquisitive neurotic who would hoard a medieval cross or a Papuan shrunken head.
Nobody could help him.
One even suggested he try a firm of theatrical costumiers.
They had a mass of worthless artefacts from crowns to Papal tiaras that they hired out.
Müller realized he was being ridiculed and hung up.
He decided to stop over in Paris and spend a couple of days  following a similar route.
He paid calls to  La  Vieille Cité, famed for its antiquities, where he was politely entertained and actually bought a little Renaissance bronze relief, but no one had heard of a cross coming on the market in recent years.
He knew the fakers and the fences in Paris as well as London, and he skimmed through them, without any hope of success.
He was tired and frustrated by the end of his stay.
The charming little bronze was a compensation.
He decided to sell it to the Americans who had bought the  triptych .
He always stayed at a high-class hotel on trips abroad.
He liked comfort and it was part of his image.
He was packing in his room at the Georges V when his telephone rang.
He supposed it was his wife, Susan.
Or maybe Eloise.
He'd kept in touch with her since he left home.
She'd told him the nurse was coming to see her lawyers and make a statement at the end of that week.
Things were moving, she'd said, and the steely note in her voice had excited him.
‘I'll be with you,’ he'd assured her.
‘I'll hurry back.’
It wasn't his wife and it wasn't Eloise Brückner.
It was a woman; she had a vulgar Parisian accent.
She had heard, she explained, that he was enquiring about an old Russian cross.
Müller kept his voice cool.
Yes, he agreed.
He was asking around.
Did she have one?
No, she answered.
But she had some information.
She could come to his hotel if he liked.
Müller didn't like the sound of her.
He suggested they meet at a bar he knew round the corner from the Place de Grève.
Six o'clock, she suggested.
He paused; he'd have to catch a later flight.
‘My name's Levison,’ she told him.
‘I'm wearing a red dress.’
‘Six o'clock,’ he said and hung up.
He was five minutes early, but she was already there, conspicuous in the red dress which was too tight for her.
She wasn't what Müller expected.
She was middle-aged, overweight and ill at ease in the chic little bar.
He came up and introduced himself.
She got up and they shook hands.
Her bag and shoes were cheap.
He had expected some kind of tart from Les Halles and found a respectable Jewish matron in an unbecoming colour.
‘Would you like something to drink?’ he asked.
‘No thank you.
I don't drink.’
She brought out a man's handkerchief and loudly blew her nose.
People at nearby tables looked round.
Müller said, ‘I do have to catch my plane, Madame Levison, so if you don't mind, I'd like to get down to business.
How did you hear about me?’
She had gentle brown eyes; they were her best feature.
‘I've got friends in the business,’ she said.
‘My father was well known in the old days.
He had a fine shop in the Avenue de  l'Opèra .
Everybody respected him.’
She put the handkerchief away.
‘Excuse me,’ she said.
‘I've got a nasty cold.
Summer colds are always the worst.
My friend called me and said you'd been to see him and were asking about a Russian cross.
He knew my father very well.
He thought I might know something and he wanted to do me a good turn.’
‘That was kind,’ Müller said.
‘Who was this friend?’
To his surprise she named a reputable dealer in fine art that he had been to see that afternoon.
‘Times have been hard since my father died,’ she explained.
‘He took in a partner and we got married.’
She shrugged.
‘He was not like my father.
He ruined the business.
When he died I had to sell up.
There wasn't much left.
I do a little dealing from home.
Small things.
People offer me stuff they don't want.’
Müller had wasted enough time.
He interrupted.
‘You said you had information about the cross.’
She nodded.
‘My father used to talk about it.
He was nearly eighty when he died, but he had such a memory!
Someone came to the shop and tried to sell him an old cross with paste stones in it.
A long time ago — twenty years or more.
He didn't offer for it.
When he was telling the story, he used to bang his fist on his forehead like this.
‘I wouldn't offer for it!
I ask you!’‘
Müller was on the edge of his seat.
Brückner's investigators had found a jeweller who'd refused to buy a cross that fitted the description of the Holy Relic.
Twenty-five years after the war ended a man had gone in to the shop and been told that his treasure was studded with spinels instead of rubies.
Paste wasn't accurate, but it served well enough.
There the search had ended.
Until now.
‘He never got over it,’ Madame Levison said.
‘He only found out what he'd missed a few years ago when some German came in asking questions.
By chance, he said.
The Germans were asking everywhere, advertising, making enquiries all over the trade.
‘My father remembered the man with the cross; he remembered him because he was young and so nervous.
He didn't want to sell the cross unless there was a lot of money.
The German wanted to know about the man.
My father got suspicious.
He just said he was a foreigner, he couldn't remember anything else.
He didn't want to help a German.
Forgive me, but you can understand why.
He'd lost a lot of relatives in the war.’
‘I understand,’ Müller said.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘It's not your fault,’ she said simply.
‘You weren't even born.
I don't think you can hate forever.’
‘No,’ Müller agreed.
For a moment he felt the old shame rise in him.
‘Tell me about the man.
Tell me what your father said about him.
You're being very helpful, Madame.’
‘He was a Russian,’ she said.
‘My father talked Russian.
He'd learned it from his grandparents.
They left Russia after one of the pogroms.
He told the man it was very old, but the gold work was too fragile to be reworked and the stones weren't worth anything.
He said the Russian said to him, ‘Then it's God's will I keep it.’
And he walked out.
My father didn't think of it again till this German visited the shop and showed him an illustration.
He recognized it.
Then he looked it up and found it was some priceless Tsarist cross he'd turned down.
‘He loved telling the story.
My friend must have heard it from him, and after you left remembered and telephoned me.
He said you were a gentleman who'd pay a fair price for anything I could tell you.’
‘What do you consider a fair price, Madame?’
He could think of some people who'd say she'd told him nothing he didn't already know and offer a few hundred francs.
But Müller had never done business that way, and it was evident that she was her father's daughter.
She was a trader.
‘Five thousand francs was what my friend suggested.’
Müller smiled.
‘And how much are you giving him out of that?’
She blushed.
‘He made the introduction,’ she said.
‘Fair is fair.’
‘I don't have that much in cash.
Do you mind a cheque?’
‘No.
A cheque is fine.
Thank you.’
She opened the bag, took out the handkerchief and made a louder noise than before.
‘I hate colds,’ she said morosely.
‘Especially summer colds.
Goodbye, Monsieur Müller.
If you're looking for this cross, I hope you find it.
It must be worth a fortune!’
‘Money couldn't buy it,’ Müller said.
‘Goodbye, Madame.’
Müller got to the airport and caught the seven o'clock flight home.
He had gone as far as he could go.
He had no more resources to call upon.
The cross had never surfaced since that one appearance in the shop owned by Madame Levison's father.
Who ever had it then still had it, or had passed it on.
A German would have thrown away worthless loot.
A Russian who talked of God's will would have kept it.
It was up to Moscow to start checking among the  émigrés  and escapees who'd gone to Paris after the war ended.
That evening he showed his wife the little bronze relief.
Afterwards, when she was preparing dinner, he slipped into his study to telephone Eloise.
‘I'm home,’ he said in his warm voice.
‘I just wanted to you know I've been thinking of you.’
He was thinking of her.
And thinking that if he pleased her as much as he hoped, she might be persuaded to part with the Fabergé desk set.
The letter reached Irina by special courier.
She was at the clinic when it was delivered, working on some case notes.
The Italian lady suffering post-natal depression was proving difficult to treat.
Her husband and relatives were virtually camped in the clinic, driving Irina mad with their interference.
She had been tempted to banish them and forbid all visits, but they wouldn't be intimidated.
The director of the clinic was a reputable Swiss psychiatrist.
He had no idea of the real identity of one of the major shareholders in the enterprise and he regarded Irina as a dedicated and skilful doctor.
He insisted that the Italians should be humoured.
They were related to the Agnelli family and he was impressed by the connection with such wealth and power.
Irina suspected that  his own Italian origins made him sympathetic to the fuss they created.
She slit the envelope open.
It was written in Cyrillic.
There was no heading on the paper, but she knew the signature.
The  chargé d'affaires  in Geneva was Moscow Centre's top man.
The message was brief.
‘A civil action is pending against you brought by Adolph Brückner's widow, alleging mistreatment of her husband.
You are recalled to Russia as a matter of urgency.
Your husband is to accompany you.
You are responsible for his return.’
She felt her pulse rate double; she flushed hot and then went cold.
She was recalled to account for what had happened.
Why had her methods been exposed?
Why had Brückner died, putting the clandestine operation at the Amtel clinic at risk?
Serious charges could be brought against her when she got home.
Unless Viktor Rakovsky took responsibility.
She snapped at her lighter; her hands trembled.
At last the little flame flared and she set it to the paper, watching the end blacken, smoulder and curl as it burned.
It lay in a charred heap in her ashtray among the cigarette butts.
Who had betrayed her?
Who had given information to Brückner's wife?
A civil action alleging misconduct leading to her patient's death.
It was Rakovsky's fault.
She pushed her chair back and threw the debris from the ashtray into her wastepaper basket.
Rakovsky had pursued his private vengeance.
Then she paused, realizing that he had a faultless motive.
The Holy Relic was his alibi.
Brückner couldn't be left alive with that knowledge.
His defence would stand.
Hers wouldn't.
She'd aroused suspicion in some member of the staff and they'd reported her to Brückner's widow.
And she realized at once who it was.
The sister who'd protested and overruled her by bringing in another doctor to relieve Brückner's suffering.
She'd seen the hostility in the woman's face and had her moved to another ward.
That must be who had accused her.
Irina swore in fury.
She should have taken precautions against such a mishap.
She'd become careless, complaisant.
Five years ago she'd have got the woman sacked on some pretext, rendering her harmless if she alleged anything against a reputable doctor in  a famous clinic.
The grieving widow was rich and powerful enough to hound anyone through the courts.
Irina forced herself to calm down.
She lit a cigarette…composed herself.
The pulse steadied, the cold sweats stopped.
She would go home.
She had given years of valuable service.
Rakovsky would support her.
She hadn't missed the sting in the tail in that curt directive.
It was her responsibility to being Dimitri back to Russia with her.
Easy for them to say, she thought bitterly.
If it hadn't been for Müller's exposure, he might have been amenable.
He might still have loved her and been capable of persuasion.
But not now.
Now Dimitri hated her.
He hated her more in his sobriety than when he was drunk.
And he was still sober, much to her surprise.
The distance between them widened every day.
They saw little or nothing of each other.
He lived his separate life and she waited for him to falter and slip back into alcohol.
But he didn't.
Irina stubbed out her cigarette.
She went to the window and opened it, gazing out at the magnificent view over the vast lake.
Five years of exile among strangers would soon be over.
Suddenly her heart ached for the sight of her native country, for the sounds and scents and the voices of her own people.
Once a Russian, always a Russian.
She remembered reading a biography of a Tsarist  émigré  after the Revolution and the phrase came back to her.
It was the only thing in the whole book that she related to, ‘We cherished our language and our culture.
We never wanted to lose our Russianness, no matter what country we lived in .’
She thought.
‘I'll come out of it unscathed.
And when I'm home maybe I'll be happy again.
No Russian is truly happy outside Russia.
And I'll bring Dimitri with me, however I have to do it.
Switzerland destroyed us.
Russia may give him back to me.’
She took the key out of her bag and opened the locked drawer in her desk.
Her passport was in order.
His was out of date.
She picked up the telephone and asked for a courier service.
That afternoon the passport was delivered to the Soviet Embassy for renewal on an emergency application.
When Irina got home that evening Dimitri was not there.
She realized suddenly how empty and unlived in the apartment had become.
There were no signs of him about the place.
No books  left lying about, no newspapers scattered or folded untidily on a table, no dirty cups or glasses.
He came home to sleep and as soon as he woke after she'd left for the Clinic, he went out.
There were no weekends for them.
No days spent together.
He left the apartment in the morning.
If she enquired, he merely said he was going walking and he didn't know when he'd be back.
She wasn't to wait for him if she had anything else to do.
It was so cold and self-contained, his eyes were empty when he looked at her.
He hated her so much that he refused even to see her as a person.
She had tried to follow him once.
She wasn't skilled enough and a tram ride lost him to her.
She came home in despair and went back to the clinic to work rather than spend the Sunday alone, or try to pass the time with friends.
She went in to their bedroom.
He'd made his bed when he left; that was unlike him, but then the sober man was neat and organized.
Irina sat on the bed.
He'll never come back of his own free choice, she admitted.
There's only one way to get him home and I'll just have to take it.
As soon as I have his passport.
Lucy dialled the number.
A bright voice answered on the third ring.
‘Good morning, Amtel clinic.
Can I help you?’
Lucy's mouth was dry.
She said.
‘Doctor Volkova's secretary, please,’ and swallowed hard.
‘One moment,’ the switchboard said.
She waited; it seemed she waited for an eternity.
Less than a few seconds, but it seemed longer than time.
‘Doctor Volkov's office.’
The same honeyed tone, she thought; they must be trained to speak like that, oozing reassurance.
She realized that she had betrayed her knowledge of Russian by using the feminine version of the doctor's surname.
‘Good morning,’ Lucy forced herself to sound calm.
‘I would like to make an appointment with the doctor.’
‘And have you a letter from your doctor?
Normally it's your doctor who makes the appointment.’
The voice was a little less friendly now.
‘I'm visiting,’ Lucy said.
‘I came specially in the hope of seeing Doctor Volkov.’
She was careful not to make the same mistake.
‘I have no letter.
My doctor's in England, but he promised to write to her before I arrived.
Could you just check for me, please?’
‘May I have the doctor's name, Madame?’
‘Harrison,’ Lucy invented.
‘Doctor Philip Harrison, 27 Sloane Square, London.
I've been getting attacks of giddiness and I'm not sleeping well.
He wanted me to see a specialist in Harley Street, but I'd heard so much about your clinic and Doctor Volkov, I said I wanted to consult her.
Are you sure you haven't had a letter?’
‘One moment.
Doctor Volkov is off duty today, but I'll see if I can check through the files in case.’
‘Thank you,’ Lucy said.
She hung up.
Today.
Her heart gave a frightened leap.
She'd planned it differently.
She had to do it today.
No doubt the secretary would dismiss the call as the work of some crank hoping to bluff her way in without a doctor's recommendation.
She took a deep breath.
They'd made their plans for escape.
She argued in favour of a direct flight to London and then on to Jersey.
Dimitri would be safe there.
Nobody would think of looking for him in the Channel Islands.
He would meet Mischa and the others in London at the exhibition in the art gallery.
The next step would be to come out in public and call a Press conference.
That would guarantee his safety.
So long as he was in the limelight, he couldn't be attacked or abducted.
The media would be the best bodyguard of all.
He was fired with enthusiasm.
His spirits were so high he didn't detect the chill of fear in Lucy.
She was proud of him.
It didn't seem possible for her love to deepen and grow, but it did.
If she loved the sad victim of despair and betrayal, even more did she love the brave idealist.
Loved him enough to steel herself to lie and excuse herself that afternoon, while she made her way to the Amtel clinic.
‘Don't be long, my darling,’ he said.
‘I'll miss you.’
She forced herself to smile, to be lighthearted.
‘No, you won't; you'll be busy.’
He was working on his speech and his Press statements.
He said, ‘I could come with you.
Why don't I?’
She put him off with a kiss.
‘I can't see you sitting in dress shops all afternoon,’ she said.
‘I won't be long.
If I buy something nice, I'll wear it home for you.’
She waved at him from the door and went down to the street.
She'd hired a car a few days before, with the trip to the clinic in view.
No taxis, no chance of being delayed.
In and out, and drive like the wind.
She got in, checked that the newly cut key was in her purse and switched on the engine.
Clouds were gathering overhead and the windscreen was spotted with rain.
At mid-morning the traffic was heavy, slowed down by the showery outbreak.
Lucy kept looking at her watch.
She had decided to reach the clinic by lunchtime.
There was a good chance that the secretary would take time off for lunch while the doctor was absent.
It was Lucy's hope of getting into the outer office unchallenged.
Once there, she had to gamble on the consulting room being unlocked.
Her hands were sticking to the wheel.
She sat behind a stream of cars stopped at the traffic intersections till they surged onwards and then stopped again.
The rain grew heavier and thunder rumbled over the mountains.
At this rate, she thought desperately, the lunch hour will be over before I even get there.
Then she remembered how things were here, and calmed down.
The Swiss enjoyed their food.
They started early and worked late, but they took an hour and a half for lunch.
If the woman she'd spoken to was having a break, she wouldn't be back to her desk before two o'clock.
It was just after one, when Lucy crossed the Pont du Mont Blanc, and the traffic was lighter.
She drove as fast as she dared past the Jardin Anglais and at last swung out on to the Quai Gustav Ador.
The sky was bright, the distant grumble of thunder died away and the sun shone, striking light off the puddles that had gathered from the downpour.
Driving along the Quay, Lucy thought about that morning when she had gone to the little bistro on the Place de Trainant to find Volkov.
She remembered the sinking despair when the smirking waiter had shrugged and said, ‘He's always drunk.’
She'd needed all her courage then, to stand over him and introduce herself; to refuse to be sent away, to admit that she had come to Geneva  in vain.
Perhaps I fell in love with him then, she thought; when I discovered that he was a man and not a shining hero.
The first time I looked into his eyes and saw how much he'd suffered.
And I'm taut with fear, she reproached herself, when all that can happen to me is to be thrown out of this damned clinic.
If they call the police that would be different.
I'd be arrested, Volkov wouldn't know what had happened to me.
Panic rose for a moment.
She crushed it ruthlessly.
I can't afford fear.
I've got to succeed.
I've got to get his passport and take him away from here.
Before our luck runs out.
It's been too easy for us; we've led charmed lives till now.
There was a Russian saying her father liked to quote: ‘God doesn't always frown upon the wicked .’
She put her foot down on the pedal and the car leaped forward.
In her agitation she had taken the longer route on to the Quay de Cologny.
She slowed and turned right crossing the Chemin de  BelleFontaine and down the Route de la Capite, upwards off the main highway and into the Chemin Faguillon.
There was a discreet sign pointing higher still to the Amtel clinic.
She turned into the big car park.
Expensive cars parked in neat rows that the staff had reserved for them.
She spotted the name Dr Volkov on a smart little board above an empty space and her heart jumped.
She found a parking space close to the main entrance.
She put the key in her pocket and left her purse in the car.
She saw the building that Adolph Brückner had looked at on his arrival that day, the pain in his head threatening like the thunder clouds that were drifting back over the mountain tops.
Clean architectural lines, gleaming glass, flower beds so neat and regimented that no weed would dare to seed itself.
Two nurses in crisp white came down the main steps, laughing and talking, hurrying away.
Lucy walked up the fight of steps; the plate glass doors slid open electronically as she crossed the beam.
More flowers inside.
A small fountain pattered gently in the big reception hall.
A desk with ‘Reception’ in French, German and Arabic loomed on her left.
She absorbed every detail, her senses sharpened by a flood of adrenalin.
She went to the reception and a smiling woman in a white blouse and neat grey skirt rose up and asked if she could help her.
Lucy smiled back.
‘Doctor Volkov's secretary,’ she said.
The receptionist made a quick assessment.
Nicely dressed, but not expensively enough to be a client.
‘She may still be at lunch,’ she said.
‘I'll ring for you.’
‘Oh, don't bother,’ Lucy said quickly.
‘I'm a friend of hers.
I've only popped by for five minutes.
Second floor, isn't she?’
‘Third,’ the receptionist corrected.
‘You can take the lift over there.’
‘Thanks,’ Lucy said.
Lifts could be on the wrong floor at the wrong moment.
‘I'll take the stairs.
Good for the figure.’
‘Round the corner, by the flower shop,’ she was directed.
The woman looked after her and gave a little shrug.
If she wanted to climb all that way, that was her business.
She had an English accent; the English weren't normally health conscious, unlike the Americans, and they always took the lift.
Lucy skirted the kiosk overflowing with vases and baskets of flowers; the heady scents were sickening.
A man came out with a big bouquet of Regale lilies, festooned with white ribbons.
He looked miserable and anxious; he almost bumped into Lucy.
He said, ‘Oh, scusi Signorina,’ and walked towards the lift.
She hurried past him to the stairs.
It was a longer climb than she expected.
Nervousness made her breathless.
She paused at the landing leading onto the third floor.
Carefully she pushed the door open and looked left and right before stepping into the corridor.
There were five consulting rooms, two waiting rooms, the lift doors and another door marked ‘fire exit only’.
The floors were carpeted, the lighting soft; flower prints in gilded frames hung between the doors.
It reminded Lucy of a luxury hotel.
Then she stopped dead.
There was a nurse's cubbyhole with a little desk behind a glass door.
Someone was moving in there.
She caught a glimpse of uniform and retreated behind the door on to the landing.
She watched through a crack and at last a nurse came out of the tiny office and went to the lift.
Lucy could hear her humming as she waited.
Then she was gone and the corridor was empty.
The name was stencilled inside a brass frame on the fourth door along.
Dr I. Volkov .
Lucy paused.
She raised her hand to knock.
If the secretary had come back early, and if she answered, Lucy had decided to  go in and bluff it out.
‘Doctor Volkov asked me to collect something from her office.
Would you open the door please?
She's in a terrible hurry .
’It had sounded convincing when she rehearsed it.
Quiet authority was the key.
She mustn't hesitate.
Just walk in, say the words, demand that the office be opened for her.
At that moment Lucy realized that no responsible employee in an ordinary office, let alone a hospital, would have admitted her without written instructions or a telephone call to confirm.
She knocked.
She knocked again.
Nothing happened.
She couldn't hear any movement from inside.
She tried the handle.
It turned and the door opened.
She slipped in and closed it very carefully.
A quarter to two.
She had lost precious time waiting for the nurse to leave.
She crossed the room in a few quick strides, grasped the handle of the door set in the wall and pulled.
It was locked.
She couldn't help it.
She gave a stifled cry of disappointment.
Then she swung round to the empty desk.
Word processor, internal and external phones, a tiny switchboard with dead lights, linking the office to who-knew-what departments.
The key was in the top drawer, neatly labelled.
I. Volkov.
She couldn't turn it at first; she fumbled and wrenched and then made herself try again, without forcing.
At last she was inside the consulting room and the door was closed behind her.
The blinds were half-drawn against the sunlight.
She ran to the desk, bumping against a large armchair, not feeling the impact.
She had the key out of her pocket and in her hand.
She was trembling as she bent down and inserted it carefully into the left-hand drawer of the desk.
She didn't hear the door open.
Irina slammed down the telephone.
She had arranged to lunch with friends at the Lion d'Or at Cologny and call in to the clinic afterwards to see one or two patients.
The Italian lady was being particularly troublesome, demanding that the baby be left alone with her.
Irina refused to allow it; the mother was a danger to her child as well as to herself.
She gave the clinic the restaurant number.
She always let them know where she could be reached in an emergency.
They telephoned  in the middle of the dessert.
She came back to the table and excused herself.
Both her friends were women.
They were partners in an art gallery that specialized in avant-garde paintings by young artists.
Irina accepted their lesbian relationship without feeling threatened herself.
They were intelligent and amusing companions and soon she would be leaving them forever.
Without even saying goodbye.
She had invited them to lunch as a silent farewell.
‘I'm so sorry,’ she said.
‘It's an emergency.
One of my patients has gone missing.
Damned woman!’
She drove fast towards the clinic, her mood angry.
She had no sympathy for the rich, spoiled girl who'd walked out of her room and disappeared.
Her frantic husband had gone to visit her and found the empty bed and her nightgown on the floor.
Mercifully the new baby was in a special room with a maternity nurse.
They were searching the clinic in case the mother was hiding somewhere.
She hadn't been seen leaving the building.
Irina jerked her car to a stop in her reserved bay and hurried up the steps into the main hall.
The receptionist called out to her as she went to the lift.
‘Excuse me, Doctor.
There's a package for you.
Vera's not back from lunch, so I kept it at the desk.’
‘Damn Vera,’ Irina said under her breath.
Taking extra time off because I wasn't in till late this afternoon.
I'll have a word to say to her when she gets back.
She took the envelope and stepped into the lift.
It was special delivery.
She tore it open.
Dimitri's passport was inside.
She pressed the third-floor button to go to her office, and put the passport away before she went down to her patient's room and the distraught Italian husband.
No Vera, she noted furiously, striding across the empty office, ignoring the fact that it wasn't even two o'clock.
She felt like punishing someone because her lunch was interrupted.
She saw the key in her door and lost her temper.
Now that was inexcusable.
To forget to lock her private office and leave the key in the lock.
‘I'll sack her for that,’ she said out loud.
‘As soon as she comes back, I'll tell her she's sacked!’
She opened the door and froze.
A woman was going through  her desk.
Not her errant secretary; she was plump and dark.
The intruder was blonde; her hair shone in a shaft of subdued sunlight from the slatted blind.
She was bending down, absorbed in what she was doing.
Irina was startled, but she wasn't afraid.
People didn't frighten her.
She was used to controlling them.
She stepped in to the room on the soft carpet and said loudly in French, ‘What the hell do you think you're doing?’
Lucy jerked upright.
She stood rooted staring at the woman.
She didn't answer.
The drawer held various Russian documents and certificates, Lucy had discovered  Irina's passport, but there was no sign of Volkov's.
‘Who are you,’ Irina demanded.
‘What are you doing in my office?’
It must be a patient, she thought, wandering about and creeping in to steal something.
The emergency button to summon help was by the desk, under the ledge.
She moved closer to Lucy.
Then she saw the drawer that was open and knew this was no ordinary thief.
She made a quick lunge across the desk for the call button.
Instinctively, Lucy grabbed at her wrist.
‘You rotten little spy,’ Irina hissed at her in Russian.
‘You'll pay for this, whatever you're up to.’
She wrenched herself free, and aimed a blow at Lucy with all her weight behind it.
It sent Lucy reeling backward.
She stumbled and fell to her knees.
Irina reached the button and pressed hard.
‘We have people here,’ Irina said, in French this time, ‘who know how to deal with people like you.’
Blind terror washed over Lucy like a wave.
And from that terror she drew unexpected strength.
She propelled herself forward and grappled with Irina.
For a moment or two she was the stronger, but not for long.
The other woman had one hand on her throat and she was squeezing brutally.
Any second now, the door would open and she'd be seized.
‘You bitch,’ Irina spat at her.
‘I'll have you in a strait-jacket.’
There was a box on the desk, just within reach.
Lucy grabbed for it; she was choking with the grip on her throat.
She slammed it down as hard as she could on her opponent's head.
Cigarettes scattered everywhere.
The fingers gripping her windpipe  slackened and Irina slumped backwards against the desk and slid to the ground.
Her mouth was open and her eyes had rolled back.
Lucy was sobbing, getting her breath.
She stumbled across the floor to the door and kicked something.
She saw it lying at her feet, half out of the opened envelope.
Dark background with a red hammer and sickle in the centre.
She stooped and picked it up.
Volkov's wife had dropped it in their struggle.
It was Dimitri's passport.
Her heart was pounding and her head felt light; she thrust the passport into her blouse and closed the door behind her.
The key was still in it.
She locked it.
She is dead , Lucy said to herself.
I hit her so hard I killed her .
She put the key in her pocket and walked into the corridor.
She saw the bright-red arrow of the lift ascending.
No time to use the stairs.
She ran to the emergency exit door and pushed the bar to open it.
Outside she found herself at the top of a fire escape.
The ground dipped and swayed beneath her; she felt dizzy and clung to the rails, forcing herself to go down, to keep looking up, away from the void below.
At last her feet touched the ground.
She was at the rear of the clinic.
Thank God she'd locked the door.
They couldn't get in and find the dead woman until they got another key or broke the door down.
She had time to get to her car, to make her escape.
The engine coughed and wouldn't start.
She tried again; it sulked, spluttering.
A third time.
When she was about to abandon it, and get out and run, it fired.
She put it in to gear and eased out of the space, willing herself not to rush, not to panic.
On the Quay Gustav Ador, she overshot two traffic lights; cars hooted furiously at her.
Her throat was still painful where the other woman's fingers had dug in to her.
She banished the horrible image from her mind; the contorted face, the eyes rolling back as Irina fell after the blow to her head.
The cigarettes scattered all around the floor.
Nausea welled up in her; she fought it down, forcing herself to concentrate on the road, to hang on until she saw the street sign Chemin de la Tourelle.
There was the apartment block.
She was home.
She was safe.
Dimitri opened the door and she fell into his arms.
‘I've got your passport.
Oh Dimitri, your wife found me in her office.
We fought and I hit her…’
Lucy burst into tears.
‘You're crazy.
How could you have taken such a risk?
My darling, please stop shaking.’
Volkov held her close; marvelling at her selfless courage even as he reproached her.
‘I killed her,’ Lucy wept.
‘I hit her so hard because she was choking me.
Oh, darling, what have I done?’
‘It doesn't matter,’ he insisted.
‘What terrifies me is what she would have done to you.
You'd have been drugged, and locked up.
God knows what lie she'd have made up to the staff, and they'd have believed her.
I am so angry with you, Lucy, and I love you so much for doing it.’
Tears filled his eyes.
‘What are we going to do?’ she cried.
‘The first thing is to find out what's happened,’ he said gently.
‘We've got to get away,’ Lucy insisted.
‘Pack a few things and get on a plane.’
She held on to him.
‘Where are you going?’
‘To phone the clinic,’ he said.
Lucy watched him.
He's wrong , she thought.
He didn't see her face.
The way she fell .
She heard him say, ‘Doctor Volkova please.
It's her husband.’
There was a pause, a long pause while he waited.
‘What?
But that's terrible!
I'll come right over.
How did it happen?’
Lucy's heart gave a wild jump and started racing as she listened.
‘Yes, of course.
Thank God it wasn't worse.
Thank you, thank you, doctor.’
He hung up and turned to Lucy.
‘She's not dead, my darling.
But you did give her quite a blow.
That was a doctor at the clinic.
She's concussed and they're keeping her in overnight.
She doesn't remember anything about what happened.
Her secretary said some crank had tried to get an appointment and a woman came to the clinic pretending she knew the secretary.
They think they're one and the same, and that she was responsible for the attack.
Apparently, they've issued a description and it's in the hands of the police.’
Lucy said slowly, ‘Thank God.
I'm so relieved I only knocked her out.’
He put his arms around her.
‘So am I,’ he said.
‘For your sake  rather than hers.
But you're right, we have to leave at once.
By the morning she'll remember.
She'll be able to describe you properly.
The receptionist was vague.
We have to leave today, Lucy.
Before Irina realizes that I've gone and my passport is missing.’
‘We can fly to London,’ she said.
‘And then get a plane to Jersey.‘
Volkov picked up the passport and flipped through it.
He looked at her with a frown.
‘No, we can't.
Unfortunately.
I didn't think.
I told you, I've been moved around like a parcel.
I have no visa.
I can't get into England without one.
I'd be stopped and deported.
My wife's friends in the KGB would be happy to escort me home to Russia.’
‘Oh, Volkov!
It was all for nothing!
Why didn't I think of it?’
She sank back in despair.
‘I thought all I had to do was get you a valid passport and we'd be safe.’
He said gently, ‘I didn't think of it either.
We're like children playing grown-up games.
We don't even know the rules.
Me with all that fine talk about liberating the Ukraine, and I can't even remember about a visa.
It's my fault, not yours, sweetheart.’
He reached out for her hand.
‘But we're not going to be beaten.
We can't fly, but we can go by car.
We can travel from Switzerland to France.
It's all very casual these days at the frontier.
Then we'll think of a way to get to Jersey.
Come on, it's time to pack.’
Lucy got up.
‘I love you,’ she said.
‘And you're wrong about us.
We're not children and I'd say we're learning the rules pretty quickly.
You may have noticed I'm not shaking any more!’
They packed her clothes and his few belongings, pyjamas, shaving kit, a change of shirt.
His experience was useful.
If you expect to be arrested, you clear out everything that might give a clue or be used to incriminate you.
Volkov scoured the flat clean of their presence, down to the last crumb in the kitchen cupboard and a twist of make-up-stained tissue in the waste basket.
No rent was owing.
Lucy had paid in advance.
She left cash for the telephone, erring in favour of overpayment, and put it in an envelope by the phone.
At last they had her suitcases strapped up and were ready to drive away from the little haven they had shared.
At the door, Lucy paused and looked back.
‘We were so happy here,’ she said.
‘I'll never forget this place.’
‘Maybe one day we'll come back,’ Volkov said, taking her by the arm.
‘No more time, darling.
We must hurry.’
He threw the luggage into the boot of her hired car and helped her into the front seat.
He bent and kissed her quickly.
‘We'll be in France in about twenty minutes,’ he said.
She looked up at him.
‘You're sure we won't be stopped?’
‘My wife used to go across regularly.
She said they only look at the car's registration number.
If it's Swiss or French they don't usually bother.’
The car started first time for Volkov.
He put it in gear and they were on their way.
The Renault in front was halted at the French border.
Lucy felt her heart leap, but they were waved through.
Volkov smiled at her, squeezing her hand.
It felt cold.
‘Our luck is holding, my darling,’ he said.
‘I told you we'd be all right.’
He'd mapped out a route for them, and given it to her to follow.
It would take two hours or more to reach the Auto-Route du Soleil on the long way to Paris.
He hadn't thought further than that and he didn't want to worry Lucy more than he had to.
As they passed through the town of Isserre, spots of rain spat on to the windscreen.
The sky had darkened and thunder rolled in the west.
They were on a main road, wide, well signposted.
The rain came lashing down.
‘Try and sleep,’ he said.
‘We've a very long way to go.’
She looked pale and tense.
‘I'll try, but I don't think it'll work,’ she said.
The conditions were horrible, the visibility poor, but the traffic was light.
Which was why he noticed the Peugeot.
It didn't come close or overtake.
It was a faster car than their small Renault.
Volkov changed gear and increased his speed.
He watched in the driving mirror.
The Peugeot accelerated, its wipers flashing at double rate against the driving rain.
He was being deliberately foolhardy.
There was no reason for the driver of the Peugeot to copy him.
‘We're learning the rules,’ Lucy had said, before they set out.
But there were some rules he knew better than she ever would.
And he hadn't forgotten them.
He might have forgotten about needing a visa because he'd developed the prisoner mentality, so common among people who were never permitted to travel.
You didn't know what you would never need to know.
But he remembered very clearly what it felt like to be followed.
They'd followed him for years when he was politically active.
He looked up at the mirror once more and saw the car behind him, keeping the same distance, the rain spurting fanwise from its front wheels.
For a moment the old fear ran through him, the fear associated with that word of infinite menace.
They .
He'd been allowed to cross the border.
Was there another car ahead, waiting to pull out and sandwich them with the Peugeot coming up behind?
He knew the technique.
A half-empty road, a forced halt.
A quick struggle and it was over.
He had to make absolutely sure, but he didn't want to alarm Lucy.
He said, ‘I'm going to pull in at the next layby.
I want to check the rear tyre.’
He stopped the car, but left the temperamental engine idling.
Lucy had told him about her desperate moment when the car refused to start outside the clinic.
There was nothing wrong with any of the tyres.
He walked round the back of the car and busied himself with the boot.
The Peugeot drove past.
He waited, seeing it well out of sight down the straight road.
A few more cars sped by.
He climbed back in.
Lucy said, ‘Everything all right?
Oh, darling, you're soaked.
Here, take your jacket off.’
Ten minutes later they passed the Peugeot.
Within fifteen minutes he spotted it again in his rearview mirror, lurking behind a large French container lorry.
He laid a hand on Lucy's knee and said,
‘We're being followed.’
He heard her gasp.
‘I stopped to make sure.
They passed us, waited for us to catch them up and they're behind us again.’
‘Who is it?
Oh, Volkov.
Is it the police?’
‘Not the police, no.
We'd have been stopped long ago.
There's a turn-off two miles further on.
Sit tight.
I'm going to lose them.’
He swung off the main road without signalling.
The road ahead was narrow; a signpost flashed past them, too quickly for Lucy to read it.
Behind them, the Peugeot veered into view, skidding slightly on the wet road.
A right-hand fork appeared suddenly; Volkov took it, the Renault's tyres screeching.
A rapid gear change gave them speed on the corner and he sat bent over the wheel, concentrating fiercely on the road through the sheets of rain.
‘For God's sake,’ Lucy muttered.
‘Shut your eyes if you're scared.’
She was clinging to the seat with both hands.
A hill loomed ahead of them.
They went up and down as if they were on a roller-coaster.
An isolated house was on their right, guarded by dark gloomy barns.
Without any warning, Volkov braked so hard she was thrown forward against her seatbelt.
‘Sorry, darling,’ he said.
‘I only just saw it.’
It was a farm track, little more than a rough pathway across the fields.
They bumped over the potholes and stones and then Volkov reversed the car, facing the way they'd come.
‘We'll see them from here,’ he said.
‘They won't see us, it's nearly dark.’
She managed a shaky laugh.
‘You didn't tell me you were a racing driver!’
He slipped his arm round her.
‘I used to enjoy playing the fool in a car when I was young,’ he said.
‘Country roads like this, no traffic.
It was an old car, but I had a friend who worked in an engineering factory and he fiddled with it till it could go quite fast.
We saved up for it together.
He hit a tree and that was the end of the car.
He wasn't hurt, but I was a fully fledged professor before I could afford another.
We've lost them.
Nothing's passed.’
‘If it wasn't the police, who were they?’
Lucy asked.
‘I assumed it was a KGB trap,’ Volkov admitted.
‘One following, one ahead.
But they didn't know I was leaving.
How could they?
I don't think I would have got away from the KGB so easily.
I don't know who it was, but I know we were being tailed.
But now, we get back on the road.
Let me look at the map and  see where we go to rejoin the main road to the auto-route.
Do you mind driving through the night?’
‘I don't mind anything so long as we're safe,’ she said.
‘When you're tired, I can take over.’
They reached the auto-route du Soleil and settled down to a steady ninety kilometres an hour.
The little car had served them well, despite its temperamental starting mechanism, and he didn't want to stress the engine.
Lucy slept after the first few hours, and woke with a start from a nightmare where she was being chased and her feet were weighed down with heavy, heavy shoes.
Volkov stopped at an all-night cafe.
‘We can stretch our legs and have some coffee and something to eat, but we'd better keep going,’ he said.
‘Of course, I haven't any money.
I'm so hopeless you should have left me behind!’
‘I needed a driver,’ she said, and managed to smile at him.
‘I can change some Swiss francs.’
The coffee was strong and they were both hungry.
It was self-service, presided over by a bored cashier.
Three other late-night drivers were eating sandwiches and drinking beer.
They glanced up without much interest at the couple who came in.
Their lorries were parked outside.
Lucy paid for the coffee and the rolls full of ham and cheese.
The cashier grumbled about changing Swiss money, but made a calculation that was to his advantage on the rate.
‘I can drive,’ she offered.
She still looked pale, with deep shadows under her eyes.
Volkov shook his head.
‘You sleep tonight and drive tomorrow.
It's auto-route all the way to Paris.
Now settle down and go to sleep.
But kiss me first.’
She put her arms up and held him close to her.
He kissed her slowly, with great tenderness, gently exploring her mouth.
‘You're a wonderful girl, Lucy.
You know that was a brand new passport?
Issued from the Embassy.
You know what you saved me from by that crazy thing you did today?
They were going to take me back to Russia.’
She broke away and stared at him.
‘They couldn't.
You wouldn't have gone!’
‘I wouldn't have had any choice,’ he said slowly.
‘They'd have  left it to Irina to arrange that.’
He silenced her with another kiss, and gathered her to him.
‘Now put your head back and shut your eyes.
No more excitement for tonight.
I'll wake you and we'll stop somewhere for breakfast.
Now sleep, my darling.’
Slowly Irina reached up and touched her head; the windows were shaded and the room was in semi-darkness.
The headache was thunderous.
She felt nauseous.
There was a dressing over a large lump; when her fingertips made contact she winced.
Gradually her eyes became accustomed to the dim light and to her surroundings.
She was in bed in a private room in the clinic.
In spite of the pounding in her head she tried to concentrate.
The day before was a blur; it had been a complete blank.
Concussion, she diagnosed.
I've been concussed.
I still am, that's why there's no light to hurt my eyes.
I've had an accident.
Hit my head.
There should be a bell within reach to summon a nurse.
With her other hand she groped and found the switch.
She pressed.
An accident.
A fall.
No, not a fall.
The sudden movement as she started to remember caused an agonizing throb of pain and she froze.
The door opened and a nurse came in to view.
‘Doctor?’
Irina focused on her; her sight was clear now.
‘I need painkillers,’ she said.
‘What happened to me?’
‘Do you remember anything?
Doctor Rodier said you weren't to try too hard, just let it come by itself.’
‘I know how to treat concussion.’
Irina croaked at her.
She couldn't raise her voice.
‘Just tell me what happened.’
The nurse hesitated.
‘You were attacked,’ she said at last.
‘Someone broke into your office.
They struck you on the head and left you locked inside.
You don't remember any of it?
I'll call Doctor Rodier.’
The nurse hurried out.
She didn't want the responsibility.
X-rays showed there was no serious damage to the skull, but Dr Volkov had remained unconscious for some time after the door had been finally broken down.
Attacked.
Yes , Irina whispered inwardly.
Yes, that's what happened.
 A woman.
A woman stealing from my desk …
Unconsciously one hand became a claw reaching for the other's throat.
The image came and went, but it was sharper, the fuzz was clearing round the edges.
Blonde hair in the sunlit shaft coming through the blind.
That's how she knew it wasn't Vera.
Vera who?
Vera her secretary.
She was struggling to reach the bell under her desk top.
They were grappling, and she'd got her hand on the woman's windpipe, holding her off, squeezing.
Then nothing.
Blackness, blankness.
‘Good morning, Irina.
How are you feeling?’
She opened her eyes and saw Rodier standing by the bed with the nurse hovering behind him.
‘Terrible, thank you.
How bad is it?’
‘Not too bad.
How's the memory?’
‘I can remember finding a woman in my office.
We struggled, then nothing.’
‘She hit you with the cigarette box,’ he explained.
‘Very hard; I was worried about a hairline fracture, but luckily it was just a bad lump.
We kept you sedated and put you to bed here.
Can you describe the person who did it?
We have a vague description, but if you saw her close up and could tell us, it would help the police.
But only if it comes easily.
You know you mustn't strain to remember.’
‘I know,’ she muttered.
‘She was blonde, quite young.
Thin, not heavy.
She didn't speak.
The blinds were partly drawn.
It all happened so quickly.’
And she had opened my locked drawer where I keep my private papers, but I'm not going to mention that.
‘Was anything stolen?’ she asked.
‘Nothing that we know of,’ the doctor answered.
‘Your secretary checked and everything was there.
Your passport, some money, a diary.’
Passport.
The word danced behind her closed eyelids.
Her passport.
No, that wasn't taken.
Why did passport mean something when it hadn't been stolen?
The headache seemed to split her skull.
‘You husband telephoned,’ she heard the doctor say.
‘He was very concerned.
He said he was coming over.’
‘I don't remember,’ Irina said.
‘He didn't show up,’ the doctor said.
‘We telephoned your apartment, but there was no reply.
We thought he'd call in again or come over.
I tried myself this morning, in case you were fit enough to go home, but still no answer.’
‘He's drunk,’ Irina mumbled.
‘He'll be sleeping it off somewhere.‘
‘I'm sorry,’ the young man said.
‘I didn't know.’
‘A shock would start him off,’ she said, more to herself than to him.
‘I knew it wouldn't be long before he went back to it.
If only I could get some relief from this headache…’
‘Nurse has got something for you.
Sleep for a couple of hours and then see how you feel.
You won't be going home, Irina, especially if your husband's not able to look after you.
Just relax, take the tablets and don't worry.
I'll come back and see you this afternoon.’
She managed to swallow the pills with sips of water.
The nurse smoothed the bedcovers.
Irina could have screamed at her to go away and stop fiddling, but it hurt even to whisper.
Passport.
The word was running through her consciousness like a tune without a title.
Her passport.
No, not hers.
And then the answer came to her.
It came as the drug took control and she began to slide away.
Ten minutes later the nurse checked on her.
She was in a deep sleep.
The hand reaching out for the bell had fallen slackly over the edge of the bed.
It was late afternoon and the nurse had gone off duty.
When the bell rang again the new nursing sister hurried to answer it.
She found Irina Volkova sitting up in bed, the bell switch gripped hard between her fingers.
‘Have you seen the papers?’
‘No,’ Peter Müller said.
‘I came straight from the shop.
Why?’
Eloise Brückner handed him the Munich Zeitung , open at the second page.
It was a small paragraph.
‘That woman was attacked,’ she said.
‘Knocked out by someone who broke in to her office.’
‘What woman?’ he asked.
He wasn't really interested.
He was aware only of Eloise sitting next to him, with her legs crossed at  the knee, one delicate ankle encircled by a thin gold chain.
He couldn't stop glancing at it, and the foot in its black silk court shoe with the very high heel, swinging to and fro, making the erotic little chain glint.
‘That doctor who treated Adolph,’ Eloise said impatiently.
Müller stopped thinking about the foot, the ankle, the long leg and what lay hidden out of sight under her skirt.
‘Doctor Volkov?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
There was triumph in her voice.
‘Here, read it.’
He took the evening newspaper and skimmed quickly through the story.
A woman intruder.
That was unlikely.
The doctor was knocked unconscious during a struggle.
Even more suspicious.
People like Irina were trained to deal swiftly with a violent patient.
‘Who could have done it?’ he wondered.
‘Perhaps one of her patients came back to give her a taste of her own vicious medicine,’ Eloise snapped.
She had developed an implacable hatred for Adolph's doctor.
Irina was judged and found guilty before she was tried, Müller thought.
He was surprised by the depth of Eloise's vindictiveness.
And excited by it, too.
He titillated himself with thoughts of her applying that cruelty to him.
He'd never tried that variation before.
He had always dominated in bed, as he intended to dominate her.
But a role reversal might be interesting to start off with.
He shrugged and passed the newspaper back.
It sounded as if Irina was setting herself up for the planned return to Moscow, ahead of the Brückner lawyers.
For medical treatment after the assault.
It was an old ruse, but useful.
‘It says she suffered a concussion, but nothing serious,’ he remarked.
‘The police are looking for the woman.
Never mind about that, my dear.
I've been looking forward to seeing you so much.
You're looking so much better, you know.’
He leaned closer and lightly touched her hand.
He let the contact lengthen; she didn't move away.
‘I'm fine,’ she said.
‘Thanks to you, and all my friends.
You know, Peter, everyone's been so good to me.
I knew people thought so highly of Adolph.
He was so clever, so successful, but I never realized they cared about me, too.’
He slipped his fingers round her palm and held it comfortingly.
‘You underestimate yourself.
You're beautiful, charming and intelligent.
And warm.
Adolph was admired — he was quite awe-inspiring, too.
But you are loved.’
‘The children have been very brave,’ she said.
She let him hold her hand.
He was so kind, so steady.
There was nothing sexual, she told herself.
Just a warm hand holding hers.
‘You're sure you won't let me take you out to dinner?
It would do you good,’ he suggested again.
‘No, no.’
She shook her head and the rich scent flowed towards him…
But we can have a quiet dinner here, if you don't mind.
If you won't be bored?’
It was a little flirtatious, she admitted that.
But pleasing men was second nature to Eloise.
She smiled and she lifted her eyelids at a man in a way that conveyed how attractive and interesting he was.
It was a harmless habit and besides, she liked Peter Müller.
He had beautiful, strong white teeth.
He squeezed her hand for a moment and then let it go.
‘You know I'm never bored when I'm with you.
Now why don't I pour us a drink?’
‘Friedrich can do it,’ she said.
‘I think I can manage,’ he said, getting up.
He didn't want the Brückner's butler coming in and out.
He wanted her mellow with wine before dinner, and then he would advance a few more steps.
Good food — they kept a marvellous table — more wine, and perhaps a little brandy.
An arm along the back of the sofa that could lightly rest upon her shoulders, a casual pressure of his thigh against hers.
Instant retreat if she signalled he was going too far.
He wasn't going to rush this.
Planning her seduction was an excitement in itself.
He would be patient, stalk her carefully right up to the bedroom door.
He poured Moselle for her, brushed fingers as he handed her the glass and looked into her eyes.
He drank Scotch whisky.
She once said she liked the smell.
She was the kind of woman who convinced herself that she liked all the rich smells associated with men.
Brandy, cigars.
She told men this, with the lift and flutter of the eyelashes that was her trademark.
She used it now as she said, ‘It's so sweet of Susan to spare you tonight.
I do hope she doesn't mind lending you for just one dinner.
I've got so many problems at the moment.
‘Of course not,’ Peter Müller said.
‘She's gone to see some Polish art film.
You know the kind of thing, all black shadows and gloom.
She's gone with a friend who likes that stuff.
I couldn't sit through it.
I like to be entertained, to be happy.
And you must be happy, my dear.
Adolph wouldn't want you shutting yourself away.
All right, we dine here tonight and I'll help with any problems you want, but next time we go to the Hofburg!’
He named the best restaurant in Munich.
Eloise smiled.
‘Just the three of us — that would be lovely.’
‘Just the three of us,’ he echoed.
He didn't mind.
He knew she didn't mean it.
Dinner was excellent, as he anticipated.
Eloise was an accomplished hostess and Adolph had expected perfection in his home.
Looking round at the elegant dining room, waited on by the unobtrusive Friedrich, Peter Müller wondered what it would be like to live on such a scale, with so much money to make life as smooth as silk.
He and Susan lived well; their two sons in America wanted for nothing, but this lifestyle was majestic by comparison.
He put the fleeting temptation aside, surprised that it had even occurred to him.
He loved his sons and was fond of his wife.
His plans were laid for retirement.
Money and a house in the Caribbean sunshine — more than most spies, however successful, could dream of achieving at the end of their careers.
He was going to take Adolph's place in bed, but not at the head of his table by marrying the widow.
No, that was a foolish fantasy, impractical.
He set out to be amusing; he had a fund of anecdotes, some about people Eloise knew well.
They were funny without being malicious.
She laughed and encouraged him.
He thought she looked maddeningly attractive, and emboldened by the fine claret, pressed his knee against hers under the table.
She let it rest for longer than she should have done and then moved slightly away.
‘A wonderful dinner,’ he declared as they left to take their coffee in her sitting room.
‘As always; you spoil me, Eloise.
Now  I want to spoil you in return.
I want you to unload all your problems on me and let me take care of them.
If I can.’
‘That would be wonderful,’ she said.
He followed his plan, eased himself down beside her on the cushioned sofa and slid his arm along the back behind her.
Her hair was drawn back, skilfully arranged to fall in loose waves from a gold clasp.
It brushed the back of his hand.
‘My real problem is dear Adolph's collection,’ she said.
He smiled at her.
‘Which collection?
His pictures?
The porcelain?
There's so much, such priceless things.’
‘I know,’ she sighed.
‘It'll take months and months to settle the estate.
He was even richer than I thought.
No, I shall keep the house exactly as it was; he'd want me to do that.
What worries me is his Russian collection.
It worries the lawyers, and the insurance company were always fussing about keeping it in a private house.
The burglar-alarm system is a nightmare, just because of them.
All those boxes and objects, and the early jewellery.
Apart from the desk set.
As you know, Peter, that's unique.
Not another like it in the world!’
‘I do know,’ he said.
‘Clocks and calendars, but not a matching set with the Imperial provenance.’
He had stopped thinking lewd thoughts; his mind was concentrated on what might be a perfect opportunity to obey Viktor Rakovsky's order.
‘They say,’ Eloise went on, ‘that the value of the Russian works of art could make quite a difference to the total outcome, after taxes.
And I must admit, I find the restrictions very boring.
They're suggesting that I have a permanent security guard on duty, day and night, apart from an alarm system that would be more suitable to the Bundesbank than a private house!
They wouldn't have dared lay down conditions like that to Adolph.’
‘You mustn't let them take advantage of you,’ he said.
The steel flashed behind the velvety eyes.
‘Don't worry, I won't!
They're not going to dictate to me just because Adolph's dead.
In fact, the lawyers suggested something and I'm beginning to think it's a solution.
It would put the insurers in their place as well.
I want to ask you what you think of it.’
She turned and looked at him.
‘Why don't I give the Russian collection to the  Munich Museum of Fine Arts in Adolph's memory?
The Adolph Brückner Bequest.
Don't you think it sounds rather nice?
Wouldn't he like that?’
Müller's expression of concern was only too genuine.
‘My dear Eloise — I don't know.
Let me think a moment.’
It was worth trying, but he didn't have high hopes.
‘From the moral point of view,’ he said slowly.
‘There is an alternative.
Everything Adolph bought was effectively stolen.’
‘Peter!
You're not suggesting?…’
She flushed with indignation.
‘No.
No, my dear, of course I'm not linking Adolph with what I've just said.
Let me explain what I mean.
All those treasures were part of Russia's heritage.
They were bartered for Western currency, sold by families desperate for money to buy food.
Looted, smuggled out.
It's one of the ugliest stories in the art world.
I remember an old friend saying it was the rape of Russia's heritage.’
‘But you dealt in those things yourself,’ she protested.
‘Two of our gold boxes came from you.
The one from Catherine the Great to Potiemkin and the other one, the Orlov snuff box!’
‘I know,’ he said gravely.
‘I was no better than anyone else.
But I have thought about it ever since my old friend said that.
Eloise, why don't you do something remarkable in Adolph's memory?’
‘What?’ she said coldly.
‘Give the whole collection back to the people of Russia.
It would cause a sensation.
And set a great precedent.’
She didn't hesitate.
She stared at him and he knew what the answer was going to be.
‘I wouldn't dream of it,’ she said.
‘Adolph hated the Communists.
Certainly not , Peter.’
No easy solution to his problem, he thought.
He forgot about sex; he was angry instead.
Nothing showed on his face.
‘If that's how Adolph felt, you're right, of course,’ he said.
‘But don't be rushed in to giving such a priceless collection away till you've had plenty of time to think about it.
The museum will accept it, no doubt about that.
They'll jump at such an offer!
I'm just wondering whether there's any connection between your  lawyers and the museum itself?
They don't act for the governing body, by any chance?’
‘I don't know,’ Eloise frowned.
It was a point Adolph would have made.
He checked out everything.
Check first and trust afterwards, he used to say to her.
Müller pressed the advantage.
‘It might be wise to find out,’ he said.
‘Would you like me to make some enquiries?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Yes, if you can, that would be most helpful.
If they are trying to use me to get something for the museum, then I shall think of something else.
It doesn't have to be Munich.’
‘You know, I haven't had a look at the things for a long time,’ Müller remarked.
‘I'd like to see everything again, refresh my memory.
Then maybe I can advise you better.
That's if we're not going to set off the alarm system!’
Eloise's mood had lifted.
She laughed.
‘We'd have half the police force here in a few minutes if we did,’ she said.
‘It's connected to all major stations throughout the city.’
Steal it if you have to .
Müller wished Viktor Rakovsky to a special place in hell.
Let Moscow Centre try and organize a burglary and see what happened.
‘All right,’ she said, ‘Let's look at it together.
I haven't been into the room since Adolph died.
I just went through the catalogues with those damned lawyers.
He was so methodical, he kept everything documented and photographed.
I wonder whether they weren't trying to get it for the museum.
They have a lot of government work.’
Müller had sowed the dragon's teeth of doubt.
Munich Museum of Fine Arts was unlikely to benefit now.
Suspicion was inherent in the super rich.
He followed Eloise out of the sitting room — she called it her boudoir, which he thought an affectation — and along the wide corridor towards the big first-floor room where the Brückners held their parties and the guests were able to admire his Russian art collection.
In the corridor, Eloise paused by a console table; a superb bluejohn vase with Louis XVI ormolu mounts was in the centre.
An identical table and matching vase was a few yards further on.
‘This is the first switch,’ she said.
‘There are three on this floor, just for the ballroom.’
She stopped by the table and pressed a carved and gilded flower head.
It depressed a fraction.
‘That turns the first part of the system off,’ she explained.
‘How clever,’ Müller remarked.
He had noted the flower head carefully.
Third on the left of a larger floral carving.
‘Very ingenious.’
‘Adolph's idea,’ she smiled at him.
‘He was so inventive.
Now, it's the same here, only on the other side.’
She pressed another carved and gilded flower head on the second table.
Third on the right of the larger flower group this time.
He followed her as they approached the green-and-gold-painted double doors leading to the ballroom.
Eloise paused and said, ‘This is the last; it clears the system completely so we can open the door.’
Müller stopped.
He said, ‘My dear, I don't think you should let anyone know what it is.
Even me.
I'll turn my back.’
‘Oh Peter, don't be so silly!’
She was herself again, fluttering the melting look at him.
‘It's so brilliant I want you to see it.
You know that's one of the reasons I loved Adolph so much.
He had the most amazing brain.
Look!’
It was a bronze elephant clock, complete with gilded howdah, and the clockface on its back.
Eloise opened the glass case and adjusted the minute hand until both golden hands were on the twelve numeral.
The clock chimed the hour.
‘Isn't that genius?’ she demanded.
‘There's no clock mechanism in there, just the final switch for the ballroom system.’
‘Supposing someone moved the bronze?’
Müller asked.
‘They couldn't,’ she said.
‘it's bolted to the table and the table is secured to the floor.
Now we can open the doors and go in.’
He remembered the first time he had come there, his first coveted invitation to the home of one of the richest men in West Germany.
A client of enormous potential if he managed to hook him.
Eloise switched on the lights.
The room was flooded with a soft illumination, cleverly directed at the Gobelin tapestries that lined one wall.
He glanced up.
‘Ah,’ he said, and meant it.
‘How beautiful that is!’
Brückner had bought the painted ceiling from Italy and had it fitted.
Tiepolo no less, before the artist had commanded the fortune of the present day, but still a great deal of money, even twenty years ago, when Brückner renovated the old mansion and started filling it with treasures.
Together they walked across the carpet; a splendid Second Empire Aubusson which was always rolled up for the parties.
At the far end, specially lit, Adolph Brückner's collection of Russian works of art sparkled in a glass display case.
It always excited Müller to see them.
‘They are lovely,’ Eloise murmured beside him as they stood and admired.
‘Perhaps I should keep them.
Adolph left it up to me to decide what to do with everything.’
There were the two gold and jewelled boxes Müller had sold him at a staggering profit, considering he had bought them from someone facing criminal charges, and desperate for cash.
The early Byzantine pendants and a necklace that had graced some medieval nobleman's wife.
Two fifteenth-century icons set in beaten silver, studded with  amethyst and quartz.
Rarity was what Brückner valued more than gems and gold.
A pair of rock crystal goblets engraved with the cipher of Peter the Great.
Boxes, portrait miniatures and then in a section of its own in the centre of the display, the works of Carl Fabergé in the high days of Tsarist glory.
‘I think he's my favourite,’ Eloise said, one slim finger directed at a toad made of nephrite, its bulging eyes two big ruby cabochons, surrounded by a ring of diamonds.
Diamonds formed the wide mouth so that the little creature seemed to grin with light.
‘He's got such a naughty look,’ she said.
Müller smiled.
He thought that if he'd had the choice, it wouldn't be the toad snuff box, but the marvellous box in yellow and white opal enamel, with the unhappy Nicholas II's cipher and crown, and the Imperial eagles in diamonds and black enamel.
By comparison, the desk set was almost modest.
It had the place of honour because, as he'd said earlier, it was unique.
Designed and made as a present from the emperor for his niece.
A Christmas gift, since the Easter feast was celebrated by the exchange of eggs and was more important in the orthodox calendar.
They gleamed watery green, with the diamonds like frost, sparkling under the light.
He stood for a moment in silence.
In his imagination he saw Brückner stuffing them in to his pockets, wrapped in the clothing of the woman he had raped, while his companion murdered her.
God knows how she had got hold of them, he thought.
Or how the greatest treasure of all, St Vladimir's Holy Cross, came to be hidden in a humble farmhouse in the Ukraine.
For all those years Adolph Brückner had guarded his bloody loot and built his reputation as an art lover around it.
The Grand Duchess Elizabeth, owner of the clock and the calendar, had been murdered by the Bolsheviks, like her uncle the Tsar.
Like the woman in the house by the woods.
In the end they had driven Brückner to near madness and death.
It was no more than he deserved.
Müller caught Eloise by the elbow.
‘Don't give anything to anyone, my dear,’ he said.
‘I was wrong to suggest what I did.
Keep them; I'm sure that's what Adolph would have wanted.
Let's go back, shall we?’
Outside in the corridor she said, ‘I must reset the alarm.
You see what I mean about it being a nightmare?
And this is just one room!’
It worked in reverse.
The elephant clock was set to twelve-thirty.
Third gilded flower on the left of the first console table going the opposite way, third flower on the right of the second table.
A light touch and not even a mouse could have scuttled through that ballroom without setting off the alarm all over the house — and the city.
‘A brandy before you go?’
Eloise offered.
Müller decided to abstain.
‘It's late,’ he said.
‘Susan will be home by now.’
He thought he detected a flicker of disappointment on her face.
No harm in that.
He came close and took her hand in both of his.
He kissed it and then lightly touched her cheek with his lips.
‘I've had a wonderful evening.
And, next week we are going to the Hofburg.
I'll call you tomorrow.
And you know, anything I can do for you — just ask.
Give my love to the children.’
She crossed and rang the bell.
‘Friedrich will show you out,’ she said.
‘Thank you for being such a dear friend.
I look forward to our dinner.’
He drove home slowly, thinking.
The sight of the desk set had emptied him of all desire.
He was reminded of his priorities.
He had to get it.
His reward, as Viktor promised, would be commensurate.
The Volkovs would soon be back in Russia.
That part of his operation was dosing down.
As he drew up outside his own apartment, he shut off the engine and sat there, thinking through to the future.
He'd boasted to Irina that politicians come and go, but spies go on forever.
He was in his early fifties.
He had a thriving business, a good life by any standard.
But his secret life was contracting as East/West tensions slackened.
There would be less and less for him to do without the outlet at the Amtel clinic.
And, therefore, less reason to go on, to take the occasional risk.
He didn't want to play the game part time.
The risks were still there and the satisfaction alone wouldn't justify them.
He would get Rakovsky the desk set, then retire before they retired him.
It was a bonus that he could do it by way of Eloise Brückner's bed.
He drove the car into the garage reserved for residents and went up to his apartment.
Susan was waiting.
She hadn't gone to any cinema and she hated art films with subtitles.
He had explained that he was going to see Eloise, in the hope she might be willing to sell him something.
She came and kissed him in her brisk way.
‘Any luck, darling?’
‘I might get the two boxes back,’ he lied.
‘The Orlov one anyway.
It's worth three times what he gave me for it.’
‘She won't give you any bargain,’ his wife said.
‘That lady knows about money.’
Müller couldn't argue with that.
‘So do I,’ he said.
‘Leave it to me.
I'll get it out of her.’
They sat hand in hand and watched a late-night television movie.
They were very companionable.
The next morning the Swiss detective agency called to say that Dimitri Volkov and his companion had crossed over to France.
Regrettably, their surveillance team had lost them.