

WOMEN, WELFARE AND POVERTY
REDUNDANCY, UNEMPLOYMENT AND POVERTY Claire Callender
The purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate the inadequacy of redundancy payments provisions and social security benefits in alleviating the impact of unemployment and poverty upon women.
The appropriateness of existing policy provision is assessed by exploring some of the financial consequences and other implications of job loss for a group of redundant women.
Unemployment is not equally distributed among all groups in society but is concentrated among some of the poorest and least powerful in the labour force and in society as a whole.
One such vulnerable group is women.
However, little is known about either the scope or nature of women's unemployment.
Many women workers exhibit labour market characteristics traditionally associated with vulnerability to unemployment.
They frequently work within structures of insecurity — their jobs are unskilled, poorly paid and often part-time; they have few fringe benefits; and they may work unsocial hours in poor working conditions, lacking the security of trade unions or protective legislation (see Susan Lonsdale's chapter in this volume).
There is considerable debate, however, on the extent to which women or certain categories of women workers are particularly susceptible to unemployment in comparison with men (Callender, 1985).
Official monthly statistics, based upon those claiming social security benefits, suggest that women's unemployment has at times risen at a much faster rate than men's, although the absolute and percentage numbers for men remain higher.
For instance, when   unemployment was rising between 1979 and 1986, male unemployment rose by 146 per cent while female unemployment increased by 276 per cent .
However, when unemployment declined between 1987 and 1990, the decline was greater for women than men.
By 1991, as the recession deepened and unemployment rose, male unemployment grew by 13 per cent and female unemployment by 11 per cent in the first six months (Employment Gazette , Table 2.1, various volumes 1986–91).
These statistics and other measures of unemployment, all of which are socially constructed and based on certain assumptions, need to be treated with caution.
For instance, the computation of the monthly statistics has changed over thirty times in the past decade.
These statistics underestimate the levels of unemployment and are incomplete and biased (Unemployment Unit, 1991).
However, they particularly misrepresent the numbers of women who do not have paid work and want employment or who are underemployed (Callender, 1985).
Thus it has been estimated that one in four women who lose their jobs do not appear in the monthly claimant count.
The variation in the definitions of unemployment used in statistics creates differing estimates.
For example, the spring 1990 Labour Force Survey (LFS), which enumerates women who would like a job and are available for work, includes almost three-and-a-half times as many women as the monthly claimant count and puts the figure of female unemployment at about I million higher than the claimant count.
By contrast, the LFS estimates lower numbers of unemployed men compared with the claimant count (Table 9.1).
Non-working women do not comply with our male-dominated conceptual framework for defining who is unemployed.
If a man is healthy, of working age and not working, then he is unemployed.
However, women in a similar position are not necessarily ascribed that status.
Hence women may not ‘fit’ the  classifications and categories used in statistics (Roberts, 1981).
They may also be excluded because they are not entitled to benefits, do not register for work, or do not define themselves as unemployed.
In other words, women's invisibility in the official statistics reflects both social security arrangements and differences between men and women's experiences of unemployment.
Unemployed women are often defined out of the labour market by structures and ideologies which regulate that market.
These forces not only exclude women from unemployment statistics but also from ‘legitimate’ experiences of unemployment.
Women's experiences are marginalised so that their unemployment is not considered a problem or worthy of comprehensive social policy responses.
One such experience which is peripheralised and rendered invisible is the poverty associated with unemployment, as Townsend (1979) has shown.
We shall examine some of the social policies and structures which shape women's experience of unemployment and poverty before exploring some of those experiences.
ACCESS TO REDUNDANCY PAYMENTS
One policy which influences women's experience of unemployment is the redundancy payments legislation.
Since the legislation was introduced in 1965 it has been revised, more recently in recognition of its discriminatory nature.
However, overall it remains deeply rooted in notions of a ‘traditional’ job and the ‘standard’worker, namely, a full-time employee with a history of continuous employment who is typically male.
The concern here is with statutory redundancy payments, not ex gratia payments which are privately and separately negotiated either with individuals or in collective agreements.
These ex gratia payments have attracted media attention which has contributed to the development of many myths about redundancy payments generally (Levie et al .,
1984).
But ex gratia payments, like other occupational fringe benefits, are unequally distributed (Sinfield, 1978).
Women do not have equal access to them because of their location in the labour market and consequently are more dependent than men on the less generous statutory minimum payments.
The economic rationale behind the redundancy payment legislation was to facilitate labour mobility so that industry could adapt to changing economic and technological requirements.
The payments were part of a package of benefits which were to act as a carrot to persuade workers to accept being made unemployed.
Today, the redundancy legislation is used to reduce the labour force because of economic decline.
However, the ultimate aim of the legislation — to shed labour and alter workers' consciousness so that they accept being sacked — remains the same.
The Wages Act 1986 and the Employment Act 1989 radically altered the financing of redundancy payments by abolishing the government's subsidy of employers' redundancy costs.i These changes, which herald another shift in the purpose of the legislation, bring into question the role of redundancy payments and their relationship with the social security system, but above all they put a higher premium on dismissing the cheapest workers.
The Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 (amended in 1984, 1985, 1986 and 1989) secures the rights of redundant workers to financial remuneration.
Eligibility for payments is now restricted to workers under the age of 65 who have a minimum of two years' full-time service since the age of 18.
Payments are calculated on the basis of the worker's age, length of continuous service, and pay.
These three criteria are discussed in turn below.
Redundancy payments are calculated on a sliding-scale according to age, so the cheapest workers to dismiss are the youngest workers and/or those with the shortest service.
In practice, workers under the age of 20 do not receive payments and this especially affects women because girls have tended to leave full-time education earlier than boys.
Until the legislation was changed in 1990 by the 1989 Employment Act, women were also penalised because service after their statutory retirement age (60 years) was ignored in the calculation of payments.
Yet women are less likely than men to leave paid employment at the statutory retirement age; it is estimated that in 1990 22.7 per cent of women between the ages of 60 and 64 were economically active, compared with 14.4 per cent of men aged 65–9 (Tinder, 1991).
In addition, women received proportionately smaller payments on their sixtieth birthday because the number of years included in reckonable service was less for women.
Finally, women could never receive the maximum compensation because of differential retirement ages, payments based on age, and the ceiling of twenty years' maximum that counted towards payments.
These provisions were deemed discriminatory under the EC Equal Treatment Directive and consequently the 1989 Employment Act raised the age limit to 65 years for women.
The value of redundancy payments increases with a worker's length of service and any break deprives workers of their rights to payments.
An employee must work a minimum of sixteen hours for two years continuously with the same employer to be eligible for payment.
This clearly affects women adversely because it overlooks their discontinuous patterns of employment (Martin and Roberts, 1984).
Moreover, part-time workers, the majority of whom are women, are doubly disadvantaged.
If they work between eight and sixteen hours a week they need five years' continuous employment before they qualify for payment, while those who work less than eight hours a week have no entitlement to redundancy payments.
The final component in calculating compensation is weekly pay levels.
This also disadvantages women because, despite equal pay legislation, men and women's pay remains unequal.
Moreover, these disparities in earnings increase  with age over the lifetime, varying according to occupation (see Heather Joshi's chapter here).
Consequently, proportionately fewer women receive payments based on their peak earnings.
The cumulative impact of these three determinants of redundancy payments is that women are discriminated against both directly and indirectly by the legislation.
The 1980 Women and Employment Survey showed that 36 per cent of employed women were not eligible for redundancy payments, primarily because they had insufficient lengths of service (Martin and Roberts, 1984, p. 35).
Anderson (1981) also found that a higher proportion of redundant women were not entitled to any payments compared with men.
Furthermore, eligibility for statutory payments declined down the occupational ladder and those eligible for payment earned more than those ineligible — findings particularly significant for women.
Thus, those who benefit most from this gender-blind legislation are non-manual male workers.
Women's disadvantaged position is confirmed by unpublished figures from the Department of Employment (based on a sample of people receiving payments direct from their employers) which show that in 1986 only about a third of all payments went to women.
The median payment for men in 1986 was £1,780, for women it was only £697; while the mean was £2,028 and £1,016 respectively.
The distribution of the payments likewise shows considerable differences between the sexes.
Over half (53 per cent) of women's payments were under £750 and three-quarters under £1,500.
By contrast, a quarter of the men received under £750 and 45 per cent under £1,500.
Only 5 per cent of all women received payments between £3,251 and £4,750 (maximum payment for 1986) while the respective figure for men was 25 per cent.
More recent payments made only to employees whose employers were insolvent show similar trends (Figure 9.1).
These figures highlight the low level of statutory minimum redundancy payments for both men and women.
However, women receive lower redundancy payments than men and a larger proportion of them are ineligible for payments altogether.
This makes women cheaper to dismiss and makes them more vulnerable to redundancy.
The legislation therefore perpetuates women's disadvantaged position in the labour market and reinforces their economic dependency out of employment, as will be shown shortly.
Nevertheless, redundancy payments play a special role for women because they may be the sole source of financial compensation for job loss.
This is due to the nature of social security provision to which we now turn.
ACCESS TO SOCIAL SECURITY PAYMENTS
Men's and women's claims to social security income maintenance have been subject to different assumptions.
Assumptions about the economic relationship between men and women in the family and the sexual divisions of labour in the   home and workplace underpin social security provision.
These assumptions are very apparent in relation to unemployment benefit.
Unemployment benefit
Until the Social Security Pensions Act 1975 married women were either ineligible for full unemployment benefit or, by opting for reduced National Insurance contributions, were excluded altogether.
Since the implementation of this legislation in 1978, only married women and widows already paying reduced contributions could continue to do so, provided they did not leave the labour market for more than two years.
Married women, like single women and men, therefore became eligible for unemployment benefit (if they had paid full National Insurance contributions).
However, in 1989, 20 per cent of married women were still paying reduced National Insurance contributions compared with 34 per cent in 1984 and 64 per cent in 1978 (unpublished statistics, DHSS, 1986; DSS, 1991).
There are other reasons why women are unable to build up sufficient National Insurance contributions and are thereby denied access to unemployment benefit.
Indeed, a recent survey showed that more women than men did not receive unemployment benefit because of inadequate contributions (Erens and Hedges, 1990).
Changes in contribution conditions mean that higher paid people qualify for benefits faster than lower paid people and this especially affects women who make up the majority of low-paid workers.
The 1988 Social Security Act also tightened the contribution tests, making receipt of benefit conditional on two years' consecutive employment immediately prior to claiming.
In the same year, it became harder to re-qualify for unemployment benefit once entitlement had been exhausted.
All these changes in contribution conditions strengthened the link between recent employment and unemployment benefit, whereby claimants have to ‘earn’ their right to benefit.
Paradoxically, they also encourage a greater reliance on means-tested benefits, which are divorced from employment records.
However, they particularly affect women with their discontinuous employment patterns and temporary jobs.
Most important of all, their impact falls in particular on those groups of women who have the least recourse to income support (see below).
Other recent changes have generally restricted access to unemployment benefit (Atkinson and Micklewright, 1989) and, in particular, they have denied benefit to women who had been eligible to at least some benefit in their own right.
Two examples will suffice.
First, the Social Security Act 1986, which abolished the reduced rate of unemployment and other National Insurance benefits where contributions were not fully satisfied, especially affected the low paid and those with discontinuous employment patterns.
In 1985, 21,838 women received reduced rates of benefits, of whom an estimated 78 per cent would have been unlikely to have had any independent entitlement to any other benefit, thus rendering them economically dependent upon their partners (unpublished statistics, DHSS, 1986).
Secondly, unemployed people with temporary part-time jobs, who earn above the lower earnings limit, can no longer claim unemployment benefit.
Since 1989 benefits have been calculated on a daily basis rather than a weekly basis.
If a part-timer earns above the limit (£52 per week for 1991/2) on any one day, s/he receives no benefit at all for the rest of the week.
Previously they would have lost benefit solely for the one day on which they earned above the limit.
Women are most affected by this change as they are much more likely than men to receive money from a part-time job while unemployed (Erens and Hedges, 1990).
The net result is to deter part-time employment among unemployed people and to increase women's economic reliance on their partners.
People who normally work part-time and earn below the National Insurance earnings threshold pay no contributions and receive no contributory benefits.
Data on the numbers of people affected, and women in particular, are not readily available and are difficult to calculate (Hakim, 1989).
In 1984 it was estimated that three-fifths of part-time workers — some 2.75 million employees, mostly  women — were earning below the National Insurance threshold (Employment Gazette , 1984) and, given the rise in female part-time employment, the figure would be much higher today.
Indeed Hakim (1989) suggests that during the late 1980s there was a gradual increase in both the absolute numbers and the proportion of the workforce outside the National Insurance net.
She estimates that for 1987/8 about 2.2 million people in employment fell outside this net.
Of these, four-fifths were women and over four-fifths were part-time workers.
Overall, about 18 per cent of all working women, but only 3 per cent of men, had earnings below the National Insurance threshold and so women were seven times more likely than men to be outside the National Insurance net (Hakim, 1989, p. 480).
Even where part-time (and full-time) workers earn above the limit, they still may be disqualified from unemployment benefit unless they can satisfy the DSS that they can make adequate care arrangements for children or an elderly/sick person within twenty-four hours of finding a job.
Thus the presence of dependants is used as a means of excluding women from benefits.
The 1989 Social Security Act, which strengthened the tests of availability for work and actively seeking work, penalises women with domestic commitments yet further.
Now claimants have to be both available and be prepared to accept full-time employment.
After a maximum ‘permitted period’ of thirteen weeks, claimants can neither impose restrictions on the nature, hours, rate of pay or location of work for which they are available, nor refuse a job handled by the Employment Service for those reasons.
Hence the many women who, for domestic reasons, only want a part-time local job may have their unemployment benefit and income support reduced or withdrawn.
Claimants also have to show that they are taking ‘reasonable steps’ to actively find work each week.
They are expected to use a diversity of job search methods and to keep records of their job-seeking activities which they have to show when interviewed by an Employment Service counsellor.
These regulations put a premium on formal job search methods which can be recorded, such as Jobcentres and newspapers, rather than informal methods of seeking employment, such as unsolicited visits or letters to employers.
Not surprisingly, employers have reported an increase in formal methods, especially Jobcentres, and unsolicited written applications from the unemployed since the regulations came into force (Callender and Metcalf, 1991).
However, other research shows that these methods are not the best for actually securing a job, especially for women (Callender, 1988).
Women are most likely to get a job, and particularly part-time work, via informal social networks and the importance of this successful method increases with duration of unemployment (Erens and Hedges, 1990).
Hence, these regulations penalise those unemployed who use successful, but the least observable, job search strategies and may discourage them from using those strategies.
It is paradoxical that the single most successful job strategy is the least active and the most difficult to prove (Callender, 1989).
Other recent regulations concern the suspension of unemployment benefit or a  reduction of income support for people who left their job voluntarily without good cause.
The 1986 Social Security Act extended the disqualification period from six to thirteen weeks and in April 1988 it was increased again to twenty-six weeks.
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary unemployment is blurred and may affect women disproportionately.
For instance, women may be forced to leave their job for domestic reasons or to follow their partner to a new job.
Indeed, research suggests that being classified as ‘voluntary’ unemployed is one of the most important reasons why women in particular are denied benefit (Erens and Hedges, 1990).
In addition, both unemployment benefit and income support, under certain circumstances, can be withdrawn or suspended if claimants fail to comply with the range of new procedures aimed at policing their behaviour; for instance , if they fail to attend counselling or Restart (introduced in 1986) interviews with Employment Service Officers or turn down ‘positive offers’ of help from the Restart menu, such as employment or a training programme.
However, figures disaggregated by sex on the numbers of claimants who have had their benefit withdrawn for such reasons are not readily available.
Income support
Unemployed people, depending on their circumstances, may be eligible for means-tested income support in addition to unemployment benefit.
Once their entitlement to unemployment benefit expires (after twelve months), they are totally dependent on income support.
Until 1983, married and cohabiting women could never claim the means-tested benefit of the time — supplementary benefit.
To comply with the EC Directive 79/7, complex rules were introduced allowing them to claim under very restrictive circumstances.
However, when income support replaced supplementary benefit in 1988 under the 1986 Social Security Act, either partner was freely allowed to claim income support when both were unemployed.
However, a couple's income continued to be aggregated and any progress towards the effective (rather than formal) equal treatment of men and women was undermined by the introduction of the ‘full-time exclusion clause’.
If one partner is in full-time employment (redefined as twenty-four hours or more per week and from April 1992 as sixteen hours per week), the other no longer has the right to claim income support.
As a result, the number of women eligible for income support has been radically reduced.
In addition, the clause is likely to deter both employed women from continuing with low-paid jobs and women returners from entering such employment when their partners are unemployed.
If the partner continues working, the couple may have to survive on an income below the statutory safety net.
As the Social Security Advisory Committee has commented:
There is already substantial evidence to show that the wives of unemployed claimants are less likely to work and more likely to stop working once their husbands are unemployed, than other women.
This tendency should not be encouraged by the benefit system.
(SSAC, 1985, p. 83)
One of the main thrusts of the social security reforms of the 1980s was to improve labour market discipline and, in particular, increase work incentives and reduce reliance on state benefits.
However, the concern was gender-specific, focusing on men and appearing unnecessary or irrelevant for women.
As Lister (1987, p. 15) has commented, ‘The concept of financial and economic independence for women does not get a look in.’
Overall, women's claims to maintenance from the state both determine and are determined by their relationship to their families and the formal labour market.
Together, these factors contribute to the low percentage of unemployed women claiming unemployment benefit and income support and to the stark gender differences in patterns of income maintenance among unemployed people (Table 9.2).
Moreover, as suggested earlier, these figures under-represent the number of unemployed women, rendering their unemployment invisible.
In these social security provisions we see a set of values and institutional arrangements which condition the position and experience of those out of work, and which is both premised upon and reinforces a male-dominated notion of unemployment.
It is to these experiences of unemployment and social security that we now turn.
WOMEN'S EXPERIENCES OF UNEMPLOYMENT AND SOCIAL SECURITY
There is debate on the extent to which women's varying experiences of social security and unemployment are different from those of men.
Coyle (1984) stresses the differences, while Dex (1985) emphasises the similarities, although she acknowledges the lack of research in this area.
More recent research (Erens and Hedges, 1990) shows both important similarities and differences.
Several factors point to the differences in the experience of unemployment: women's position in the labour market and access to occupational benefits; their domestic roles and the dominant familial ideology; their lack of control over household resources; their problematic identification with the ‘unemployed status’; and their treatment by the DSS, Jobcentres, the Benefits Agency, Training and Enterprise Councils and the Training, Enterprise and Employment Directorate of the Department of Employment.
Ironically, these qualitative differences between men and women have actually been used to explain away and neglect women's unemployment; their unemployment is not perceived as a problem because it is not the same as men's.
The ‘real’ problems, which are associated in politics, policy and academe with persistent high unemployment, are those of men.
The following empirical evidence suggests that despite the existence of some differences in the experience of unemployment, women's unemployment is a significant issue, although the nature of women's problems and concerns do differ from those of men.
However, significant similarities do exist, too.
These similarities belie the assumptions (based on the declared differences) that women's unemployment does not matter.
The point is that the differences and similarities are not necessarily mutually exclusive; rather, they both raise gender-specific issues.
Some of these issues will now be illustrated by the experiences of a group of married women made redundant following the partial closure of a clothing factory in South Wales.
The clothing factory, which was opened in 1939, is part of a multinational company and until recently the major employer of female labour in the area.
The factory is located in a sub-region where both male and female unemployment rates are well above the national average.
The redundancies took place in stages from 1979 to 1981, reducing the workforce from more than 1,500 to 500.
However, certain types of women were ‘selected out’ by the redundancy process; they tended to be disadvantaged in human capital terms, which made them vulnerable to poverty (Callender, 1986b).
All the women in the study were or had been married and were aged between 20 and 59.
They had been made redundant involuntarily and had worked full-time in the factory in low-paid, unskilled manual jobs on the shopfloor.
When the women were made redundant in 1981, their weekly take-home pay averaged  £55 and for half of the women it was the only wage in the household.
The majority of the interviews took place between nine and twelve months after the women's redundancy.
The women's financial situation on becoming unemployed depended on their eligibility for redundancy payments and unemployment benefit.
Redundancy payments, ranging from £50 to £598, were received by most of the women.
The majority of payments were too small to replace the income lost from earnings and, therefore, were used to supplement other income, to buy goods for the home or saved for emergencies.
The women recognised the inadequacy of their compensation:
If Brian [husband]was working…maybe I could have put the money away for a rainy day, but in our place…you more or less need it.
What is £300?
It's nothing, is it?
Nothing compared with when you've got a wage of £60 a week, is it?
Claiming unemployment benefit and registering for work
Once unemployed, redundancy payments were the only monies received by half the women interviewed, because they were ineligible for unemployment benefit.
Older women were least likely to be eligible because they had started working at the factory when the married women's option (i.e. to pay reduced NI contributions) was in full operation and the majority had not considered it financially worthwhile to pay full contributions.
They had entered into complex calculations, weighing up the potential loss of both short- and long-term benefits against the extra cash in their pay packets and had decided to maximise their already low pay at the time they most needed it.
Other women had thought their employment would only be temporary and so believed they would not be in the labour market long enough to build up sufficient contributions.
Yet others had correctly calculated that they were too old or their employment patterns too discontinuous to be eligible for pensions.
Although not all women were aware of the consequences of having paid reduced contributions, none of them had anticipated being made redundant.
All the women who had paid full National Insurance contributions had sufficient contributions to be eligible for unemployment benefit.
Most of these women had negative experiences of claiming benefit.
Like men in similar situations, the women stressed the feelings of stigma, shame and humiliation in claiming benefit.
Encountering unsympathetic staff in a physically depressing environment (‘It's a depressing place, cold, the clocks don't work’), many women found the experience alienating and impersonal: ‘I just sign my name, feel like a convict, lining up and all that.’
Another woman observed: ‘You are nothing.
You go in a line like everybody else, you feel the same as everybody else…
You are just one of a million.’
It was an experience which could not be divorced from the notion of scrounging.
Indeed, a recurrent theme among these women was that  they felt they had no right to benefit, that they were getting something for nothing, in marked contrast to a wage.
As one woman said:
It's the thought of having to be there…
You feel you're going begging — oh, give me a job, give me a job, sort of thing.
You feel you're begging for something that isn't there.
You feel you're begging for money…
Probably it's money that's coming to me because I have paid insurance.
But it's not the same as having a wage, it's not the same as having a pay-packet.
You sign this piece of paper, you feel as if you're scrounging, you're getting something for nothing.
The ‘street-level bureaucracy’(Lipsky, 1981) which the women faced added to their sense of powerlessness, alienation and distrust of officialdom.
Only a small minority had claimed unemployment benefit before and so they found the complex procedures bewildering and confusing.
As one woman said, ‘It all made me feel uncomfortable.
What questions are they going to ask now, and have I got the right answers.
Oh I don't like signing on the dole.’
Women's receipt of unemployment benefit automatically meant they had registered for work.
However, several women who received no benefits also registered, although the majority in this position did not, because they desired to be self-sufficient and free from official agencies.
They preferred to avoid contact with what they considered an alienating agent of the state's authority.
This feeling was compounded by confusion over the respective roles and functions of the Department of Employment, the Department of Health and Social Security, the Manpower Services Commission, the ‘dole’, unemployment benefit offices, employment offices and Jobcentres.
Not surprisingly, there was a widespread uncertainty about what registration entailed, about whether they were eligible to register, and about whether it was relevant to their needs, as Cragg and Dawson (1984) also discovered.
Some women did not perceive themselves as unemployed and so felt it was not legitimate to register.
This rejection of the ‘unemployed’ label is probably associated with the blurring of the boundaries for women between employment and economic inactivity and between unemployment and economic activity which renders their classification in the labour market problematic (Callender, 1985).
Other women did not want to adopt the ‘unemployed’ label associated with registering for work or did not want confirmation of their unemployed status.
Some women did not register because they were discouraged from looking for paid work because of the poor state of the economy.
Finally, the attitudes of some women illustrated the ‘queuing principle’(Martin and Wallace, 1984), namely, that in times of high unemployment, certain social groups are felt to have greater claims to paid employment.
In other words, some women defined themselves out of the labour market because they felt that they were unlikely to get paid work or because they believed that they had no right to paid work.
However, it must be emphasised that all the women who chose not to register for work actually did want paid employment and took up any employment  opportunities which arose (Callender, 1986a).
Moreover, as Cragg and Dawson (1984, p. 43) found, there was no significant correlation between registration and success in finding employment.
The financial impact of unemployment
Townsend's (1979) work has firmly established the links between unemployment and poverty.
His notion of relative deprivation, with its focus on social well-being, activities and the social construction of need, highlights the importance of employment as a major source of participation within society.
However, his analysis fails to consider fully how experiences of unemployment and thus poverty associated with unemployment are gender-specific (Callender, 1988).
The following analysis therefore incorporates Townsend's emphasis on the non-material aspects of poverty but, in addition, exposes the gender-specific dynamics of poverty.
A common assumption made about female unemployment is that it does not cause financial hardship in the same way it does for men.
Such assumptions have been used as a partial justification for women's ineligibility for social security benefits.
However, the loss of income of the women studied did have a considerable impact upon them and their families.
The extent of financial hardship varied among the women depending upon the size of their redundancy payment, whether they received unemployment and/or supplementary benefit, their earning status in the household, the employment status of their partner, whether there were other sources of income and how the family managed its income.
Inevitably, the financial consequences were most immediate and dramatic for those women who were not in receipt of benefit or who were the sole wage earners.
In fact, about a third of the women were both the sole earners and were ineligible for unemployment benefit.
However, without exception, all the women had to make some economies because their wages had been an essential part of the household economy and their benefits were too low to compensate for their lost earnings.
Interestingly, it was only with this loss that many husbands realised the importance of their spouse's wage to the family.
There were large variations in the systems (Pahl, 1989) used by the households both to manage and control their income (see Gillian Parker's chapter here).
Nevertheless, in the majority of cases it was the women who managed the money by taking responsibility for day-to-day budgeting arrangements, paying the bills and organising the family finances.
Consequently, they had the worry of juggling finances and trying to make ends meet.
However, they did not always have control over the money or make the key decisions over how it was spent and distributed.
In general, the women in the study had spent their wages on food, items for the children or had saved some money while their husband's wages were spent on larger bills.
Usually the women kept some money ‘for their own’ to buy themselves make-up, tights or clothes, and pay for the occasional trip or night  out (see Pahl, 1989).
Once unemployed, this small sum was the first economy all the women made.
Even if they received unemployment benefit it was usually spent entirely on food.
In other words, they cut first and most their personal consumption rather than collective consumption.
With the loss of their pay-packet and ‘their’ money they lost a sense of independence and freedom — vital ingredients to women's social well-being.
They lost their ‘little treats’ and ‘extras’which were an important bonus of paid employment.
By contrast, the husbands, irrespective of their employment status, nearly always had some ‘pocket money’(although the sum may have been reduced) which reflected their control over the family finances.
The economies made on collective consumption and their effects on the family ranged from cutbacks on savings, which had little immediate impact but rocked their sense of security, to cutbacks on essentials like food, which signalled hard-hitting poverty.
Most women were more cautious and conscious about how they spent the household's money but about half were just ‘living from week to week’, struggling to meet their financial commitments with every penny of the weekly budget accounted for.
They curtailed their social activities, they abandoned trying to save, they dispensed with their holiday plans, home improvements and repairs, their cars, telephones and televisions.
As one woman who had a disabled unemployed husband commented:
The telephone bill came, it was only £24.
Well it was either that or stuff for the kids.
You can't see the kids without so he [husband]let it be cut off.
Of course to have it put back on would cost another £9 extra.
With his leg and one thing and another it does make a difference having a ‘phone…
Now it's like robbing Peter to pay Paul, you're not living you're just existing.
Now you've got to think twice before you can breath tidy.
The women cashed in insurance policies and used up their savings and redundancy money.
They cut down on cigarettes, food, heating and lighting, and stopped buying clothes and presents.
Little or no monies were allocated to maintaining their worker status — they could not afford special trips to the Jobcentre or to visit factories, a finding echoed in more recent research (Erens and Hedges, 1990).
All these economies were necessary not because the women's husbands were unwilling to share the money but usually because none was available.
It was the women who had to make hard decisions and choices as to what expenditure to cut or what bill could be postponed for yet another week.
They dreaded the unanticipated bill or unforeseen expenditure.
It was primarily up to the women to devise strategies for saving money, especially within spheres of expenditure that they both managed and controlled.
They shopped around for bargains and cheaper food; were more selective as to what food was bought; and cooked cheaper but filling meals which often took longer to prepare.
As one woman remarked: ‘I used to buy a lot of biscuits and things.
Well, cake, we don't  even know what it looks like now, a piece of cake.
It's a luxury isn't it?
Meat, you just can't run to it.’
Shopping was a skilled but painful exercise, as one woman observed:
Shopping in the supermarket, you're going around and looking and you know you can't have it, you have to leave it.
That's the hardest thing…
You can't just go in and pick up everything you need, you've got to stop and you've got to think.
And you'll have one thing one week and something else another.
Other strategies to ‘save’ money included joining clubs to purchase essentials which they could not afford to pay for in a lump sum, although being aware of the extra costs of the high interest on such purchases; having slot meters installed to control electricity consumption; and delaying lighting the fire until later in the day to conserve coal:
In the morning some get up and light the fire straight away, I can't afford to.
When the children go to school I leave Brian [unemployed husband]and Kim [unemployed daughter]to stop in bed.
Well, perhaps I won't light the fire until half past eleven or something to try and make it go that bit further.
It was the women who had to face their children's disappointment at their unmet wants and it was the women who constantly had to say no:
You tell the kids they can't have this and they can't have that.
And they want to know why…’ cos the other children have got them and why can't they have this and why can't they do this…it's hard, it's really hard on them.
The children would come in, perhaps their friends are going to the pictures, and sometimes I'd cry because I know mine can't go.
Whereas before, when I was working, I could give it to them.
But not now and they don't understand.
And often it was the women who sacrificed their own needs to satisfy those of the rest of the family.
It was a draining and depressing experience, as one woman commented:
You do get a lot of tension trying to make ends meet…
And the worst part of being unemployed is having to be always broke…thinking over where's the next money going to come from.
The social effects of unemployment
The material deprivation many women and their families experienced was only one aspect of their poverty.
A major economy all the women faced was a reduction in their social lives.
They could no longer afford to go to the pubs, clubs or bingo, nor the occasional day out or trip.
These activities had to be either totally abandoned or curtailed.
Fun was an expensive commodity that many of the women could no longer afford.
With this reduction of social activities came a sense of social exclusion.
Even prior to redundancy, many of the women did not have a particularly extensive social life because of the constraints of their working and domestic lives.
They had had little time to socialise and some had lost contacts with friends and neighbours as a direct result of being in full-time employment.
Most socialising had been concentrated within the private domestic sphere with their female kin and children.
Unemployment exacerbated and accentuated the already privatised nature of their lives.
With the loss of their paid employment outside the home, both their social contacts and horizons were radically curtailed.
Their world became even more confined and focused on the home.
They thus became excluded from the social networks of employed people which are vital for job-acquisition (Callender, 1986a).
With this constrained lifestyle came boredom and loneliness.
In this respect, unemployed married women probably find their circumstances significantly different from those of unemployed men, many of whom are likely to have their wives at home to provide company (Martin and Wallace, 1984).
Two of the things the women had valued most when they were in employment were the social interaction and companionship of their friendly workmates.
It was this company they sorely missed once unemployed.
For most of the women, paid work had been a route out of the family and domestic and financial dependence.
As one woman commented:
I have missed working.
I've missed the company as much as the money.
Before, I loved being at home but I loved being in work too and I do miss it, the girls and all.
I still haven't really settled to it because my nerves have gone all wonky being in the house.
It's all right when the children are here but when everybody goes I am back on my own all day.
With the loss of their jobs they not only lost a sense of financial security, they also lost a sense of personal security.
Being in employment had given these women personal confidence, a sense of independence, autonomy and pride.
As one woman said:
I think you feel more of a person because you're independent.
I loved that.
You are more independent, you're contributing, not only helping and doing in the home but you're bringing in some money as well.
You're not entirely dependent on your husband.
And I think you have much more confidence, you're bound to, mixing with people.
As I say, you feel more of a person.
Time and again the women stressed their loss of independence and with that loss came frustration, insecurity and a sense of worthlessness ‘commensurate with that which men experience over the loss of their breadwinner status’(Coyle, 1984, p. 107).
It should be stressed that the women did not question their roles as housewives and mothers.
Rather, it was the financing of that role that led to the feelings of dependency.
Moreover, housework was a highly privatised activity which was not as well regarded and was much less interesting than paid employment.
Nor could these married women return easily to their previous domestic roles if, in the course of their employment, their children had grown up.
In short, the expectations and attitudes of these women had changed as a result of their experiences of paid work.
Going out to work had become the normal pattern of their lives, not a deviant one.
The loss of paid work did not mean, therefore, a return to a ‘normal’ way of life, but a change to a new, more restricted and less rewarding one.
As Martin (1983, p. 22) suggests: ‘When full-time working women become unemployed they do not move from one role to another, they simply lose one — like men.’
Nevertheless, the family did cushion the blow of job loss for some women and their domestic role did offer a way of making sense of their experience.
Indeed, a few women embraced domesticity and the family and tried to become more involved in, for example, their extended family.
One woman ‘decided to have a baby so I wouldn't be lonely in the house on my own and there was not much chance of me getting a job’.
What is evident from the women studied is that they wanted and needed paid work for economic, social, psychological and personal reasons.
These wider, non-material aspects of unemployment and poverty remain untouched by any legislative provision.
For a third of the women these hardships were temporarily alleviated when they obtained new paid employment.
However, with one exception, none of these new jobs were permanent; some were part-time, and all were low-paid.
Yet again, these women continued to be excluded from both redundancy and social security provisions but this time in rather different ways.
None of their jobs lasted long enough for them to be eligible for redundancy pay and they remained unprotected by employment protection legislation.
Some jobs were too short-lived for them to build up sufficient contributions to acquire eligibility for unemployment benefit.
Several jobs were paid below the National Insurance contribution threshold (Hakim, 1989), while other women did jobs like running catalogues which were not recognised as ‘work’.
These women's experiences reflect the disenfranchisement and casualisation of many women's work.
They highlight the false assumptions which underpin much social security provision.
Women's role in the labour market was not secondary to their domestic responsibilities.
For many of the women, paid employment was part of being a ‘good’ mother and providing for their children — providing not extras but vital necessities.
These women did not work for ‘pin money’— their contribution to the family economy was paramount.
Part-time employment was often the only paid employment they could find, while others had little choice but to work part-time if they were to fulfil their changing domestic commitments.
Discontinuous employment was an integral part of these women's working lives.
CONCLUSION
Poverty not only exists as a consumption experience but it is also related to labour market experience.
We have seen how the redundancy payments scheme disadvantages women in comparison with men.
Its effects are to make women more vulnerable to job loss, to exclude or only inequitably compensate them, and to perpetuate poverty through insufficient payments.
Once women are unemployed, social security benefits are also unlikely to provide an adequate (if any) replacement income for their lost wages.
Both redundancy payments and social security benefits are totally inappropriate for dealing with today's long-term structural unemployment and play no role in compensating for recurrent unemployment or the casualisation of work.
Their shortcomings help swell the growing numbers of the ‘new’ unemployed and the ‘new’poor; women whose unemployment and poverty remain hidden.
Neither redundancy payments nor social security benefits are rooted in the reality of women's working lives.
Rather, they are based on misplaced assumptions and upon male-dominated notions of employment.
They therefore fail to consider the position of women in the labour market.
But that market, by its very nature, leads to gender inequalities and poverty, too, as the unemployed women's replacement jobs illustrate.
These women's experiences of poverty demonstrate its different facets.
Being unemployed has all the social, psychological and moral effects characteristic of men but with additional gender-specific dynamics.
The women in this study may not have identified with the ‘unemployed’ status, but employment remained a central organising principle of their lives.
They acutely felt its loss; the loss of their independence in both the public and private spheres; the constant financial pressures; and the frustrations of having ‘to live every day at home in poverty’.
NOTES
1.
All employers used to receive a rebate of 35 per cent of their redundancy bill from the Redundancy Fund.
From 1986, only employers with less than ten employees were eligible, but this exemption was subsequently abolished in 1990.
It is estimated that nearly £200 million in 1987–8 would be saved by the government (Department of Employment, 1986).
As a result of this change, no statistics are now available on the size of redundancy payments made directly by employers.
The only data currently available are on payments to employees whose employers were insolvent.
2.
In October 1991, the Equal Opportunities Commission unsuccessfully challenged these hours thresholds in the High Court under a Judicial Review.
The EOC claimed that the thresholds contravened the European Directive on Equal Treatment by discriminating against part-time women workers.
The Court decided that although the hours thresholds did amount to indirect  discrimination, they were not contrary to European Community law since they could be ‘objectively justified’ on policy grounds.
3.
The following review is selective and concentrates on the way unemployment benefit impacts on women.
For a fuller review of social security provision for the unemployed and the detailed regulations, see Morris and Llewellyn, 1991; CPAG, 1991.
4.
Unfortunately, the Department of Employment was unable to provide more recent statistics on the grounds that they would be too costly to collate.
5.
At the time the fieldwork was conducted and until the Social Security Housing Benefit Act 1982, it was compulsory for all those claiming unemployment benefit to register for work at a Jobcentre.
Registration is now voluntary at Jobcentres.
LONE MOTHERS AND POVERTY Jane Millar
Currently there are over I million lone mothers in Great Britain, of whom about two-thirds are living in poverty.
Lone mothers are perhaps the most ‘visible’ of all poor women.
One of the themes of this book is that measures of poverty which are based on the family or the household as the unit of measurement cannot accurately reflect the true extent of poverty among women because they take no account of what happens inside the family.
However, because they are ‘heads of households’, lone mothers do show up more readily in the statistics (that is, when they are not partially hidden in the category of ‘lone parent’).
Thus we know much more about the extent of poverty among lone mothers than among other women.
However, this does not mean that the causes of poverty are different for lone mothers.
On the contrary, it is precisely because lone mothers are women that they have a very high risk of poverty.
The situation of lone mothers — their position in the labour market and their treatment in the social security system — reflects particular assumptions about women and their roles.
Analysing the economic position of lone mothers in the context of the economic position of women in general is therefore the only way to understand the causes of their poverty.
Conversely, examining the situation of lone mothers, where the consequences of the economic inequalities between men and women are so clearly seen, also casts light upon the nature and causes of these inequalities.
Since the first edition of this book was published in 1987 the financial  situation of lone mothers has deteriorated — the gap between the incomes of lone mothers and other families with children has widened and the risk of poverty has significantly increased.
In October 1990 the government published a White Paper Children Come First (DSS, 1990a) which proposed substantial changes to the arrangements for child maintenance when parents separate.
In effect these proposals, due to be enacted in 1992 and 1993, set out to replace state financial support for lone mothers with private financial support from former partners.
The second part of the chapter looks at these new arrangements and the issues they raise in more detail.
The first part sets the scene by examining the extent of poverty among lone mothers in the 1980s and the impact this poverty has on the lives of lone mothers and their children.
THE EXTENT OF POVERTY AMONG LONE MOTHERS.
As discussed in Chapter I government statistics obscure almost as much as they reveal the extent of poverty among women.
Nevertheless the official statistics show that, in the 1980s, lone parents have come to be more and more concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution (House of Commons Social Security Committee, 1991).
In 1979 29 per cent of lone parents had incomes of less than half of the average (income here is measured net of tax and National Insurance, after housing costs, and taking into account family size).
In 1988 59 per cent of lone parents had incomes below this level, amounting to 1.6 million adults and children.
Couples with children also fared badly during the 1980s, but their risk of poverty still remains much lower than that of lone parents (18 per cent in 1988, up from 9 per cent in 1979).
Family Expenditure Survey data also show the widening gap between the incomes of lone parents and the incomes of couples with children.
In 1979 the average disposable income (after tax and National Insurance contributions) of households consisting of a lone parent and children was £70.46 compared with £123.30 for a couple with two children (DE, 1980).
Thus the incomes of the lone parents were equivalent to about 57 per cent of those of the couples.
In 1989 the average income for lone parents was £134.61 compared with £339.71 for the couples with two children, equivalent by then to only 40 per cent(DE, 1990c).
In real terms the average incomes of lone parents have fallen — if their incomes had gone up in line with the Retail Price Index then they would have been about £12 per week higher in 1989.
By contrast the incomes of couples with children have risen significantly above the rate of inflation.
Thus lone parents were both relatively and absolutely worse off by the end of the 1980s than they had been at the start of the decade (see also Roll, 1988a, 1988b).
All these statistics relate to lone parents as a whole and not separately to lone mothers and lone fathers.
However, other evidence shows that lone mothers are  in general worse off than lone fathers (Knight, 1981; Millar, 1989; Bradshaw and Millar, 1991).
There are two main, and related, reasons why lone mothers have become so much worse off financially during the 1980s.
The first is that they have become much more reliant upon state benefits: first supplementary benefit and latterly income support (which replaced supplementary benefit in 1988).
In 1979 there were 309,000 lone mothers receiving supplementary benefit, by 1989 this had risen to 737,000 lone mothers receiving income support (DSS, 1991).
To put it another way, in the late 1970s about 45 per cent of all lone mothers were receiving supplementary benefit, by the late 1980s over 70 per cent of all lone mothers were receiving income support.
Of all children in families on income support, 62 per cent are in lone-parent families.
The second reason for rising poverty — and the flip-side of increased receipt of state benefits — has been falling employment rates, especially the rates of full-time employment.
In 1977/9 about 47 per cent of lone mothers were employed, 22 per cent full-time and 24 per cent part-time.
In 1986/8 only 39 per cent of lone mothers were employed, 17 per cent full-time and 22 per cent part-time (OPCS, 1990).
However, employment is not a guarantee against poverty, even for those who have full-time jobs.
A national survey of lone parents carried out in 1989 found that 65 per cent of lone mothers working twenty-four or more hours per week were low paid, defined as earning less than two-thirds of median male hourly earnings (Bradshaw and Millar, 1991).
So both lack of employment and low pay for those who are employed have contributed to the higher poverty rates.
While the employment rates of lone mothers have been falling those of married mothers have been rising.
In 1986/8 56 per cent of married mothers were employed, 18 per cent full-time and 38 per cent part-time (OPCS, 1990).
Many of these married women are also low paid, especially those in part-time jobs, and this means they too have a high risk of being poor (Millar, 1991a; Susan Lonsdale's chapter here).
But in terms of family income the growth in the number of two-earner couples means that the gap in the incomes and living standards between lone mothers and other families with children has become wider.
LOOKING BACK
However, neither the fact that lone mothers have a very high risk of poverty nor the fact that they are very likely to be dependent on state income support are particularly new.
For example, in York at the turn of the century Rowntree found that the second most common cause of poverty after low wages was the ‘death of the chief wage-earner’, accounting for 28 per cent of all poor households and 16 per cent of all poor persons (Rowntree, 1902, p. 120).
Most of these women were widows, although a small number (3 per cent) were ‘deserted or separated’ wives.
Not all of these widows would have had dependent children of course, but a significant proportion must have done as there were 460 children under 14 in the 403 households in this group.
Rowntree's later study in York (Rowntree, 1941) suggested that the introduction of widow's benefits had led to a substantial decrease in the extent of poverty among lone mothers.
But of course these benefits did nothing for the increasing number of lone mothers who were not widows but who were unmarried or, more commonly, divorced or separated.
Thus in the early 1950s — after the post-war welfare reforms — lone mothers were again heavily over-represented among the poor.
In 1953/4 19 per cent of all poor families with dependent children were ‘headed’ by a lone mother compared with only 5 per cent of all families with dependent children (Abel-Smith and Townsend, 1965, p. 33).
This over-representation of lone mothers among poor families has been found over and over again re.g.
Finer, 1974; Fiegehen et al .,
1977; Layard et al .,
1978; Townsend, 1979; Mack and Lansley, 1985).
Similarly, there is a long tradition of receipt of state benefits.
Snell and Millar (1987) have estimated that about 30 per cent of all families receiving parish relief under the old Poor Law (prior to 1834) were lone mothers; and Thane (1978) has pointed out that, throughout the period of the operation of the new Poor Law, women (often widows or deserted or separated mothers) made up the majority of adult recipients of relief.
Thus although poverty among lone mothers has increased in the 1980s, as a group they have long been vulnerable to poverty.
This poverty has become much more visible in recent years because the number of lone-parent families has increased so dramatically.
In 1971 there were about 570,000 lone parents in Great Britain, in 1976 about 750,000, in 1986 about 1,010,000 and in 1989 about 1,150,000 (Haskey, 1991).
About 17 per cent of all families with children are now headed by a lone parent, nine in ten of whom are lone mothers.
However, even this situation is not ‘new’ if looked at over the longer term.
As Anderson (1983) has pointed out, marital breakdown rates in the nineteenth century were probably not very different from those found today, the difference being that divorce rather than death is now the main cause of lone parenthood.
Similarly, estimates based on parish records suggest that in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries on average about 19 per cent of all families with children were lone-parent families (Snell and Millar, 1987).
THE EXPERIENCE OF POVERTY
The ‘typical’ lone mother is hard to find because the phrase covers so many people with so many diverse experiences.
Table 10.1 shows some of the family characteristics of lone mothers, lone fathers and couples.
Just over half of lone mothers have only one dependent child, two-fifths have a youngest child of under school age, the average age of the women is 32 years but a fifth (mainly   single women) are aged under 25.
Lone fathers are older and usually have only one, often teenage, child.
Couples are also older than lone mothers, tend to have larger families, but about the same proportion have a youngest child of under school age.
Most lone parents — both men and women — have been married and are separated or divorced from their former partners.
Among lone mothers 58 per cent are ex-married, 35 per cent are single and 7 per cent are widowed (Haskey, 1991).
The numbers of single mothers have risen dramatically in the 1980s (from 130,000 in 1976 to 360,000 in 1989) but they nevertheless remain in the minority among lone mothers.
Bradshaw and Millar (1991) found that about 17 per cent of the single mothers in their sample had lived with their former partners before becoming a lone parent.
They also found that the ex-married women had been married for about eight years, on average, before becoming lone mothers.
Sixty per cent of the single women and 47 per cent of the ex-married women no longer had any contact with their former partner.
About 18 per cent of Black families are headed by a lone parent compared with about 15 per cent of white families (Haskey, 1991).
There are quite wide variations between the different ethnic groups in the proportion of lone-parent families.
Among families of West Indian origin as many as 49 per cent are lone-parent families, as are 30 per cent of African families but only 6 per cent of Indian and 8 per cent of Pakistani families.
For all these different groups, and for  white families, the experience of being a lone mother will differ with differences in family and kinship networks, and in attitudes towards lone parenthood.
For Black families racism and labour market disadvantage (see the chapter by Juliet Cook and Shantu Watt here) mean an increased risk of poverty.
Clearly therefore lone mothers are not all the same and what they experience as lone mothers will be affected by many factors including age, race, class, family relationships and so on.
The interaction between these factors is complex.
Phoenix (1991), for example, argues that for young teenage mothers it is their lack of resources, rather than their race, which most structures their lives.
But whatever the differences between them, what is common to very many lone mothers is the importance of state social policy in determining their lives.
In particular, lone mothers are likely to be dependent on the state for two very basic needs: housing and income.
About half (54 per cent) of all lone mothers are local authority tenants, compared with only 18 per cent of two-parent families (OPCS, 1990).
With the policy of selling local authority properties it is increasingly the worst housing that remains and thus lone mothers are becoming concentrated in this poor housing.
Only 34 per cent of lone parents live in a detached or semi-detached house compared with 61 per cent of other families; and 13 per cent of lone parents are over-crowded compared with 6 per cent of other families (OPCS, 1990).
Marital breakdown often means that families must move — 58 per cent had done so in the Bradshaw and Millar survey.
About 27 per cent of single mothers share accommodation, usually with their parents.
Many lone mothers, especially Black women, live in inner-city areas, where housing conditions and amenities are often very poor.
Income support is the main source of state social security for non-employed lone mothers and most lone mothers will spend at least some time, and often lengthy periods, in receipt of income support.
Bradshaw and Millar found that about 85 per cent of all lone mothers had spent some time on income support since becoming a lone parent with 72 per cent still in receipt at the time of the interview.
Of those on benefit half had been in receipt for more than 2.6 years.
State benefits create contradictory and ambiguous responses among those who must rely upon them.
On the one hand for many lone mothers benefits provide a relatively stable and secure source of income at a time when there may be no other alternative.
Many lone mothers are excluded from employment by lack of jobs, lack of child care, and negative attitudes towards working mothers, and few lone mothers receive regular maintenance.
Thus for many families there is no choice but to spend some time on income support.
On the other hand, income support provides an income which is very low and this means many families struggle to make ends meet.
Bradshaw and Millar found that only a quarter of lone mothers on income support said they were managing all right financially and 52 per cent said they ‘almost always’ worried about money.
Berthoud (1989) also reports that many lone parents on benefit have debts and money problems.
Furthermore, the majority of lone parents lost out financially as a result of the  1988 social security changes (Svenson and MacPherson, 1988; House of Commons, 1989).
Living on income support is for many a very negative experience — the intrusive questioning about income and about personal relationships; the difficulties of queuing with young children; the problems when benefits are delayed or lost; the lack of control over income as more and more direct deductions are made — all these and more contribute to the difficulties of bringing up children alone on a low income.
Not surprisingly perhaps, lone mothers suffer consequences in terms of their health.
Popay and Jones (1990), analysing General Household Survey data, found that lone parents report themselves to be in poorer health more than parents in couples; and that more lone mothers report poorer health than lone fathers (see also Hilary Graham's chapter here).
For lone mothers the experience of poverty and the consequences of poverty are in some respects similar to, and in others different from, those of married mothers.
One of the key differences between the two relates to the impact of a male partner in the household.
Men in general bring in higher wages than women so a family with a male partner will almost always have a higher family income than a family of a lone woman.
On the other hand, a number of studies (Houghton, 1973; Evason, 1980; Pahl, 1985; Bradshaw and Millar, 1991) have found that some lone mothers, typically between a quarter and a third, say that they feel better-off as lone mothers than they did as married women because being alone means that they themselves have control over their (albeit limited) resources.
This control extends into other areas of family life.
Charles and ken (1986) found that food consumption differed significantly between lone-mother and two-parent families in a way that was related to the presence of male partner.
The lone mothers in the Bradshaw and Millar study reported that the best thing about being a lone parent was ‘independence’(while the worst was ‘loneliness’) and 47 per cent said they preferred to stay as lone parents in the near future, rather than re-marry (23 per cent) or live with a partner (13 per cent ).
RECENT POLICY DEVELOPMENTS
Up to and including the 1988 social security changes, the basic policy response to the growing numbers of lone-parent families has been to add to or modify the existing system of benefits rather than make any fundamental changes.
The basic benefits available to lone parents (with the exception of widows) are the same as those available to other poor families with children: income support for the non-employed and family credit, and other means-tested benefits, for the low-paid workers.
Lone parents do receive slightly more advantageous treatment than couples, with a lone-parent family premium in income support, a small weekly addition to child benefit in the form of one-parent benefit and an additional tax allowance.
However, the government has recently started to question policy in this area for a variety of reasons.
First, the costs of providing benefits for lone parents have risen very rapidly as a consequence of the increased receipt of income support among lone parents.
Between 1981/2 and 1988/9 real expenditure (taking inflation into account) on income-related benefits for lone parents rose from £1.4 billion to £3.2 billion (DSS, 1990a).
Secondly, changes in the labour market and the increased participation of women in employment has raised questions about the extent to which lone mothers — like more and more married mothers — should be expected to take paid employment (Brown, 1989).
Thirdly, concern about the supposed negative consequences of benefit ‘dependency’ in creating an ‘underclass’of individuals and families who have no self-motivation has very much focused on lone-parent families (Field, 1989; Murray, 1990).
Finally, and closely related, have been moral concerns about family breakdown and unmarried motherhood.
Partly, these relate to fears that state policy (especially social security and housing policy) might be helping to create such families; and partly to disapproval of the way in which absent parents are able to evade their ‘responsibilities’ to provide for their families.
These financial and moral concerns have given rise to a change in policy, which has led to the Child Support Act due to be implemented fully by April 1993.
Maintenance and child support
Bradshaw and Millar found that only 29 per cent of lone parents received maintenance from their former partners.
Only 13 per cent of single mothers received any payments compared with 32 per cent of separated women and 40 per cent of divorced women.
On average, maintenance made up only 7 per cent of total income, with the mean amount being about £26 per family, or £16 per child per week.
Among those on income support only 22 per cent were receiving any maintenance, which represents a substantial fall since 1979, when half of lone parents on supplementary benefit were receiving some maintenance.
The Child Support Act sets out to increase the amount of maintenance paid by former partners, both in terms of the actual amounts paid by individuals and in terms of the number of people paying.
There are two main elements to the new system — the use of a formula to determine payments and the establishment of a Child Support Agency to set, collect and enforce payments.
The formula sets an amount for maintenance (based upon income support rates), allows the absent parent an amount of money for his personal needs (again set by income support rates and also including reasonable housing costs), and then requires the absent parent to pay half of his remaining income in child support.
(The scheme applies equally to women if they are the absent parent but the vast majority of absent parents are in fact men.)
The White Paper sets out the details of the formula (DSS, 1990a; see also Millar and Whiteford, 1991 for further details and a comparison with the recently introduced Australian scheme).
The DSS estimate that the average assessment will be about £40 per  week (compared with £25 now) and that in about 25 per cent of cases the bill will be payable in full.
The Agency is to be established within the Department of Social Security and will take responsibility for all aspects of child support, leaving spouse support, property settlements and issues of custody and access within the jurisdiction of the courts.
All lone parents who claim benefits will be required to use the Agency to establish child support liabilities while non-claimants may choose whether or not to do so.
Both newly separating couples and already existing lone-parent families will be brought into the scheme, which means that existing maintenance orders will be re-assessed according to the formula.
The Agency will have powers to trace absent parents through Inland Revenue records and to enforce payments through measures such as attachments of earnings.
These proposals clearly raise a number of very fundamental issues.
The first, and probably most important, point on which to judge their value is their likely impact on poverty — to what extent will these changes reduce poverty among lone mothers?
On the face of it, if such increased levels of maintenance can be collected from many more absent parents, then it looks as if lone mothers stand to gain quite substantially.
However, the reality is that for very many lone mothers there will be no financial gain at all.
This is because, for those on income support, any maintenance received will continue to be deducted from their benefit.
Given that almost three-quarters of lone mothers are on income support this means that for the majority income will not change, regardless of how much maintenance is collected.
Those very few who do receive enough child support to ‘float’ them off income support may nevertheless lose financially because of the consequent loss of passported benefits such as free school meals.
Owner-occupiers will also lose help with mortgage payments.
The government estimates that about 50,000 lone parents will come off income support as a result of the new scheme (DSS, 1990a, para. 5.35).
At current rates of receipt this means that there will still be over 700,000 lone parents on income support with no financial gain from any maintenance collected.
The government has resisted introducing a ‘disregard’ of maintenance for those on income support partly because of fears that this might create a disincentive to work.
It argues that if child support was received in addition to income support the resulting higher incomes would mean that more lone mothers would remain longer on benefit rather than looking for paid employment.
In order to create such an incentive to work there will therefore be a £15 disregard of child support for family credit, housing benefit and community charge benefit.
Maintenance will therefore add to the incomes of those in work, but the existence of different earnings disregards and tapers in the various in-work benefits mean that the impact will be difficult to work out, and could create substantial uncertainty in decision-making.
For some lone mothers the level of maintenance received might actually fall (Bingley et al., 1991 ).
Furthermore, some lone mothers on income support will have their benefit cut if they refuse to name the absent parent.
This has been one of the most  controversial clauses in the Act and was deleted in the House of Lords but reinstated by the government.
It involves a 20 per cent reduction in the personal allowance of a lone parent who refuses to name the absent parent, unless she has ‘good cause’ not to do so, for example because of violence, incest or rape.
For many women this will cause no problems but for some it might cause very substantial difficulties.
Bradshaw and Millar found that 24 per cent of lone mothers who were or ever had been on income support said they had been, or would be, unwilling to give such information to the DSS.
There are many reasons why women might be unwilling to name the absent parent.
For some it might be fear of violence (Bradshaw and Millar found that a fifth of the lone mothers in their study said violence was a factor in the marital breakdown).
For others it might be that they wish to maintain the relationship between the father and the children and fear that ill-feeling will be created by a vigorous pursuit of maintenance.
For others it might be that they want the relationship to end completely and do not want to be financially dependent on their former partners (Bradshaw and Millar found that a fifth of those not receiving maintenance said that they did not want any).
For men being named as an absent parent will mean a much higher maintenance bill than in the past and thus some men may put pressure on the women to avoid this.
The benefit penalty means that it will be the lone mothers — and their children — who will bear the cost of this.
Another reason why lone-parent families could gain very little from these new measures is simply that absent parents may not have incomes high enough to enable them to pay child support at the levels required.
There are very little data available on the incomes and circumstances of absent parents but the data collected by the government as background to the White Paper suggest that such men tend to have lower than average earnings (DSS, 1990a, Vol. 2, para. 3.6).
Forty per cent of lone parents estimate that their former partners cannot afford to pay (or pay more) maintenance (Bradshaw and Millar, 1991).
In addition many divorced men re-marry and have second families.
The formula ‘protects’ the incomes of second families by not allowing them to fall below income support levels plus £8 and 10 per cent of the difference.
This puts the second family at only just above income support levels and there is therefore a danger that one of the main effects of these changes will be to impoverish second families without directly helping first families.
Conversely, if the absent parent has a high income, the lone mother and the children will not share in this because, once the maintenance bill is met, the absent parent is liable for only 25 per cent more of any additional income.
Men with high incomes will therefore pay proportionately less than men with low incomes.
The way in which child support is calculated means that the amount payable can vary according to a number of different factors.
If the lone mother takes employment her earnings enter the calculation and reduce the maintenance bill for her former partner.
If the former partner has a change in housing costs, or in earnings, or if he has more children, then his maintenance bill will be varied.
And if he does not pay, or does not pay the full amount, then payments will have to be enforced leaving the lone mother to cope in the meantime (although for those on income support maintenance can, as now, be signed over to the DSS).
Child support will therefore not necessarily be any more reliable or regular in the future than it has been in the past.
Thus the financial dependency of individual women on individual men is perpetuated in that at least part of her income will still depend on his actions and circumstances.
In addition, the way in which the amount of child support is calculated includes an amount of money in respect of the lone mother.
This is intended to reflect her costs as ‘carer’ of the child(ren) but it seems probable that many people will interpret it as being money for her maintenance.
This is likely to be very unpopular and further reinforces individual dependency.
Furthermore, this focus on child support does nothing to compensate women for the real inequalities that marriage and child-rearing brings.
The contribution that women make to families through their unpaid domestic labour, and the costs they incur in doing so in terms of lost current and future earnings, are inadequately recognised in the current financial arrangements following divorce.
One very significant example concerns pension rights.
Many women lose access to a pension through their partner because of divorce and there is no compensation for this (Joshi and Davies, 1991).
These wider questions remain unaddressed.
The Child Support Act highlights the complexity of the issues surrounding financial relationships and obligations in a society where family structures are rapidly changing.
On the one hand, setting and enforcing more adequate levels of child support goes some way to redressing the balance of the current situation where the costs of supporting children fall almost entirely on the mother.
On the other hand, as the new scheme stands, it will make little impact on the poverty experienced by lone mothers; there is still no adequate compensation for women for the costs they bear as a consequence of inequalities in marriage and child-rearing; and the financial dependency of individual women on individual men is maintained.
This approach to child support also gives priority to a particular type of family relationship — that based on biological parenthood.
As Margaret Thatcher put it, when introducing these proposals: ‘Parenthood is for life’(The Independent , 19.7.90).
But biological parenthood is only one element in actual patterns of family structure and family life and its importance is not necessarily always paramount.
Step-parents provide most of the economic and emotional care for some children.
Some separated parents share care by having their children live sometimes with one parent and sometimes with the other.
Some women choose to bring up children alone without a male partner.
There are lesbian couples with children, and increasing numbers of children born as a result of artificial insemination.
Clearly, not all children have two ‘natural’ parents, a mother and a father.
Nevertheless the ‘family’ in this form is still explicitly and implicitly upheld and supported by social policy and the Child Support Act can be seen as another example of this.
Employment
The third change introduced in the Child Support Act — alongside the introduction of the Agency and the use of the formula — is the change to the benefit rules regarding hours of work.
For all claimants, not just lone parents, income support will cease to be payable to those employed for more than sixteen hours per week, and family credit will become payable instead.
(Under current rules the change-over occurs at twenty-four hours.)
This is potentially a very radical change, bringing part-time work much more within the remit of social security benefits.
For lone mothers the aim is to encourage more employment, with what are likely to be low earnings from part-time jobs supplemented by both means-tested benefits (especially family credit) and child support (as discussed above, with a £15 disregard).
These changes do reflect a recognition of the growing importance of part-time work (which is where most of the new jobs have been created in recent years) and a recognition that full-time work is difficult for many lone mothers to sustain, given their domestic responsibilities.
However, there are likely to be a number of problems with this approach in practice.
First, focusing again on poverty, this income ‘package’ of earnings, benefits and child support will create a strong poverty trap for lone mothers, making it very difficult for them to improve their incomes.
An increase in earnings will lead to a reduction in both benefit and child support and so lone mothers will tend to be trapped at a low level of income.
Unless lone mothers can be helped out of low-paid jobs they will still remain poor.
Secondly, the package is insecure.
Living on a low income requires strict budgeting and control over expenditure.
But this is very difficult to do if income fluctuates.
So a week in which the former partner misses his child support payment is likely to cause substantial problems; likewise the period while benefits are being assessed or re-assessed.
Earnings might vary because of piece-work, overtime or short-time working.
Some lone mothers are therefore likely to take the view that their children can be more securely supported by remaining on income support.
Thirdly, the lack of adequate and affordable child care remains a significant barrier to employment, even part-time employment.
The UK has one of the worst records in Europe in relation to the provision of child care (Moss, 1991).
Bradshaw and Millar found that most employed lone mothers relied on their families to provide care, often unpaid; and that lack of child care was one of the main factors keeping lone mothers out of employment.
The issue of employment for mothers, and especially mothers of young children, is surrounded by some ambiguity both in policy and in popular attitudes (Brown, 1989; Brannen and Moss, 1991).
On the one hand, more and more mothers are employed outside the home but on the other hand there is still a strong ideology supporting the view that mothers ought to stay at home to care for their children.
The government remains reluctant actively to support or  encourage women's employment despite the fact that women's employment is growing steadily.
For lone mothers employment — even though often low paid — does mean higher incomes and greater independence.
Work also provides social contact and reduces the isolation experienced by those bringing up children alone.
However, it also has to be remembered that employment is not a solution for all lone mothers.
Bradshaw and Millar found that about two-thirds (62 per cent) of lone mothers on income support said that they did not want to work immediately although they would want to work in the future.
The main reasons for not wanting immediate employment were to do with their children and their perceptions of their children's needs.
Some had very young children and (like many mothers of young babies) felt they ought to stay at home and care for them.
Some felt their children had been hurt by the family breakdown and that they needed additional care.
Some felt that they needed to compensate their children for the ‘loss’ of the other parent, and so should devote more time to them.
Some felt constrained by lack of alternative child care — as many as two-fifths said they would return to work sooner if they could get child care.
Thus there are many reasons why employment may not always be possible or desirable.
However, there is clearly much untapped potential for paid employment among lone mothers.
Bradshaw and Millar estimate that up to 70 per cent of lone mothers could be employed if all who said they wanted to could immediately get jobs and child care.
But even if this were possible a substantial number of lone parents (about 300,000 on current figures) would continue to be reliant on the state for at least some period while caring for their children.
Thus policy-makers need to consider not just how to open up employment for lone mothers, but also how best to support those who are not employed.
The 1980s have been bad years for lone mothers, as for so many others.
In the long term it will be impossible to improve the financial situation and security of lone mothers without directly tackling the wider issue of gender inequalities in employment and in the family.
Women face impossible difficulties in trying to combine the roles of mother, paid worker and unpaid domestic worker, and when marriage breaks down the consequences are obvious in terms of the vulnerability of lone mothers and their children to poverty.
‘COMMUNITY CARE’: THE FINANCIAL CONSEQUENCES FOR WOMEN Caroline Glendinning
This chapter considers the financial consequences of community care policies for those women on whom such policies increasingly depend — the mothers, daughters, wives, sisters, neighbours and friends who are providing a substantial amount of help and support to a disabled or elderly person.
It is important to bear in mind that these financial consequences have, until very recently, remained largely hidden.
Indeed, one of the major arguments for the promotion of ‘community care’ over the past decades — its lower cost, compared with institutional and residential alternatives — has been sustainable precisely because the costs to carers and their families have been largely ignored.
Only the public expenditure costs have been counted, not those which fall within the private, domestic domain (Rimmer, 1983; Parker, 1990a).
However, ‘community care’ appears far less of a cheap option if the unwaged labour of women is included in the financial calculations (Finch, 1990).
Apart from the important political issues surrounding the recognition (financial or otherwise) of women's domestic work (see Ungerson, 1990; Land, 1991), full acknowledgement of these private costs is also important if individual women are not to experience increased impoverishment, insecurity and dependency as the consequences of providing care.
‘COMMUNITY CARE’ POLICIES IN THE 1980s AND 1990s
It has been suggested (Walker, 1982, p. 11) that the popularity of ‘community care, owes much to its flexibility and adaptability — the term can be used to  describe a wide range of institutions and services (and, critics would add, the lack of them too).
This flexibility can be illustrated by the subtle shift in official notions of ‘community care’ which has been evident in policy documents of recent years.
Original intentions to replace large-scale institutions with statutory services provided in the community have increasingly been modified, with a growing emphasis being placed instead on the role of families, friends and neighbours as the main providers of ‘community care’.
Thus care in the community has increasingly become care by the community (Parker, 1990b, p. 10).
There has also been a corresponding shift in the role advocated for statutory social care agencies, from the direct provision of services for elderly and disabled people themselves, to supporting instead those relatives, friends and neighbours who are increasingly responsible for providing most of their care:
the primary sources of support and care for elderly people are informal and voluntary.
These spring from the personal ties of kinship, friendship and neighbourhood…
It is the role of public authorities to sustain and, where necessary, develop — but never to displace — such support and care.
(DHSS, 1981, para. 1.9)
Similar assumptions underpin the 1993 planned reorganisation of ‘community care’ services, with the role of statutory agencies as direct service providers reduced yet further.
Instead they are destined to become ‘enabling authorities’, purchasing and managing the services provided by other statutory, voluntary and private sector agencies and supporting informal carers in their role as the primary care-givers:
the great bulk of community care is provided by friends, family and neighbours…it is right that they should be able to play their part in looking after those close to them…service providers should make practical support for carers a high priority.
(DHSS, 1989a, pp. 4–5)
Moreover, public expenditure restraints during the 1980s in particular have helped to turn the rhetoric of care by the community into de facto reality, as support services such as home helps and nursing auxiliaries have been reduced or withdrawn — a theme developed by Hilary Land in her chapter here on the demise of the social wage.
There is extensive research evidence that disabled and elderly people who are living with someone else, particularly when this includes a non-elderly married female relative, are less likely to receive statutory services than are those living alone (Qureshi and Walker, 1986, 1989; Arber et al .,
1988; Arber and Gilbert, 1989; Parker, 1990b).
The 1993 changes are likely to intensify yet further this shift from public to private provision.
As Baldock and Ungerson point out, these changes can be characterised as the public case-management of a plurality of private and voluntary welfare services, which 
signifies and requires a substantial redefinition of the traditional relationship between these sectors.
Whereas until now the doing of tasks was a public function (home help, care assistant, district nurse, meals on wheels) and their integration into an overall care plan was a private function, now the public sector proposes to do the co-ordinating and the private, voluntary and informal will do the actual caring work.
(Baldock and Ungerson, 1991, p. 141)
What are the implications for women of this historical — and continuing — trend?
COMMUNITY CARE — A WOMAN'S ISSUE?
It has long been argued by feminist critics that ‘community care’ is merely a euphemism for care by the family — which in turn means care by women.
(For a summary of this argument see Finch, 1990, pp. 43–4.)
Furthermore, anxieties about an increasing ‘care gap’— the growing disparity between the numbers of elderly people likely to need care in the future and the contracting pool of potential informal carers — invariably arise from discussion of the demographic factors affecting the availability of women to care.
Qureshi and Walker (1986) for example cite the effects of family breakdown on daughters (and daughters-in-law) and women's increased labour market participation as two major factors prompting concern about a shortfall in the supply of informal care.
As will be discussed below, recent evidence on the demography of informal care suggests that some modification of these assumptions may be necessary, but in some very important respects the work of providing ‘care’ in the ‘community, remains an issue of central importance to women.
The 1985 General Household Survey (GHS) and the OPCS surveys of disabled people, also conducted in 1985, provided for the first time national data on the numbers and characteristics of those involved in giving additional domestic or personal help to an infirm, sick or disabled person.
Fourteen per cent of adults aged 16 and over — about 6 million altogether — were found to be looking after or providing regular help to someone who was sick, elderly or disabled.
Around 1.7 million of these were looking after someone in the same household; 1.4 million were providing help or supervision for at least twenty hours a week; and 3.7 million were carrying the main responsibility for providing that help (Green, 1988).
Surprisingly, perhaps, the GHS figures showed little difference between the proportions of women and men who said they were caring (15 per cent and 12 per cent respectively).
These proportions represent about 3.5 million female and 2.5 million male carers overall (Green, 1988, p. 6).
However, the similarities between men and women carers, both in terms of their personal characteristics and in terms of the kinds of help and support they give, are more apparent than real.
At all ages up to 75, a higher proportion of women are likely to face caring  responsibilities than their male counterparts.
The widest difference occurs in the 45–59 age group, where 24 per cent of women are carers compared with only 16 per cent of men (Green, 1988, p. 8).
Only among the over-75s are men more likely to be caring than women (10 per cent compared with 6 per cent), mainly because of the care they are providing for a disabled spouse ( Evandron , 1990, pp. 6–7).
Women informal carers are also likely to be carrying heavier responsibilities than male carers.
Sixty per cent carry the main responsibility for supporting the disabled or elderly person compared with only 46 per cent of male carers, while the latter are more likely to play a role which is  ancillary to another main carer — 42 per cent compared with 31 per cent of female carers (Evandron, 1990, p. 15).
Although there is apparently little difference in the proportions of male and female carers who are providing twenty hours or more help and support each week, clear gender differences do emerge as care-giving becomes more intensive.
Of the carers in the 1985 GHS who were living in the same household as the person receiving care, 51 per cent of women reported spending at least fifty hours a week giving help compared with only 39 per cent of men.
A similar gender difference was apparent in the time spent helping someone who lived in a separate household; here 32 per cent of women but only 22 per cent of men spent ten hours or more each week on care-giving (Green, 1988, p. 21).
Differences are also apparent in the types of help and support which carers give, suggesting that women care-givers are likely to be involved in more intensive and intimate activities.
As a whole, women (28 per cent) are more likely than men (19 per cent ) to provide help with personal care.
Among carers living in the same household as the person receiving care, this difference is even more apparent, with 62 per cent of women providing help with personal care and 53 per cent being responsible for giving medication, compared with 43 per cent and 37 per cent of men respectively.
The only type of help in which, according to the 1985 GHS, men clearly outnumber women is in taking the disabled person out — 60 per cent of men compared with 49 per cent of women carers living in the same household as the person being given care (Green, 1988, p. 27).
An unexpected finding of the General Household Survey was the continuing high proportions of single women carers.
As Lewis and Piachaud point out in their chapter here, unmarried women have traditionally played a significant role in the care of elderly parents and other relatives and the same appears to be true today.
Twenty-nine per cent of unmarried women in the 45–64 age group were carers, according to the 1985 GHS, compared with 24 per cent of married women and only 16 per cent of men.
Younger women who have previously been married may also be assuming this traditional role.
Twenty per cent of widowed, divorced and separated women aged 30–44 were carers, compared with only 10 per cent of men of similar age and status.
In addition, unmarried women carers are more likely than either married women or men to be carrying particularly heavy caring responsibilities.
Again in the 45–60 age group, noticeably higher proportions of unmarried women were caring for someone in the same  household, were the main carers of their disabled relatives and friends, and were caring for over twenty hours a week than were either their married or male counterparts (Green, 1988, pp. 9–10).
Whilst, overall, only slightly larger proportions of women than men may be likely to identify themselves as carers, the greater numbers of women in the adult population mean that in absolute terms more women are involved in care-giving than men.
Moreover, among those who are involved in caring, women are more likely to be heavily involved and to undertake activities which are arguably more demanding and unremitting.
Furthermore, some groups of women, particularly those in middle age, those who have never married, and those whose marriages have ended, are particularly likely to have heavy care-giving responsibilities.
Apart from these demographic characteristics of informal care-giving, in other important respects it remains an issue of central importance to women.
First, it shares characteristics which are common to many of the activities typically undertaken by women, especially on an unpaid basis — routine, repetitive tasks which have few circumscribed limits of time or obligation.
Moreover, the ambiguous meaning of ‘caring’, especially the unarticulated elision of ‘caring for’ with ‘caring about’, adds important emotional overtones to these tasks: ‘the dominant cultural perception of caring sees it as involving essentially female qualities’(Baldwin and Twigg, 1991, p. 123).
Secondly, there are deeper connections between care-giving and the social construction of masculine and feminine identities, as Ungerson (1983) and Graham have explored: ‘Caring’ becomes the category through which one sex is differentiated from the other…it becomes the defining characteristic of [women's]self-identity’(Graham, 1983, p. 18).
The personal meanings which are attached to caring, and their relationship to the wider sexual divisions of labour, therefore have especial significance for women.
However, too heavy an emphasis on the affective dimensions of care-giving can obscure the sheer physical and emotional labour involved (as the current rhetoric of ‘community care’ indeed does).
This leads to a third reason why caring is of special significance to women.
It has a strategic significance in bridging the gap between women's unpaid and unacknowledged domestic work and that which is rewarded by (albeit low) wages.
Indeed, because care-giving is so crucially important to current community care policies, it is increasingly difficult to keep it entirely confined within the private domestic domain.
The recent development of ‘paid volunteer’ schemes, where small payments are made to untrained local people to provide regular help and support to disabled and elderly people in order to sustain their continued residence in ‘the community’, illustrates precisely this growing interface between private unpaid and public waged caring work (Leat and Gay, 1987; Qureshi, 1990; Baldock and Ungerson, 1991).
Indeed, Baldock and Ungerson have argued that ‘because most care-work is actually carried out for no payment at all…these payments, however small, are an improvement on the usual position of informal carers’(Baldock and Ungerson, 1991, p. 147).
Despite the potential for exploiting volunteers, Baldock  and Ungerson argue that such schemes may provide the basis for a shift from unpaid to paid care-work.
‘Community’ and informal care therefore provide appropriate contexts within which to argue for the value of women's unpaid caring work to be recognised, as Land (1991) and Ungerson (1990) have recently done.
The effects of care-giving on women's paid employment and living standards, as described below, lend further weight to this argument.
‘COMMUNITY CARE’— THE EFFECTS ON WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS
Both national survey data and smaller in-depth studies now enable us to document at least some of the financial effects of care-giving on women, although we still know very little about the consequences for women who begin or continue to give care in their own old age, or about the experiences of Black women carers.
The information which is available highlights the importance of disaggregating household-based data on incomes and expenditure patterns and looking at the consequences for the individuals within those households.
By doing so, we can see how women carers can, and do, experience disproportionate reductions in their incomes and living standards; absorb extra care-related expenses through restricting their own personal expenditure; and experience increased financial dependency, not only on a male partner but also on the person they are caring for.
Labour market participation
Caring for a disabled or elderly person is clearly associated with lower rates of labour market participation among women.
Baldwin's (1985) study of parents caring for a severely disabled child showed that the mothers, economic activity rates were almost half those of a control group of mothers who did not have a disabled child (33 per cent and 59 per cent respectively).
This difference increased with the age of the youngest child in the family, so that by the time the latter had reached 11 years old still only 44 per cent of the mothers of disabled children were in paid work compared with 87 per cent of control group mothers.
Similar differences in participation rates were revealed by the 1985 GHS and the OPCS disability surveys.
Among women under 65 who were caring for more than twenty hours a week, only 40 per cent were employed, compared with 62 per cent of women generally (Green, 1988).
Heavier caring responsibilities were clearly associated with lower rates of employment; only about one-fifth of working-age women providing more than fifty hours a week care for an elderly person were employed, compared with two-thirds of married women and half of all single (never-married) women caring for less than twenty hours a week (McLaughlin, 1989).
In many instances it is likely that these lowered rates of  employment are the direct result of providing care, although in some cases it is possible that a temporary withdrawal from the labour market (for example, because of redundancy or child-bearing) may enable some women to take on informal caring responsibilities and delay their return to paid employment.
Two carers in one recent study described these different effects:
I was working as a care assistant…
I actually gave up work while [mother]was in hospital…when she first had her stroke…
As long as mum is alive and as long as I'm able to look after her, there's no way I could hold down a job.
(Married woman looking after her mother)
I were applying for jobs…
I'd just got [my daughter]into school…
I said to the doctor ‘Well that's the end of that then’.
‘Do you work?’ he said.
I said ‘No and I aren't going to now, am I?’
(Married woman whose mother came to live with her after developing Alzheimer's disease)(Glendinning, 1992a)
Carers who do not withdraw altogether from the labour market nevertheless often have to reduce or restrict the hours they can work.
Paradoxically, the widespread availability of part-time employment for women may enable them to remain in the labour market, even while providing substantial levels of care, whilst men appear more likely to have to choose between full-time employment and stopping work altogether (see Green, 1988, Table 2.9; Parker, 1992).
Nevertheless, the experiences of women carers suggest that even these part-time opportunities may be restricted, with shift work bonuses, longer hours and training opportunities all forgone:
If I didn't have me mother, I could have more hours [as a home help], if I had no ties.
But I'm at work and I'm thinking ‘I've got to get back’.
(Widowed woman living with her frail elderly mother)
I used to work like everyone else on this shift system…
I couldn't cope with never knowing what days I was going to be there — you had to wait till the rota was up to see which days you'd be working…
I was doing 20 hours…
I reduced it to 14 and regular hours.
(Married woman nursing auxiliary, caring for her father-in-law)(Glendinning, 1992a)
Care-giving can also have longer term effects on labour market participation.
Both the 1985 GHS (Green, 1988) and McLaughlin's (1991) study of the invalid care allowance (ICA) found that women who had ceased to care within the previous twelve months were less likely to be in employment than their non-carer peers.
Difficulties in returning to work after a period out of the labour market are particularly likely to be experienced by older women:
I could only go out there and do what I was doing before, which is…labouring.
And labouring wages are pathetic…
If anything happens to me mother — and it's not all that far off really — I'm expected to pick meself up, go back out there and start again.
But the thing is, I was 36 when [mother]came here; I'm now 47.
Is there anyone who's going to employ me?
I can't see it happening.
(Widowed woman, caring for her frail and confused mother)(Glendinning, 1992a)
Current and future earnings
Women who have to leave the labour market altogether, or who find the location, hours and other opportunities for employment restricted, will inevitably experience reduced earnings.
Systematically comparing mothers with and without disabled children who had paid work, Baldwin (1985) found a £5 difference in mean weekly earnings.
This difference increased to £16.30 among mothers whose youngest child was over 10 years old (1983 figures).
A small-scale study of women caring for frail elderly relatives found average earnings losses of £87 a week among women who had given up or been unable to return to work and average weekly losses of £28 among those still in paid work (Nissel and Bonnerjea, 1982).
One of Glendinning's (1992a) respondents described the financial effects of her switch from full-to part-time work as a store supervisor:
Although I'm half time, I still run a full section…
I reckon over the past two years I've probably lost about £8,000 with being at home, in lost earnings.
(Unmarried woman living with her frail elderly mother)
However, it is not just current earnings which may be reduced by care-giving, but future earnings and pension entitlements too.
As Heather Joshi has estimated (see Chapter 8 here), women returning to work after a period caring for children or at a later stage of the life cycle are likely to re-enter the labour market at lower rates of pay.
McLaughlin's (1991) study showed clearly that the personal incomes of ex-carers were around £40 lower than the 1988 Family Expenditure Survey (FES)per capita average, while the incomes of two-adult households containing an ex-carer were £144 a week lower than their FES counterparts.
In the longer term, as Alan Walker and Dulcie Groves show in Chapters 12 and 13 here, current state, occupational and private pension schemes do not take adequate account of women's caring responsibilities and this is as true of women's care of disabled and elderly people as it is of young children.
Unfortunately, there is little systematic evidence on this as yet, although one recent small-scale survey (Caring Costs, 1991) found a number of women expressing considerable anxiety about their own future old age:
My national insurance stamp has not been paid since I gave up work to look after mother.
Who pays for it?
I can't afford to.
I gave up my job at 60.
I now have a reduced occupational pension  because of early retirement — one-third of my salary…
I lost an income of £9,000 a year.
Coming on top of a period of reduced or forgone earnings towards the end of their working lives, the future prospects for carers such as these are indeed grim.
THE EXTRA COST OF CARING
There is a large body of evidence that disablement incurs extra expenditure (see for example Nissel and Bonnerjea, 1982; Glendinning, 1983; Baldwin, 1985; Martin and White, 1988), although the measurement of that expenditure is both problematic and controversial (Thompson et al .,
1988, 1990; Matthews and Truscott, 1990).
However, two additional issues have only recently begun to be explored: first, the extent to which the work of informal care-giving also incurs extra expenditure, over and above any additional costs arising directly out of disablement; and, secondly, the extent to which the costs of disablement are in fact borne by carers and other members of their households, because the incomes of disabled and elderly people themselves are simply too low.
In other words, just as the poverty experienced by women has largely been obscured by household-based studies of income and expenditure, so we need also to examine the patterns of expenditure and consumption within care-giving households, in order to assess the full costs to informal carers.
First, it is clear that some extra care-giving-related expenses can be identified.
Glendinning's (1992a) study indicated that these may fall into four main groups.
First, where an elderly person had moved into the household of a younger generation relative, the latter often made extra purchases, ranging from an extra bed or bedding through to the construction of an additional bedroom, in order to provide the necessary accommodation.
Secondly, consumer durables, especially laundry equipment, microwaves, dishwashers and freezers were frequently purchased to save time or ease the work of care-giving.
Thirdly, some carers regularly spent extra on transport and other services, again usually to save time.
Fourthly, carers who were managing to retain full-time jobs often spent a considerable amount of money each week on substitute care, it statutory day care services were not adequate.
Even more widespread was extra spending by carers on items and services which were needed by the disabled or elderly person, but which were not covered by the financial contribution which the latter made to the household budget (even when this included both retirement or invalidity pensions and disability benefits).
Extra spending by carers on heating, food and laundry for the disabled person were particularly common:
She couldn't cope on her own income, not with what she needs.
The  heating alone would swallow most of that.
(Single woman living with her unmarried brother and their very frail elderly mother) I do think that disabled people, unless they've had a big cash payment through an accident [compensation]…they don't get enough to live on…
If she had a flat of her own, she would get more benefit but her quality of living would come down.
(Married woman caring for a daughter disabled in adulthood)(Glendinning, 1992a)
THE EFFECTS ON CARERS' LIVING STANDARD
Lower incomes, extra spending on care-related equipment and services and extra expenditure arising from the disability of the person receiving care all lead to lowered standards of living among care-giving households.
Using a number of different measures of inequality (quintile income distribution, median income levels and a ‘poverty line’ of 140 per cent of supplementary benefit), Evandron (1990) found that carers were consistently worse off than non-carers.
Carers living in the same household as the person receiving care, female carers, those with sole responsibility for providing care and those who were not economically active were especially disadvantaged.
Two-thirds of current carers in McLaughlin's (1991) study reported that caring had had an adverse effect on their living standards, regardless of their household income level.
Luxuries, treats and even basic necessities could be difficult to afford, a point emphasised by some of the respondents to the Caring Costs (1991) survey: ‘We need a new kettle, iron, redecoration, freezer, tumble dryer, bedding, microwave.
The whole family goes without clothes.’
‘We need new fittings in the house, new carpets.
There's lots of things I can't afford, you understand’(Caring Costs, 1991, pp. 5–6).
However, closer examination of how these deprivations were experienced within care-giving households suggests that it was often carers who bore the brunt of them, while trying to protect the living standards of the disabled or elderly person:
I go out less for drinks, less visiting friends, going to listen to music.
I smoke less — I'm desperately trying to give up smoking.
(Single woman receiving supplementary benefit, caring for a friend with a severe spinal injury)
I used to go out for a drink now and again.
Well I don't do that any more.
I can't get out and I haven't the money to do it.
Smoking — I'm packing that up and all, that's too dear.
My social life, you can say I've cut down on that.
(Widowed woman receiving supplementary benefit, caring for her frail and confused elderly mother)
Whatever she [mother]needs, it's there regardless…if her money didn't  amount to whatever she needed, she would get it, even if I had to borrow for it, she would get it from somewhere.
(Woman, not employed, married to unemployed man and caring for her blind mother)(Glendinning, 1992a)
SOCIAL SECURITY PROVISION FOR CARERS
Until very recently, Britain was the only country in the EC to have a social security benefit, the invalid care allowance (ICA), targeted at informal carers themselves.
(A similar benefit was recently introduced in Eire.)
Introduced in 1975, ICA is intended to replace the earnings lost or forgone by a working-age carer who is providing full-time (at least thirty-five hours a week) care to a severely disabled person.
For the first eleven years following its introduction, ICA offered one of the most explicit examples of the assumption that married women are (or should be) economically inactive and financially dependent upon an earning husband — until 1986 they were excluded from the benefit on the grounds that ‘they might be at home in any event’(DHSS, 1974, para. 60).
However, despite the extension of ICA to working-age married women in 1986 following a successful appeal to the European Court, ICA is still received by less than one-tenth of all carers who are providing thirty-five hours' help a week (McLaughlin, 1991, p. 2).
This restricted coverage is largely the result of the complex eligibility criteria governing ICA.
Thus the person being cared for must be receiving attendance allowance, in recognition that s/he is ‘severely disabled’; the carer must not be in full-time education or earning (from April 1992) more than £40 a week; carers cannot take more than four weeks' holiday in any six-month period, nor can the disabled person be in hospital for more than four weeks at a time.
Carers cannot receive another contributory or non-contributory benefit as well as ICA; and ICA is deducted in full from means-tested income support and housing benefits, so that some carers receiving these latter benefits may see no advantage to be gained from claiming ICA.
Perhaps most crucially, ICA, as a non-contributory benefit, is very low — in 1991/2 less than 80 per cent of the basic minimum income support payable to a single adult.
All these factors contribute to the poverty experienced by many women care-givers.
First, at £32.55 (1992/3), ICA is well below the incomes which many women can earn, even from low-paid part-time employment (see Susan Lonsdale's chapter here).
As one of McLaughlin's respondents, who had been caring for her mother for seven years, pointed out: ‘Well that really is a nonsense because the amount it is at the moment compared to anybody that's had the chance of a full-time job, you're talking of £24 as opposed to a job of about £98’(McLaughlin, 1991, p. 48).
The low level of ICA also means that many carers will still have to ‘top up’ the benefit with means-tested income support — if they are eligible.
However, carers with savings above the limit for means-tested benefits have to rely entirely on  ICA plus income from their savings, a strategy which is likely to increase their risk of poverty in the longer term (Glendinning, 1990).
The limit on the amount which can be earned while receiving ICA effectively discourages carers from retaining contact with the labour market.
Indeed, the earnings limit has a particularly harsh effect on women, who are more likely than men to be able to combine care-giving with continued part-time employment (McLaughlin, 1991, p. 50).
In addition to its low level and the discouragement of part-time work, ICA also plays an important role in structuring the financial dependency of women care-givers.
First, the link between ICA eligibility and the receipt of attendance allowance by the person receiving care means that ‘the disabled person acts as ‘gatekeeper’ to income for the carer’(McLaughlin, 1991, p. 36).
Yet over half of the disabled people being cared for in Glendinning's (1992a) study had apparently failed to claim the attendance allowance when they first became eligible, thereby potentially affecting their carers' benefit entitlement as well:
I heard about it from a neighbour this year…
Then I went to the carers' meeting [at the day centre]and there was somebody there from CAB and they said ‘You should have been getting it ages ago’.
(Married woman with no earnings, caring for her confused elderly mother)
She [mother]didn't really know about it until one day the doctor came here and…she said…
‘Do you get attendance allowance?’ and I said ‘No, I don't get anything’, and she said ‘Well jolly well apply for it!’
(Single woman caring for her mother)(Glendinning, 1992a)
Secondly, married women whose earnings are curtailed (but nevertheless remain at a level above the ICA earnings limit) or who stop work altogether and claim ICA are likely to find their financial dependency on an earning spouse is increased.
As one of Glendinning's (1992a) respondents explained: ‘I gave up my job.
I have given up a lot of my independence.’
Interestingly, two of the carers in Glendinning's study were single women who were sharing a household and some of the responsibilities of care-giving with an unmarried brother as well as their elderly parent.
In both instances it was the sister whose earnings had been substantially restricted or reduced.
When the patterns of resource allocation within these unmarried sibling households were examined, it was apparent that the brothers' higher earnings were making a substantially greater contribution to the housekeeping, thereby creating a degree of financial dependency for their unmarried sisters which was little different to the dependency of the married women carers on their earning husbands.
Thirdly, the very low level of ICA and the other restrictions on benefit entitlements for carers (see Glendinning, 1990) create a situation in which some carers are financially dependent on the person they are caring for.
Single carers who have given up work to care appear to be especially likely to find themselves in this situation.
Thus once incomes had been pooled and responsibilities for the  various household outgoings apportioned, it was clear that some of the carers in Glendinning's study were being supported by the disabled or elderly person.
This represented a return to the financial dependency on a parent which had characterised these carers' younger, pre-adult days:
Me mother's kept me in food, she's looked after me dogs, she's paid the vet's bills…
At 47 years of age I can't see why I should have to live off me mother…to that extent.
What happens when she dies, who do I live off then?
(Widowed woman receiving (then) supplementary benefit who had been caring for her frail mother for ten years)
This dependency and insecurity was of concern to other carers in similar situations:
I've got to think — if anything happened to me mother, say she were to pass away tonight — I've no job and nothing coming in at all, only perhaps interest from savings which wouldn't keep me…
The only thing I worry about is if I lose my mother at this time of life, before I'm due for a pension — what's going to happen to me?
(Unmarried woman receiving only ICA who had given up her job as a local government clerk to care for her mother)
CONCLUSIONS
In short, the lowered or lost earnings of many women care-givers are likely to lead to poverty and to increased financial dependency — on a spouse, on an earning sibling, or on the person being cared for.The extra expenses which many carers also experience, on items needed by the disabled or elderly person or on equipment and services to ease the work of care-giving, are likely to add to these financial pressures.
Moreover, as with studies of resource allocation and budgeting in households containing young children (Graham, 1987a, 1987b; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a), research has begun to uncover the unequal ways in which these pressures are experienced within care-giving households, with carers lowering their own standards of living in order to safeguard the needs of the person receiving care.
This situation is exacerbated by the inadequacy of current social security provision, for both disabled people and informal carers.
The incomes of many disabled and elderly people are demonstrably inadequate, particularly when their extra needs are taken into account (Martin and White, 1988; Walker, 1990; see also Alan Walker's and Dulcie Groves' chapters in this volume).
Consequently, for many carers, subsidising the living expenses of an elderly or disabled person in order to provide them with what the carer considers to be an acceptable standard of living is an integral part of care-giving.
But social security provision  for carers too is far from adequate.
As Hilary Graham pointed out in the first edition of this book:
Unlike other family dependants…women are economically dependent not because they need care but because they give it.
Women's economic dependency within the family is created not by their own physical dependency but through the physical dependency of others…for women, economic dependency is the cost of caring.
(Graham, 1987a, p. 223)
This conclusion is as pertinent to women caring for an elderly or disabled person as it is to their sisters caring for young, able-bodied children.
If ‘community care’ is not to result in increased impoverishment and dependency for women care-givers (with all the possible long-term adverse consequences for their own old age), then employment and social security policies and the provision of ‘community care’services have to be integrated to a far greater extent than they are at present.
Indeed, policy developments in each of these three areas have largely taken place in complete isolation from the others; only very recently has the importance of social security to the effectiveness of ‘community care’ been recognised in any official document (House of Commons Social Services Committee, 1990).
In the long term, enabling carers to retain contact with the labour market, through arrangements such as job-sharing, flexitime and entitlements to ‘family leave’(Glendinning, 1992b) and through the removal of some of the present restrictions on ICA (McLaughlin, 1991, p. 50), represents one of the most effective ways of helping carers avoid poverty.
Increasing the level of ICA and removing the ‘gatekeeping’ function exercised by the disabled person's receipt of attendance allowance would help to reduce the financial dependency currently experienced by many carers.
Services such as day care can be important in enabling carers to retain paid employment, while other collective provision, both general and specialist — incontinence services, transport, special equipment, for example— will relieve carers of some of the extra expenses which are currently privately borne.
However, until these issues are addressed, poverty, dependency and insecurity, in both the short and longer terms, will be the prices paid by women for their contribution to ‘community care,.
THE POOR RELATION: POVERTY AMONG OLDER WOMEN Alan Walker
Older people comprise a large proportion of those living in poverty in Britain and have done so ever since the systematic studies of Charles Booth (1894) at the end of the nineteenth century.
But poverty is not evenly distributed among older people, and gender is one of the clearest lines along which the economic and social experience of old age is divided.
Thus more than twice as many older women as older men live in poverty or on its margins.
Among those in advanced old age (80 years and over) the ratio is around five to one.
The dual purposes of this chapter are to describe and explain this major division in the distribution of resources in old age.
The main themes underlying this examination of poverty among older women may be summarised as follows.
Poverty in old age is a function, first, of low economic and social status prior to retirement, which restricts access to a wide range of resources; and, secondly, of the imposition of depressed social status through the process of retirement itself.
Within these social processes, which are responsible for the construction of poverty in old age (and, incidentally, the social construction of old age itself), the situation of older women is significantly different from that of older men.
The economic and social status of women before retirement is, of course, closely related to the advantages secured by men in the social division of labour (see the chapters by Susan Lonsdale and Heather Joshi in this volume).
This distorted access to resources in youth and middle age — institutionalised in segregative and discriminatory employment and other social  policies as well as in the domestic division of labour — is reflected, in due course, in the relative disadvantage of women in old age.
The process of retirement too has a differential impact on men and women, but the experience of women has remained obscured because old age has been regarded, in Simone de Beauvoir's (1977, p. 101) terms, as ‘a man's problem’.
Women have been neglected in studies of the transition to retirement even though the proportion of women participating in the labour force, and therefore undergoing retirement from paid employment in their own right, has been growing steadily — an example of the patriarchal construction of retirement both in practice and in policy analysis and research.
The situation of older Black women is even worse, suffering as they do exclusion based on both patriarchy and racism.
So, underlying this chapter is a theory of ageing based not on the analysis of biologically determined differences in senescence or individual adjustments to the ageing process but, instead, on the social creation of dependent status and on the structural relationships between older people and younger adults and between different groups of older people, especially men and women.
(For a more detailed account of this approach see Walker, 1980, 1981; Phillipson and Walker, 1986.)
The main practical implication of this theoretical position is that social policy is the primary focus of attention in explaining poverty in old age and in attempting to overcome it.
Thus social policy must be critically evaluated not only for its failure to eradicate poverty among older women (and, to a lesser extent, men), but also because it occupies a central role in producing and legitimating both the poverty of a substantial proportion of older people and the marked inequalities between older women and men.
The starting point for this analysis is a description of the current financial status of older women.
POVERTY AND LOW INCOMES AMONG OLDER WOMEN
The principal financial problem faced by older people is poverty.
This fact has been demonstrated in official and independent research studies spanning the last century.
Moreover, this pattern of poverty and financial insecurity among older women is common to all patriarchally organised societies, both developed and underdeveloped (Storey-Gibson, 1985).
Poverty among older women in Britain has endured to the present day, despite the significant political commitment given to pensions in the 1970s, which culminated in the legislation in 1975 introducing the state earnings-related pension (SERP) scheme and in the series of pledges to uprate pensions in line with earnings or prices whichever was the greater (Walker, 1985a), policies which did result in some improvement in the relative position of older people in the national income distribution (see below).
Poverty is one important aspect of the substantial inequalities in income and other resources between the majority of those under and those over retirement age (Townsend, 1979).
While just under one in five (17 per cent) of all persons  in Great Britain are over pension age, they comprise more than one in four of those living on incomes on or below the social assistance level (supplementary benefit between 1966 and 1988 and income support thereafter), and one in three of those living in poverty according to this definition or on the margins of poverty (i.e. with incomes of up to 40 per cent above the appropriate social assistance rates).
The risk of experiencing poverty is twice as great for those over retirement age than it is for below retirement age (Johnson and Webb, 1990).
Within the generally impoverished status of older people, women and especially lone women (i.e. those living alone, including single, widowed, separated and divorced women) are often particularly disadvantaged (see Table 12.1).
In 1987 (the most recent information available — see below) more than one in three older women (35 per cent) were living on incomes on or below the poverty line as defined by supplementary benefit levels, compared with less than one-quarter of older men (23 per cent ).
Just under half of lone older women compared with just under two-fifths of single older men had incomes on or below the poverty line.
In all, more than three out of five older women were living in or on the margins of poverty.
Since the first edition of this volume, the government has discontinued the low-income families statistical series and substituted it with a new series showing households below average income.
We are only able to present the figures for 1987 in Table 12.1 because the House of Commons Social Security Committee commissioned the Institute for Fiscal Studies to calculate them.
The Committee also secured the publication of the 1988 households below average income data and these show that seven out of ten lone pensioners have below average incomes (after the deduction of housing costs) and that older women outnumber older men in this income group by three to one (House of Commons Social Security Committee, 1991, p. xxxix).
In 1988 43 per cent of single pensioners were living on incomes below half of the average and more than two in three of them were women.
The preponderance of women among poor older people is, of course, partly due to the larger number of women than men in the elderly population as a whole.
This results primarily from the greater longevity of women compared with men; life expectancy at birth is 78 years for women and 72 years for men, while at 65 it is 17 years for women and 16 years for men.
(A century earlier these figures would have been 11 years and 10 years.)
The main contributory factor here is the greater decline among older women than older men in mortality rates over the last forty years or so, with cancer and circulatory diseases now being the main causes of the higher mortality rate among men (Ermisch, 1983, 1990).
Today more than 90 per cent of British women are expected to reach pension age (60) compared with three-quarters of men (65)(Ermisch, 1990, p. 20).
Also, as a result of their greater longevity, elderly women are more than twice as likely as men to be widowed and, as a consequence of this and the lower propensity of the current generation (if not succeeding ones) to have married in the first place, they are three times as likely to be living alone.
More women than men therefore   survive into old age and advanced old age.
But as Table 12.1 shows, the incidence of poverty among older women, especially lone women, is strikingly high compared with that of men.
Table 12.1 underestimates the poverty of older married women in two main respects.
In the absence of more sophisticated data, the calculation of the numbers of married women and men living on low incomes has been forced to assume an equal division of income within the income unit.
However, as Pahl (1980, 1989) and others have shown (and see Hilary Graham's chapter in this volume), the distribution of income within the family is likely to give women unequal access to total household resources.
Secondly, it is not possible to distinguish in the aggregate figures either those married women who are not entitled to pensions until their husbands reach the age of 65 or those aged 60–4 whose husbands do not appear in the statistics.
As a result the procedure of dividing the numbers of married persons by two artificially deflates the numbers and proportion of married women in poverty.
If it is difficult to distinguish precisely the living standards of older women in official statistics, it is impossible to say anything at all about the position of older Black women (or men for that matter).
As a much greater proportion of women than men survive into advanced old age, they increasingly dominate the poverty profile of successively older age groups.
For example, among income support recipients in 1989 the ratio of women to men increased from being roughly equal among those aged 60–9, to three to one in the 70–9 age group, to 4.6 to one for those aged 80 and over (DSS, 1991, p. 28).
Women who have never married are over-represented among the very elderly.
However, as Table 12.2 shows, it is not simply that there are more women in the older age groups.
Older lone women are more likely than   lone men to have to rely on income support and widows are much more likely than widowers to do so.
Further evidence of the disadvantaged position of older women in relation to men can be gained from information on the distribution of income.
Older women in the bottom quintile of the income distribution have slightly lower incomes than men in the same quintile and older men in the top quintile have much higher incomes than women in the top quintile.
Table 12.3 shows the inequalities in net income between older women and men.
Two important features of Table 12.3 should be noted.
The inequality between lone men and lone women is greatest among those aged 75 and over.
Secondly, very elderly women are poorer than young ones.
The significant inequalities in income between older men and older women  are mirrored in the distribution of other resources.
For example, in his national survey of household resources and standards of living, Townsend found that a higher proportion of older lone women than lone men had less than £100 worth of assets and fewer than six consumer durables.
The acute disadvantage experienced by widows was also noted by Townsend:
Not only were there more of them than of other groups living in poverty or on the margins of poverty; more had no assets or virtually no assets, and fewer possessed substantial amounts of assets…
According to a variety of indicators of economic situation, widowed women were least advantaged.
(Townsend, 1979, p. 796)
A similar pattern of inequality was discovered in a local survey of all those aged 60 and over living in their own homes in the city of Aberdeen.
Men had higher incomes and savings than women.
Moreover, even when household income was controlled for marital status, women were still disadvantaged.
These objective inequalities were reflected in subjective appraisals; for example, men envisaged less difficulty in obtaining emergency cash than women (Taylor and Ford, 1983, p. 190).
In addition to sex-based inequalities in income and household resources, older women, in general, are more disadvantaged than men according to a range of other indicators of deprivation.
They are three times more likely than older men to be living alone and only half as likely to have a spouse.
Older women report more illness and long-standing health problems and consult their GPs more frequently than men (OPCS, 1990).
Even within broad socio-economic groupings there is a higher prevalence of reported acute sickness among older women than men.
For example, among those aged 65 and over in non-manual socio-economic groups 12 per cent of men compared with 17 per cent of women report acute sickness and among manual groups the proportions are 16 per cent and 21 per cent respectively.
The average number of days per year on which people in non-manual groups experience restricted activity due to illness are 32 among men aged 65 and over and 46 for women in the same age group.
The figures for manual groups are 43 and 58 respectively (OPCS, 1990, p. 80; see also Victor, 1991).
Older women are also more likely than older men to suffer from psychological problems such as loneliness and anxiety and to have lower levels of morale or life satisfaction (Atchley, 1976; Abrams, 1978).
The older person's experience of poverty is an enduring one and, because of their greater longevity, the poverty of older women is particularly long-lasting.
In 1989 the proportion of pensioners who had been in receipt of income support for three years or more was nearly double that for younger adults (76 per cent as against 39 per cent)(DSS, 1991, p. 44).
It is important to emphasise before concluding this section that although flat-rate and earnings-related pensions imply that social needs are similar among older people — as, indeed, does the exclusion of older people from some benefits  for people with disabilities (Walker, 1990)— the fact is that needs, as well as resources, are unevenly distributed in old age.
For example, disability is a major indicator of the need for additional income and other resources among those both under and over retirement age (Townsend, 1981).
People with disabilities are more likely than the non-disabled to experience poverty, have lower incomes and fewer assets.
The combination of old age and disability substantially increases the risk of poverty (Townsend, 1979).
Moreover, the more severe the disability, the higher the disability-related costs that are incurred and, therefore, those with the more severe disabilities are more likely to suffer financial hardship than those with less severe disabilities.
The national surveys of disability conducted by OPCS in 1985 revealed a higher prevalence of disability among women aged 75 and over than men in the same age group.
Very elderly women were also more likely to experience severe disablement than their male counterparts.
In the total population (including those in communal establishments) the prevalence of severe disability (OPCS categories 8–10) was 107 per 1,000 among men aged 75 and over and 154 among women in the same age group (Martin, Meltzer and Elliot, 1988, p. 22).
The higher incidence of disability among older women is partly attributable to their greater longevity, but in addition some disabling conditions affect women more than men.
For example, the number of women suffering from arthritis is more than three times that of men.
The current generation of older women were more likely to have contracted poliomyelitis, are more likely to have strokes or develop multiple sclerosis.
They also have a higher prevalence of high blood pressure and rheumatic complaints (Campling, 1981, p. 142).
A significant proportion of women with these disabling conditions are also responsible for caring for a male spouse or other relative with a disability.
Primarily because of their greater experience of disability, the needs of older women are often greater than those of older men.
In other words, it is not just that elderly women experience a higher incidence of poverty according to the social assistance measure of poverty.
The gap between their needs and resources is likely to be even wider than the social security-based poverty line suggests.
EXPLANATION OF POVERTY AMONG OLDER WOMEN
Why are older women poor, and why is the incidence of poverty greater among this group than among older men?
It would be wrong to conclude that it is simply because women live longer than men.
We have already seen that even within age cohorts women are more likely to experience poverty and low incomes.
An adequate explanation of the greater incidence of poverty among women in old age must reflect on the social and economic status of women before as well as after retirement and, therefore, the systems of distribution which determine status and access to resources.
Chief among these are employment and, linked to  it, the occupational pension system and social security.
Inequalities forged or reinforced in the labour market are carried into retirement via occupational and state (earnings-related) pension schemes.
Thus the poverty of older women is a function both of lifelong comparatively low access to resources (including the non-participation of some in the resource-generating potential of joint households via marriage); and of the restricted access to resources which is imposed by retirement and the assumptions about the level of state pensions which are allied to it.
These factors imply that poverty in old age is not solely determined by gender; there are some acutely deprived groups of older men and some relatively affluent groups of older women.
Nevertheless the severe disadvantage experienced by a large proportion of, in particular, very elderly women rests on the social production and distribution of resources in relation to the combination of social class, age, race and gender.
Some of the systematic disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market — especially working-class women, lone parents and those from ethnic minorities — are discussed elsewhere in this book and will only be mentioned here.
Similarly, the role of occupational and private pensions is covered fully in the chapter by Dulcie Groves and it is therefore necessary only to highlight here the main features which disadvantage women and contribute to their greater likelihood of experiencing poverty in old age.
Occupational pensions
It is primarily through variations in access to the ownership of occupational pensions that inequalities forged or reinforced in the labour market are carried into retirement.
Rights to occupational and private pensions are built up during the individual's employment.
These schemes and the benefits they provide, in general, are organised hierarchically according to employment status and occupational class (James, 1984).
Since women are much less likely than men to be employed full-time, to be in highly paid secure jobs or to hold managerial or professional posts, they are less likely to be members of occupational pension schemes.
Those working in the public sector and those in jobs with strong union organisation are more likely to have occupational pensions.
Among full-time employees aged 16 and over, 54 per cent of women and 64 per cent of men are members of an occupational pension scheme.
Women are more likely than men both not to be members of such schemes and to work for employers without them.
The membership differential between men and women is particularly marked in engineering (65 per cent of men are in an occupational pension scheme and 48 per cent of women), hotels and catering (41 per cent of men and 28 per cent of women) and transport and communications (71 per cent and 54 per cent)(OPCS, 1990, p. 223).
Although over half of women employed full-time are members of employers'  pension schemes, this represents only about one-fifth of adult women (Joshi and Davies, 1991).
Thus the proportion of all men belonging to occupational pension schemes is more than double that of women.
As a consequence, many women are reliant on their male partner's pension scheme to reduce the likelihood of their experiencing financial hardship in old age.
This means, in turn, that divorce can have a devastating effect on the income prospects of, mainly, older women (Joshi and Davies, 1991).
Essentially, occupational pension schemes are designed — by men with male ‘family wage-earners’ and male middle-class career patterns in mind, so not only do they exclude the majority of part-time workers, but they tend to assume that earnings peak in the final years of working life, which is much less often the case for women than for men.
Part-time women workers are particularly disadvantaged here.
Interestingly, membership of occupational schemes among women in the higher earnings groups is greater than that of men (86 per cent compared with 82 per cent among women and men with gross weekly earnings of £250 or more).
This suggests a high propensity to join such schemes among women where their incomes and access to occupational pensions are on a par with men's.
The implications of this unequal access to occupational pension schemes during paid employment are that older married couples and lone men,regardless of age , are much more likely than lone women to have occupational pensions; three-fifths have income from such pensions compared with two-fifths of lone women.
Among the very elderly (75 and over) the proportions of married couples, lone men and lone women with income from occupational pensions are 61 per cent, 49 per cent and 33 per cent respectively.
There are two forms of inequality related to occupational pensions which also serve to disadvantage very elderly women, especially widows.
In the first place, there is the differential distribution of occupational schemes between men and women outlined above.
Secondly, there is an inequality between younger and older women in their ability to gain access to the newly emerging occupational pension opportunities.
Thus a half of lone women aged 60–4 receive income from occupational schemes compared with only a third of those aged 75 and over.
This points to the changes in employment and related opportunities between the generations.
Older women (55–9) in employment were more likely to have started their working lives in manual occupations, particularly semi-skilled factory work, than younger women and, therefore, their access to occupational pensions was more restricted (Martin and Roberts, 1984, p. 146).
Retirement policies
The growth of retirement and, more recently, early retirement has ensured that an increasing proportion of older people have been excluded from the labour force over the course of this century.
This social process of exclusion has denied  both older women and men access to earnings and the other economic, social and psychological aspects of the workplace.
Partly because of the reliance of many older married women on their husband's state pension contributions, the proportion staying in the labour market beyond the age of 60 has remained fairly high (between a quarter and a fifth, compared with 8 per cent of men working beyond the age of 65).
Furthermore, the proportion of older men remaining economically active fell by 50 per cent over the period 1975–88 while the rate for older women was relatively stable).
There is, however, a sharp decline to only 4 per cent remaining economically active at the age of 65 or over (OPCS, 1990, p. 202).
The position of non-married women is rather different.
Their rates of economic activity over recent years have followed the male pattern of rapid decline in the 60–4 age group (from a third in 1973 to less than a fifth in 1988) with a similar decline in, the 55–9 age group (60 per cent to 48 per cent).
The operation of this social process of exclusion from the formal economy (called retirement) has been closely related to the organisation of production and the demand for labour.
Accounts of the emergence first of retirement and then of early retirement suggest that older people and, it must be said, particularly older men, have in fact been used as a reserve army of labour, to be tapped when labour is in short supply and to be shed when demand falls (Graebner, 1980; Phillipson, 1982; Walker, 1985b).
The advent of large-scale unemployment in the 1930s was crucial to the institutionalisation of retirement, and its return in the mid-1970s and then again in the early 1980s resulted in two surges in the growth of early retirement (Walker and Taylor, 1991).
Like the experience of employment, attitudes towards retirement and the experience of retirement itself are socially divided.
Although a significant proportion of women remain economically active until the age of 60 or even 65, retirement is still regarded as a predominantly male experience.
Of course, with economic activity rates among women peaking at around two-thirds for married women in middle age and four-fifths for non-married women in their twenties and early thirties, there are a significant proportion who never experience ‘retirement’ from paid employment in their own right because they have withdrawn from the labour market long before formal retirement age.
But since this proportion is relatively small, the main explanation for the neglect of women in the study of retirement is more likely to be a combination of two particular factors.
First, women's labour market participation is regarded as marginal in comparison with that of men.
Secondly, the vast majority of economically active women are engaged in at least two roles — formal and informal — and there is no such thing as retirement from the latter domestic role.
The assumption appears to be, therefore, that women do not experience the same degree of loss as men do when they retire from paid work.
The experience of retirement is also divided on the basis of occupational class.
There are those, mainly salaried, workers who are able to choose whether or not to leave work at the retirement age, leave prematurely, or perhaps work on.
Then there are those, predominantly male workers, who are effectively coerced into  retirement and sometimes early retirement by poor working conditions, ill-health, redundancy and unemployment (Walker, 1985b; Walker and Taylor, 1991).
Thus for large numbers of older workers, poverty is experienced prior to the official pension ages.
In fact, redundancy (or the threat of it) and ill-health are the main reasons why older people leave employment prematurely (S. Parker, 1980; Laczko et al .,
1988).
So for some older workers the retirement age is effectively lowered by unemployment, sickness or injury.
As with unemployment itself, semi-skilled and unskilled workers are over-represented among those who are ‘discouraged’ from economic activity by lack of employment opportunities, including some of the early retired.
Because the arbitrary pension ages of 60 and 65 have been adopted as customary retirement ages, women have been forced to retire five years earlier than men.
In general, the earlier the retirement the sooner the imposition of poverty and, especially in the case of older women, the longer that poverty must be endured.
A series of legal rulings by the European Court of Justice and the House of Lords have pushed the British government towards the equalisation of retirement ages, if not pension ages.
In 1986, the European Court ruled that the earlier retirement age for a woman employed by a health authority contravened the EC Equal Treatment Directive 76/207.
As a result, the government added an amendment to the Sex Discrimination Bill (1986) to make it unlawful for a woman to be dismissed on grounds of age when a man would not be.
In 1990, the European Court held that a 60-year-old man employed by an insurance company had been unlawfully discriminated against because when he had been made redundant his company pension scheme was deferred whereas a female member of the scheme could have drawn her pension immediately.
This ruling mirrored the previous one but applied to occupational pension schemes as opposed to the then state retirement ages.
Early in 1991, six women pensioners won a long-running case for compensation against their employer after being forced to retire from their jobs at 60.
Their case began in an industrial tribunal in 1986, went to the European Court and was finally ruled on in April 1991.
Despite these landmark judgments and the abolition of the earnings rule in 1989 (see below), the five-year differential in state pension age still remains at the time of writing.
Moreover, the achievement of equal retirement ages, when it eventually comes, though significant, would do nothing to remove the tyranny of fixed age retirement for both women and men.
The main implications of age-barrier retirement are, first, that it results in an average fall in income of about a half.
As a result, those who continue in employment after retirement age are less likely to experience poverty.
Secondly, for those who do continue in employment, retirement age can produce a dramatic downward shift in occupational status (Walker, 1981, p. 82).
So, for example, in the national survey of retirement conducted in 1977, between the age groups of 50–9 and 60–73, the proportion of women in junior and intermediate non-manual socio-economic groups fell from nearly half to nearly one-third, while the proportion in the unskilled group rose from one in ten to nearly one in four (S. Parker, 1980).
Of course, these changes in employment and socio-economic status were reflected in earnings.
PENSION AND SOCIAL SECURITY POLICIES
The corollary of this social process of exclusion from the labour force, coupled with restricted access to alternative forms of post-retirement income, is that older people and women in particular are heavily dependent on the state for financial support.
They are, in effect, trapped in poverty by virtue of their reliance on state benefits.
We have seen that retirement has a differential impact on older people which depends primarily on their prior socio-economic status and the access which this grants to resources which might be carried into retirement.
In addition, because of social pressures to limit the level of state pensions and other benefits for those outside the labour force, retirement imposes a lowered social status on the majority of older people in comparison with younger adults in the labour force (Walker, 1980, 1992).
The dependency relationship between older people, the state and the labour market was institutionalised by the ‘retirement condition’, introduced in 1949, whereby state pensions were conditional on retirement rather than age.
Thus, until recently, the state pension was, in effect, a ‘retirement’ pension.
This encouraged an end to labour force participation and established the two arbitrary ages as customary retirement ages.
(Ironically, Beveridge (1942) had hoped that the retirement condition would encourage workers to defer retirement.)
On 1 October 1989 the retirement condition was abolished along with the earnings rule which placed restrictions on what national insurance pensioners could earn.
However, the state pension is still tied to the ages of 60 and 65, though it looks like this will change after the next general election, as a result of pressure from the European Court rulings outlined above and, in particular, their impact on the private pension industry.
Whether this will mean a levelling up to 65 or down to 60 is not clear at this stage.
The safest bet, actuarially and politically, is the age of 63 with its obvious implications for the extension of the working lives of women as a means of ‘paying for’ the reduction of those of men.
The abolition of the earnings rule is likely to widen inequalities in income between older men and women as it will allow the former's higher earnings to be extended into old age.
The social security system is also one of the main mechanisms through which the income inequalities between older women and men are both generated and reinforced and by which the dependence of women on men is encouraged.
Older married women are less likely than men to receive a National Insurance retirement pension in their own right.
Thus, just under two-thirds of women in receipt of retirement pension have qualified on their partner's insurance contributions (DSS, 1991, p. 89).
The basic pension is payable according to a contributions formula which stipulates that to gain a full pension, sufficient contributions have to be paid in nine out of every ten years of a ‘working life’(i.e. paid employment).
So, if a person's paid employment lasts for forty years, she will need to have thirty-six qualifying years.
Many women are unable to qualify for a full pension because of periods spent out of the labour force or in part-time work while caring for children or disabled relatives.
Some limited home responsibilities protection was introduced in April 1978 in order to help women in this position, but in order to qualify for a full pension they still require twenty years' worth of contributions or credits.
While single women receive a single person's pension, married and divorced women can choose to claim a pension in their own right (if they have sufficient contributions) or as a dependent wife.
However, the dependent wife receives only 60 per cent of the single person's pension — a fact that reflects not only the dependent status of married women but also the failure of the social security system to adapt to the increase in economic activity (particularly in part-time jobs) among women since the Beveridge scheme was introduced.
The state earnings related pension (SERP) scheme also tends to disadvantage women as much as the basic pension, and recent changes to the SERP scheme have worsened their position.
The SERP scheme was introduced in 1975.
It applies only to those reaching pensionable age since April 1978 and will not reach full maturity until 1998.
Because it is an earnings-related scheme, if women do qualify for a SERP, the pension they receive will reflect their tendency to earn less than men.
Of course, because the scheme is in the process of maturation, the vast majority of current pensioners, both women and men, do not receive a SERP.
Ironically, the introduction of the SERP scheme did represent an attempt to improve the pension position of widows and other women.
It allowed the surviving spouse to inherit the full SERP entitlement of a contributor, provided both were over retirement age.
It also provided for home responsibility credits towards the basic pension.
This relative ‘generosity’ to women was one of the main sources of official criticism of the scheme when it came under fire in the mid-1980s (Bornatt et al .,
1985, p. 31).
The government's original proposal for the SERP scheme in the Green Paper on the Reform of Social Security was to abolish it altogether (DHSS, 1985a).
However, the weight of influential opinion against this option, which included the Confederation of British Industry and the National Association of Pension Funds, and the public outcry which greeted the proposal, caused the government to modify its plans.
Thus proposals in the White Paper (DHSS, 1985b) were intended instead to reduce the cost of the SERP scheme.
Two of the measures enacted by the 1986 Social Security Act had a significant impact on women by reversing the main attempts of the 1975 scheme to begin, albeit very slowly, to adjust state pensions to the economic experiences of women.
In the first place it is proposed that the calculation of earnings-related pension is now based on 20 per cent of a lifetime's average earnings (forty years) rather than 25 per cent of the best twenty years.
This had been considered to be ‘over-generous’ to those, especially women, who have shorter than average periods of employment or non-incremental earnings.
Moreover, because SERPS provides the basis for the guaranteed minimum pension within occupational schemes, this measure also replicates in the private sector the disadvantage experienced by women in the public sector.
Secondly, the proportion of SERPS that can be inherited by a spouse has been reduced to a half rather than the full amount under the original scheme (Walker, 1986, p. 193).
The limited steps made by women towards more equal treatment in the provision of state earnings-related pensions were therefore reversed by the 1986 Act.
Although these contentious measures were deferred until after the 1987 General Election, they were barely discussed during the campaign itself.
The proposals made by the then DHSS for the rest of the social security system, including social assistance, were not deferred.
On the basis of the government's own estimates, all of these changes made 1.9 million pensioners aged 60–79 and 350,000 of those aged 80 and over worse off, the vast majority of them being women (DHSS, 1985b).
Further changes introduced by the 1986 Social Security Act were intended to increase the numbers who contract out of the SERP scheme.
In essence, these created rebates on contributions to occupational schemes and reduced the requirements they had to meet in order to be officially ‘approved’.
For the first time, money purchase schemes have been allowed to contract out (i.e. pension schemes that depend on the outcome of investments rather than a formula based on contributions).
Again, because of their lower earnings and more precarious relationship to the labour market, women's access to this government subsidy and the most attractive occupational schemes is likely to be more restricted than men's (see Dulcie Groves' chapter in this volume).
This brief review of retirement and pension policies should be sufficient to indicate that the economic dependency — and therefore the poverty — of older people in general and older women in particular has been socially manufactured.
Two sets of policies are in operation.
On the one hand, age-restrictive social policies have been used by the state both to exclude older workers from the labour force and to legitimate that exclusion through the notion of ‘retirement’.
On the other hand, sex-discriminatory policies, particularly in the provision of pensions, have restricted the access of older women to even minimal income entitlements on a par with men.
When coupled with the impact of lifelong low social and economic status resulting from the influence of social class, the effect of these policies is to impose the very severest deprivation on very elderly working-class women.
For example, in the study of older people in Aberdeen, younger (60–74) middle-class men and older (75+) working-class women were the two groups at the extreme ends of the income distribution.
None of the middle-class men had incomes below £30 per week and over half had incomes in excess of £60.
By comparison, more than three in five of the older working-class women had an income of less than £30 per week and none had over £60 (Taylor and Ford, 1983, p. 192).
CONCLUSIONS
Because the widespread poverty of older women and the penury experienced by some groups among them derive to a considerable extent from the operation of social and economic policies within patriarchal capitalism, any major change in their status rests on the development of alternative policies.
There is not space here to outline a full manifesto (see Bornatt et al .,
1985; Walker, 1986, 1990) but three fundamental sets of policies will be highlighted.
The practical implication of the analysis presented here is that the main determinants of the poverty of older women and the inequalities between them and older men have already been established long before retirement age.
As in other spheres of women's lives, the key to their poverty and deprivation in old age is the socially constructed relationship between gender and the labour market.
The labour market is the primary source of the inequalities which are carried into retirement.
Major changes are required in the structure and organisation of work to give women in general, and older women in particular , equal access to paid employment and, in addition , a genuine choice about retirement.
The promotion of work for all, regardless of gender, throughout the economy is the only realistic way that choice can be provided for women and older workers.
This means that both paid and unpaid labour must be assessed in terms of their contributions to society and rewarded commensurately.
A broad focus on work is necessary because the concentration of policy on access to paid employment is unlikely to overcome the sexual division of labour in the home and the restrictions it imposes on women's role in paid employment.
Care must be taken, however, to ensure that a broader-based policy does not simply confirm the subordinate position of women as the primary domestic workers.
Equality of access must be promoted in all forms of work with the right not to take part in some roles as strongly guarded as the right of access to others.
Furthermore, flexible retirement, with a minimum pension age of 60 for both women and men, would provide opportunities for older people to choose when precisely to retire (Walker and Laczko, 1982; Schuller and Walker, 1990).
Secondly, since many of the inequalities in pension provision derive from assumptions underlying the Beveridge social security system, an alternative approach is required if the poverty of older women is to be overcome.
All pensioners have a need for income regardless of whether their previous employment was waged or unwaged.
The priority is the provision of an adequate (in terms of social participation) flat-rate pension regardless of history or gender.
This means that the contribution or employment test, which discriminates against substantial numbers of women, should be abandoned.
The pension would be paid on an individual basis and at a level that enables older people to participate in the normal life of the community.
The provision of an adequate flat-rate pension would also prove a better vehicle than pension-splitting for dealing with the problems that are likely to face older women in the future as a  result of divorce.
By the year 2025, some one in seven older women will be divorced (Joshi and Davies, 1991).
Thirdly, the special needs of the large proportion of very elderly people with disabilities, overwhelmingly women, must be recognised in the form of a disablement allowance paid in addition to the retirement pension.
This would compensate for the extra costs and disadvantages of disability, and thereby help to reduce the disparity experienced by many older women between their needs and resources.
What chance is there that a start on such a package could be made in the near future?
After all, the poverty of older people has been recognised by both official and independent research for over 100 years.
Moreover, this account has demonstrated that social policies themselves reflect the paternalistic assumptions embedded in capitalist relations.
The socially constructed relationship between age, gender and the labour market has not only been the cause of poverty in old age, but has also formed the basis for the spread of a more general dependency among older people and age discrimination in many aspects of public policy and social attitudes (Walker, 1990).
Older women are especially prone to ageist assumptions and comments.
Despite their preponderance in the population, they are usually ignored by the wider society and also to some extent by the women's movement (Peace, 1986).
In the first edition of this volume I pointed, optimistically, to some signs that this situation was changing slowly with, for example, the establishment of the Older Feminists Network in 1982 and the recent Age Concern/EOC joint initiative on incomes in old age.
But they remain merely hopeful signs.
Moreover, Britain lags far behind developments in the USA, where older persons' organisations like the Gray Panthers are dominated by women, and where the shared interests between women and older people are recognised more commonly.
Men, both young and old, and the social institutions they have constructed in their image, have proved consistently impervious to the longstanding case for equality between the sexes in the distribution of power and resources.
There are very few hopeful signs of change on that front.
Men are unlikely to be divested of power and advantage without a struggle.
Perhaps the combination of the growing strength of the feminist movement in this country and the expanding numbers of older women over the next twenty to forty years will provide the keys to political and social change.
The women's movement in the USA has played a major role in exposing the similar processes which are responsible for the creation of sexism and ageism (and, for that matter, racism).
Moreover, this broad focus has enabled older women to participate fully in the opposition to the twin evils of sex and age discrimination.
Without a recognition of the common disadvantage experienced by women and older people, there is always a danger that proposals to eliminate sexism in certain aspects of social policy may unwittingly condone ageism by arguing that there is actually a conflict of interest between women (as carers) and older people (see, for example, Finch, 1984).
Until the potential political power of the millions of women who are disadvantaged in relation to paid and unpaid labour and in  retirement is realised, policies to combat the poverty of many of those aged 60 and over are not likely to be forthcoming.
Unfortunately, the very poverty that afflicts older women so deeply is a major factor in their political acquiescence.
NOTE
1.
am very grateful to the Department of Social Security for providing the statistics contained in Tables 12.2 and 12.3.
OCCUPATIONAL PENSION PROVISION AND WOMEN'S POVERTY IN OLD AGE Dulci Groves
When in the 1960s poverty was ‘rediscovered’ in the UK, it became clear from research findings that those elderly people who had occupational retirement pensions derived from their previous employment were least likely to be living in poverty, as then defined.
It also became clear that women were greatly under-represented among that minority of elderly people who had such occupational pensions.
Furthermore, most female occupational pensioners were, in the language of the day, spinsters — mainly former teachers or civil servants.
Few married women had occupational pensions derived from their own earnings.
Surprisingly few widows had occupational pensions derived from their husbands' entitlements.
Elderly non-married women were substantially over-represented among the poorest.
‘Very elderly’ women over 75 were among the poorest of all.
What are the links between female poverty in old age and access to occupational pension scheme benefits?
Why was this early-1960s generation of older women, the youngest survivors of whom are, in the early 1990s, among the oldest within the current ‘very elderly’ female population, so under-represented among those with an employer's pension?
How effective has occupational pension provision been in removing the present generation of ‘young elderly’ women, currently aged 60–75, from poverty?
What are the prospects for the present generation of working-age women (16–60) with regard to occupational pension entitlements when they themselves reach pensionable age?
Women's access to occupational pension benefits, particularly those derived from their own (not a husband's) paid work record, is a crucial issue in the light of the major changes to retirement pension provision enacted in 1986 (see Groves, 1991).
It is also important in the light of recent legal changes which have as their goal ‘economic self-sufficiency’ for divorced women.
The aims of this chapter are, first, to explain why women now over pensionable age have benefited less than men from the existence of occupational pension provision, thus increasing their likelihood of being poor in old age.
Secondly, it will comment on working-age women's access to membership of employers' pension schemes and the extent to which it appears that their risk of poverty in retirement may have lessened, both by increased access in their own right and through improved provision for widows.
This critique, presented in an historical perspective, will focus both on women's opportunities to generate eventual occupational pension scheme benefits themselves via paid employment, and on issues relating to widows' benefits.
The modern ‘occupational pension’(or employer's pension) derives from an early nineteenth-century civil service provision whereby elderly (or infirm) employees deemed to be suffering from physical or mental disabilities could be ‘superannuated’; that is ‘retired’ and awarded a replacement income or pension in an amount proportionate to the total number of years of service completed.
By mid-century, a standard format had been devised which allowed a long-service civil servant to retire at a minimum age of 60 on a pension equal, at maximum, to two-thirds of his previous salary.
The scheme was devised by men for men, since no women civil servants were at that time employed (Rhodes, 1965, Chapter 2).
These civil service pension arrangements were in due course copied, with modifications, by other public and private sector employers, though up to World War I it appears to have been a small minority of mainly the more prestigious employers who developed such formal occupational pension provision.
Some schemes developed out of previous informal arrangements, characterised as ex gratia pensions, whereby an employer would award a retirement pension to a particularly long-serving or otherwise ‘deserving’ employee — a paternalistic, ‘one-off’arrangement which could fail if the employer later ceased trading.
All such pensions came to be known, in common parlance, as ‘private pensions’, to distinguish them from the state pensions first introduced in 1908 for indigent elderly people over 70, followed later (1925) by contributory state retirement and widows' pension schemes.
Strictly speaking, all these ‘occupational’ or employers' pensions were either ‘public sector’pensions derived from formal arrangements made for central or local government employees or ‘private sector’pensions.
The latter were derived from commercial, industrial or other employment within the ‘private sector’ of the labour market.
Banks and insurance companies were early providers of formal occupational pension schemes during the second half of the nineteenth century.
After World War I there was an expansion of such private sector provision.
Employers who might previously have paid ex gratia pensions to  favoured employees began to set up formal schemes arranged through insurance companies (Rhodes, 1965, p. 87).
The target beneficiary was the salaried ‘family man’ who, by reason of earning more than the £250 limit applied to non-manual workers, was excluded from participation in the new 1925 contributory state scheme, under which a retirement pension became payable at 65 and a modest pension became available to widows of any age (Groves, 1983, p. 41).
These early developments in occupational pension provision pre-dated the later nineteenth-century trend towards the employment of women in ‘white-collar’ occupations.
Women were not, for instance, recruited into the civil service until the 1870s.
They came on the scene when the private telegraph companies were ‘nationalised’ and integrated into the Post Office, the women literally being taken on as a ‘job lot’with their male colleagues.
These and later women were brought into the civil service pension scheme designed, as noted, for men.
The civil service, like the private telegraph companies, found its female employees to be competent, ‘docile’ workers, with the additional advantage of being cheaper to employ than men.
Women did not qualify for a ‘family wage’ since it was assumed (erroneously in some cases) that they lived at home with parents or relatives and that they did not have dependants to support financially.
The crunch came when it was realised that these competent women had a propensity to marry (Martindale, 1939).
The civil service ‘efficiency experts’ of the mid-1870s quickly worked out that the retention of married women would be ‘inefficient’in managerial terms, since the longer that female employees remained in government service, the more they would cost because of the modest incremental salary progression within their low-paid ‘women's grades’.
Furthermore, there was a danger that they would stay in service long enough to qualify for a retirement pension — an even more expensive proposition.
Swiftly a ‘marriage bar’ was introduced, though its application does not appear to have been universal in the civil service until 1894 when government typists (hitherto an ‘unestablished’all-female grade) obtained permanent, pensionable ‘established’status by agreeing to a rule requiring automatic resignation on marriage.
It was agreed that in lieu of the pension forgone, such women would qualify for a ‘marriage gratuity’ on leaving — a lump sum of a value relating to years of service not exceeding twelve (Martindale, 1939; Holcombe, 1973).
The ‘marriage bar’ became the rule in other forms of public sector employment and in many types of private sector employment, especially when unemployment rates were high between the two world wars.
Thus up to the end of World War II (when the public sector marriage bar was abolished and young women retained paid jobs on marriage), in order to qualify for an occupational pension in old age derived from her own earnings a woman usually had to remain unmarried.
The choice was marriage or career.
Furthermore, salaried men were not expected to have ‘working wives’.
The development of widows' provision in occupational pension schemes is a reflection of this bourgeois family form (see Hall, 1979).
Holcombe (1973) has pinpointed five major occupations entered by women, from choice and/or financial necessity, in the late nineteenth century — teaching, the civil service, nursing, clerical work and employment in the retail trades.
Women's occupational ‘choices’ were limited and these five occupations predominated up to the time of World War II and well beyond it.
Elementary school teachers had access to a national pension scheme from 1898 so that teaching, along with the civil service, came to be thought of as a ‘secure, pensionable occupation — a ‘good job’ for a single woman.
Nursing in public hospitals was also pensionable, while the more prestigious voluntary hospitals were early pension providers.
The Royal National Pension Fund for Nurses (1887) is an early example of the personal ‘portable’ pension, which entailed taking out an insurance policy so as to purchase an annuity on retirement.
However, nurses were very badly paid, which may in part account for a seemingly low take-up of non-compulsory pension scheme provision for nurses (Maggs, 1983, p.131).
In 1936 the Ministry of Labour carried out a pioneer survey of private sector employers' pension scheme membership, finding that women comprised about 20 per cent of the total membership of around 1.6 million persons.
Nearly half the women were in the ‘administration, clerical and sales’ category, a minority being in sales.
Private sector nurses were included and, indicative of an expansion of occupational pension provision into higher-status ‘manual’ employment during the inter-war period, just over half the women in private sector schemes were manual workers (Ministry of Labour Gazette , 1938).
However, the ‘progressive’ employers who developed this form of occupational welfare, mainly after World War I (Jones, 1983), typically operated a ‘marriage bar’and the ‘women's pension scheme’doubled as a savings scheme which produced marriage gratuities.
The eventual pensions received by women who participated in these inter-war schemes would have reflected their low and unequal pay as well as conditions of service which typically required women to retire much earlier than men, especially in private sector employment.
The Ministry of Labour survey showed that no fewer than 37 per cent of the ‘administrative, clerical and sales’ group were made to retire by 55 and a similar proportion by the age of 60, whereas 65 was the ‘normal’retirement age for men (Ministry of Labour Gazette , 1938).
Such practices reflect pre-war pension policies which, from the point at which women first began to enter white-collar employment, were clearly geared towards the recruitment of successive cohorts of low-paid young women for routine duties, a rapid turnover being ensured via the marriage bar.
Employers were content to retain a cadre of single women who could supervise other women, though once into their fifties such women were at risk of being construed as ‘too old’.
Formal occupational pension provision was used ‘in the managerial interest’ to retire women early, a practice which could increase their risk of poverty in old age.
Meanwhile, for men, such provision was a well-established device used to attract and retain competent male employees.
Occupational pension scheme rules and  related personnel policies helped to construct salaried men, in particular, as ‘good providers’, who typically served out a lengthy working life with one employer.
While occupational pension provision was originally intended as ‘superannuation’, it gradually came to incorporate provision for dependants, typically widows or dependent children including unmarried adult daughters.
Again,ex gratia arrangements appear to have preceded the inauguration of formal schemes.
The civil service in 1909 reduced the retirement pension from two-thirds to half salary in order to provide a lump sum in addition.
By this means a male pensioner could choose to provide for any dependants after his death (Rhodes, 1965, p. 51).
The police force was the first public sector occupation to achieve widows' pensions as such.
By the mid-1930s male civil servants could choose to ‘allocate’ part of their pensions; that is, to opt for a lower pension on retirement, so that if they died first their wives would get a modest continuing pension (ibid .,
p. 79).
From 1937 male teachers could opt to take only one-third of the lump sum due to them on retirement so that an annuity would potentially be available to their widows (Gosden, 1972, p. 148).
By the mid-1930s such ‘option’ arrangements were characteristic of private sector provision also; it was for the male breadwinner alone to decide whether he would so provide for his dependants or take his full pension on retirement.
The new insurance-based schemes adopted by the private sector between the wars offered the possibility of a lump sum payment where a scheme member died in service (Owen, 1935, p. 88).
In the two decades between the outbreak of World War II and the poverty studies of the early 1960s there were changes both in patterns of female economic activity and in the nature of occupational pension provision.
The latter expanded under favourable tax arrangements begun during the war (Pilch and Wood, 1979).
However, although in wartime married women were positively encouraged and in some cases required to re-enter or remain in the labour market, working in those very occupations from which they had previously been ‘barred’, such women were often categorised as temporary workers, or were employed part-time.
There is no evidence to suggest that they made substantial wartime gains in terms of occupational pension entitlements.
Nor, once the war had ended and formal marriage bars were removed, did the increasing presence of married women in the labour force mean that efforts were made to extend female access to membership of occupational pension schemes.
Far from it.
It was still the case that a white-collar woman employee within the public sector (including, now, the nationalised industries) had reasonably good pension prospects provided that she completed a lengthy period of full-time service.
However, the early surveys of the Government Actuary's department show that in the private sector in 1956 there were only 34 per cent of ‘salaried’ women (71 per cent of men) and 23 per cent of ‘waged’women (38 per cent of men) in schemes (Government Actuary, 1958, p. 4).
By 1963 somewhat comparable proportions were 40 per cent of ‘non-manual’ women in schemes (80  per cent of men) and 15 per cent of ‘manual’women (55 per cent of men)(Government Actuary, 1966, p.
I 2).
It was accepted practice for employers to admit women to schemes at older ages than men — 30 was not uncommon.
In the post-war decades, the majority of women had married and subsequently left paid work to have children by the age of 30 (see Rimmer, 1981).
However, they increasingly returned to work in both the public and private sectors once their children were in school, but tended to do so part-time (see Manley and Sawbridge, 1980).
Nor, even if full-time, did they typically do the same type or level of paid work as that performed by the men who were included in the employers' pension schemes.
The post-war National Insurance arrangements made it an unattractive proposition for married women, typically low-waged, to opt for paying full National Insurance contributions when a much cheaper ‘married woman's option’ was available.
This option gave a married woman the right to a dependent wife's retirement pension at 60 per cent of a full single person's rate, once her husband had retired.
Furthermore, even if a woman paid in for a full pension she had to pass the ‘half test’; that is, she had to work for at least half of her married life before she could count in her contributions both before and after marriage (Groves, 1983, pp. 45–7).
This rule resulted in only a small minority of married women becoming fully insured and helped to reinforce their financial dependence within marriage.
It also helped to construct married women and, by extension, all young women, as employees who were ‘not interested’ in pensions, their wages typically being construed as ‘pin money’.
The technical pensions literature of the early 1960s advised employers to leave women out of pension schemes and give ex gratia (unfunded) pensions to that dwindling minority of single women who did become long-serving employees (Pilch and Wood, 1960, p. 80).
Occupational pension providers were more interested in improving the benefits available to women as widows, rather than as scheme members in their own right.
By 1960 widows' pensions were available in all public sector occupations apart from teaching, though they were still relatively uncommon in the private sector which continued to rely on ‘allocation’ options and lump sum provision (Government Actuary, 1958, 1966).
The above scenario helps to explain the part played by access to occupational pension scheme benefits in determining the income levels of the elderly women whose financial circumstances were studied between 1959 and 1965.
Cole with Utting (1962, Chapter 5) estimated that 76 per cent of single and widowed women over pensionable age in Britain in 1959 were living in poverty (defined as less than £3.50 per week).
Whereas 37 per cent of couples and 38 per cent of non-married men had an employer's pension, only 7 per cent of non-married women had one, including an even smaller percentage of widows.
Likewise Townsend and Wedderburn (1965, Chapter 4), studying elderly people over 65 in Britain in 1962, found only I 1 per cent of non-married women with occupational benefits — 18 per cent of single women and 9 per cent of widows, the older women being the poorest.
By 1965 it appeared that 48 per cent of  retired men over 65, but only 24 per cent of single women over 60 and 11 per cent of widows over pensionable age had employers' pensions, younger women predominating among those women who had a pension in their own right (Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, 1966, p. 154).
The single women had, on average, better pension levels than the men in all age groups, reflecting the levels of female employment in white-collar, public sector jobs.
However, Townsend and Wedderburn (1965, Chapter 5) make it clear that the low level of many occupational pension payments sometimes served merely to keep their recipients off National Assistance, though still on the margins of poverty.
Indeed, while it is not the brief of this chapter to comment on state pension provision, it must be remarked that in the early 1960s, as subsequently, it was chiefly the low level of state provision which made the presence or absence of entitlement to occupational pension benefits so crucial to many household budgets, not least to lone female households.
The introduction in the early 1960s of the state ‘graduated’ pension scheme, an earnings-related second-tier provision for lower income employees not in occupational pension schemes, opened up a growing gender gap in employee pension coverage.
The lowest earners, seldom included in employers' pension provision and among whom women predominated, were excluded from the graduated scheme.
Meanwhile employers continued to expand occupational provision for full-time salaried and some manual grades of staff, to the extent that full-time employment in the public sector became largely synonymous with access to occupational scheme membership.
Employers, on the advice of specialists within the pensions ‘industry’, contracted out their better paid grades of full-time staff from the new graduated scheme (Heclo, 1974, p. 273).
Hence the number of men in private sector schemes increased dramatically, by 3 million between 1956 and 1967, but among women by only half a million (Government Actuary, 1981, p. 6).
From the late 1960s to the mid-1970s there was much political debate on pensions reform and two failed attempts at legislation before the Social Security Pensions Act 1975 was passed, becoming effective in 1978.
The Labour Party favoured a major role for earnings-related state pension provision while the Conservatives wished for broad occupational coverage and a residual second-tier state pension, in which many employed women would have found themselves.
The compromise was a system within which ‘approved’ occupational pension schemes were closely related to a new state earnings-related pension scheme (SERPS).
Employers could contract ‘occupational groups’ of employees out of SERPS and into employers' provision (see Groves, 1983).
The Government Actuary's 1983 and 1987 surveys show that, during the years since the 1975 survey, about half of all men in private sector employment had access to occupational pension provision.
However, whereas in 1975 17 per cent of women had access, the proportion increased to 25 per cent in 1979 (Government Actuary, 1978, p. 8; 1981, p. 4).
By 1987 34 per cent of full-time private sector women were covered but only 7 per cent of part-timers  (Government Actuary, 1991, Table 2.4, p. 6).
Since 1967 the number of women in public sector schemes had nearly doubled from I to 2 million, while the number of women in private schemes had risen from 1.3 to 1.4 million.
Male membership, by contrast, fell by 35 per cent in the private sector and by 10 per cent in the public sector (ibid .,
Table 2.1, p. 4).
Female numbers partially reflect a major increase in female labour force participation since 1967, while male numbers reflect, among other factors, a declining number of men in the British workforce.
It might be thought that the present generation of ‘younger’ retired women have, by virtue of improved access to occupational pension benefits, greatly reduced their risk of poverty in old age, which for women officially begins five years earlier than men at the ‘pensionable age’of 60.
However, in 1982 only 40 per cent of lone (i.e. non-married) women aged 60–4 had their own and/or a widow's occupational pension and 25 per cent of that age group were drawing a supplementary (means-tested) state pension.
Between the ages of 65 and 69, 37 per cent of lone women and 62 per cent of lone men had some sort of occupational pension.
Only 20 per cent of the lone men drew supplementary pensions, along with 33 per cent of widows and 28 per cent of other lone women (DHSS, 1984, p. 17, Table 4; p. 19, Table 7).
Married couples were most likely to have occupational pensions and least likely to have a supplementary pension.
However, Hunt (1978, p. 28, Table 6.4.3) showed that employers' pensions were a very small component of elderly wives' incomes.
Analysis of data from the 1985 and 1986 General Household Surveys (Ginn and Arber, 1991) provides much detail on gender inequalities in occupational pension entitlements and in the actual value of pensions paid.
Only 26 per cent of women over 65 had income from their own or a survivor's pension, as compared with 62 per cent of men.
A further 2 per cent of women and 4 per cent of men had income from private pensions not derived from past employment (ibid .,
Table I, p. 378).
Only 12 per cent of married women had ‘non-state pension’ income from these two sources compared with 67 per cent of married men, as did 34 per cent of widows (60 per cent of widowers), 28 per cent of separated/divorced women (46 per cent men) and 47 per cent of single women (46 per cent men)(ibid .,
1991, Table II, p. 383).
Single women are a very small proportion of the entire age cohort: among them it was the non-manual workers, notably those who had had professional or managerial jobs, who had non-state pensions.
Furthermore, only 20 per cent of the women were getting more than £5 per week in non-state pension income, as compared with 50 per cent of the men.
Only 7 per cent of the women were getting more than £25, though 26 per cent of the men were reaching this level.
Women were severely under-represented among those pensioners with the highest non-state pension incomes.
Entitlement to a good occupational pension and access to any associated lump sum benefits is the key to a more adequate income in old age.
To date, women have been greatly under-represented among those pensioners with such  entitlements.
The typically bi-modal career followed by women in Britain over recent decades (leaving aside the marriage bar which affected older women) has meant that married women and mothers of any marital status do not fit into structures of occupational pension provision designed for male breadwinners.
Both the current generation of ‘young elderly’ women and women now of working age have been profoundly affected by the following aspects of women's employment and employers' pension provision.
Occupational pension provision has always served best the interests of employees who have a lifelong record of full time employment in the better paid occupations which offer an employer's pension as a fringe benefit.
Outside public sector employment, which offers transferable pension rights, occupational pension benefits are maximised by minimal job changing or by an ability to compensate for any loss of pension rights on job change through a better remunerated new job.
It is men rather than women who have, typically, been able to fulfil these requirements.
Most women since World War 11 have had interrupted working lives.
The Department of Employment's survey of women who were of working age in 1980 (Martin and Roberts, 1984) presents much evidence to explain why most women do not complete lengthy periods of pensionable service and why, where they have had access to occupational pension benefits, they tend to end up with lower weekly rates of pension and smaller lump sums than their male contemporaries.
Most employers have required women to retire from their jobs at a ‘normal’ pensionable age of 60, whereas a much greater number of men are permitted to remain until 65, despite trends towards earlier retirement.
While this practice has now been successfully challenged in the courts, the effects on pension scheme provision and older women's economic activity rates have yet to be seen (Davidson, 1990).
Women's limited access to employers' pension benefits are directly related to the traditional domestic division of labour which assigns the ‘breadwinner’ role to men, principally husbands, and the major responsibility for the unpaid work of the home (especially child care) to women.
Joshi and Owen (1981, pp. 106–7) studied the labour force participation of successive cohorts of women in Britain from 1950 to 1974 and found that it was motherhood, rather than marriage, which determined the length of women's lives in paid work with Ms Average withdrawing from the labour market for seven years.
Younger women had higher economic activity rates.
Martin and Roberts (1984, pp. 11–12) found that older women, many of whom would not have been contributing to the state pension scheme in their own right, tended to leave the labour market in their mid-fifties.
Caring for elderly relatives or an ailing husband is a common reason for such withdrawal (Finch and Groves, 1983).
A striking feature of women's economic activity (highlighted in the chapters by Susan Lonsdale and Heather Joshi in this volume) is the extent to which mothers and some childless women work part-time.
This typically depresses their eventual income in old age.
Only 12 per cent of part-time women workers (7 per cent of those in the private sector and 21 per cent of those in the public sector) were members of occupational pension schemes in 1987 (Government Actuary, 1991, Table 2.4, p. 6).
Women working more than fifteen hours per week part-time are far more likely to be in an employer's pension scheme than those working less (OPCS, 1990, Table 10.14, p. 229).
In the past decade, employers have made increasing use of temporary and fixed-term ‘short duration’ contract staff.
Meager (1986) showed that in 1984 such employment strategies were widely applied in relation to personal service, office and manual workers and to some extent to the recruitment of managerial, technical and professional staff.
Two-thirds of the ‘short duration’ workers identified in the sample were women in non-professional categories.
Case studies showed that employers made savings arising ‘mainly from temporary workers having less beneficial (or no) entitlement to holiday and sickness pay, and particularly to occupational pensions’(Meager, 1986, p. 12).
It was the larger employers of more than 200 workers who had greatly expanded their temporary recruitment since 1980.
These were the very employers who, in the past, had been most likely to include their workers in occupational pension schemes (Government Actuary, 1958, 1966, 1968, 1972, 1978, 1981).
Women's work has always been highly segregated (Hakim, 1981), with important implications for female access to occupational pension benefits.
The Social Security Pensions Act 1975 specifically allows employers to exclude workers from membership of occupational pension schemes by occupational category, thus facilitating the legal exclusion of women in vertically segregated occupational categories which are mainly or exclusively female.
However, even where, as in many public sector occupations, membership of an employer's pension scheme was (until 1988) automatic for permanent full-time staff, including women, horizontal segregation ensured that women, typically, ended their working lives with lower pension benefits than their male colleagues.
Among women working full-time in the better paid jobs, there is a concentration of women in the lower grades of their particular type of employment.
Martin and Roberts (1984, pp. 151 — 2 and Heather Joshi's chapter here) document the downward mobility experienced by women returning to paid work after a break, especially when returning to part-time work.
Many full-timers have also had periods of part-time work or career breaks.
Thus with their typically lower pay (see Susan Lonsdale's chapter in this volume) and lower lifetime earnings compared with men, the average woman ends up with a lower salary or wage on which to base her final salary for the purposes of working out occupational pension entitlements.
Even if her scheme permits her to make additional pension contributions to make up for missing years of service, such payments will cost her more than would be the case for a man of the same age and salary status, since the arrangements assume that a woman will live longer and therefore claim benefits for longer than a man.
Study of the development of both state and occupational pension provision reveals arrangements which, especially until the 1975 legislation, endorsed the traditional domestic division of labour.
It was difficult for married women to  achieve a substantial basic retirement pension record within the state pension scheme and to gain access to an employer's pension scheme.
The Social Security Pensions Act 1975 included an ‘equal access’ clause which entitles women to membership of an occupational scheme where this is available to men in the same category of employment.
But as noted, this still leaves a substantial number of women with, over a working lifetime, limited access to occupational pension benefits in their own right.
One way in which the 1975 legislation can be said to have further endorsed the domestic division of labour is by making provision of widows' pensions by occupational schemes one condition of approval by the Occupational Pensions Board.
Indeed, the more recent history of pension provision shows more concern on the part of both governments and occupational pension providers to increase widows' benefits (themselves symbolic of the financial dependence of wives in marriage), than to help women build up their own occupational pension records.
Some private sector occupational schemes are generous towards widows, especially if the death occurs in service.
Such provision can reduce a widow's risk of poverty in old age not least because, unlike public sector schemes, private sector schemes are increasingly permitting widows to keep their pensions on remarriage and operate no cohabitation rules.
The preoccupation with providing for widows is one outcome of the high marriage rate for women which has persisted in Britain since World War 11.
Single (never married) women now form a very small proportion of the older working-age groups and a far smaller proportion of the ‘young elderly’ female population (OPCS, 1991, Table 1.16), p. 14).
However, there are two groups of women whose marital status can put them at risk of poverty in old age because of their inability to qualify for dependants' benefits.
An increasing number of couples are cohabiting, including older, previously married partners who in due course remarry.
There is also an increasing number of women who have lost a potential occupational widow's pension, and associated benefits, on divorce.
If a man with occupational pension scheme entitlements dies leaving a female partner with whom he is living, it will depend on the rules of his pension scheme and the discretion of the scheme trustees (or manager) as to whether the woman qualifies as a female dependant with regard to any pension and/or lump sum for which her partner may have nominated her.
The trustees may refuse to accept her as a beneficiary or may require any benefits to be divided with other individuals.
One route to female poverty in old age is therefore through financial dependence in a marriage-like relationship which fails to deliver the occupational benefits to which a wife would have been entitled (see McGoldrick, 1984, Chapter 5).
Pension providers are currently being challenged in this way by the existence of new family forms.
Divorce is likewise raising complicated issues of entitlement to dependants' occupational benefits, since on divorce a woman loses her potential right to a widow's pension and/or benefits.
Section 5 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 allows a wife to oppose divorce after five years' separation on the grounds that dissolution of the marriage would cause ‘grave financial or other hardship’, but  very few such cases have succeeded (Cretney and Masson, 1990, pp. 130–1).
It is the older wife in a divorce case, who has no recent contact with the labour market or a poor earning capacity, who has sometimes much to lose through the ending of her marriage.
Older women are less likely to remarry than younger women (Ermisch, 1989, pp. 50–1) and are consequently at risk of poverty in old age unless, unusually, they have been able to generate an adequate income through their own resources.
The Matrimonial and Family Proceedings Act 1984 has as one goal the promotion of economic self-sufficiency for both parties on divorce.
Any benefits such as pensions which the parties to the divorce will dose the chance of acquiring must be taken into consideration.
However, the law does not normally allow for any order to be made which will directly affect pension entitlements (see Cretney and Masson, 1990, pp. 405–7).
Although the courts do have wide powers to re-allocate property and can require an ex-husband to take out life assurance, such arrangements do not necessarily compensate for the loss of an index-linked widow's pension in old age or a lump sum and widow's pension payable on a husband's death in service.
Such benefits can to some extent compensate a widow for lack of access to occupational scheme benefits in her own right and for financial disadvantage arising from the traditional domestic division of labour.
Furthermore, it is commonly argued that the courts can fail to place a proper actuarial value on potential pension benefits and that (typically in pursuit of a ‘clean break’) a divorcing wife's loss of potential benefits can be ‘traded off’ or glossed over against her need for a home.
Freedman et al .
(1988, Chapter 6) address these issues, suggesting that pension rights should be jointly held by husband and wife for the duration of the marriage, allowing for a split on divorce.
Loss of potential pension rights on divorce is now the subject of considerable debate as an unresolved issue of social policy and family law (see Joshi and Davies, 1991; Law Society, 1991).
Looking to the future, while the Social Security Act 1986 (operational from 1988) does not affect current pensioners or employees nearing retirement, it has profound implications for younger people (see Groves, 1991).
Employers can no longer require membership of an occupational pension scheme as a condition of service.
Employees can opt out of SERPS (with a generous financial rebate) into a modest ‘appropriate personal pension’(APP) arranged commercially on an individual basis by a licensed financial provider.
Additional personal pensions (PPs) may be purchased to supplement an APP, SERPS or an employer's pension (see Ward, 1990, Chapters 6 and 7).
The SERPS has been severely downgraded (including widows' benefits) and will become a progressively less effective vehicle for compensating women in particular for their disadvantages in the labour market.
By 1991 over 4 million people, including a substantial number of women, had opted for a rebated APP instead of SERPS (Committee of Public Accounts, 1991).
Marketers of personal pensions do appear to have discouraged exits from good occupational schemes and indicated that a return to SERPS may advantage  employees as they get older.
An APP (or PP) is a ‘money purchase’(or ‘defined contribution’) scheme.
The size of the eventual capital sum, which must be used in its entirety in the case of an APP for purchase of an annuity at 60 or later for women (at 65 or later for men), will depend on long-term investment performance and the state of the financial market, which dictates the current price of annuities.
Personal pensions over and above APPs may be taken in part as a capital sum and at any age between 50 and 75 (see Wilson and Davies, 1988, Chapter 4).
All money purchase schemes are potentially unpredictable, and are especially likely to lose value through monetary inflation (and not least if the annuitant lives a long time) unless the annuity is fully index-linked, which is not the case under present legislation.
For women, money purchase schemes are problematic in that early contributions are likely to promote the best returns, yet younger women typically leave the labour force for several years and/or work part-time on motherhood.
Women (like men) may be tempted towards the cheapest option (an APP) rather than joining a good occupational scheme (if this is available) or paying the substantial personal pension contributions additional to the APP likely to be necessary to secure a really adequate personal pension in retirement.
Furthermore, tradition dictates that married women should be dependent on their husbands for income in old age, his being the ‘serious’ earnings.
Some employers, faced by likely future compulsion (under EC law) to include part-timers within occupational pension schemes where full-timers are eligible, are now taking up their rights under the Social Security Act 1986 to provide money purchase (rather than‘final salary'/ ‘defined benefits’) contracted-out occupational pension schemes or COMPS (see Ward, 1990, pp. 37–9) targeted at those occupational groups which include preponderantly female lower-paid staff.
A study (Davies and Ward, 1992) for the Equal Opportunities Commission sheds light on the likely impact of personal pension provision on women.
The Commission is already on record (1985, pp. 16–17) as having stated that, given women's typically discontinuous employment careers, ‘personal pensions, are likely to be a recipe for female poverty in old age.
This chapter has attempted to explain why women have had unequal access to occupational pension benefits as compared with men.
It can be argued, however, that neither a reformed employers’ pension system, nor the new personal pension arrangements, are likely to guarantee an adequate income in old age for anyone (male or female) with a discontinuous employment record and/or a history of multiple job changes.
A really well-designed state pension scheme (complete with lump sums) and not so closely tied to employment history as any of the current schemes on offer, could probably do as well or better than occupational or personal pension provision for most women.
It can also be argued that all pension and retirement benefits schemes should be fully subject to sex discrimination law.
Women's greater share of unpaid domestic work and their labour market position, including low pay, have inhibited their ability to generate an adequate  income for old age.
Widows' pensions were designed as a partial replacement for loss of a ‘family wage’ or husband's retirement pension, but have become increasingly problematic as more women get divorced or prefer to remain unmarried.
Meanwhile there is a real need to render women less invisible in debates on pensions and in statistics on pensions and poverty in old age.
For the foreseeable future, occupational pension provision is likely to exist in some form.
If women are in future to minimise their risk of poverty in old age, they will need to grasp their fair share of whatever is on offer in the admittedly inequitable sector of pension provision.
Up to now, femininity has never been equated with financial self-sufficiency, but adult women will need to learn about the complicated world of personal finance and pension provision and exercise their choices so far as possible.
To date, given the inadequate levels of state pension provision and the limited opportunities most women have had to save or invest for old age, their limited access to occupational pension scheme membership has been a major factor in the construction of female poverty in old age.
Such poverty compounds the economic and domestic inequalities typically experienced by women over a lifetime and magnifies such inequalities in old age.
NOTES
Much material for this chapter is derived from a doctoral thesis on women and occupational pensions (Groves, 1986).
WOMEN, THE FAMILY AND POVERTY
BUDGETING FOR HEALTH: MOTHERS IN LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS Hilary Graham
This chapter reviews the research evidence which sheds light on the-economic circumstances of mothers in low-income households.
It looks, in particular, at the position of mothers in families on benefit.
Thus, rather than developing a broad perspective on women's experiences of poverty, the chapter reviews what recent studies reveal (and obscure) about the impact of low household income on Black and white mothers caring for children.
The focus on households with children reflects recent trends in economic welfare in Britain.
Households with children have borne the brunt of the widening inequalities in income; they have been hard hit, too, by changes in the social security system which offers a minimum income for an increasing number of families.
Looking at the experiences of mothers in these households provides an insight into what life is like at the sharper end of economic and social change in Britain.
The chapter begins by exploring some of the limitations of the data on low-income households.
It then turns to examine evidence which illuminates the economic circumstances of households, drawing out what these data suggest about families headed by Asian and Afro-Caribbean parents.
The second part of the chapter sets the concept of poverty within the gendered organisation of family life.
Against the backdrop of mothers' health responsibilities, it suggests that budgeting strategies represent the everyday routines through which many mothers seek to reconcile financial commitments with health needs.
RESEARCHING WOMEN AND POVERTY: SOME LIMITATIONS OF THE DATA
Four limitations of the data should be noted.
First, social trends and policy changes are affecting low-income families in ways that leave studies rapidly out of date.
The pace of change means that insights culled from even the most up-to-date research may still miss crucial dimensions of how mothers cope with poverty.
For example, there is little evidence about the effects of the recent round of changes in the social security system, introduced in April 1988, on claimant households.
Secondly, much of the available data relate, not to women, but to the households in which they live.
In both the large national surveys and the smaller scale studies, data tend to be collected and analysed at a household level (for example, Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989; Ritchie, 1990; DE, 1990c; DSS, 1990b).
As a result, knowledge about women's experiences is often derived indirectly from studies which describe household patterns of income, expenditure and consumption.
Thirdly, household studies adopt different measures of ‘low income’ and ‘poverty’.
Some data sources place households into income bands which do not contain an obvious low income/poverty line (as, for example, in the government's Households Below Average Income — DSS, 1990b).
Other data sources, most notably the small-scale studies, identify households on benefit or with benefit-level incomes, and describe coping strategies in this context (see, for example, Evason, 1980; Graham, 1987b; Ritchie, 1990; Phoenix, 1991).
As these different income measures suggest, there is no common population of low-income households to which the various data sets refer.
The data which they provide are thus not strictly comparable.
What they suggest, however, are the broad parameters within which the lifestyles of mothers in low-income households take shape.
In trying to tease out these broad parameters, we hit a fourth problem.
Since the early 1980s, debates within feminism and anti-racism have highlighted differences among women.
Particular attention has been given to ‘race’ and racism as structures which mediate gender divisions (and divide women), with these differences always cross-cut by other dimensions of identity and experience (by sexuality, social class and the oppressions associated with disability, for example).
Recent studies have described how racism shapes both the distribution and experience of poverty and the patterns of physical and mental ill-health associated with it (see the chapter here by Juliet Cook and Shantu Watt; also Gordon and Newnham, 1985; Eyles and Donovan, 1990).
Such arguments sit uneasily within a tradition of British poverty research where data are constructed in ways which prevent ‘race’(let alone racism) being a focus of analysis.
For example, the national surveys of income and expenditure  include Black and other ethnic minority households, but typically do not describe respondents in terms of ethnic identity (see Brown, 1984, as an exception).
In most small-scale studies, too, the ethnic identities of respondents remain undeclared (see, for example, Burghes, 1980; Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989; Ritchie, 1990; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a).
In feminist research on poverty and resources within households; respondents again tend to be given no ethnic identity.
Indeed, where studies have provided this information, it is typically only to note that the majority of the sample were white (for example, Wilson, 1987; Graham, 1987b).
If, as Phoenix suggests (1988a, p. 154), ‘race’ is seen as something that only influences Black women, this silence about ‘race’is likely to signal an absence of Black people in the populations of most poverty studies.
It suggests, too, that feminist research on resources within households has grounded its analyses in the accounts that white women have given white researchers about their lives.
It is only the most recent studies, where detailed findings are still awaited, which clearly include a significant proportion of Asian and Afro-Caribbean parents (Cohen, 1991a, 1991b; Craig, 1991; Sadiq, 1991).
In these studies, racism is also a more explicit part of the research agenda.
Further, most studies have focused primarily on heterosexual couples in nuclear households (see, for example, Burghes, 1980; Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989; Pahl, 1989; Ritchie, 1990).
While some studies of resources within households have included one-parent households, information from women living in other kinds of household have not informed the typologies that researchers have built to explain how households run their financial affairs.
These typologies may well not capture the patterns found in lesbian relationships or in multi-family households.
One in ten households with children with South Asian heads are multi-family households.
Among families with white.
West Indian and African heads of household the proportion is one in forty (Haskey, 1989).
The money-management systems identified in studies of white couples may not capture, either, the ‘moral economy of kin’ described by the respondents in Afshar's study of Pakistani women.
This study, of three-generational households in West Yorkshire, notes the expectation felt by women to contribute their labour and their income to a family unit beyond the household (Afshar, 1989).
These four limitations of the research literature on mothers' experiences of poverty — the lack of up-to-date evidence, the lack of data on women, the variability of measures of low income/poverty, and the eclipsing of ‘race’ and other dimensions of difference among women — set limits on what is known about mothers in low-income households.
They suggest that our understanding of mothers' experiences has to be gleaned from studies employing a variety of income measures, which collect and analyse their data in ways which obscure differences both within and between households.
Specifically, while poverty disproportionately affects Black families, studies which address women's experiences of poverty focus disproportionately on white families.
Taken together, these problems raise the issue of whether anything useful can be said about Black women from a research tradition which has failed to engage with their lives.
While clearly not capable of resourcing an anti-racist perspective on women's poverty, it may none the less be possible to provide some insights into experiences which Black and white mothers share.
As a number of commentators have noted, ‘Black’ and ‘white’do not represent fixed group identities which stand in contrast to each other.
Gilroy, for example, has argued against catch-all terms like ‘Black’, ‘Asian’ and ‘Afro-Caribbean’which imply homogeneous groups of people whose culture and way of life stands in contrast to some white norm (Gilroy, 1990).
Emphasising specific minority group needs among women can obscure their common material needs, for housing and income, for example(Nanton, 1989).
Some recent studies have drawn attention to these common material circumstances.
For example, Phoenix, in her study of women who had their first child between the age of 16 and 19, argued that contrasting the lives of Black and white women did little to illuminate their experiences of becoming a mother (Phoenix, 1991).
Pointing to the way in which poverty structured the lives of the majority of her respondents, she concluded that ‘young Black women and young white women become pregnant for the same sorts of reasons, and this is because they share the same socio-economic contexts’(Phoenix, 1988a, p. 154).
THE ECONOMIC POSITION OF LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD: SOME RECENT TRENDS
The economic contexts in which mothers care for their children have been deeply affected by the widening of income inequalities in Britain in recent decades.
The economic welfare of many families has been directly affected, too, by changes in the social security system.
This section reviews the trends in income and income maintenance while the next section examines what these trends suggest about the position of families headed by Asian and Afro-Caribbean parents.
Three trends are shaping the living standards of households with children.
First, there has been a sharp reversal of the trend towards greater income equality in Britain which characterised the decade from 1939.
The evidence suggests that income differentials between households at the top and bottom of the income scale narrowed during the war years of 1939–45 and that, through the late 1940s, the poorest households found basic necessities increasingly affordable.
It was around 1950 that the gap in living standards between rich and poor was at its narrowest (Wilkinson, 1989).
From this point, living standards have widened, decade by decade, up to and including the 1980s (Wilkinson, 1989; Townsend, 1991a).
Data on household income point to a second trend in the distribution of  income in Britain: a shift in the composition of households in the low-income groups.
They point, in particular, to a sharp deterioration in the economic position of households with children through the 1970s and 1980s (O'Higgins, 1989).
As a result, families represent an increasing proportion of households with the lowest standards of living.
In the late 1980s, only a third of households contained children (OPCS, 1990).
However, households with children made up nearly 60 per cent of households with incomes in the lowest 10 per cent of the income distribution (Oppenheim, 1990).
Thirdly, there has been a widening of income inequalities among households with children.
The majority of families experienced a sustained rise in living standards through the 1970s and 1980s.
However, the overall rise masked a decline in living standards for a minority (O'Higgins, 1989).
Among this minority, a high proportion are one- and two-parent households headed by parents without a full-time job.
Data for 1987 suggest that nearly 80 per cent of families where the head of household is unemployed have incomes below 50 per cent of average income (Oppenheim, 1990).
Recent changes in the social security system are likely to have intensified these widening income inequalities among families with children.
Combined with changes introduced earlier in the decade, the 1986 Social Security Act has worked to increase the financial responsibilities of parents on benefit and reduce their access to additional sources of financial support for expenses that they are unable to meet from their regular benefit.
For example, the 1986 Act removed the right to benefit for most 16- and 17-year-olds and made it a requirement that claimants pay 20 per cent of their rates/poll tax and 100 per cent of their water rates.
At the same time, it replaced the regulated system of single payments for claimants in financial difficulties.
Families were major beneficiaries of the single payments system, which provided one-off payments as a matter of entitlement to claimants who qualified for help.
The new scheme, the Social Fund, offers only limited help through grants with the result that most families have to look to discretionary loans to cope with large items of expenditure or with an emergency.
Reviewing the impact of these changes on claimant households, Svenson and McPherson (1988) calculated that the majority of lone-parent families (74 per cent) and couples with children (81 per cent ) lost out financially in the shift from supplementary benefit to income support.
BLACK HOUSEHOLD WITH CHILDREN
The patterns of post-war immigration provide the context in which the income trends outlined in the previous section have impacted on Black households with children.
In reviewing the limited evidence, it should be noted that households are typically defined by the ethnic group into which the head of household is classified.
Other adults and children thus assume the ethnic group identity  ascribed to the designated ‘head of household’.
Such an approach masks diversity within households.
For example, analyses of the 1984–6 Labour Force Survey suggest that over a quarter of married and cohabiting Afro-Caribbean women (and Afro-Caribbean men) aged under 30 had white partners (CSO, 1988).
Post-war immigration from the New Commonwealth developed through the 1950s and 1960s, at a time when income trends were shifting from increasing equality to increasing inequality.
Most Asian and Afro-Caribbean men and women were drawn into low-paid occupations which placed them at the lower rather than the upper limits of these widening inequalities.
For example, a study of earnings in Leicester suggests that, in 1990, 86 per cent of Asian women in employment had gross earnings of less than £150 a week.
Among white women, the proportion was 55 per cent(Duffy and Lincoln, 1990).
Reflecting these patterns of post-war immigration, most ethnic minority groups have a higher proportion of young adults and children than the population as a whole.
Data from the Labour Force Survey for the late 1980s indicate that around a half of Afro-Caribbean households and over 70 per cent of Pakistani and Bangladeshi households contained children, compared with around one-third of white households (Haskey, 1989).
As these statistics suggest, Asian and Afro-Caribbean women are significantly more likely than white women to live in households with children (Duffy and Lincoln, 1990).
The age and household composition of ethnic minority communities means that they have been more affected by the fall in the relative income position of households with children during the 1970s and 1980s than the white population.
It means, too, that these communities have been disproportionately affected by social security changes relating to families, like the change in the benefit position of 16- and 17-year-olds (Oppenheim, 1990).
Further, the limited evidence points to both indirect and direct discrimination within the social security system.
For example, the social security system sets conditions which can make it hard for families to support family members who live elsewhere.
Data from the early 1980s indicate that 40 per cent of Afro-Caribbean households and 30 per cent of Asian households send money to dependants, compared with 5 per cent of white households (Brown, 1984, p. 232).
However, the social security system (including child benefit) does not recognise such financial obligations (Gordon and Newnham, 1985).
Change and complexity in the social security system can further disadvantage claimants whose first language is not English (NACAB, 1991).
In one recent survey of income support claimants in Bradford, Asian respondents made up nine out of ten of those who had not heard of the Social Fund (Craig, 1991).
It has been argued, too, that the emphasis on discretion within the Social Fund could give greater scope for the individual racism displayed by some social security staff (Cooper, 1985; Atkin and Robbings, 1991).
The evidence suggests that the trends which are adversely affecting the living standards of families with children have hit Black households hard.
If social  research always followed in the wake of social trends, there should be a rich vein of studies in which Black families, and Black women within these families, describe their poverty.
Yet, as noted earlier, studies of poor families have dealt primarily with white households.
The emerging feminist perspectives on poverty, too, have been resourced primarily by the accounts provided by white women.
As the next sections scan the literature, it is important to remember how few studies have given Black as well as white parents an opportunity to tell researchers about the realities of their lives.
POVERTY: AN INCOME THAT UNDERMINES CARE
Both the major definitions of poverty — as an absolute and as a relative condition — turn on the question of individual health.
The two concepts define poverty in ways which, explicitly or implicitly, call attention to people's physical, social and emotional welfare.
Health is the pivot around which an absolute concept of poverty revolves.
Poverty is defined as an income insufficient to keep members of the family in a state of physical well-being.
As Rowntree put it, life on the poverty line is governed by the regulation that ‘nothing must be bought but what is absolutely necessary for the maintenance of physical health’(Rowntree, 1941, p. 103).
An absolute conception of poverty thus alerts us to the fact that health — for some or all of the family — will be bartered in the struggle to meet basic needs.
A relative concept highlights not only costs to physical health.
It also draws attention to the social and economic isolation of poor families; to their exclusion from the experiences of parenthood and childhood that others take for granted and from the cultural and political life of the communities to which they belong.
As Townsend notes, ‘their resources are so seriously below those commanded by the average individual that they are, in effect, excluded from ordinary living patterns, customs and activities’(Townsend, 1979, p. 31).
Relative poverty is often experienced as the difference between ‘living’ and ‘existing’.
As mothers in a 1988 study of forty-five white, Asian and Afro-Caribbean families on benefit put it (Cohen, 1991a, p. 28):
We're not living on the dole.
We're just existing barely…
Going into the butcher's shop and asking ‘You got some bones for the dog?’ and then making a pot of soup…
Living is where I could go into a shop and say…
‘I'd like a pair of shoes, fit them on my bairn and we'll take them’.
In their different ways, both absolute and relative concepts suggest that the struggle to make ends meet is fought out in and against the routines which sustain health; in the routines of buying bones from the butcher and not buying  new shoes for the children.
While it is unlikely that a feminist politics informed their development, these concepts draw attention to routines which, in many households, are deeply gendered.
In most households, it is the culturally defined role of women which includes responsibility for family and individual welfare.
Research suggests that, irrespective of ethnic affiliation, women are primarily responsible for the health and care of children, and that this figures as a central and defining source of their identity (Mayall, 1986; Warrier, 1988; Afshar, 1989; Phoenix, 1991).
Women's caring responsibilities frequently include the welfare of male partners as well as children.
These responsibilities, in turn, are associated with domestic duties, with the preparation of food and the serving of meals, the maintenance of the home and the washing, ironing and repair of clothes.
Reflecting this gendered division of care, in over 80 per cent of households, women are ‘mainly responsible for general domestic duties’, which include cleaning, washing and ironing, shopping and cooking (Jowell et al .,
1988, p. 184).
In many households, ‘the cycle of caring’ rolls forward to include not only young children and partners but frail older parents and adult children and siblings with illnesses and disabilities.
Studies suggest that those needing help with everyday health tasks are concentrated among households with low incomes.
The rates of disability, physical illness and poor psycho-social health are all higher among those living in low-income households (Blaxter, 1990).
Underlining these patterns, a recent study of ninety-one claimant households with children found that the majority reported that at least one member had a chronic illness or disability (Craig, 1991).
As the context in which many mothers experience poverty, the gendered organisation of care gives the experience a particular edge.
It means caring in circumstances which threaten both the well-being of family members and the economic survival of the household.
In meeting these responsibilities, some mothers play little part in household budgeting.
In Cohan and Sadiq's study where most of the Asian families were Mirpuri Muslims, a number of the women were not involved in the day-to-day management of money, particularly with respect to transactions involving outside agencies (bills, mortgage repayments and the DSS, for example)(Sadiq, 1991).
However, in the majority of households, responsibility for looking after the family and home goes hand-in-hand with money management.
Studies of (white) low-income households have described how women commonly manage the weekly budget and take the major responsibility for making ends meet.
In Bradshaw and Holmes' study of two-parent families on benefit, the majority (58 per cent) of the couples reported that the woman was responsible for managing the money (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989).
While money may be under female management, it is not necessarily under the woman's control.
Where their partners control what they manage, women can find their attempts to meet health needs and financial commitments thwarted.
The comments of one respondent in a mid-1980s' study of mothers with pre-school  children which I conducted reflected a theme identified in other studies of family life (see Brannen and Wilson, 1987).
She noted:
His hobby is fishing and do-it-yourself things and he'll just go out and buy the tools and I think, ‘Oh that money, what I could have done with that money!’
So I will budget and go around the markets and that, and find the best buys and he'll just go to the best shops because it is convenient.
Her comments also shed an indirect light on the experiences of some lone mothers.
Over 80 per cent of lone mothers depend on social security benefits for some or all of their income, and have average incomes well below the average for two-parent households (Millar, 1989; see also her chapter here).
Despite their greater poverty, lone mothers may not always see marriage or cohabitation as improving their access to resources.
For example, some respondents in Phoenix's (1991) study of white and Afro-Caribbean mothers aged under 20 pointed to their increased control of household resources as one reason why they felt they fared better economically by staying single.
Lone mothers in other studies have described how their greater control of resources can offset the lower incomes they are able to secure for their families (Evason, 1980; Graham, 1987b; Bradshaw and Millar, 1991).
In my study, a white mother, previously married to a full-time skilled manual worker and now living on benefits, described her changed economic circumstances like this:
Money was the issue, because he used to spend his money on hobbies and I'd never know what I'd be getting from week to week and some weeks I'd not get anything.
He wanted me to handle all the money side and do the bills but some weeks I had nothing for food, nothing for bills, nothing for the children.
So I'm much better on.
Definitely.
I know where I am now, because I get our money each week and I can control what I spend.
Oh, he was earning more than I get but I was worse off then than I am now.
Her comments set the divisions of caring responsibilities and material resources in particularly sharp relief.
In a less extreme way, however, gender divisions provide the everyday context in which many mothers confront household poverty.
Set within this context, poverty is a daily struggle to meet health needs without jeopardising financial survival.
MEETING HEALTH NEEDS AND MAKING ENDS MEET
This section explores how mothers resist the impact of poverty on the health of their children, their partners and themselves while, at the same time, working to meet the financial commitments of the household.
Budgeting often embraces  both dimensions: it marks out the routines through which mothers confront, and struggle to contain, the conflict between individual health and economic survival.
It is through their budgeting strategies and skills that many mothers seek to maximise health opportunities without (further) threatening economic survival.
In exploring these strategies, the section draws primarily on studies which pre-date April 1988 when the major changes introduced in the 1986 Social Security Act came into force.
As yet, there are few studies which describe the economic circumstances of households since April 1988.
The section describes budgeting strategies in households on benefit under two broad headings.
The first set of strategies seeks to meet health needs and make ends meet within household income.
The second set of strategies looks to outside sources of support.
In practice, these strategies are often pursued in tandem.
Separating them out, however, signals the priority given by most parents to managing the economic dependency of living on state benefits as independently as possible.
Meeting health needs and financial responsibilities without recourse tot others
Low-income households devote a higher proportion of their weekly income to basic and collective necessities, such as food and fuel, than better-off households (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989; CSO, 1991a).
Alongside the priority given to food and fuel goes a restriction of expenditure on items which are — or can be treated as — individual and less essential, like clothes, shoes, private transport and leisure.
In Bradshaw and Holmes' study of two-parent, two-child households on benefit, about three-quarters of the women and men lacked more than two items of basic clothing, with women's clothing tending to be in the worst condition and children's in the best (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989).
While statistics on household expenditure suggest that families give priority to health needs, in practice many mothers find themselves cutting back on basic necessities.
Spending on current health needs is often constrained by the serving of financial commitments taken on in the past to secure basic health resources.
Credit and debt repayments for housing, fuel, furniture and children's clothes tend to have first call on the income, being deducted from benefit at source or paid early in the weekly budgeting cycle.
Because of the priority given to these ‘fixed costs’, mothers typically draw on the household income when it is at its most depleted.
The residual income has to cover a range of items which are directly related to caring like food, clothes, services and transport for mothers and children.
As one white respondent noted in my study of mothers in low-income households, ‘The bills come first, they've got to, then the meters (for fuel) and then food.’
It was a theme reiterated by other mothers in the study:
As I see it, you get your bills in for a certain amount and you've got to  pay it.
You can't sort of say — well, I know some people do — but I can't say ‘I won't pay that bill because I've got to buy some food.’
I put away the money to pay that bill and if I haven't got anything left over to buy food with, then we have to manage.
As this comment suggests, food is the major item to be paid for within the family's residual income.
It is also the item of expenditure over which a mother is most likely to exert control.
As a result, the conflict between health-keeping and house-keeping is often experienced in a particularly acute form in the diet she can give her children.
One white lone mother in my study, living with her two pre-school children on benefit, noted:
Food's the only place I find I can tighten up.
The rest of it, they take it before you can get your hands on it really.
So it's the food…
The only place I can cut down is food…
You've got to balance nutrition with a large amount of food which will keep them not hungry.
I'd like to give them fresh fruit, whereas the good food has to be limited.
Terrible, isn't it, when you think about it?
The evidence suggests that, through the 1980s and 1990s, financial commitments to outside agencies, and in particular credit repayments and debt obligations, have exerted an increasing pressure on low-income families.
As families find themselves giving more priority to fixed costs, spending on other resources is squeezed further.
A range of personal items — new clothes, underwear, make-up, haircuts, public transport, leisure services — rarely appear in the expenditure diaries of mothers in low-income households.
However, cutting back on personal items does not always produce the necessary economies.
In these circumstances, mothers have described how they turn to collective items where they can restrict what they consume.
For example, mothers report how they cut back on their own consumption of food in order to protect the living standards of children and partners.
As one mother in Ritchie's study of families on benefit noted: ‘I buy half a pound of stewing meat or something and give that to Sid and the kiddies and then I just have the gravy — before I used to buy soya things and substitutes to meat but I can't afford that now’(Ritchie, 1990, p. 35).
Other studies too have described how mothers regularly cut down or miss out on meals in order to provide a better diet for their children.
As one mother described: ‘I've seen me going three or four days without anything to eat…
I've always been the one that ends up just going without’(Cohen, 1990, p. 28).
The ‘individualising’ of the family's lifestyle is apparent, too, in other areas of consumption, including clothes, fuel and transport.
A mother in Craig and Glendinning's study described the different standards of dress which she set within her family:
I'll go to jumble sales for my clothes.
I won't go to a catalogue for mine.
But I'm not seeing me kid and me husband walk to town in second-hand  clothes.
I'll make do for myself but I won't make do for them.
(Craig and Glendinning, 1990a, p. 31).
Her approach to clothes was matched by a mother in Ritchie's study who noted that the cost of fuel meant that she did not light the fire during the day when her children were at school but saved the limited fuel supplies to protect their standard of living.
As she put it, ‘as long as it's warm when the children get home, I'm not bothered about myself (Ritchie, 1990, p. 36).
It was an approach also adopted by mothers in my study of low-income households.
For example, two lone mothers, one white and one Asian, described the scope for savings in personal fuel consumption in the following ways:
I put the central heating on for one hour before the kids go to bed and one hour before they get up.
I sit in a sleeping bag once they've gone to bed.
When the children are in bed, I turn the heating off and use a blanket or an extra cardigan.
(Graham, 1985, p. 246)
These personal cost-cutting measures, like the other approaches outlined in this section, are mediated through the wider household distribution of resources.
The financial control exercised by a partner or by other members of the household may constrain a mother's attempts to look after health within the limits of the resources available to her.
For example, a white mother with two children in my study described her strategies for budgeting on benefit in great detail, ending her account by noting how these strategies floundered: ‘Because he spends his money and we could do with it.
On benefit you never have enough money.
We need it all but he has to have his bit’(Graham, 1985, p. 89).
The control that partners exercise over other household resources, like food or fuel, can also limit the scope for savings in collective and personal consumption.
For example, women have described to researchers how it is difficult to cut down on food when cooking for a partner who expects meat with his main meal (Charles and Kerr, 1986).
Partners' preferences can also make it more difficult to control household fuel consumption and to effect cutbacks in personal consumption.
As a respondent in my study commented about economising on the heating: ‘I turn it off when I'm in on my own and put a blanket on myself.
Sometimes we both do in the evening but my husband doesn't like being cold and puts the heating back on’(Graham, 1985, p. 246).
With or without a supportive partner, managing independently remains a common goal for many mothers searching for ways of meeting health needs while cutting back on health resources.
However, studies have documented how increasing economic dependency is the cost of trying to keep families in health and in credit.
One respondent in Cohen and Sadiq's study of white, Asian and Afro-Caribbean families on benefit summed up how both physical and financial survival is threatened by poverty with the comment, ‘You have to incur debt to live’(Cohen, 1991b).
Looking for additional sources of help for survival
For mothers faced with the task of reconciling an inadequate income with the health needs of their children, small additional sources of income can take on a significance disproportionate to their size.
The major source of independent income available to mothers is child benefit, which, Brown's survey suggests, reaches almost all eligible white, Asian and Afro-Caribbean households (Brown, 1984, p. 233).
However, the value of this additional source of income has been falling in real terms over the last decade.
Beyond this universal benefit lie the discretionary sources of help from the informal and formal sectors of welfare.
While many mothers rely on both, it is helpful to look briefly at each in turn.
Studies have highlighted the importance of families and friends as sources of mutual support for parents who have access to them.
They have highlighted, too, how this system of exchange is mediated through women, reflecting and reinforcing the gendered organisation of care within the families.
Thus, most of the day-to-day help received by mothers comes from other women, from female friends and female relatives (Graham, 1986; Willmott, 1987).
Their mothers and their partners' mothers play a particularly important part in this informal economy of care, providing both practical help with child care and material support, typically in kind rather than cash.
Gifts of food, children's clothes and toys give tangible expression to mothers' health-keeping and housekeeping responsibilities.
For mothers struggling to meet these responsibilities, such gifts can help to protect the living standards of their children (Craig and Glendinning, 1990a; Ritchie, 1990).
One Afro-Caribbean mother in my study, who was living on benefits with her partner, described how it was her grandmother who bought her daughter's shoes, while her mother
is always buying things.
If she sees a nice dress for her, she'll buy it.
A couple of times she's sent money for Easter eggs and school photos.
Occasionally, she's given me £5 or £10 if I go down to see her and says ‘Treat yourself and don't tell Paul.
Treat yourself’.
(Graham, 1985, pp. 167–8)
Material support from kin can be more deeply woven into mothers' budgeting strategies, providing essential health resources on a regular basis.
Two white lone mothers in my study described their economic dependency on kin in this way:
We have three good meals a day at my mum's, Saturday, Sunday and Monday, and we always have meat and fresh vegetables then.
It would worry me if I was having to feed her all the time but knowing that three days out of seven she's getting good meals, it doesn't worry me so much.
And more often than not, when I come back from me mum's, I find little  bits in the bottom of the bag because she feels sorry for us.
(Graham, 1985, p. 141)
If I've had a big bill, occasionally I've had to say to my mum ‘I've no money left, can I come down for the week?’ and I've had to go down there.
Somehow or other I manage to get through and I think it's because my parents help me.
(Graham, 1985, p. 249)
As the last comment suggests, mothers, and families more generally, can be an important source of financial help in emergencies.
In Bradshaw and Holmes' 1986 study of two-parent households on benefit, two-thirds of the respondents said they would turn to their families for money in an emergency.
Mothers were the single most frequently cited source of help (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989).
While parents provide a lifeline for many women in poverty, they are not always an unproblematic source of help.
First, women may not have access to relatives who are able or willing to respond.
In Morris' study of the households of forty redundant steelworkers, kin were providing extra help — mostly in the form of food and clothes for the children — for less than a third of the families (Morris, 1983).
The poverty of parents can limit what they can provide.
One white lone mother in my study noted that her mother was also a woman coping alone on a very limited income: ‘she'd rather put us first but I don't want to see her go without.’
Secondly, asking relatives for help can undermine the moral base on which relations with kin are built.
Loans and gifts of money provided by older relatives can often run counter to the expected patterns of support.
As one single mother noted about the financial support she received from her mother, ‘it's not very nice her doing it because I feel I should be helping her’(Cohen, 1991a, p. 40).
Receiving such help can undermine further an already-fragile self-esteem.
An Asian single parent interviewed in Cohen and Sadiq's study conveyed the sense of distress felt about having to turn to relatives for financial help:
This is the first time in my working life I have to go to the family to ask them for money.
I've never asked them for anything before…then all of a sudden, you become partly dependent on them…it's very difficult.
(Cohen, 1991a, p. 40)
Many parents also have reservations about turning to outside agencies for financial help.
There is some evidence to suggest that Asian claimants are particularly reluctant to become indebted to agencies beyond the family (Cohen, 1991b).
However, borrowing to meet health and financial commitments has become a fact of life for many mothers on benefit.
In Bradshaw and Holmes' study, 96 per cent of claimant households with children had debts averaging £441, and with an average weekly repayment which represented 12 per cent of their weekly income (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989, p. 44).
In Cohen and Sadiq's 1989/90 study of forty-five single parents and couples with children, two-thirds  had debts most commonly for housing fuel and children's clothes (Cohen, 1991 a).
Some mothers turn to ‘tick’ credit from local shops, primarily for food and clothes.
Most of the Asian claimants in Cohen and Sadiq's study were able to buy goods on credit from local Asian shops where they were known (Sadiq, 1991).
Mail-order catalogues were less commonly used by Asian mothers than by white mothers in their study.
Other studies confirm the significance of mail-order catalogues for white mothers (Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a).
Among poor households as a whole, they represent the major source of credit (Berthoud, 1989).
Catalogues can offer a more flexible system of credit than commercial loans and Social Fund loans, allowing mothers sometimes to miss repayments when money is particularly tight.
Because catalogues are typically run by someone the mother knows, they can also link a mother to the networks beyond her home (Cohen, 1991a).
Little is yet known about the impact of the Social Fund scheme on the patterns of borrowing.
While the scheme makes some provision for grants, most of the payments are in the form of loans to those deemed eligible and able to meet the repayments.
Thus, rather than an additional source of money, the Social Fund represents an additional fixed cost and one, moreover, which is repaid by direct deductions from benefit.
The limited evidence suggests that knowledge about the new scheme — particularly among Asian claimants — can be limited (Craig, 1991; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a; Cohen 1991b).
For those with access to a Social Fund loan, it can prove a too-expensive form of debt.
While interest-free, the weekly repayments can be pitched above what parents can afford (Craig, 1991; Cohen, 1991b).
Rather than increasing claimants' economic independence, studies tracking the impact of the new social security regulations point to increasing debt and increasing dependency on kin (Craig, 1991; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a, 1990b; Cohen, 1991 a, 1991b).
Craig and Glendinning (1990b) point to a ‘transfer of dependency’, away from state support and towards relatives and friends.
As families face greater financial hardship, the health threats that poverty represents become starker.
As one Asian claimant interviewed in Cohen and Sadiq's study put it, ‘to borrow from someone to eat is very bad.
But when you're desperate you have to’(Cohen 1991b).
CONCLUSIONS
The chapter has focused on one group of women in poverty, scanning the research literature for information on mothers in low-income households.
Within the limits of the data, it has sought to identify the trends affecting the economic circumstances of low-income households, looking within claimant households for information on how Black and white mothers cope with family poverty.
A number of interlocking themes emerge from the chapter.
First, the  economic circumstances of poor families have worsened relative to the rest of the population in recent decades.
The early 1990s seem to be intensifying this pattern, with claimants reporting that each year is worse than the previous one and the hardest they have ever experienced (Cohen, 1991b).
Secondly, because of their position in the family economy, deepening poverty has a particular significance for women.
For most mothers, the experience of poverty is one which is structured by the need to protect the health as well as financial security of the family.
‘Budgeting’ is therefore not simply about money management: it is about health care management as well.
It represents the strategic space in which mothers work to resist the impact of poverty on individual health while trying, at the same time, to prevent their families slipping further into debt.
It is thus in their budgeting strategies that the conflict between health needs and financial survival is often most acutely felt.
Thirdly, the chapter has suggested that, in seeking to reconcile these conflicting objectives, mothers (and fathers) have to look to others for help.
They have looked to relatives, and to mothers in particular, to credit agencies and to the social security system.
Until the mid-1980s, the single payments scheme provided a particularly important resource for claimant households.
Studies conducted in the early and mid-1980s described how mothers weave informal and formal sources of support into their budgeting strategies in ways which, at least in part, served to protect the living standards of their families (Graham, 1986; Bradshaw and Holmes, 1989).
However, economic trends and social security changes appear to have undermined these strategies.
Studies conducted since April 1988 convey mothers' powerful sense that, as their poverty deepens, strategies which once gave some protection to their families are crumbling under the weight of increasing debt (Cohen, 1990, 1991 a, b; Craig and Glendinning, 1990a, 1990b; Craig, 1991).
In reviewing patterns of survival in lower income families, the chapter has drawn its evidence from an established research tradition which has paid little attention to gender.
It has drawn its evidence, too, from a more recent feminist literature which has rooted its perspectives in the lives of white women living with men.
Findings gleaned from these research literatures provide only partial insights into the issues confronting mothers caring in poverty.
These partial insights are likely to prove to be provisional insights, understandings in the process of revision.
They are likely to be revised as the circumstances of mothers' lives change through the 1990s.
The themes identified in the chapter are also likely to be re-worked as poverty research engages with feminist debates about diversity and difference.
Looking forward, I anticipate new understandings of how gender and poverty connect.
And I anticipate new perspectives on how these connections are reflected in the lives of mothers working for the health and survival of their families.