

Editorials
Prostate cancer: to screen or not to screen?
It's happening, but the case has not been made
Cancer of the prostate is a common and important health problem.
In 1978–82 in the European Community, with some geographical variations, the incidence amounted to 55 per 100000, mortality 22.6 per 100000, cumulative lifetime risk up to the age of 74 years 3.9%, and cumulative mortality 1.2%.
Of all cancers diagnosed in men, 13% are carcinomas of the prostate and 8.6% of all deaths due to cancer are caused by this disease.
This amounts to 84889 new cases and 35084 deaths a year.
Moreover, the incidence and mortality of prostate cancer are increasing faster than can be attributed simply to the increasing age of the population.
One response to these statistics has been increasing demands for screening programmes.
Is early detection possible and would early treatment help?
About 50–60% of all cases of prostate cancer in the European Community present with obvious metastases or are locally too advanced for potentially curative management.
Of those cancers that seem to be limited to the prostate clinically, 25–35% will have lymph node metastases.
Of the remainder, another 25–35% will be too advanced for curative treatment and will turn out to be unresectable if surgery is attempted.
Those patients who present with metastatic disease and are treated with maximal endocrine treatment will have a median survival of 36 months.
On the other hand, patients with locally confined but palpable disease who are treated by either radiotherapy or radical prostatectomy will show five year survival rates of 75–85% and will enjoy a life expectancy comparable to that of an aged matched male population.
Against this background, therefore, it seems we should try to detect prostate cancer early and to reduce mortality by aggressive early management.
This simplistic view is, however, untenable.
In two large and representative necropsy studies the cumulative incidence of prostate cancer over all ages was found to be 32.9% and 18.2%.
If we take the 32.9% found in Franks's study as representative and compare this prevalence figure with the yearly mortality in the European Community — 22.6/100000 — this suggests that only one in 1456 patients would die of prostate cancer.
This calculation, often used in arguments about screening for prostate cancer by those critical of screening and early detection measures.
Mortality does not, however, take lifetime risk into consideration.
It is more realistic to compare the cumulative incidence at necropsy with the cumulative risk of detection of clinical cancer and the risk of dying from it up to the age of 75.
For the European Community these figures are: 32.9%, 3.9%, and 1.2% respectively (a ratio of 27:3:1).
Thus if all cancers discovered at necropsy were identified clinically and treated then 26 out of 27 patients would be treated unnecessarily because these tumours do not represent a threat to their lives.
Even among men diagnosed as having clinical prostate cancer only one in three dies of the disease.
However, a cut off at age 75 gives an unrealistic picture because those patients diagnosed at the age of 70–75 (the highest incidence) will die at 75–80.
Across all age groups the ratio of incidence to mortality is two to one.
The discrepancy results from many competing causes of death affecting this largely elderly population and to a low and slow rate of progression of many of the lesions, especially those found at necropsy.
The challenge therefore is to separate the pussycats from the tigers and identify aggressive tumours.
Most (latent) carcinomas of the prostate found at necropsy are focal with a diameter of 1–2 mm and a volume of 0.005–0.05 ml.
Tumours of this size are not identified clinically except incidentally in surgical specimens removed because of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Half of such incidental tumours are focal.
The generally accepted policy is not to treat these tumours unless they are detected in a very young patient.
a Tumours detected by digital rectal examination, through raised values of prostate specific antigen, or by transrectal ultrasonography are usually 4–7 ml in volume, and truly focal lesions are diagnosed in less than 4% of cases.
The risk of identifying focal lesions on a large scale in any screening programme therefore seems negligible.
The overall detection rate of one time screening is about 2.5%.
Once a carcinoma has been detected should it be treated?
There are no valid randomised comparative studies of surveillance versus treatment.
Historical comparisons between the results of the few surveillance studies of locally confined disease with results of treatment studies are not conclusive.
Important prognostic factors such as T category, grade of differentiation, DNA ploidy, plasma values of prostate specific antigen, and age make comparisons difficult.
Accordingly there are no great differences in cancer related and overall mortality between treatment and surveillance studies.
This might be due to the ineffectiveness of treatment, to a slow rate of progression of tumours, to competing causes of death, or, most likely, to a combination of all these factors.
Radiotherapy and radical prostatectomy are effective in treating locally confined prostate cancer.
Clearly, therefore, some of the clinically detected locally confined tumours do not form an immediate threat to life.
These tumours are, however, part of the lifetime incidence quoted above (3.9%)— which suggests that overtreatment occurs in two of three patients.
The sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive values of all three diagnostic tests (digital rectal examination, prostate specific antigen, and transrectal ultrasonography) are too low to justify their use.
The use of each alone would result in many unnecessarily worried men and unwarranted prostate biopsies.
Unfortunately we do not yet know the accuracy of the three tests in combination.
The low specificity and positive predictive value is not, however, the only reason for not recommending the routine use of these tests.
Early detection regimens should not be applied unless benefit is shown in terms of reduced mortality from cancer in randomised prospective trials.
This is not the case.
There is, however, considerable pressure in many parts of the world to apply these methods as screening tests.
Pressure comes from patients but also from doctors.
In the United States the American Cancer Society and the American Urological Association recommend an annual rectal examination for men aged over 50.
A recent survey has shown that most American urologists will also test for prostate specific antigen in any patient in that age group who walks into their office.
In Germany population screening for prostate cancer has been a policy since 1978, and in Belgium an insurance supported annual check up includes a rectal examination.
Yet screening should not be recommended as public health policy until clear benefit in terms of reduced mortality from cancer can be shown in prospective screening studies.
Such studies need to be carried out urgently, but in the meantime it seems that both public and profession are ready to accept a considerable possibility of overtreatment.
Waiting times for outpatient appointments
Time for ideas to come out of academe and into the clinic
As the financial year 1992–3 draws to a close some hospitals are already asking their doctors to stop admitting patients for elective surgery until the new financial year.
This may limit the ability of these hospitals to meet their pledges of maximum inpatient waiting times of two years.
The fact that some providers, including NHS trusts, have run out of money is not solely a problem of inefficiency or poor resource management (although it may be in some cases); it is also a reflection of the diversity and complexity of the demand for health care, which makes it so unpredictable.
National guarantees cannot possibly take account of this variation, and standards can often only be met at a cost elsewhere.
One of the worries about the limit on inpatient waiting times was that instead of tackling long waiting it would merely shift delays and patients would end up waiting longer for outpatient consultations.
Inpatient waiting times have long been the focus of attention, but for many patients waiting to be admitted to hospital is just the tip of a ‘waiting iceberg.’
British patients wait longer than most of their European neighbours to be seen by a hospital doctor, and for many the wait is not just weeks but months — months that may potentially make a great difference to their condition, as German et al show (p 429).
Some women wait a year for a consultation with a gynaecologist.
The wait for an outpatient appointment is invisible.
The NHS still lacks a systematic method of collecting information about outpatient waiting.
The most commonly used statistic is average waiting time per specialty, but that figure varies with local definitions and is so skewed by interconsultant variation that it is virtually meaningless.
Some regions do not produce even these data.
Research too has overlooked outpatient waiting, concentrating instead on waits for inpatient procedures or general practitioner referral patterns.
The publication of Waiting times for first outpatient appointments in the NHS , the report of a workshop commissioned by the Department of Health, therefore provides a timely reminder of the issues and offers some worthwhile solutions.
Reliable, up to date information about outpatient waiting times is essential.
The report points out that most hospital computers could provide these data.
We also need meaningful alternatives to measuring performance by averages, and the report argues that looking at centiles (for example, the time within which 90% of patients were seen) may give a better view of the situation.
The report also urges greater communication, especially between consultants and general practitioners, not just about waiting times but about referral objectives and patient follow up too.
This is not the first time such suggestions have been made.
Indeed, followers of the waiting list debate may experience déjà vu when reading this report.
Back in 1978 the Department of Health and Social Security brought together clinicians, statisticians, health service researchers, economists, and civil servants for a similar seminar addressing waiting times for hospital treatment.
Among the papers presented was a description of the ‘operations room’ at the Ipswich Hospital (a Portakabin)— whose staff held, coordinated, and above all, integrated information about waiting lists and waiting times.
Wall charts and card indexes displayed data on inpatient waiting, new referrals, numbers waiting for an appointment, and waiting times for first non-urgent appointments as well as information on theatre availability and bed  state.
Information on inpatient and outpatient waiting times by specialty and consultant was sent, every three months, to local general practitioners, who had the additional benefit of a direct, ex–directory telephone link to the centre to make inquiries.
Other equally cogent suggestions for improvements in information systems and outpatient waiting list management have been voiced but have gone, it seems, unheard.
The NHS is modelled on the ‘patient patient.’
When it was born rationing was a part of everyday life and people queued quietly for health care just as in the war they had queued for food.
Consumerism, medical progress, and the Patient's Charter make delay less acceptable.
Patients are now being promised local charter standards for waiting times for first outpatient appointments and maximum clinic waiting times of 30 minutes.
The workshop participants rightly urge caution in setting national standards for outpatient waiting times, in favour of targets which could ‘allow differential rates of progress.’
Waiting in one area is contingent on activity in others.
The choices being made by purchasers and providers will have an impact, and in some places extra resources may be required.
That said, there are opportunities to reduce outpatient waiting times.
We have to find ways of managing waiting more effectively and keeping the customer (be it general practitioner or patient) informed.
On the research agenda we need to look at organisation, information, and communication, and it may be time, as this new report suggests, to debate and reconsider the role of outpatient clinics.
The ideas are there; now they must come out of academe and into the clinic.
Screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Not yet feasible
Last autumn the Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Association launched a campaign to raise awareness of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and, together with the Sports Council's National Sports Medicine Institute, announced a pilot screening programme to detect the condition among young athletes.
The association's aims are laudable: counselling and support, provision of information, promotion of increased awareness to both the public and doctors, and support for research.
Specific screening campaigns, however, should be based on a logical, not purely emotional, response to tragic cases.
Any screening programme needs to fulfil several clear conditions: the disease should be common (or important in its effects); there must be a reliable screening procedure to detect disease early; and treatment should be available to modify the outcome.
Does hypertrophic cardiomyopathy meet these conditions?
Certainly the condition has potentially devastating effects, as the tragic cases of sudden death in apparently fit young people described by the association illustrate.
However, the condition is not common.
The incidence is estimated to be 2.5/100000/year with a prevalence of 20/100000.
The condition is associated with a high incidence of sudden death (2.5% per year in adults and 6% in children and adolescents), and it is the commonest recognised cause of sudden death in competitive athletes.
Sudden death associated with exercise is a major cause of death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and as a result patients with the disease are recommended to avoid strenuous exercise.
Screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be done either by echocardiography or by genetic screening.
Echocardiography is superficially appealing since the technique is non-invasive and relatively cheap.
It is, however, fraught with problems.
Even in relatives of known patients there is heterogeneity in the echocardiographic findings.
No systematic data are available on the population prevalence of possible echocardiographic criteria for diagnosing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but one study has found asymmetric septal hypertrophy in 8% of a general population with heart disease other than hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Distinguishing between the hypertrophied heart of the athlete and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can be difficult, and the athletic population is a proposed target for screening.
An echo technique using analysis of diastolic flow patterns may be more sensitive.
The natural history of the disease also makes it unsuitable for screening by imaging techniques: a normal scan now is no guarantee of a normal heart in the future.
Electrocardiographic screening, while even cheaper and more widely available, is less specific and sensitive.
In about half of all cases hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is familial, the remaining cases presumably arising from sporadic mutation.
In those families with a clear genetic link hypertrophic cardiomyopathy seems in many to be inherited as a dominant gene with a high degree of penetrance.
The recent finding of mutations in the gene coding for β-myosin heavy chain in some families with the condition has both clarified the nature of the genetic defect and simultaneously raised the prospect of some form of genetic screening.
Of those families with documented familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, however, only about half have identifiable mutations related to the β-myosin heavy chain gene, and little is known of the incidence of genetic abnormalities in non-familial cases.
In familial cases without a gene defect regular echocardiograms are the only practicable screening method.
As yet there is little definitive evidence that treatment improves prognosis in patients with symptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
There are no data from prospective randomised controlled trials.
A retrospective study showed that amiodarone was associated with a better prognosis in patients with documented ventricular tachycardia on  electrocardiographic monitoring.
In another study a group of children with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at high risk of sudden death (history of loss of consciousness, family history of sudden death) who were given amiodarone had a better prognosis than an untreated group at low risk.
But the case for amiodarone is not proved, and it has been associated with a higher incidence of sudden death.
A high risk group can be identified on electrophysiological and haemodynamic grounds, and on the basis of a high risk family history.
There is, however, no evidence that any therapeutic intervention benefits patients with asymptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, let alone those with only the genetic trait or borderline asymmetric septal hypertrophy.
These are the subjects whom screening would detect in larger numbers than real cases.
Screening can have value in reassuring unaffected members of families where the genetic abnormality is known.
It can also be used to guide controlled trials of promising treatments in affected members.
Only once effective treatments are established, however — and this includes advice to avoid strenuous exercise — should generalised screening be advised.
Given the low incidence of the condition, lack of proved treatments, and low sensitivity and specificity of the available screening tests, widespread testing of the general population cannot yet be advised.
Screening of athletes would detect only a small proportion of affected individuals, though it may reduce the risks of sudden death on exertion for those few.
The major benefit would be in raising awareness of this potentially devastating condition.
On not listening to patients
Putting patients first must be more than a slogan
Last week a British psychiatrist was convicted of repeatedly sexually assaulting patients over a period of 12 years.
One of the most disturbing features of the case was how patients' protestations of abuse were ignored.
This may be the extreme consequence of a health service which, although it insists that it puts patients first, often doesn't do so at all.
Most of the patients assaulted by Dr Gordon Maden were young men with severe psychosocial problems — many of them drug addicts with a criminal record.
People within the health and social services had been aware for years of the patients' accusations, but nothing was done.
One patient who complained was told ‘to stop being silly.’
A colleague of Dr Maden's is quoted as saying that nothing was done because ‘nothing really terrible had happened…
The addicts weren't too cut up about it.
They had to deal with more degrading things in their lives.
And addicts are cunning, devious people.
To be honest, I felt they could quite easily manipulate him.’
This is a long way from the central idea of total quality management — that the patient or customer is king.
And homeless drug addicts must have as much right to the throne as Hampstead intellectuals.
Last week the House of Commons select committee on the ombudsman heard another story of neglect in the NHS.
The health ombudsman's officer was investigating a case of a terminally ill woman who was moved from her ward in the King Edward VII Hospital in Windsor every weekend for 10 weeks because the ward was closed at weekends to save money.
When the ombudsman reported on the case he said: ‘I cannot recall ever having encountered such a manifest and deplorable lack of regard by management for the welfare of a hospital inpatient.’
Last week's hearing was to examine why, when the ombudsman's officer was investigating the case, she was repeatedly interrupted by a nurse manager.
Once again the NHS ignored the principle of total quality management and instead of learning from its mistakes was desperate to deny them.
These are both extreme examples, but there are probably hundreds of examples every day within the NHS of patients being ignored and treated brusquely.
Trisha Greenhalgh describes two such cases on p 464.
In one case a woman waited three quarters of an hour with her child screaming with an open wound.
The doctor eventually arrived and grumbled.
‘We should probably see that again; bring it back next week.’
The ‘it’ was presumably the wound rather than the child, but the woman was upset that she had no time to ask if her child would be all right.
In the second case a woman asking questions about her leg ulcer was told, ‘Look, dear, you go away and make up your mind what you want done, and then we might be able to help you.’
When the NHS was founded, people were grateful to have access to free health care and accepted not being treated as equals.
But we should be further on in the long march from paternalism.
The NHS reforms and the Patient's Charter are designed to try and make the health service more customer or patient oriented, but structural reforms and exhortations will never be enough on their own.
Deeper, cultural changes are needed, and total quality management — with its insistence that only the patient can define quality — is the way forward.
This should be familiar to doctors.
The first lesson we learn at medical school is to listen to the patient.
Antibiotic prophylaxis of group B streptococcal infections
Rapid testing of women at risk may be worth while
The group B streptococcus is the commonest cause of non-iatrogenic bacterial sepsis in the first weeks of life in many centres in Britain, continental Europe, Australia, and northern America.
About two thirds of infections occur in the first five days and more than half of these are apparent at birth.
These early onset infections are characterised by pneumonia and septicaemia, accompanied in 30% of cases by meningitis, and have a mortality of about 20%.
The only practicable way of preventing group B streptococcal sepsis is chemoprophylaxis, though immunoprophylaxis may well be an alternative within a decade.
The options available are simple: withhold all chemoprophylaxis, offer it to everyone, or target a risk group.
There are difficulties with all three approaches.
A prerequisite for early onset group B streptococcal infection is maternal genital carriage during pregnancy.
Reports of genital carriage vary widely, but 20% to 25% of women are probably carriers in most countries.
Despite this, the incidence of the infection seems to vary widely.
In the United States about 1% of infants born to colonised mothers develop group B streptococcal infection; in northern Europe, including Britain, the incidence seems to be about 10 times lower.
Some European countries do have higher rates — for example, the incidence of group B streptococcal infection in Norway may be as high as 1.8 per 1000 live births.
In England, however, the low infection rate seems to have remained stable over the past decade as the number of cases reported each week to the Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre has not varied greatly.
The heaviness of carriage and the risk of neonatal septicaemia are directly related: infants who are heavily colonised have an increased risk of infection of at least 10-fold.
The risk of neonatal group B streptococcal sepsis is also significantly increased in combination with perinatal risk factors.
In a prospective study in Chicago 61 out of 32 384 newborn infants had group B streptococcal septicaemia (1.9 per 1000 live births).
When one or more of premature labour, membranes ruptured longer than 18 hours, or intrapartum fever were present the attack rate rose to 7.6 per 1000, while in the absence of risk factors it fell to 0.6 per 1000.
Fifteen of the 16 cases with a fatal outcome had one or more of these risk factors.
Giving antimicrobial agents to all pregnant women would reduce the incidence of neonatal sepsis due to group B streptococcus but would represent an unjustified overprescription of antibiotics.
Indeed, identifying all carriers of group B streptococcus during pregnancy by culture and giving prophylaxis during labour also represents a level of antibiotic administration which is hard to justify.
Some American centres identify carriers and then give prophylaxis during labour to those at increased risk.
This approach is based on the finding that intrapartum ampicillin significantly reduced neonatal group B streptococcal infections when given to carriers who had one or more additional risk factors.
Another reason for adopting this approach is that infants born to mothers who have no perinatal risk factors suffer from less severe infections and respond better to treatment.
Unfortunately genital carriage of group B streptococcus is unstable, so a swab taken during pregnancy does not necessarily predict carriage at delivery.
Combining vaginal and rectal swabs, together with the use of a selective culture medium, improves the predictive value (positive predictive value of 67% and a negative predictive value of 92%) but only to a level which makes mass screening viable in areas with high rates of infection.
In areas of lower incidence the cost-benefit ratio of this approach does not justify such large scale screening, and the risk of adverse effects outweighs the benefits.
The fact that group B streptococcal infections are rare in many British hospitals also means that clinicians have little incentive to initiate preventive measures.
An alternative approach to targeting that is particularly suited to low risk areas is offered by rapid tests: first identify the risk during labour and then test for carriage.
This avoids mass screening and means that fewer than 5% of women will receive intrapartum chemoprophylaxis.
Several new kits based on latex particle agglutination or enzyme immunoassay technology can yield results within 20 minutes, and these tests may be performed by the bedside.
None are as good as conventional culture, and though their specificity is good the sensitivity is relatively poor (up to 60% in total but up to 90% in heavy carriage).
Nevertheless, they seem to be sensitive enough to detect most heavy carriers.
In a retrospective analysis a latex agglutination test gave positive results in all mothers who delivered infants with group B streptococcal infections, and no neonatal deaths due to group B streptococcal infection occurred in the group testing negative.
The sensitivity of such kits may also improve.
The choice in Britain is therefore between withholding all chemoprophylaxis and using a rapid screening test.
Both decisions involve compromise, but we believe the latter approach should now be taken as it targets a sufficiently small  group and does not necessitate an expensive mass screening programme.
More sensitive conventional cultures should be used when possible.
We suggest the following: when an additional risk factor (preterm labour, prolonged rupture of membranes, or fever) is present conventional culture and a rapid test should be performed, and if either gives a positive, result antibiotics should be given during labour.
In some cases — for example, maternal pyrexia and prolonged rupture of membranes — the rapid test is unnecessary and antibiotics should be given regardless of carriage.
Rectal and vaginal cultures should be taken during a multiple pregnancy and if these yield group B streptococcus, prophylaxis should be started during labour.
If results are negative a rapid test should be performed during labour.
As there are no reliable data on mothers who have already had an infected child, they should receive chemoprophylaxis regardless of culture.
It can be argued that such mothers may not develop protective IgG antibodies and may continue to carry the same strain of group B streptococcus.
Ampicillin or amoxycillin remain the drugs of choice, although a first generation cephalosporin may be used in the case of ampicillin allergy.
Richard Doll at 80
Where there's smoke
Fifty years ago doctors had recognised that there was a growing epidemic of lung cancer in Western countries but had not identified its origins.
The most likely cause was thought to be diesel exhaust fumes.
The research published in the BMJ in 1950 by Sir Richard Doll and his colleague the statistician the late Sir Austin Bradford Hill solved the problem in a way that was both surprising and conclusive: they showed that cigarette smoking was responsible.
At that time smoking had not been linked with heart disease or even with bronchitis — it was seen as a harmless if foolish habit.
Doll and Bradford Hill had firm opinions on the responsibilities of research workers.
It was their job to get results, but they left it to others to act on the research findings.
They did not start campaigning against smoking; instead they set out, with popperian zeal, to do more research to challenge their own findings.
Their later work looked at the smoking habits and health of doctors and led to the crucial evidence that those who stopped smoking eventually lost their increased risk of lung cancer.
Sir Richard Doll's long and distinguished career as an epidemiologist is to be celebrated on 15 February by a meeting at the Royal Society hosted by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund.
He will himself present new data on the cohort of doctors he has been studying for the past 40 years, while his colleagues will review current knowledge on some of the many other topics that he has studied — including the effects on health of oral contraceptives, the parts played by radiation and by asbestos in various cancers, and patterns and trends in mortality.
A one day meeting cannot cover all the topics to which Doll has made contributions; his early work in clinical gastroenterology, for example, showed the uselessness of a bland diet for peptic ulcers and also helped establish the importance of basing decisions about treatment on the results of controlled clinical trials.
Readers of the BMJ will remember with pleasure Sir Richard's account of his experiences as a medical officer at Dunkirk, published at the time of the 50th anniversary of the retreat.
He went on to work in a hospital ship in the Mediterranean — a year which he later described as being one of the most enjoyable of his life.
He has not lost this capacity for pleasure; by his own account he continues to enjoy his research, and we wish him many more life enhancing years to come.
PAPERS
Trends in incidence of anal cancer in Denmark
Abstract
Objective —
To study long term trends in incidence of anal cancer in a well monitored, unselected population.
Design —
Descriptive epidemiological study based on data from the Danish Cancer Registry.
Setting —
Denmark, 1943–87.
Main outcome measures —
Time related changes in anal cancer incidence according to sex, age, birth cohort, urban or rural residence, and marital status.
Results —
The incidence of anal cancer remained fairly constant in the period 1943–57 and was similar for men and women, but it increased 1.5-fold among men and nearly tripled among women thereafter.
Among men the incidence increased from 0.25 per 100000 population (world standardised) in 1958–62 to 0.38 in 1983–7 (p=0.01) and among women from 0.28 to 0.74 (p<0.01).
The greatest increase was among residents of the capital (Copenhagen).
During 1943–87 age specific trends increased in young and middle aged men and in all age groups among women.
Men with anal cancer were significantly more likely throughout the study period to be unmarried than were patients with cancer of the colon (adjusted odds ratio 2.7; 95% confidence interval 2.0 to 3.6) and stomach (2.1; 1.5 to 2.8), but no association with marital status was found among women.
Conclusions —
The distribution and incidence of anal cancer have changed appreciably since around 1960, especially among women, which indicates important aetiological changes.
Changes in sexual behaviour may have facilitated the spread of a transmittable agent of aetiological importance.
It has recently been suggested that cigarette smoking promotes anal cancer, and this finds indirect support in the synchronism between changes in anal cancer incidence and heavy smoking behaviour.
Factors associated with homosexuality are likely to explain some of the cases among men.
Introduction
Over the past two decades a possible increase in the incidence of anal cancer has been noted, especially in American communities known for their high representation of homosexual men.
In previous studies excess risks were associated with a history of syphilis, anal condyloma, anal intercourse, homosexuality, and smoking, and Daling et al emphasised the association with sexual activity.
We have found evidence for a possible aetiological link between anal cancer and cervical cancer,; for which a sexually transmitted agent is strongly suspected to be involved.
An excess incidence of both anal and cervical cancer has been found among patients with iatrogenic immunodeficiencies related to transplantation.
Furthermore, observations from epicentres of the AIDS epidemic have suggested an increase in relation to the AIDS epidemic.
In line with this, we and others have recently described anal epithelial abnormalities in a substantial proportion of homosexual men with immunosuppression induced by HIV and have documented a strong association between these abnormalities and the presence of human papillomavirus.
So far, little has been published on the time trends for anal cancer, probably because of the limited access to long term data and those truly representative of populations.
Using a national cancer registry that started 50 years ago, we examined trends of anal cancer in Denmark.
Methods
The Danish Cancer Registry has recorded all cases of cancer in Denmark since 1943.
As the object of our study was to identify clues to the aetiology of epidermoid anal cancer, we included only invasive non-adenocarcinoma and non-melanoma anorectal cancers.
Because of changes in the use of coding systems in the Danish Cancer Registry, information about histology was obtained differently before and after 1978.
All original records on anal cancers coded according to a modified version of the seventh revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD7) from 1943 to 1977 were examined manually to avoid inclusion of adenocarcinomas (n=47) and melanomas (n=19).
Apart from 446 cancers notified and coded as anal cancers (172 men and 274 women), some anal epidermoid carcinomas were notified as rectal cancers.
To estimate the number of inappropriately notified anal cancers we examined all 2722 records of rectal cancers in 1950, 1960, and 1970 (8% of rectal cancers 1943–77) and found 20 cases of epidermoid histology (six in 1950 (0.8%), eight in 1960 (0.9%), and six in 1970 (0.6%); seven men and 13 women); thus we estimated that there were 244 misplaced cases of anal cancer (107 men and 137 women) in the entire period 1943–77.
A search for epidermoid perianal cancers among the 183 trunkal skin cancers notified in 1950, 1960, and 1970 resulted in no additional cases.
Since 1978 the Danish Cancer Registry has used the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O).
Topography codes used were 1541, 1542, 1543, and 1548, and histology codes were 80513–80523, 80703–80763, 80903–80953, and 81203–81243.
A total of 442 anal cancers were identified.
To validate the registry data with respect to coding errors we examined a sample of 1003 rectal cancers (9% of rectal cancers 1978–87) and found no misclassified anal cancers.
As perianal skin cancer is coded with skin cancer of the trunk we manually examined records for all trunkal skin cancers (topography code 1735) with a histology of squamous cell carcinoma or transitional cell carcinoma (n=221) and identified 57 epidermoid perianal cancers.
In addition, we examined a sample of 1744 records of skin cancers (33% of trunkal skin cancers 1978–87) to estimate the number (n=22) of other perianal skin cancers.
statistical methods
Age standardised incidence figures were calculated by direct standardisation, using as reference the world standard population.
Time trends and age at diagnosis were evaluated with a linear regression model by the method of least squares.
To study potential associations with marital status we used a nested case-control design in which all individually identified anal cancer patients served as cases (n=888) and all patients with colon cancer (n=54207) and stomach cancer (n=58198) diagnosed during 1943–87 were used as independent control groups.
Odds ratios were calculated and unconditional multivariate logistic regression models were used to adjust for potential confounding by age at diagnosis and calendar period.
Results
Overall, 888 cases (303 men and 585 women) of anal cancer were identified; these had information on all variables.
Another 266 anal cancers were calculated from the representative samples.
This led to an estimated total of 1154 anal cancers (422 men and 732 women) diagnosed in Denmark during 1943–87.
Overall incidence — For both sexes, highly significant increases in the incidence of anal cancer (fig 1) were seen during 1943–87 (p for trends<0.001).
In the early decades age adjusted incidence rates were similar for men and women (0.20–0.25 per 100000 person years).
Since around 1960 incidence rates nearly doubled in men and tripled in women, and most recent data (1983–7) give incidence rates of 0.38/100000 for men and 0.74/100000 for women (world standardised).
Age specific incidence according to period and birth cohort — Age specific incidence rates were compared for the periods 1943–62, 1963–77, and 1978–87.
These periods contained approximately equal numbers of cases.
In men the median age at diagnosis fell from 68 years in 1943–62 to 67 years in 1963–77 and 63 years in 1978–87 (p for trend<0.001).
Among women the median age at diagnosis remained fairly constant (67 years in 1943–62, 62 years in 1963–77, and 66 years in 1978–87).
Subsequently, the cancer cases were divided into three birth cohorts of approximately equal size, covering the periods 1863–1902, 1903–17, and 1918–87 (fig 2).
For men, the recent increase in incidence was seen almost  exclusively among the young and middle aged and was confined to men in the most recent birth cohort (those born since 1918).
For women, a pattern of gradual increase was seen by birth cohort in all age groups.
Incidence according to histology — The material was divided in three histological groups: 1 squamous cell carcinoma; 2 transitional cell carcinoma (including basal cell carcinoma); and 3 rare and unspecified histological types.
Squamous cell carcinomas constituted the overwhelming majority of reported histological results throughout the study period, and the overall rise in anal cancer incidence could be explained almost entirely by the increase in incidence of squamous cell carcinoma, with only a minor contribution from transitional cell cancers in the latest part of the study period (data not shown).
Incidence according to geography — The material was analysed geographically comparing incidence in the capital area (Copenhagen and its suburbs) to that in the rest of Denmark (fig 3).
In 1983–7 a quarter of the Danish population lived in the capital area.
Among men in the capital the incidence of anal cancer remained stable around 0.20–0.25 per 100000 until the late 1960s and increased appreciably hereafter.
During the following 20 years a threefold increase in incidence occurred among men in Copenhagen and its suburbs (p for trend=0.001).
Although at a much lower level, the incidence among men residing in the rest of Denmark also increased significantly, being 30–40% higher in 1983–7 than in 1943–7 (p for trend<0.001).
From having similar rates in the early part of the study period, men residing in the capital area in 1983–7 had approximately 2.5-fold more anal cancer than men living in the rest of Denmark.
Among women an appreciable increase was observed in both geographical areas during 1943–87 (p for trend<0.001).
The overall increase in incidence was greater in the capital area than in the rest of Denmark, and by 1983–7 this difference reached statistical significance (fig 3).
Incidence according to marital status — In total, 53 (17%) of 303 men with anal cancer, 1790 (7%) of 24420 men with colon cancer, and 2872 (9%) of 33248 men with stomach cancer had never married.
Among women the figures were 11% (64 of 585 anal cancer cases), 13% (3898 of 30787 colon cancer controls), and 12% (2859 of 24062 stomach cancer controls).
Men with anal cancer were significantly more likely never to have married than were men with colon or stomach cancer (table).
Odds ratios adjusted for age and period were 2.7 (95% confidence interval 2.0 to 3.6) for men and 1.0 (0.8 to 1.3) for women, with colon cancer as control and 2.1 (1.5 to 2.8) for men and 1.2 (0.9 to 1.6) for women with stomach cancer as control.
The significant difference observed among men was consistent and showed rather similar odds ratios throughout the study period.
Similarly, increased odds ratios were found for different age strata.
Discussion
We observed a profound change in the pattern of epidermoid anal cancer.
The increase in incidence started around 1960, at which time the difference in incidence between men and women also emerged.
By 1983–7 women had twice the incidence of men.
This finding is in line with a study from Sweden that also found a significant increase in incidence during the shorter period 1970–84, resulting in twice the incidence in women as in men.
About 1960 a dramatic difference in incidence emerged between residents of Copenhagen and residents of the rest of Denmark.
In Sweden the steepest increase was also observed in the most densely populated cities, indicating a strong association between certain urban lifestyle factors and anal cancer.
We made a considerable effort to adjust for problems related to potential misclassification of anal cancers.
A proportion of the cases from the period 1943–77 was derived as an estimate based on the rate of misplaced cancers and could, in theory, contribute importantly to the increasing trends of anal cancer.
However, the proportion of cases deriving from this estimate of misplaced anal cancers actually decreased during 1943–77.
Therefore, the observed trends were almost exclusively explained by the 400% increase during 1943–77 in cancers accurately coded as anal.
risk factors
In a recent study we found women with anal cancer to have a high risk of having had cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or invasive cervical cancer diagnosed previously.
This risk was at least as high as for patients with vulval cancer, indicating the potential for shared aetiological factors in these anogenital cancers.
A subsequent study of second cancers following anal and cervical cancer found further support for this aetiological link.
Sexual behaviour and infection with human papillomavirus seem important in addition to smoking in the genesis of cervical cancer and may also be involved in the aetiology of anal cancer.
In contrast with what has been reported for cervical cancer patients, the lifetime number of sexual partners has not been found of significant, independent importance in the few case-control studies of anal cancer published so far.
Although anal intercourse may play some part it does not seem to be a necessary activity for the development of anal cancer.
In the study by Holly et al 18% of female cases and 14% of controls reported ever having had anal intercourse.
In another case-control study Daling et al found a significant association between anal intercourse and anal cancer among men but not among women.
More Danish women than men practise receptive anal intercourse, and it seems this sexual practice has become more prevalent during the past decades.
This parallels our finding of a higher incidence among women, but does not necessarily imply a causative role of anal intercourse.
The increasing incidence of anal cancer we observed was apparent well before the sexual liberation in Denmark in the late 1960s and early 1970s, but the possibility exists that a potentially carcinogenic agent has become increasingly common in the anal region as a result of changing sexual habits.
Marital status was not important for the development of anal cancer among women.
However, throughout 1943–87 men who had never married were at increased risk of anal cancer compared with colon or stomach cancer, Previous studies have reported an association between men who had never married and anal cancer and argued that these findings reflected an association with male homosexuality.
Because of the early establishment of the Danish Cancer Registry we were able to show that this potential association dates back to at least the 1940s.
Therefore, the potential influence of male homosexuality on the development of anal cancer does not seem to be a new phenomenon.
Smoking as a risk factor for anal cancer has been suggested by Daling and others.
Indeed, changed smoking habits might explain some of the observed recent increase in anal cancer incidence.
The percentage of Danes who smoke has decreased, but that of heavy smokers (>515 cigarettes/day) rose between 1953 and 1991 from 6% to 22% in men and from 1% to 14% in women.
During this period there was a greater proportion of heavy smokers in the capital area, which is in agreement with the observed geographical distribution of patients in the present study.
The temporal proximity between changes in smoking habits and changes in anal cancer incidence supports a late stage or promotional role for smoking.
However, a simplistic model based exclusively on smoking habits fails to explain the higher incidence in women, since women do not smoke as heavily as men.
HIV infection has been mentioned as a possible cofactor in the increasing incidence of anal cancer in some areas of the United States.
Our study shows that the increase in anal cancer incidence started 20–25 years before the first AIDS patient in Denmark was diagnosed in 1981.
This, combined with the female predominance of this cancer, indicates that HIV is unlikely to have had any role so far in anal cancer development in Denmark.
However, evidence is accumulating that, as in cervical cancer, human papillomavirus may have a causal association with anal cancer.
Certainly the considerable rate of detection in the anal region of high risk types of human papillomavirus along with anal intraepithelial neoplasia in immunosuppressed homosexual men warrants further attention.
It seems plausible that the life expectancy of people infected with HIV is too short today for invasive anal cancer to develop, but better treatment regimens might one day change this picture.
summary
The increase in anal cancer incidence seen particularly  in women and residents of the capital argues in favour of recent important changes in behavioural or environmental factors of importance to the development of this cancer.
The contemporary changes in smoking habits and incidence of anal cancer would support the hypothesis that the anus is yet another site with increased susceptibility to carcinogens resulting from smoking.
Recent changes in sexual habits also coincide with the trends in anal cancer incidence and suggest, as with cervical cancer, that an infectious agent is involved.
Finally, men who had never married were found at increased risk since the 1940s, indicating a potential association with male homosexuality.
The relation of small head circumference and thinness at birth to death from cardiovascular disease in adult life
Abstract
Objective —
To determine how fetal growth is related to death from cardiovascular disease in adult life.
Design —
A follow up study of men born during 1907–24 whose birth weights, head circumferences, and other body measurements were recorded at birth.
Setting —
Sheffield, England.
Subjects —
1586 men born in the Jessop Hospital.
Main outcome measure—
Death from cardiovascular disease.
Results —
Standardised mortality ratios for cardiovascular disease fell from 119 in men who weighed 5.5 pounds (2495 g) or less at birth to 74 in men who weighed more than 8.5 pounds (3856 g).
The fall was significant for premature cardiovascular deaths up to 65 years of age (x≥5.0, p=0.02).
Standardised mortality ratios also fell with increasing head circumference (x≥4.6, p=0.03) and increasing ponderal index (weight/length)(x≥3.8, p=0.05; for premature deaths x≥6.0, p=0.01).
They were not related to the duration of gestation.
Among men for whom the ratio of placental weight to birth weight was in the highest fifths the standardised mortality ratio was 137.
Conclusion—
These findings show that reduced fetal growth is followed by increased mortality from cardiovascular disease.
They suggest that reduction in growth begins early in gestation.
They are further evidence that cardiovascular disease originates through programming of the body's structure, physiology, and metabolism by the environment during fetal life.
Maternal nutrition may have an important influence on programming.
Introduction
People who had low growth rates during fetal life and infancy have high death rates from ischaemic heart disease.
Among 5654 men born in six districts of Hertfordshire, England, during 1911–30 death rates from ischaemic heart disease fell progressively between those with the lowest and highest weights at 1 year.
The death rates in those who weighed 18 pounds (8165 g) or less at 1 year were almost three times greater  than in those who weighed 27 pounds (12247 g) or more.
Findings in women were similar (unpublished).
Combined death rates from all causes other than cardiovascular disease did not vary with weight at 1 year.
Death rates from cardiovascular disease fell with increasing birth weight but the relations were not as strong as with weight at 1 year.
Examination of men and women who still live in Hertfordshire has shown that lower birth weight and infant weight are associated with a higher incidence of known risk factors for cardiovascular disease, including raised blood pressure, plasma glucose and insulin concentrations, and plasma fibrinogen and factor VII concentrations.
These associations parallel those with death rates from cardiovascular disease in that high early weight is associated with a low incidence of each risk factor.
The associations are strong and graded and are independent of social class, either at birth or currently, and of influences in adult lifestyle such as smoking and alcohol consumption.
A striking feature of the findings is that different risk factors are related to different patterns of early growth.
Blood pressure is related to birth weight but not independently to weight at 1 year.
Plasma fibrinogen concentrations are related to weight at 1 year but not independently to birth weight.
These findings are evidence that the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease is programmed during the period of rapid growth in early life.
The term programming is used for long term changes in the body's structure, physiology, or metabolism brought about by environmental influences acting at critical stages of early life.
Animal experiments provide numerous examples of programming which occurs because the organs and systems of the body mature during periods of rapid growth before and immediately after birth.
There are critical windows of time during which maturation must be achieved; failure of maturation is to some extent irrecoverable.
Birth weight, the only measurement recorded at birth in Hertfordshire, is a crude measure of fetal growth which summates head size, body length, and fatness.
Blood pressure in children and adults is more strongly predicted by thinness at birth and a high ratio of placental weight to birth weight than by birth weight alone.
Measurement of head size and length at birth gives an insight into the timing of growth retardation during intrauterine life.
Furthermore, in the absence of data on duration of gestation, the consequences of retarded fetal growth cannot be distinguished from those of premature birth.
We have therefore followed up a group of men born before 1925 in a hospital in Sheffield where routine measurements of the baby at birth included head circumference, body length, and duration of gestation.
Subjects and methods
From 1907 onwards a standardised record was kept for each woman admitted to the labour ward at the Jessop Hospital, Sheffield, England.
The record contained details of the mother's previous pregnancies and external measurements of her pelvis, including the conjugate diameter (distance between the symphysis pubis and the fifth lumbar vertebra).
The baby's birth weight, placental weight, length from crown to heel, head circumference, and biparietal and occipitofrontal diameters were also recorded.
Up to 1922 weights were measured in pounds (1 lb=454 g: 1 lb=16 ounces); thereafter some were recorded in grams.
Lengths, head circumferences and diameters were measured in inches (1 inch=2.54 cm).
Measurements were often rounded, and we therefore preserved the units as pounds and inches and converted weights in grams to pounds.
In 91% of the records the mother's conjugate diameter was measured in centimetres: we preserved these units.
Most girls born 70 and more years ago cannot be traced because of change of name at marriage.
We therefore studied only boys.
A total of 2421 singleton boys were born alive during 1907–24 and had their birth weight and either head circumference or both head diameters recorded.
Overall 1586 (66%) were traced through the NHS central registry at Southport, and 693 had died between 1 January 1951 and 31 December 1990.
The average birth weight of men who were not traced was 0.2 pounds (91 g) less than those who were traced.
We analysed cause of death in relation to measurements at birth.
The numbers of deaths were compared with those expected from national rates for men of corresponding age and year of birth.
Death rates were expressed as standardised mortality ratios, with the national average as 100.
Cardiovascular disease was defined by ICD (ninth revision) codes 390–459.
The social class for all except 27 of the men who died could be derived from the occupation recorded on the death certificate.
Head circumference had not been recorded for 137 men, but this could be estimated from the two head diameters by using the regression equation derived from the 1042 records which included the circumference and both diameters.
Results
A total of 316 of the deaths in the 1586 men were due to cardiovascular disease, 235 being certified as due to ischaemic heart disease, 49 to stroke, and 32 to other circulatory diseases.
The overall death rate from cardiovascular disease was close to the national average, the standardised mortality ratio being 94.
The average birth weight of the men was 7.3 pounds (3311 g).
Table I shows that standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease fell with increasing birth weight (χ 2 =3.5, p=0.06).
There was no similar trend for other causes of death.
Table I also shows the trends in deaths at ages up to 65 years.
The fall with increasing birth weight was significant (χ 2 =5.0, p=0.02).
The average head circumference at birth was 13.9 inches (35.3 cm).
Standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease fell with increasing head  circumference (χ 2 =4.6, p=0.03)(table I).
Deaths from other causes, however, showed an opposite trend (χ 2 =2.6, p=0.11); men with the largest head circumferences having the highest standardised mortality ratios.
The trend with head circumference was apparent for deaths before 65 years, though not significant (χ 2 =3.1, p=0.08).
Crown-heel length at birth was recorded for 1454 men.
The average was 20.3 inches (51.6 cm).
There were no trends in death from cardiovascular or non-cardiovascular disease with length, though men whose length at birth was 20 inches (50.8 cm) or less had a standardised mortality ratio of 103 from cardiovascular disease, compared with 93 in the remainder.
We calculated the ponderal index at birth as birth weight (ounces) /length (inches).
Table I shows that standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease fell with increasing ponderal index (χ 2 =3.8, p=0.05).
There was no similar trend for other causes of death.
Deaths from all causes combined also fell with increasing ponderal index.
The trend with ponderal index was apparent for deaths before 65 years and was significant (χ 2 =6.0, p=0.01).
When the data were divided according to head circumference and ponderal index (table II) the highest standardised mortality ratio for cardiovascular disease (119) was in men who had both small head circumference and low ponderal index at birth.
Conversely the lowest mortality ratio (80) was in those with a large head circumference and high ponderal index.
The corresponding figures for deaths before 65 years were 120 and 75.
Placental weight was recorded for 1320 men.
The average was 1.3 pounds (590 g).
Standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease showed no trend with placental weight.
The highest standardised mortality ratio (119), however, was in men for whom the placental weights were above 1.25 pounds (567 g) and who had a birth weight of 6.5 pounds (2948 g) or less.
Table III shows standardised mortality ratios according to the ratio of placental weight to birth weight.
The highest standardised mortality ratio for cardiovascular disease (137, 95% confidence interval 108 to 172) was in men with the highest placental weight/birth weight ratio.
These men also had the highest standardised mortality ratio for all causes of death.
The comparable figure for deaths before 65 years was 146 (105 to 198).
In the same way as in previous analyses we divided the men according to whether or not the placental weight was above 1.25 pounds (567 g).
Among men in the high placental weight group there was a significant trend of increasing standardised mortality ratios for cardiovascular disease with increasing placental weight to birth weight ratio.
Length of gestation was recorded for 822 men.
Table III shows that standardised mortality ratios for cardiovascular disease were not related to duration of gestation, though the highest ratio, 107, was in men born at 37 weeks or less.
Standardised mortality ratios for other causes of death were higher in babies born after 40 weeks, being 135 (104 to 172) compared with 92 (75 to 110) in men born at or before term.
Of the 66 deaths from other causes in men born after term, 34 were from malignant neoplasms.
Fifty of the deaths were in men whose head circumference at birth was 14 inches (35.6 cm) or more.
The standardised mortality ratio in these men was 159 (118 to 209) compared with 91 (52 to 148) in the other men born after term.
The number of previous pregnancies was recorded for all except 23 of the mothers; 33% were primiparous.
There were no trends in standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease or other causes with the number of previous pregnancies.
The external conjugate diameter of the pelvis of 1096 mothers was recorded.
The mean was 18.7 cm.
Standardised mortality ratios from cardiovascular disease fell from 116 to 91 as the external conjugate diameter increased from 17 cm or less to 20 cm and over.
The babies' head circumferences correlated strongly with the external conjugate diameters, increasing by 0.17 inches (0.10 to 0.24) for each centimetre increase in external conjugate diameter.
The trend in cardiovascular mortality with external conjugate was abolished by allowing for head circumference.
In contrast the trend in cardiovascular mortality with head circumference (table I) remained significant after allowing for external conjugate diameter.
Among the men who died mean birth weight, head circumference, and ponderal index were lowest in those in social classes IV and V (table IV), though the differences were not significant.
Discussion
We traced a group of men born in a maternity hospital in Sheffield before 1925 and related size at birth to subsequent death rates from cardiovascular disease.
Cardiovascular death rates fell progressively with increasing birth weight.
The fall was significant for deaths before the age of 65 years.
We found a similar trend in a previous study in Hertfordshire, the only other study in which a group of people has been traced from birth to death.
In Hertfordshire weight was the only measurement recorded at birth.
The Sheffield records were unusually detailed.
The study shows that men who had a small head circumference or  were thin at birth, or both, had higher rates of cardiovascular death than those who had a large head circumference or were fat.
Cardiovascular mortality was not related to the duration of gestation except for a small increase in death rates in men born prematurely.
The associations with head circumference and thinness must therefore reflect reduced fetal growth.
This is consistent with studies of cardiovascular risk factors in men and women aged 50 years in Preston.
Birth measurements including weight, head circumference, length, and placental weight predicted blood pressure and plasma glucose, insulin, and fibrinogen concentrations independently of duration of gestation.
Our study population comprised men born in one maternity hospital during 1907–24.
We traced 66% of the singleton boys initially included in the study.
Those who were not traced differed slightly from those who were: their birth weight was 0.2 pounds (91 g) less, for example.
Many of them must have died in infancy and childhood, but we have no data on deaths before 1951.
The standardised mortality ratio from all causes of death was 101 in the study population, similar to that of 104 for the whole population of Sheffield during 1968–78.
Our analysis was based on internal comparisons, and selection bias would be introduced only if the relation of head circumference and ponderal index to death from cardiovascular disease differed in those who were or were not traced.
This is unlikely.
We have information on social class only for men who died.
Those in social class IV and V had lower birth weight, head circumference, and ponderal index.
The differences, however, were small.
We do not think that reduced fetal growth is associated with death from cardiovascular disease merely through an association with adverse influences acting in the adult lives of people of low social class.
This conclusion is strongly supported by our studies of men and women in Hertfordshire and Preston in which reduced fetal growth was associated with high blood pressure, impaired glucose tolerance, and raised plasma fibrinogen and factor VII concentrations in each social class and at each level of cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, and obesity.
The studies in Preston have shown that babies who have low birth weight in relation to duration of gestation, who have small head circumference, and are thin at birth tend as adults to develop high blood pressure, impaired glucose tolerance, and syndrome X — a combination of hypertension, non-insulin dependent diabetes, disordered lipids, hyperinsulinaemia, obesity, and abdominal fatness.
This pattern of impaired fetal growth has now been shown to be linked to cardiovascular disease.
Thinness at birth is a particularly strong predictor of death before 65 years of age.
In addition, men in Sheffield who were short at birth, with a birth length of 20 inches (50.8 cm) or less, also had higher cardiovascular death rates, though the difference was small.
In the Preston studies shortness at birth was associated with hypertension and raised plasma fibrinogen concentrations in adult life.
The differences in cardiovascular mortality associated with head circumference and thinness at birth are not as large as those associated with weight at 1 year.
In Hertfordshire there were threefold differences in death rates from ischaemic heart disease between men with the lowest and highest weights at 1.
We think there may be at least two explanations for this.
Firstly, programming of cardiovascular disease may continue during infancy.
Plasma fibrinogen concentrations, for example, are related to weight at 1 year but not independently to birth weight.
Plasma lipid concentrations and death rates from ischaemic heart disease vary according to the method of infant feeding.
Secondly, the range of birth weights is less than the range of infant weights, and head circumference and length at birth are known to be inaccurate measurements.
The strength of associations with birth measurements may therefore be reduced.
Furthermore, body measurements at birth are only proxies for variables more closely related to the processes that underlie programming.
Data on cardiovascular disease from death certificates are known to be inaccurate.
Consistent with this, birth weight is more strongly associated with death before 65 years than with death at all ages.
Studies of cardiovascular risk factors show much larger trends than those with cardiovascular deaths.
The relative risk of impaired glucose tolerance and diabetes, for example, was six times higher in men with birth weights of 5.5 pounds (2495 g) or less compared with those with birth weights of more than 9.5 pounds (4309 g).
We suggest that small head circumference and thinness at birth reflect patterns of fetal growth associated with changes in certain tissues, including blood vessels and the endocrine pancreas.
These changes programme blood pressure, glucose and insulin metabolism, and cardiovascular disease in adult life.
The nature of the changes, which could include modification of gene expression, permanent reduction in cell numbers, or modification of organ structure, is unknown.
This study does, however, give an insight into the influences which reduce fetal growth and their timing in gestation.
Cardiovascular death rates were high in men with a high ratio of placental weight to birth weight.
In the Preston studies men and women who had had a high ratio of placental weight to birth weight had raised blood pressure, higher rates of impaired glucose tolerance, and raised plasma fibrinogen concentrations.
Disproportionately large placental size may be a consequence of maternal undernutrition.
It occurs in babies whose mothers were anaemic during pregnancy.
It can be produced in sheep by reducing the food intake of ewes in early pregnancy.
We suggest that maternal undernutrition, by constraining fetal growth, may programme cardiovascular disease.
Fetal growth is actively constrained by maternal size.
In this study the external conjugate diameter of the mother's pelvis was strongly related to the baby's size, including head circumference.
The external conjugate was not, however, related to cardiovascular mortality after adjusting for head circumference whereas the trend in cardiovascular mortality with head circumference remained significant after allowing for the external conjugate diameter.
In Preston, mothers' external conjugate diameters were similarly unrelated to blood pressure after allowing for birth weight and placental weight.
This suggests that the mechanisms which constrain fetal growth to prevent maternal-fetal disproportion do not effect long term programming of cardiovascular disease.
A recent study showed that babies born with smaller head circumferences and lower ponderal indices had a higher fetal heart rate at 18 weeks.
This was only partly explained by earlier births of babies with higher heart rates.
The faster heart rates may therefore have resulted from the babies already being small in mid-gestation.
Our findings reveal for the first time death rates of babies born before term who survive into late adult life, although duration of gestation was recorded for only half of the men.
Among those born before 38 weeks death rates from cardiovascular disease were a little higher but death rates from all causes were around average.
This may give limited reassurance that the increasing numbers of preterm babies kept alive in neonatal units will not have greatly increased death rates as adults.
By contrast babies born after 40  weeks' gestation had raised death rates from non-cardiovascular causes, reflected in higher rates from all causes combined.
This was unexpected and requires confirmation by continued follow up and other studies now in progress.
The babies born after term had larger head size, which was also associated with higher rates of disease other than cardiovascular disease.
In conclusion, this study shows for the first time that reduced fetal growth is followed by higher death rates from cardiovascular disease in adult life.
Bodily proportions at birth suggest that the growth reduction began early in gestation.
We suggest that this is further evidence that cardiovascular disease originates through programming in fetal life and infancy.
Maternal nutrition may be an important influence on programming.
Sexually transmitted diseases and HIV-1 infection among homosexual men in England and Wales
Abstract
Objective —
To examine surveillance data for evidence of changing sexual behaviour and continuing transmission of HIV-1 among men who have sex with men.
Design —
Analytic study of surveillance data on sexually transmitted diseases.
Setting —
England and Wales.
Main outcome measures —
Number of cases of rectal gonorrhoea and newly diagnosed infection in homosexual men.
Results —
New cases of gonorrhoea among men attending genitourinary medicine clinics increased by 7.7% in 1989 and by 4.2% in 1990.
Reports of rectal isolates of Neisseria gonorrhoeae also rose and the male to female ratio for patients with rectal gonorrhoea changed from 0.3:1 during 1988–9 to 2.6:1 in 1990–1.
Although the overall number of cases of acute hepatitis B fell during 1988–91, 81 and 82 homosexual men were infected in 1990 and 1991 respectively compared with 50 and 42 in 1988 and 1989. 1526 men had HIV-1 infection diagnosed in 1991, the largest number since 1987.
Twenty eight of the 97 (29%) men who seroconverted between January 1989 and December 1991 were aged less than 25.
The proportion of men aged 15–19 who were found to be infected with HIV-1 at their first test increased from an average of 2.4% up to 1990 to 4.7% in the first nine months of 1991.
The prevalence of HIV inspection in men under 25 attending genitourinary medicine clinics in London was 17% compared with 7.8% outside London.
Conclusion—
Unsafe sexual behaviour and HIV transmissions have increased among homosexual men after a period of decline.
Recent HIV transmissions may disproportionately affect younger men.
Introduction
A decline in the incidence of sexually transmitted diseases in men who have sex with men was well documented in the mid-1980s in various developed countries, including the Netherlands, the United States, and Britain.
Those undertaking health promotion saw this as evidence that sexual behaviour could be changed and that educational messages about safer sex had been heeded by homosexual men.
In Britain, however, homosexual men infected with HIV-1 still contracted gonorrhoea, which implied continued participation in unprotected sexual intercourse.
In 1989 increases in the incidence of sexually transmitted disease in homosexual men in the United States suggested that high risk sexual behaviour between men was increasing after a period of decline.
Increases in sexually transmitted diseases in homosexual men were also reported in Amsterdam and Australia.
In 1990 increases in rectal gonorrhoea in men were noted in several genitourinary medicine clinics in London and elsewhere in Britain.
Repeat testing  of initially seronegative homosexual men showed continuing transmission of HIV-1 infection and, in London, the incidence of infection increased in 1990–1 compared with earlier years.
Behavioural data from a cohort study supported the view that an increase in high risk sexual behaviour between men occurred in 1989–90.
Methods
We examined surveillance data for England and Wales on sexually transmitted diseases.
Trends in infections likely to have been transmitted by unprotected sexual intercourse between men were analysed for indications of changes in sexual behaviour.
We reviewed the quarterly KC60 returns from all genitourinary medicine clinics in England and Wales to determine the number of attenders for each diagnosis, sex, and (for some diagnoses) sexual orientation and age group.
Laboratory reports of rectal isolates of Neisseria gonorrhoeae , cases of acute hepatitis B virus infection, and newly diagnosed HIV-1 infection were analysed.
Most of the reports of N gonorrhoeae infection included the sex of the patient but not sexual orientation.
For a small proportion of patients infected with HIV-1 the year and month of a previous negative HIV-1 test result had been established and we examined the characteristics of these seroconverters.
As part of a study of HIV testing 18 laboratories provided aggregate data, by exposure category, on all persons tested.
We used these data to calculate the annual age specific prevalence of HIV-1 infection at initial HIV-1 testing among homosexual men.
The unlinked anonymous serosurvey of people attending genitourinary medicine clinics provided further data on the age specific prevalence of HIV infection and acute sexually transmitted disease among homosexual men.
Patient diagnosis (KC60 code) is collected in this survey and grouped into broad categories including acute sexually transmitted diseases (such as gonorrhoea or a first attack of genital herpes).
We analysed data, where appropriate, by standard χ 2 tests and linear modelling on a log scale assuming the observed frequencies to be distributed as Poisson variables.
Results
From 1981 to 1988 the number of attendances at a genitourinary medicine clinic for uncomplicated postpubertal gonorrhoea fell consistently (fig 1 (top)).
Attendances then began to increase with a 7.7% rise for men in 1989 and a further rise of 4.2% in 1990 (χ 2 =9495, df=8; p=0).
Rises in numbers of people with gonorrhoea were observed within and outside the Thames regions in 1989 (J Hilton, personal communication).
Although the number of cases of infectious syphilis seen in genitourinary medicine clinics has fallen since 1981, the rate of fall slowed in 1988 (fig 1 (bottom)).
A Poisson regression test for non-linearity in the separate trends gave χ 2 values of 408 with 16 degrees of freedom (p = <0.001).
The annual total of laboratory reports of isolates of N gonorrhoeae in rectal specimens in men fell consistently between 1982 and 1989, with the exception of 1985.
In 1990 and 1991, however, reports of isolates from men increased fivefold (fig 2).
From 1986 to 1989 most rectal isolates were from women, but in 1990 and 1991 reports from men outnumbered those from women by more than 2.5 to 1.
The trends over time were significantly different in the two sexes (χ 2 =275, df=9; p = <0.0001) and significantly non-linear (χ 2 =514, df=16; p = <0.0001).
The number of cases of acute hepatitis B diagnosed each year in men aged 15 years or over increased during the early 1980s, and reached a peak of 1285 in 1984.
Annual numbers fell rapidly from 1985 to 1987 and more gradually thereafter (table I).
The trend was significantly non-linear (χ 2 = 506.3, df=8; p = <0.0001).
Only 343 cases were diagnosed and reported in 1991 (provisional data) in men aged 15 years or over, fewer than in any of the preceding 10 years.
More than 80 cases in homosexual men were reported in both 1990 and 1991, double the 42 cases reported in 1989 and higher than the number reported in any year since 1986.
This trend was also significantly non-linear (χ 2 = 74, df = 8; p = <0.0001).
hiv infection
For 1988 the number of reports of newly diagnosed HIV-1 infection in men who had had sex with men (1062) was the lowest in any year since the widespread introduction of testing.
After 1988 it increased each year to 1526 in 1991 (table II).
The median age of homosexual men with recently diagnosed HIV-1 infection did not increase, and both the number and the proportion of HIV-1 infections diagnosed in younger homosexual men remained similar over time (table II).
In 1990 and 1991, 358 (12%) cases were in men aged 20–24 and 53 (2%) in men aged 19 years or under.
Among the two thirds for whom information on symptoms was supplied at the time of diagnosis of HIV-1 infection, the proportion asymptomatic remained relatively constant: 53% in 1986–7, 46% in 1988–9, and 52% in 1990–1.
A previous negative test result was recorded for 307 of the homosexual men infected with HIV (table III).
Rolling totals were calculated for successive three year periods: in 1985–7 there were 91 homosexual men who had a negative test followed by a positive one; in 1986–8 there were 58 such men; in 1987–9 there were 60; in 1988–90 there were 84; and in 1989–91 there were 97 (table III).
Of the 97 men known to have seroconverted during 1989–91 28 (29%) were aged under 25.
Among asymptomatic homosexual men newly diagnosed as infected with HIV during 1989–91 the proportion under 25 was 17% (271 of 1570).
During 1987 to 1991, 958 homosexual men aged 19  years or under had, for clinical purposes, had a first HIV test at one of the 18 laboratories participating in the study of HIV testing.
Between 149 and 194 were tested annually from 1987 to 1990 and the prevalence of HIV-1 infection ranged from 2.1% to 2.7%.
However, in 1991, 12 (4.7%) of the 257 men tested were infected.
This is significantly more than should  occur by chance if the true risk were equal to the largest previously observed proportion (p=0.04).
Data from the unlinked anonymous genitourinary medicine clinic serosurvey showed that in 1990, 343 of 1391 (25%) samples from non-drug injecting homosexual men in two London clinics were infected with HIV-1 compared with only 20 of 356 (5.6%) from men in four clinics outside London (χ 2 = 63.5, df=1; p = <0.0001).
The prevalence of HIV-1 infection recorded in those aged less than 25 years was 17% (52/305) among those tested in London and 7.8% (8/103) among those tested outside London ().
Of the 363 homosexual men who tested HIV-1 positive, 80 (22%) had an acute sexually transmitted disease diagnosed at the time blood was collected for investigation of syphilis.
Discussion
The extent to which isolation of N gonorrhoeae is indicative of risk of HIV-1 infection is debatable, but it is reasonable to regard rectal gonorrhoea as a marker for high risk homosexual behaviour.
Thus the increase in gonorrhoea in men attending genitourinary medicine clinics in 1989 and 1990 and the increase in rectal isolates of N gonorrhoeae in men suggest that the behaviour associated with risk of HIV-1 transmission among homosexual men has also increased.
The rise in the number of rectal isolates of N gonorrhoeae in men reported for England and Wales in 1990 is not attributable to an increase in the number of reporting laboratories, and the marked shift in the male to female ratio of cases from which these isolates were obtained is unlikely to be caused by changes in the catchment population.
Although further research would be necessary to establish the extent to which sexual practices which limit the risk of HIV transmission overlap with those which would prevent transmission of hepatitis B virus, the rise in hepatitis B infection reported in homosexual men is also suggestive of increased unsafe sex in this group.
An effective vaccine is available against hepatitis B and thus increasing incidence of acute hepatitis B infection reflects the failure of health care providers to deliver hepatitis B vaccine to those at risk.
A postal survey of genitourinary medicine clinics in 1988 showed that a third offered hepatitis B vaccine to clinic attenders, and a recent audit report from a London genitourinary medicine clinic estimated that vaccine was delivered successfully to only a quarter of susceptible new homosexual patients.
At present, it seems, acute hepatitis B in homosexual men is a more effective marker of unsafe sex than it should be.
New reports of HIV infection in men who have sex with men disproportionately could relate to people who were infected before the implementation of health education programmes but delayed having a test.
If this was the case new reports would be expected to include fewer recent infections and the average age of people with newly diagnosed HIV infection and the proportion symptomatic at the time of the HIV-1 test would rise.
As neither has happened it is probable that the incidence of HIV-1 infection among homosexual men has not fallen.
The 5.6% annual infection rate among initially uninfected homosexual men in London who had repeat HIV-1 tests during 1990–1 and the presence of HIV-1 infection in one in 20 homosexual men aged 19 years or under who were first tested during 1990–1 are further indications that transmissions continue.
Transmission of infection is occurring both among the young, who may not have been fully exposed to the health education of the mid-1980s, and in older age groups, who may have changed to unsafe sex practices after previously heeding health advice.
Two thirds of recognised seroconversions were in men aged 25 years or over, and the increase in sexually transmitted diseases was not confined to young men.
As the prevalence of HIV-1 infection among homosexual men has risen so the risk of exposure to HIV-1 with each unsafe sexual encounter will have increased.
Moreover, the data from the unlinked anonymous survey shows that some men who knew they were infected with HIV-1 still acquired acute sexually transmitted diseases.
If they acquired these infections from HIV negative partners, those partners will have been at risk of HIV infection.
The continuation of high risk behaviour in this group, who would have been counselled about safe sex when tested for HIV-1 infection, is of particular concern, as are seroconversions in those known to have had a negative test result.
In the first case counselling has failed to protect others and in the second it has failed to protect the person counselled.
The data examined in this study give a consistent picture of behaviour changes among homosexual men which have led to a continuance of HIV transmission in this group in England and Wales.
Because of the high background prevalence of HIV-1 infection risks to homosexual men practising unsafe sex are greatest in London.
Health promotion for all men who have sex with men is important, but safe sex information aimed at young homosexual men and homosexual men in London needs special emphasis.
Dangers of long waiting times for outpatient appointments at a urology clinic
Great pressure has recently been put on clinicians by hospital managers and politicians to reduce waiting times.
Unfortunately, the emphasis of current initiatives on waiting lists tends to be on reducing the wait for surgery rather than the waiting time for an appointment at an outpatient clinic.
We report the potential dangers of long waiting times for a routine outpatient appointment at a urology clinic.
Patients, methods, and results
Over the past three years 55 patients with symptoms of bladder outflow obstruction were recruited for two clinical trials.
These patients were recruited from the waiting list of new patients which comprised patients who had been classified as having routine conditions by the consultant on the basis of the information in the referral letter.
Recruitment into the trials depended on patients satisfying the entry criteria and giving their informed consent.
The protocols for the trials were approved by the ethical committee.
The average wait for these patients who were seen outside the normal times of outpatient clinics, was 13 (range 3–104) weeks.
All patients gave a full medical history and had a full examination, and routine investigations for bladder outflow obstruction were performed.
One trial (25 patients) also required transrectal ultrasonography of the prostate and a serological test for prostate specific antigen whereas the other (30 patients) required further investigation only if malignancy was suspected clinically.
During our investigation of these patients, we diagnosed seven new cases of cancer of the prostate.
These were detected by rectal examination (five), a raised concentration of prostate specific antigen (one), and transrectal ultrasonography (one).
Four of these cancers were well or moderately well differentiated, and five of the six bone scans obtained yielded negative results.
A superficial cancer of the bladder was detected during transrectal ultrasonography of the prostate and a caecal cancer was found on barium enema examination in a patient with iron deficiency anaemia.
In four patients a history of haematuria was elicited for the first time and was investigated.
Ultrasonography also detected one case of chronic retention of urine with overflow.
Comment
This study highlights the prevalence of associated disease in patients who were classed as having routine bladder outflow obstruction.
The average wait for a routine appointment at our department's outpatient clinic was eight months, with a further wait of two years for a prostatectomy.
A random poll of 16 departments of urology was conducted by means of a telephone conversation with each consultant's secretary or the clerk responsible for admissions.
The average waiting time for a routine appointment in a urological outpatient clinic was 7.4 (range 3–36) months and for a non-urgent prostatectomy 21 (9–36) months, and the situation in Wales was slightly worse than in the United Kingdom as a whole.
Opinion is divided about the value of screening for prostatic cancer and about the management of localised disease.
Since 84% of apparently localised cancers of the prostate progress if left untreated some centres advocate radical prostatectomy for early cancer.
If long term follow up shows improved survival in patients treated by radical surgery then early detection of the tumour by screening would be desirable, and the most useful method of detection is rectal examination by a trained urologist.
Since most of the prostatic cancers detected in this study had not metastasised to bone and were well or moderately well differentiated these patients might have suffered if detection had been delayed.
A long wait for a patient with bladder outflow obstruction for a specialist opinion is both undesirable and unacceptable.
The high prevalence of associated disease in these patients should encourage and justify efforts to reduce waiting times for appointments at outpatient clinics.
Effect of long term tamoxifen treatment on bone turnover in women with breast cancer
The non-steroidal antioestrogen tamoxifen is widely used to treat breast cancer, predominantly in postmenopausal women.
It exhibits oestrogenic and antioestrogenic properties, depending on the species and tissue.
In the human breast it acts as an antioestrogen whereas oestrogenic effects have been reported on human vaginal epithelium and endometrium.
If tamoxifen exerts antioestrogenic effects on bone women receiving long term treatment may be at greater risk of osteoporotic fracture.
Densitometry has generally shown no adverse effect of tamoxifen on bone mass in postmenopausal women, although one study reported loss of bone in premenopausal women.
Our study provides the first histological data on bone turnover in women receiving long term tamoxifen treatment.
Patients, methods, and results
Forty one postmenopausal women aged 40–70 with stage I or II breast cancer were recruited into the study on the basis of their willingness to undergo bone biopsy; 22 had received tamoxifen for at least 15 (range 15–54) months, and the remainder had not received tamoxifen.
Women with a history of bone disease and those taking drugs or with conditions known to affect bone metabolism were excluded from the study.
Full thickness biopsy specimens of the iliac crest were obtained under local anaesthesia after the women  had received two separate doses of demeclocycline, and a venous blood sample was taken.
Bone histomorphometry was performed by image analysis.
The rate of formation of bone was calculated as the rate of mineral apposition × (half the surface single labelled with demeclocycline+all the double labelled surface (expressed as a percentage of the total surface)).
The groups were compared with the Mann-Whitney test.
The median age of the women taking tamoxifen was 56 (range 40–70) and the time since the menopause 6 (0–25) years.
The control group's median age was 64 (46–69) and the time since the menopause 15 (0–29) years.
These values were not significantly different between the groups.
Median body weight, however, was significantly higher in the women taking tamoxifen (68.9 kg) than in the controls (61.4 kg)(p<0.02).
The median serum alkaline phosphatase concentration in the women taking tamoxifen was 60.0 (interquartile range 53–68) U/l compared with 86.5 (68–110) U/l in the controls (p<0.005).
There were no significant differences in serum concentrations of urea, electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, or parathyroid hormone.
The median rate of tissue based bone formation in the patients treated with tamoxifen was lower than that in the controls (table).
There were no significant differences between the groups in bone area, osteoid perimeter, or mineralising perimeter (table), and 95% of these values lay within the ranges reported for normal postmenopausal women.
Comment
These results show that long term tamoxifen treatment does not adversely affect bone turnover in women with breast cancer.
The preservation of normal trabecular bone area in our patients is consistent with most densitometric data, which indicate either neutral or oestrogenic effects of tamoxifen on bone.
The significantly lower median serum alkaline phosphatase concentration in the women treated with tamoxifen is consistent with an oestrogenic effect of the drug since none of the women had demonstrable hepatic or skeletal metastases at the time of bone biopsy.
The lower rate of tissue based bone formation in these patients is also consistent with this hypothesis: if tamoxifen had antioestrogenic effects an increased rate of bone formation would be expected.
Our results thus provide the first direct evidence that tamoxifen does not have antioestrogenic effects on bone in postmenopausal women and indicate a possible oestrogenic effect.
Prevalence of symptoms in patients with simple renal cysts
A few anecdotal reports have indicated simple renal cysts as a possible cause of hypertension, flank pain, macroscopic haematuria, and erythrocytosis.
Many physicians also believe that simple renal cysts commonly cause microscopic haematuria and mild proteinuria.
The frequency of association of simple renal cysts with any of these symptoms, however, has never been the object of controlled epidemiological study, and certain important questions therefore lack definite answers.
For example, should further diagnostic procedures (such as renal biopsy) be performed, after simple renal cysts are found in a patient with mild proteinuria or microscopic haematuria?
Is the prevalence of flank pain or macroscopic haematuria in patients with simple renal cysts so high as to justify invasive procedures (such as removal by surgery or the application of alcohol)?
Methods and results
Simple renal cysts were defined as one or a few cysts of 0.2 cm in diameter or more that did not result from adult polycystic disease, medullary cystic disease, or pyelogenic cysts.
The diagnosis was based on ultrasonography.
In our cooperative study, in five general hospitals, renal ultrasonography was scheduled in 1526 consecutive patients who had been referred to the ultrasound service for any abdominal examination.
Patients aged under 18, bedridden patients, and patients with renal failure or a history of kidney transplantation were excluded.
Two hundred and eighty four patients were classed as renal patients because the disease causing admission — as recorded on their official case sheet — was renal or related to the urinary tract; the remaining 1243 were classed as non-renal patients.
Medical data were recorded shortly before the renal ultrasonographic examination, and included age, sex, admission diagnosis, and a history of episodes of colicky pain or tenderness in the flank, macroscopic haematuria, and hypertension.
The renal ultrasonographic findings were recorded by the radiologist and included renal cysts — their site, number, and diameter.
Urine analysis, a red blood cell count, and blood pressure were also routinely recorded.
Analysis of variance and an unpaired t test were used  to assess variables with a normal distribution, while χ 2 analysis was used for non-parametric dichotomous variables.
The results are summarised in the table.
The overall prevalence of simple renal cysts was 17.2% (n=263), the prevalence, number, and maximum diameter increasing progressively with the patients' age (p<0.001).
The overall prevalence of simple renal cysts was higher in men than in women (22.8% v 12.3%).
This sex difference was significant in age ranked subgroups and increased with age (from 7.1% in men v 4.5% in women in the 18–45 years group to 46.1% in men v 23.3% in women in the >75 years group).
Interestingly, neither the prevalence of past symptoms nor that of proteinuria and microscopic haematuria differed in patients with and without simple renal cysts, and the red blood cell count was also the same in both groups.
However, more patients with simple renal cysts had had hypertension, and hospital blood pressure recordings were indeed higher in this group, although these differences did not hold in age ranked subgroups.
Cysts were more prevalent in renal (26.3%) than in non-renal patients (15.1%), a finding independent of age.
Comment
Our study shows that the prevalence of hypertension, flank pain, erythrocytosis, haematuria, and proteinuria is not increased in patients with simple renal cysts, and therefore, the association of these symptoms with simple renal cysts has to be considered merely coincidental.
This conclusion demands that the cause-effect relation between simple renal cysts and any symptoms be specifically proved, at least by excluding other possible causes through appropriate diagnostic procedures.
In the case of proteinuria and haematuria these may include urography or morphological studies of urinary red cells, together with renal biopsy.
Our findings cannot explain the higher overall prevalence of simple renal cysts in men.
The very high prevalence in older men, however, suggests that partial urinary obstruction due to prostatic hypertrophy might be a factor favouring the development of simple renal cysts, as observed in experimental models of renal cystic disease.
Similarly, tubular obstruction secondary to renal parenchymal disorganisation may account for the higher prevalence in patients with renal and urinary tract disease.
Analysis of national register of Down's syndrome in England and Wales: trends in prenatal diagnosis, 1989–91
The national Down syndrome cytogenetic register is thought to contain details of over 95% of cases of Down's syndrome in England and Wales.
This register now comprises three full years' data (1989 to 1991) on 3274 cases.
We report trends in prenatal diagnoses over these years and the indications leading to these diagnoses.
Methods and results
The methods of data collection and processing have been described previously; the information collected includes the result of fetal karyotyping, reason for requesting karyotyping, and mother's age.
All fetuses that are lost naturally are excluded from this analysis.
For this study, when tests of mothers' serum were the basis for referral the type of tests used were ascertained.
Measurements of a fetoprotein concentrations alone or with one other serum test have been classed as a fetoprotein tests.
The use of three serum tests together with mother's age to calculate risk has been classed as a triple test.
The proportion of all cases of trisomy 21 diagnosed cytogenetically before birth rose from 321/1077 (30%) in 1989 to 423/1115 (38%) in 1991.
The table shows the number of diagnoses of trisomy 21 stratified by age and, when appropriate, the indication for prenatal diagnosis.
The commonest reason for requesting karyotyping  was the mother's age.
The proportion of cases that were diagnosed prenatally among mothers aged >=35; rose only slightly from 270/454 (59%) in 1989 to 296/488 (61%) in 1990 to 320/515 (62%) in 1991.
The corresponding proportion among mothers <35 rose more sharply from 51/623 (8%) to 78/594 (13%) to 103/600 (17%).
The proportion of prenatal diagnoses that followed detection of abnormal concentrations on maternal serum testing rose steadily from 17/321 (5%) to 50/374 (13%) to 90/423 (21%)(representing 2%, 5%, and 8% of all cytogenetic diagnoses) in 1989, 1990, and 1991.
The proportion of these diagnoses that followed a triple test rose from 2/17 (12%) to 13/50 (26%) to 51/90 (57%).
For mothers aged <35 the proportion of prenatal diagnoses after serum screening was 12/51 (24%), 24/78 (31%), and 39/103 (38%)(2%, 4%, and 7% of all cytogenetic diagnoses in younger mothers) in 1989, 1990, and 1991.
For mothers >=35; the corresponding proportions were 5/270 (2%), 26/296 (9%), and 51/320 (16%)(1%, 5%, and 10% of all diagnoses in older women).
The proportions among the older mothers rose more steeply than those among the younger mothers over the three years.
Abnormal ultrasound scans in early pregnancy and in mid-trimester leading to a prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 increased from 1989 to 1991, from 23 to 33 cases for scans before 20 weeks' gestation and from 34 to 71 cases for scans before 28 weeks' gestation (table).
Of diagnoses made after 28 weeks, only one was recorded as leading to termination.
A large proportion of the ultrasound assessments named an anomaly detected.
These included fetal ascites or hydrops (19 cases); cystic hygroma or nuchal fold (38); and cardio-vascular (20), renal (8), and bowel (12) anomalies.
Comment
The growing use of serum screening and ultrasound examination seems to be improving prenatal screening for Down's syndrome.
In 1991 results of serum tests and ultrasonography before 28 weeks' gestation together made up 38% of the indications leading to a prenatal karyotypic confirmation of fetal trisomy 21.
They accounted for 80% of the prenatal diagnoses in mothers under 35 and 25% of such diagnoses in older women, for whom maternal age is still the most common indication although in these the use of serum screening is increasing.
In our results the proportion of diagnoses occurring after maternal serum screening rose faster in older than younger mothers.
Our findings also point to the increasing importance of fetal ultrasonography in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal trisomy 21.
Some anomalies, like fetal hydrops, relate to the current condition of the fetus while others, like cardiovascular abnormalities, are of considerable importance in predicting the future condition of the fetus.
Effect of NHS reforms on general practitioners' referral patterns
Abstract
Objective —
To compare outpatient referral patterns in fundholding and non-fundholding practices before and after the implementation of the NHS reforms in April 1991.
Design —
Prospective collection of data on general practitioners' referrals to specialist outpatient clinics between June 1990 and March 1992 and detailed comparison of two time periods: October 1990 to March 1991 (phase 1) and October 1991 to March 1992 (phase 2).
Setting —
10 fundholding practices and six non-fundholding practices in the Oxford region.
Subjects—
Patients referred to consultant outpatient clinics.
Results —
After implementation of the NHS reforms there was no change in the proportion of referrals from the two groups of practices which crossed district boundaries.
Both groups of practices increased their referral rates in phase 2 of the study, the fundholders from 107.3 per 1000 patients per annum(95% confidence interval 106 to 109) to 111.4 (110 to 113) and the non-fundholders from 95.0 (93 to 97) to 112.0 (110 to 114).
In phase 2 there was no difference in overall standardised referral rates between fundholders and non-fundholders.
Just over 20% of referrals went to private clinics in phase 1.
By phase 2 this proportion had reduced by 2.2% (1.0% to 3.4%) among the fundholders and by 2.7% (1.2% to 4.2%) among the non-fundholders.
Conclusions —
Referral patterns among fundholders and non-fundholders were strikingly similar after the implementation of the NHS reforms.
There was no evidence that fundholding was encouraging a shift from specialist to general practice care or that budgetary pressures were affecting general practitioners' referral behaviour.
Introduction
The general practice fundholding scheme, which was introduced as part of the package of organisational reforms to the NHS in April 1991, has attracted a great deal of comment.
This voluntary scheme, which gives general practitioners control over budgets to cover prescriptions, specialist outpatient consultations, and elective surgical procedures for their patients, has been embraced with enthusiasm by some general practitioners, but others have been concerned that it could encourage the development of a ‘two tier’ service, in which the advantages gained by fundholders for their patients are achieved at the expense of patients in other practices.
Proper evaluation of the scheme requires more than the anecdotal accounts published so far if the true effects are to be monitored and the policy lessons learnt.
We report the first results from a study designed to evaluate the effects of the NHS reforms in general practices and hospitals in the Oxford region.
Our study has collected data from 10 first wave fundholding practices and seven non-fundholding practices to measure their use of hospital care (inpatient and outpatient), the speed and nature of the hospitals' response to requests from the practices, prescribing patterns and costs, and any innovations or changes introduced in practice based facilities, as well as monitoring the views and experience of general practitioners, hospital consultants, and patients.
A comparison group of non-fundholding practices was essential to disentangle the effects of budget holding from any wider effects of the NHS reforms.
This paper is concerned with the effects of the reforms on general practitioners' referrals to specialist outpatient clinics.
There were several reasons for anticipating a change in referral patterns after April 1991.
The opportunity to maintain their freedom of referral was one of the commonest reasons given by general practitioners for joining the fundholding scheme.
Many general practitioners feared that non-fundholders would be forced to restrict their referrals to hospitals with which their district health authority had contracts, which might inhibit their freedom to refer outside the boundaries of their local district.
We were therefore interested to see whether there was any evidence that these fears had been justified.
Another attraction of the scheme is the flexibility it gives to general practitioners to make budgetary savings in certain aspects of their clinical practice which can then be reinvested in other aspects of patient care.
Evidence of wide variations in outpatient referral rates is indicative of a lack of consensus about the appropriateness of specialist referral in many situations.
It seemed possible that outpatient referrals might provide scope for savings if fundholding general practitioners were to refrain from referring patients in cases where they were ambivalent about the necessity for specialist intervention.
Another reason for expecting fundholders' referral rates to fall after April 1991 had to do with the way in which their budgets were set.
When the scheme was introduced there was speculation about whether those intending to become fundholders would increase referral rates in the preparatory year to ensure that their budgets, which were based on historical activity, were large enough to permit savings in subsequent years.
It therefore seemed possible that referral rates would be higher among fundholders than among control practices in the year before the introduction of budgets, but that fundholders' NHS referral rates would then fall.
Referrals from fundholding practices to private clinics, on the other hand, might be expected to increase as fundholders would have an incentive to encourage privately insured patients to claim from their insurance companies to avoid incurring a charge against the practice budget.
Fundholders were also free to purchase care for NHS patients in the private sector, so we were interested to see the extent to which this option was being taken up.
Three main questions were therefore addressed: did  non-fundholders reduce their rate of referral outside the boundaries of their local district health authority? did first wave fundholders reduce their referral rates to NHS outpatient clinics and, if so, which specialties and which patients were affected? did the proportion of patients referred by fundholders to private clinics increase and how many private referrals were paid for out of the NHS budget?
Methods
Early in 1990 we developed and piloted a referral form, which was used to collect data in the preparatory year by all practices in the Oxford Regional Health Authority that had expressed an interest in fundholding.
We also wrote to all those practices within the region with more than 8000 registered patients that did not intend to enter the fundholding scheme inviting them to act as controls in the study.
Six practices agreed to participate and one additional, smaller practice (6119 patients) was also recruited as a control.
One of the non-fundholding control practices was excluded from the analysis because it did not collect referral data for a significant part of the study.
Ten of the 25 practices in the Oxford Regional Health Authority which entered the first wave of the fundholding scheme were asked to continue collecting referral data for a further year.
These 10 practices were selected to match the controls as far as possible in terms of practice size, location, and main provider unit.
Each time a referral was made details of the referring general practitioner; the patient's sex and date of birth; the consultant, specialty, and hospital to which the referral was made; the symptoms or diagnosis; and the main reason for making the referral were recorded.
Referrals to consultant clinics were included regardless of location, so patients seen in general practice based consultant clinics were counted as referrals.
Liaison was established with one or two members of the practice staff, usually a general practitioner and a member of the administrative staff, and systems were established to ensure accuracy of information.
This close liaison was maintained with all practices throughout the study.
Aggregated referral data were regularly fed back to the practices for checking against figures collected internally.
Any discrepancies between the two data sources were investigated and errors eliminated.
The aim was to monitor only those outpatient referrals which incurred a charge against fundholders' budgets and the corresponding referrals in the control practices.
Hence referrals to the following clinics were excluded from the analysis: palliative care, oncology, renal units, radiotherapy, clinical genetics, obstetrics, sexually transmitted disease clinics, child guidance clinics, all paramedical referrals, accident and emergency and emergency inpatient referrals, consultant cross referrals and tertiary referrals, all self referrals (by patients themselves), and referrals made by district health authority staff — for example, health visitors.
Although included in the fundholding scheme, referrals to radiology, pathology, physiotherapy, speech therapy, and occupational therapy were also excluded from this analysis, which focused on referrals to consultants' outpatient clinics.
Data collection took place between June 1990 and March 1992.
Detailed analysis focused on two six month periods — phase 1 (the preparatory year) from 1 October 1990 to 31 March 1991, and phase 2 (the first year after the introduction of the reforms in April 1991) from 1 October 1991 to 31 March 1992.
All 10 fundholding practices and three of the six non-fundholding practices contributed data for the whole of these two periods.
Of the remaining three practices, one contributed for all but one of the 12 months' data collection period, one supplied data for 10 out of 12 months, and one supplied data for eight months only.
These data were used to calculate annual referral rates using the practice populations as the denominator.
Population figures were obtained directly from the practices' computer systems.
Annual referral rates for each practice were standardised for age and sex by the direct method using the total study population as the standard.
Proportions were compared by χ 2 test.
Confidence intervals for proportions and standardised rates were derived by using the software package CIA.
Results
The two groups of study practices were reasonably well matched (table I).
The fundholding practices in the study were also very comparable to the remaining  fundholding practices in the region on the available indicators.
The study fundholders were based in six of the eight district health authorities in the Oxford region whereas the controls were located in only three districts (figure).
The Oxford Regional Health Authority is well served by community hospitals, where outpatient clinics are held in addition to those in general hospitals, so none of the participating practices was far from a provider unit.
All study practices were in relatively prosperous areas: none was in receipt of a deprivation allowance.
Five of the 10 fundholding practices and three of the six control practices had a proportion of their patients in rural areas.
The proportion of patients classified as rural was 12.6% in the fundholding group and 9.0% among the controls.
During the two study periods these practices kept records of 28371 referrals.
The extent to which the organisational changes affected referral patterns was first investigated by looking at the proportion of referrals which crossed district boundaries before and after the implementation of the reforms in the two groups of practices (table II).
The fundholding practices had higher rates of cross boundary referrals than the control practices before the reforms; however, there was little evidence of change between the two study periods in either group.
Only in general surgery and paediatrics was there a significant increase in out of district referrals among fundholders (χ 2 =18.82, p<0.001; χ 2 =7.05, p<0.01).
The proportion of fundholders' referrals to out of district psychiatric clinics decreased (χ 2 =9.37, p<0.005).
There were no significant differences in out of district referrals to individual specialties among the non-fundholding practices.
Contrary to expectations, fundholders' NHS referral rates showed a small but significant increase from the first phase to the second phase of the study (table III).
The rates in control practices were lower than those of the fundholders in the first phase, but by phase 2 the non-fundholders had increased their referral rates to the same level as the fundholders.
The distribution of referrals to each individual specialty was very similar in the two groups of practices.
Interestingly, fundholders' referrals to clinics in general surgery and orthopaedic surgery increased whereas they decreased in general medicine and remained the same in most other specialties.
Fundholders' referral rates to general surgery increased from 21.0 (95% confidence interval 20.2 to 21.8) to 22.9 (22.0 to 23.7) and to orthopaedic surgery from 10.4 (9.8 to 10.9) to 12.0 (11.4 to 12.6).
The increased likelihood of referral occurred among both male and female patients in the two groups of practices, although female patients between the ages of 5–24 and 45–74 in fundholding practices were slightly less likely to be referred in the second phase of the study than in the first (table IV).
The age and sex specific referral rates from the two groups of practices were very similar in phase 2 of the study.
Seven of the 10 fundholding practices and five of the six control practices had increased their NHS referral rates by the second phase of the study (table V).
It is worth noting that changes among the two highest referring practices in phase 1, fundholding practices 9 and 10, went in opposite directions; practice 9 increased its rate whereas practice 10 decreased.
Referrals to private clinics decreased among the fundholders, also contrary to expectations.
Standardised private patient referral rates from fundholding practices decreased from 27.2 in phase 1 (95% confidence interval 26.3 to 28.2) to 24.6 (23.8 to 25.5) in phase 2.
This represented a reduction of 2.2% (95% confidence interval 1.0% to 3.4%; χ 2 =13.32, p<0.001) in the proportion of total referrals which went to private clinics.
Private referral rates among non-fundholders, however, stayed at the same level in the two phases of the study: 27.8 in phase 1 (26.7 to 29.0) and 27.8 in phase 2 (26.7 to 28.9), although as NHS referrals increased in the second phase this represented a reduction of 2.7% (1.2% to 4.2%; χ 2 =12.89, p<0.001) in the proportion of total referrals.
Only two of the fundholding practices (1 and 7) had increased their private referral rates in phase 2 as compared with phase 1.
The variation between the practices in NHS referral rates was relatively low, ranging from 89.0 per 1000 in a fundholding practice in phase 1 to 160.2 in a control practice in phase 2.
Private referral rates were much more variable, the lowest being 6.2 per 1000 and the highest 89.5, a 14-fold difference in rates.
Nearly half of all referrals from the latter practice (a fundholder) went to private clinics, but this proportion remained unchanged between the two phases of the study.
The similarities between the two groups of practices in the proportion going to private clinics in each individual specialty (table VI) were much more striking than the differences.
The number of NHS patients referred from fundholding practices to private clinics (paid for out of the fundholder's budget) in phase 2 was small: of the 59 referrals that fell into this category, most were for vasectomy or female sterilisation.
Before 1991 vasectomy was not normally available within the NHS.
Three of the fundholding practices arranged private contracts for this procedure paid out of their practice budgets as a means of improving the services available to their patients.
Discussion
referral patterns before and after reforms
These results contradict our prior expectations about the effects of the NHS reforms on referral patterns.
Indeed, the overriding impression is that referral patterns remained strikingly similar among both fundholders and non-fundholders after the implementation of the organisational changes.
We do not know how far these findings are generalisable at a national level, but we are reasonably confident that the study practices were representative of the totality of fundholding practices in the Oxford region and that the fundholding and control practices were fairly well matched on those variables, such as distance from provider units, which might have affected referral patterns.
Our findings provide no evidence that non-fundholders were more restricted in their freedom to refer across district boundaries than they had been hitherto.
We did not look specifically at extracontractual referrals and the extent to which payment for these was refused by purchasing authorities, but there is no evidence from our results that the contracting system affected out of district referrals from this group of practices to any great extent.
The fact that those practices which became fundholders had a history of referring patients across district boundaries to a greater extent than the controls in our study may provide an indication of their motivation for joining the scheme.
In other words, they may have seen it as a means of safeguarding their referral patterns, which might have been threatened had they been forced to restrict themselves to contracts made by district health authority purchasers.
For the control practices, with their low rate of cross boundary referrals, this may not have been such a concern.
There was no evidence in our data that first wave fundholders attempted to make budgetary savings by reducing referral rates.
It is particularly noteworthy that outpatient referrals to the surgical specialties increased as outpatient referrals to these specialties are likely to lead to inpatient admissions for elective surgical procedures which could incur a substantial charge on the practice budget.
This should be reassuring to those who feared that patients' access to specialist services would be curtailed as a result of the introduction of fundholding.
The fact that most practices' referral rates had increased in the second phase of the study provides no support for the view that first wave fundholders had artificially increased their rates of referral in the preparatory year to enable them to make budgetary savings in the subsequent year, although their rates were higher than those of the controls in phase 1.
There was some variation between the practices, but only three fundholders reduced their rates, which may be due to normal year on year differences.
Of the two highest referring practices, only one reduced its referral rate and then only by a relatively small amount.
Some of the control practices increased their referral rates quite dramatically in phase 2.
It is not clear why this happened, but it does illustrate the inherent instability in individual practices' annual referral rates and the consequent difficulties involved in estimating budgets on the basis of past referral patterns.
Finally, fears that fundholders would encourage referrals to private clinics to avoid a charge on their budgets seem to be unfounded, certainly as far as these aggregate data are concerned, and there was only limited evidence that fundholders were making use of their freedom to contract with private hospitals for outpatient services for NHS patients.
reasons for lack of change
What is the explanation for this apparent lack of effect?
Part of the answer probably lies in the attempt to maintain a ‘steady state’ in the first year of the reforms.
General practitioners were enticed to join the fundholding scheme by the promise of new freedoms in their gatekeeping role, but when it became apparent that their potential to destabilise the system threatened other aspects of the reforms regional health authorities were told to ‘manage the market’ to ensure that the stability of hospitals was not threatened.
The Oxford Regional Health Authority introduced ‘the 80/20 rule,’ under which fundholders agreed to contract for 80% of their hospital services budget in the first year to go to the same hospitals as in the preparatory year, leaving them free to move the remaining 20% if they so wished.
Very few practices exploited this freedom to the full.
Some fundholders did switch hospitals for some specialties where they were promised a better or a  cheaper service.
These changes occurred particularly in diagnostic services, which were excluded from our analysis.
Several practices were offered cheaper contracts by private hospitals for pathology and radiology services, but none of the study practices took this up.
Two practices used different provider units in phase 2 for individual specialties: in both cases this involved arranging for consultants from the new provider units (in orthopaedics and urology) to see patients on the practice premises.
Others managed to negotiate favourable terms with their existing providers, thus achieving savings without affecting referral patterns.
Some arranged for consultants to hold clinics on the practice premises, thus improving access for their patients but not necessarily achieving a cost saving.
Others increased provision of minor surgery with a view to reducing referrals to certain specialties.
Many hoped to achieve a reduction in numbers of follow up appointments.
However, for the most part the fundholders' business plans indicated that they planned to make savings in the prescribing element of their budgets rather than in hospital services.
Another factor which may have been important in this first year of the reforms was the determination of these pioneering fundholders to ensure the success of the scheme.
There is no doubt that they were sincere in their belief that their patients would benefit from their involvement.
Many had faced hostility from colleagues who were opposed to fundholding.
The government was also particularly anxious in an election year to ensure both that the benefits of the scheme were recognised and that accusations that they were encouraging the development of a two tier service were not substantiated.
Thus it seems likely that health authorities were encouraged to be generous in the allocation of budgets, that fundholders were less concerned than they might otherwise have been about the need to stay within strict cash limits, and that non-fundholders were allowed greater freedom of referral than might have been anticipated.
Conclusion
The overall increase in referral rates may seem disappointing to those who hoped that fundholding would provide a mechanism for reducing the demand for specialist care, but it was probably unrealistic to expect a shift to occur in the first year of the scheme.
Although we found no evidence that the referral behaviour of first wave fundholders was affected by budgetary pressures, this may not be indicative of the way in which the effects of the reforms will be felt in the next few years.
It will be important to continue to monitor these effects.
Screen detected high blood pressure under 40: a general practice population followed up for 21 years
Abstract
Objective —
To assess hypertension detected under 40 in a general practice population.
Design —
Prospective case-control study.
Setting and subjects —
Former coal mining community in south Wales.
Systematic case finding for hypertension and associated risk factors applied to a mean total population of 1945 from age 20 on a five year cycle through 21 years.
Mean population aged 20–39, 227 men and 213 women.
Case criteria: age <40 and mean systolic pressure >=160; mm Hg or diastolic pressure >=100; mm Hg.
Age and sex matched controls randomly sampled from the same population.
Main outcome measures —
Mean initial pressures and pressures at follow up in 1989 or preceding and all cardiovascular events.
Results —
25 men and 16 women met criteria.
Estimated five yearly inceptions were 26/1000 for men and 18/1000 for women.
Male group mean initial blood pressure was 164/110 mm Hg for cases, falling to 148/89 mm Hg at follow up.
Five male cases died at mean age 47.8, compared with two controls at 49.5.
Female group mean initial pressure was 172/107 mm Hg for cases, falling to 145/86 mm Hg at follow up.
One female case died aged 50, no controls.
10 male cases had non-fetal cardiovascular events at mean age 40.2, compared with two controls a mean age 50.5.
Four female cases had non-fetal events at mean age 47.2, compared with one control aged 58.
Male differences were statistically significant.
Conclusions —
Hypertension under 40 is dangerous, commoner in men than women, rarely secondary to classic causes, and may be controlled in general practice on a whole community basis.
Introduction
Primary hypertension usually begins early in life.
Measurements are unstable and poorly predictive in adolescence, but from 20 years individual variability seems to be less and does not increase with age.
Failure of antihypertensive treatment substantially to reduce coronary risk may partly be attributable to late intervention, after vascular changes are less easily reversible.
Measurement of blood pressure in young adults, though required by the new general practitioner contract every three years from April 1991, is still not  established practice.
As recently as 1991 at least one authority still questioned the value of routine measurement of blood pressure under 35.
In 1974, in seven randomly sampled London practices, Heller and Rose found blood pressure recorded in only 10% of men and 18% of women aged 20–39.
By 1982, in 23 randomly sampled London general practices Kurji and Haines found blood pressure recorded in 28% of men and 61% of women aged 30–39.
By 1986, in 5123 randomly sampled men in Scotland Smith et al found blood pressure recorded in 52% of general practitioners' records for men aged 40–44, rising to 74% of those aged 55–59.
Though high blood pressure is a treatable risk with a higher prevalence and mortality in young men than young women, that study showed that even in the age group 40–44 young women were still more than twice as likely to be detected as men.
The British regional heart study showed that men in heavy industrial areas generally have higher group mean arterial pressures than men in rural or non-industrial urban areas.
Mortality from coronary heart disease and stroke is exceptionally high in young men in the south Wales industrial valleys, with rates similar to those in the west of Scotland.
A screening programme for high blood pressure and related risks, begun in 1968 and sustained for 21 years in a defined community, gave us an opportunity to study long term management of high blood pressure in young adults in a social context, with data collected prospectively on originally unsuspected associations.
Retrospectively, we became interested in the possibility that high alcohol intake, oral contraception, and obesity might be important and treatable causes under 40.
Population and methods
Glyncorrwg is a former coal mining village in south Wales.
At 206 on the Townsend index for social deprivation it is in the worst 5% of all electoral wards in Wales, chiefly because of high male unemployment.
Over 85% of the male population are or were manual workers.
Starting in 1968, the whole adult population registered with the Glyncorrwg practice was screened for hypertension by a system of case finding supplemented by call up on a five year cycle.
This roughly doubled the number of known and treated hypertensives in the practice.
Response rates varied from 98% in 1968–70 to about 90% in subsequent five year spans.
This policy was applied to a stable population of 2100 (all ages) in 1968, steadily declining through out migration and falling family size to 1790 (895 males and 895 females) by 1989.
There were 310 male and 248 female deaths, 528 male and 578 female out migrants or transfers of care, and 750 male and female in migrants or accessions to the practice list from 1968 to 1989.
The proportion of young people increased; in 1968 there were 205 men and 194 women aged 20–39, rising to 250 men and 233 women by 1985.
For people under 40 hypertension was defined as a mean arterial systolic pressure of 160 mm Hg or more or diastolic pressure of 100 mm Hg or more (diastolic phase V), derived from three readings on separate days.
A random zero sphygmomanometer was used for almost all measurements, and outsize cuffs were used when indicated by arm girth.
All cases, including out migrants, were followed up in 1989, and deaths were included in the analysis.
Controls matched for age and sex were drawn randomly from the same population at risk, including deaths, out migrants, and in migrants.
Controls were rejected if blood pressures of 160/100 mm Hg or more were ever recorded under 40, or 170/105 mm Hg thereafter.
Records had been retained for deaths, out migrants, and secessions from the list, with summaries sent to new doctors.
Together with records for the current population these were searched for routinely recorded data on arterial pressure, smoking, body mass index (weight (kg) divided by squared height (m)), oral contraceptive use, and either stated alcohol intake or social, haematological, or biochemical evidence of alcohol damage.
Stated weekly alcohol intakes of 36 units or more were regarded as excessive, but all cases with high intake had other social or biochemical evidence of damage at some time.
These data were compared in the hypertensive and normotensive groups, as nearly as possible to the same ages at which these data had been recorded for hypertensive cases.
Periods at risk under 40 were obviously shorter for both in migrants and out migrants and deaths than for people permanently resident throughout the study.
All young hypertensives, currently treated or untreated with antihypertensive drugs, were included in the analysis and are included in the results on an intention to treat basis.
Where appropriate differences between cases when found and in 1989, and between cases and controls, were compared by Student's t test and a 2×2 contingency table for χ 2 with Yates's correction.
Results
Twenty five men and 16 women met our criteria.
Mean age at ascertainment of hypertension was 31.4 years for men (range 22–39) and 33.3 years for women (range 17–39).
Group mean initial pressure for three ascertainment readings in the hypertensives was 165/110 mm Hg for men and 172/107 mm Hg for women, and 128/79 and 124/78 mm Hg respectively for controls.
Five male and six female hypertensives were never treated with antihypertensive drugs — four because pressure fell when a cause was removed (one was given a renal transplant and three stopped oral contraception), four because patients refused, and three because no treatment programme was ever organised (one of these died of intercurrent disease soon after diagnosis, and the other two both had predominant alcohol problems).
The other 20 men and 10 women started antihypertensive medication at mean ages of 35.5 and 40.8 years respectively; many patients were observed for long periods before starting medication, especially in the early 1970s.
Based on the last three measurements before medication, mean pretreatment pressure was 172/112 mm Hg for men and 176/111 mm Hg for women.
At follow up in 1989 group means derived from the last three readings available for all hypertensives had fallen to 148/88 mm Hg for men and 145/86 mm Hg for women (all changes p<0.001).
In both male and female controls systolic pressures rose significantly (p<0.001) from 128 to 134 mm Hg and from 124 to 131 mm Hg respectively, but there was no significant change in diastolic pressure (79 and 78 mm Hg respectively on both occasions).
Of the 25 hypertensive men, by 1989 five had died at mean age 47.8 (range 40–54) years, four of cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease and one of colorectal cancer.
Symptomatic coronary, cerebrovascular, or peripheral arterial disease developed in 10 of the 25 at mean age 40.2 (range 32–53) years.
Of male controls, one died at age 40 of acute alcohol poisoning, one died of motor neurone disease, one had a non-fatal coronary thrombosis at age 47, and one had vertebrobasilar insufficiency at 53.
Differences for cardiovascular death were significant (p<0.10) and for morbidity highly significant (p<0.001).
Of the 16 hypertensive women, one died aged 49 from drowning related to alcohol; advanced coronary  disease was found at necropsy, which also confirmed a coronary thrombosis one year previously.
Symptomatic coronary, cerebrovascular, or peripheral arterial disease developed in four cases at mean age 47.2 (range 40–56) years, and one control had a minor stroke at age 58 (p<0.10).
No female controls died.
secondary causes
Causes of secondary hypertension were sought in all cases, including estimations of urine vanillylmandelic acid at periods of peak pressure or anxiety, plasma potassium, urea, and creatinine concentrations, and searches for bacteriuria and signs of coarctation or renal artery stenosis.
No such abnormalities were found except for one man with end stage renal failure from ureteric obstruction undetected in infancy, in whom the presenting sign was proteinuria rather than high blood pressure.
There was no significant difference between cases and controls in oral contraceptive use: 12 of the 16 hypertensive women had recorded use of oral contraceptives compared with 13 of the 16 controls.
Non-users had been positively recorded as such in both groups.
For users only, mean age at first prescription was 28.2 years for hypertensives (range 17–37).
These high mean ages at onset and the absence of difference in uptake between hypertensives and controls reflect the history of oral contraception, which became available in the early 1960s and made rapid progress in this village, with our support.
From careful analysis of recorded associations between individual arterial pressures and oral contraceptive prescription and withdrawal, oral contraception seemed to be a probable sole cause in three in whom pressure fell permanently after stopping the tablets and a probable contributory cause for another three whose blood pressures fell on withdrawal but subsequently showed a sustained rise.
Evidence of present or past excessive alcohol intake was found in 13 young hypertensive men, an impressive figure until we examined records for male controls; 13 of the 25 had similar evidence.
Four young hypertensive women had present or past excessive alcohol intake, compared with one control (p<0.10).
Group mean stated intakes were 46 units/week in male cases compared with 40 units/week in controls.
As expected, young hypertensives were substantially more obese than controls.
Mean body mass index at ascertainment was 28.4 for male hypertensives compared with 26.5 for controls, and 26.9 for female hypertensives compared with 22.8 for controls, differences highly significant for men (p<0.001), less so for women (p<0.01).
Obesity increased equally in all groups over the 20 years or so of follow up, despite sustained medical advice but without help from a dietitian.
Group mean body mass index in hypertensive men rose from 28.4 to 29.4, and in controls from 26.4 to 27.4.
Mean body mass index in hypertensive women rose from 26.9 to 27.6, and in controls from 22.8 to 23.5.
associated cardiovascular risks
All young hypertensives were given repeated advice and support on associated or causal risks for coronary disease, particularly smoking.
Controls were given similar advice at routine consultations, but this was generally less systematic, sustained, or reinforced unless they had respiratory symptoms.
The proportion of stated smokers among male hypertensives fell from an initial 17 of the 25 to eight, and in controls from 17 of 25 to 10.
Smoking in women was virtually unchanged, starting at eight of the 16 in hypertensives and seven of 16 in controls, and ending at six of 16 and seven of 16 respectively.
For blood cholesterol concentrations too few controls had contemporary measurements to allow valid comparisons, but attempts to reduce cholesterol by dietary advice in cases were generally unsuccessful.
Discussion
There is little evidence from controlled trials in this age group from which to assess either the value of treatment with antihypertensive drugs or their cumulative risk when taken for a remaining lifetime of 60 years or more.
Our treatment policies in this age group were conservative, particularly in the first 10 years.
However, all deaths and most of the considerable arterial damage occurred where pressures were uncontrolled, poorly controlled, or treatment was delayed until there was evidence of organ damage, largely because aggressive prescription of tolerable drugs only gradually became accepted practice in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Our four hypertension related male deaths all occurred in the first 12 years of the 21 years of follow up, suggesting their treatment was probably begun too late.
Multifactorial assessment of risks and patient education are of special importance in this age group, with an emphasis on patient education, smoking, body weight, and blood cholesterol control in management plans which should include exercise programmes and reduction in dietary fat.
The excess of male over female cases found in this age group is consistent with epidemiological studies but is still not generally appreciated in either hospital or primary care.
Young women consult more often and are more likely to have their blood pressure measured, particularly during pregnancy and contraception.
Our data understate incidence because our population included many over 40 whose blood pressures under 40 had never been recorded when our screening policy began in 1968, as well as others who migrated into the practice aged over 40 without previous recorded measurements.
As an order of magnitude we found 25 male and 16 female hypertensives under 40 on our definition in a mean population of about 1900 of all ages (227 men and 213 women aged 20–39) over 21 years.
This gives five year detection rates of at least 26/1000 for men and 18/1000 for women in the age group 20–39, so high arterial pressure in young adults is much commoner than has generally been supposed.
Practices with less stable populations would have to run shorter cycles to achieve similar detection rates.
Some inner city practices now have annual turnovers over 30%.
In all practices without a screening or case finding programme with high response most of these cases will not be detected until they are over 40.
oral contraceptives and alcohol
Oral contraceptives have been a common and important cause of secondary hypertension, which may become irreversible and occasionally lethal.
Cases reported here were associated with 50 µg oestrogen combined pills, mostly before this risk was recognised; it remains to be seen whether 30 µg pills are safer, but as the progestogen component may carry a greater hypertensive risk than the oestrogen component all cases still need careful follow up at not less than three monthly intervals.
Even with structured A4 records, computerised recall and repeat prescribing, and a relatively vigilant team, we still found it difficult to ensure that women who had stopped the pill because of a rise in pressure did not resume it, even when they and practice staff were apparently aware of the risk.
High alcohol intake is an important cause of treatment failure in hypertension, as much because of poor compliance with medication or beer promoted obesity as from direct effects on blood pressure.
Though we found little evidence of heavier drinking in our cases compared with controls (mean stated intake 46.3 against 40.5 units/week), a causal role for alcohol has clearly been established by larger studies.
The extent of alcohol problems in this age group is surprising but probably typical of other areas of declining heavy industry and high unemployment.
lessons for practice organisation
Case finding was assisted by the high contact rate in young men characteristic of mining and former mining communities.
We strongly agree with others who have found better coverage, motivation, and compliance where proactive care is developed from consultation prompted by patient demand than in screening clinics.
Our relatively good results for reduced smoking in men suggest this may be an important conclusion.
There is consistent evidence that response to well man and similar health promotion clinics is inversely related to social class and that such clinics therefore fail to address problems of prevention and management of chronic disease where need is greatest and anticipatory care could be most effective.
Such clinics burgeoned under the 1991 general practitioner contract, but there is no evidence that they detect or deal with disease more effectively than case finding within ordinary consultations.
In our experience initial screening is relatively easy.
The hard work begins with effective lifelong follow up, for which separate clinics seem to be essential for efficient division of labour, and detection and control of drop outs.
EDUCATION & DEBATE
Regular Review
The polymerase chain reaction: a tool for molecular medicine
The polymerase chain reaction has been unquestionably unique, as new techniques go, in the speed with which it has been embraced by non-experts in most specialties of the biological sciences, including medicine.
The reason for this is the unusual simplicity of the procedure.
In terms of its power to drive biological research, the advent of the polymerase chain reaction can certainly be compared with the discovery of the techniques of molecular cloning some 20 years ago.
However, whereas years of training and practice were usually needed to master the many and complex skills of recombinant DNA technology, the complete beginner can start to perform polymerase chain reaction experiments and generate meaningful results within a few days at most— hence the explosion of activity.
The technique was first described in its initial format in 1985, and over the next three years appreciation of its potential gradually became widespread.
This potential was fully realised in about 1988.
It coincided with the commercial development of two key components for the polymerase chain reaction: a DNA polymerase that could be heated at quite high temperatures (boiling water) without losing its activity, and robust machines that would quickly heat and cool samples repeatedly in a cyclic fashion.
Synthesis of the oligonucleotides required as primers in the reaction had already become a commonplace procedure.
In the past four years the reaction has become probably the most widely used single technique in all branches of the biological sciences.
What is the polymerase chain reaction?
The polymerase chain reaction is a delightfully simple concept, first alluded to 30 years ago, and very reminiscent of the way that cells duplicate their DNA to expand their numbers in vivo.
The other simple analogy is to the chain reaction of nuclear physics.
The technique permits the analysis of nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) from any source.
procedure
A small sample of DNA in solution is placed in a single tube.
(As will become clear below, any RNA samples for analysis are simply converted to DNA in a single preliminary step.)
Two oligonucleotides (which are easy to make artificially on automatic machines or can be purchased from several suppliers) are added to the tube.
Their sequences are chosen so that they match two short DNA sequences that flank the region of interest.
The exponential increase in the amount of DNA sequence that is now known, and the universal accessibility of this data through computer databases, mean that any scientist can quickly start to study genes of interest in his or her own laboratory.
There is no need to obtain DNA clones from other workers, so all the problems previously associated with that are avoided.
Considerably more oligonucleotides than the DNA to be analysed are provided deliberately.
A thermostable DNA polymerase is added to the same tube.
Deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) and salts and buffer to allow the enzyme to work properly are also included.
All these reagents are available commercially.
Taq DNA polymerase was isolated from the thermophilic organism,Thermus aquaticus.
Not only can it tolerate heating at 100°C, but it makes DNA at high temperatures compared with the 37°C physiological temperature optimum of most enzymes.
A cloned version of this enzyme without any nuclease activity is also available.
This simple mixture is placed in a heater and the temperature quickly raised to just below the boiling point of water.
This causes the double stranded DNA in the sample to dissociate into two single strands as the hydrogen bonds, which hold the two strands together under physiological conditions, break down reversibly on heating.
After a minute or so, the solution is allowed to cool towards physiological temperature.
This allows hydrogen bonds to reform.
The two DNA strands in the sample would, of course, usually relocate their partners and reform the paired double helix.
However, in the polymerase chain reaction tube the oligonucleotides, which are present in great excess, quickly and highly specifically bind to their complementary single strands from the denatured sample.
As soon as this happens the oligonucleotide can act as a primer for DNA polymerase and is extended to form a new double stranded molecule.
Thus each double stranded DNA molecule in the original sample has been melted to  form two single stranded molecules, which have then been turned into two double stranded molecules.
There is now twice as much double stranded sample DNA present in the tube as there was to start with.
The cycle is then repeated and the amount of sample DNA doubled further with every cycle.
This geometrical amplification is perfectly analogous to a nuclear chain reaction with 2-fold, 4-fold, 8-fold, 16-fold, 32-fold, etc amplification at  subsequent steps.
After n cycles the degree of amplification is of course 2 n .
Thus after 10 cycles 1024-fold amplification is achieved and after 20 cycles 10-fold amplification results.
No great manual dexterity is required to perform the technique, in that all these reactions go on by simply automatically heating and cooling without ever opening the reaction tube.
The whole process is outlined in figure 1.
The orientation of the two strands in double stranded DNA is important to note.
They are described as being antiparallel, which means that when bound together in a helix one reads 5' to 3', the other 3' to 5'.
This simple consideration dictates the design of the synthetic oligonucleotides.
When making double stranded DNA, Taq polymerase attaches new residues to the 3' end of primers.
Thus in the polymerase chain reaction DNA is essentially copied only between the two primers.
After multiple cycles of amplification, the predominant double stranded DNA species in the sample is a fragment whose two ends are defined by the two primer oligonucleotides — that is, not all the DNA in the original sample is amplified.
For example, if the sample DNA were total human DNA from a blood sample, and therefore contained 3 × 10 base pairs, amplification of any 300 base pair segment could be specifically achieved.
It will be appreciated that the signal to noise problems inherent in detecting and analysing 300 base pairs out of 3 billion (1 in 10) are very much alleviated after 30 cycles of polymerase chain reaction, when 10 copies of the 300 base pair fragment are present for every single copy of the total genomic DNA background.
problems
The polymerase chain reaction is not quite infinitely powerful or infallible.
Eventually, after many cycles, the concentration of oligonucleotide primers falls because they have all been incorporated into products of the reaction.
Similarly, the concentration of deoxynucleoside triphosphate substrates, and indeed the activity of the DNA polymerase itself, decline.
Products of pyrophosphate breakdown may inhibit further reaction.
Amplification will usually be sufficient for most analytical purposes by this stage, but should even greater sensitivity be necessary — for example, in the analysis of DNA from a single cell — then a tiny aliquot from the first polymerase chain reaction tube (as a source of sample DNA) is simply transferred to a second identical tube, and amplification is continued.
Should specificity be a problem (for instance, if the target DNA comes in a sample that also contains many other closely related DNA sequences) then this can be overcome using ‘nested’ primers in the second tube.
These match sequences just inside the two original primer sites.
Thus nested amplification of a product of the polymerase chain reaction depends, overall, on accurate recognition by four independent oligonucleotides.
The other aspect that may cause problems is the specificity of the priming reaction itself.
This depends on several considerations.
The size of the oligonucleotide will determine whether it occurs more than once in a sample DNA and therefore might prime DNA polymerase activity at multiple sites.
This will generate only spurious products of the polymerase chain Reaction when unwanted priming also occurs close by on the other DNA strand.
However, the reaction may be inefficient if one of the primers is depleted because of excessive spurious priming.
Several simple measures can be taken to eliminate this type of problem should it arise.
These include using raised temperatures during cycling, adjusting the magnesium concentration (which partly determines the ease of hybridisation), and various other easy tricks to destabilise partially mismatched primers.
On balance, these considerations do not usually constitute a serious problem, and any teething troubles can usually be overcome quickly by minor and obvious adjustment to reaction conditions.
Why has the reaction had such a major impact?
southern blotting
The impact of the polymerase chain reaction can be attributed to its practical simplicity and to its speed, sensitivity, and specificity.
Consideration of some of the routine day to day techniques of molecular biology allows this to be illustrated.
In a genomic Southern blot it is impractical to load more than 10 µg (10 -6 g) of restriction enzyme digested DNA per lane of an agarose gel.
Higher loading causes overloading and streaking.
If one is interested in a 3 kilobase fragment then this constitutes about 10 pg (10 -1 g) of the sample.
Detecting 10 pg of anything is taxing, and doing so when it is effectively ‘contaminated’ with a million-fold  excess of somewhat similar DNA fragments is even harder.
The practical consequence has previously been that prolonged autoradiographic techniques were required.
Days or weeks would be needed for each experiment.
By simply amplifying the fragment of interest it can be characterised in agarose gels, usually by visual inspection, in a few hours.
messenger rna
Another example of the reaction's impact would be the use of polymerase chain reaction to overcome some of the many problems inherent in analysing messenger RNA (mRNA) by classic techniques.
These molecules, the ultimate source of information about what is going on at a specific time in a particular cell, are extremely labile chemically (for example, to traces of alkaline detergent in less than scrupulously clean glassware) and enzymatically (to the ubiquitous ribonuclease).
A typical RNA preparation from a tissue sample or cell culture will contain around 2% of mRNA or less, with 98% ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA).
Though selecting for the polyadenylated mRNA on oligo(dT) affinity columns is possible, it is notoriously difficult even for the nimble fingered.
Handling the minute amounts of material required remains extraordinarily difficult.
Synthesis and subsequent cloning of copy DNA (cDNA) often yielded unsatisfactory clone banks with short inserts and heavy ribosomal DNA (rDNA) contamination for these purely technical reasons.
The  situation is transformed by the use of the RNA polymerase chain reaction (fig 2).
Oligo(dT) itself can be used to prime first strand synthesis of cDNA.
Commercial kits are available and even thermostable ‘reverse transcriptases’ have been introduced.
Double stranded cDNA is obtained by a number of methods including using a second oligonucleotide or degenerate mixture specific for a target mRNA, or else total double stranded cDNA is produced by ‘tailing’ the first strand and using the complementary homo(oligonucleotide) as the second primer.
This has become known as ‘anchor polymerase chain reaction.’
After multiple cycles of amplification contaminating RNA species are no longer a problem and there is plenty of material to clone, sequence, or otherwise analyse, all within a few hours and with minimal manual intervention.
Incorporating the reaction into routine molecular genetics
analysis of restriction fragment length polymorphisms
Analysis of restriction fragment length polymorphisms, previously a stock-in-trade of molecular genetics, has been revolutionised by the polymerase chain reaction.
We have discussed the inherent difficulty of Southern blotting above.
For restriction fragment length polymorphisms analysis it is essential, in particular, to generate DNA of sufficient quality to undergo digestion to completion with restriction enzymes.
This is not always easy.
Failure to cut sample DNA may lead to diagnostic errors with clinical material.
Amplifying the target DNA means that obtaining high quality DNA should never be a problem, at least in principle.
Control amplifications on samples to show that a constant restriction enzyme site can be cut strengthen confidence in the analysis.
Furthermore, the presence or absence of polymorphisms can be assessed immediately by agarose gel electrophoresis and by inspection of ethidium bromide stained products under ultraviolet light.
The reaction has in fact permitted dramatic advances in the use of genetic polymorphism in linkage analysis.
As well as classic dimorphic restriction fragment length polymorphisms, which are not particularly informative, several classes of repeat sequences have now been characterised in DNA which are highly polymorphic as a consequence of wide variation in repeat copy number.
This is easily assessed by the polymerase chain reaction using sequences that flank the microsatellite or minisatellite repeat — the size of the product reflects the number of repeat units.
The procedure has revolutionised human genetics by massively increasing the speed and power of pedigree analysis.
Of importance to the clinician, certain inherited diseases (myotonic dystrophy, the fragile X syndrome, Kennedy disease) seem to be the result of spontaneous increases in the copy number of trinucleotide microsatellite repeats Again, assays for this based on the reaction already permit presymptomatic or antenatal diagnosis.
dna sequencing
DNA sequencing, another fundamental molecular genetic technique and increasingly a vital component for identifying molecular pathology in patients, has also become reliant on the reaction.
Traditionally, single stranded DNA for sequencing was obtained by cloning into the M13 bacteriophage system and subsequently purifying phage DNA.
Given a reasonable amount of DNA template, sequencing was achieved by extending oligonucleotide primers in the presence of dideoxynucleoside triphosphate chain terminators.
Amplification by the reaction solves the DNA yield problem without cloning.
The material may be either sequenced double stranded or rendered single stranded by asymmetrical polymerase chain reaction (using very much less of one of the two primers), selective enzymatic digestion of one of the strands, or by selective capture of one of the strands by labelling one oligonucleotide with biotin and immobilising the  product on streptavidin coated magnetic beads.
So called ‘cycle sequencing’ can increase the sensitivity of the process.
In many circumstances the use of high temperatures for the thermostable DNA polymerase reaction is advantageous in sequencing because secondary structure in the template strand is eliminated.
contamination
There can be problems in controlling this powerful technique.
As the polymerase chain reaction is able to amplify even a single molecule, contamination by any previously amplified DNA would be catastrophic.
Many precautions have been devised to avoid contamination, but scrupulous housekeeping is essential in any laboratory routinely undertaking the reaction.
An extensive debate about the fidelity of copying DNA sequences by Taq polymerase has been published, but this is not usually an issue except in highly specialised applications, such as the study of variant clinical isolates of HIV.
Some applications of the reaction
There is an enormous range of novel applications of the reaction, and the list of references contains several comprehensive reviews.
Specific examples that have been particularly useful include:
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction , which permits measurement of the level of specific mRNAs in different cell populations.
The amount of target product of the reaction is compared with the amount generated from a control amplification target in the same reaction.
The technique has been most widely applied in the analysis of cytokine responses.
Race-polymerase chain reaction .
RACE stands for rapid amplification of cDNA ends.
The reaction is performed between one primer designed on the basis of a given protein sequence and a second, which flanks the cloning site in a phage, or plasmid vector.
The substrate is a total cDNA library.
The product of the reaction is derived from the target mRNA, and the technique is particularly useful for identifying 5'-terminal cDNA sequences.
Alu polymerase chain reaction is enormously valuable.
Reaction primers match sequences in the ubiquitous interspersed repetitive sequences, of which about a million copies are scattered throughout the human genome.
Amplification yields reaction products derived from the regions between Alu sequences.
As the Alu repeats are relatively unique to humans, the human component from sources such as somatic cell hybrids in rodent cell backgrounds, or human DNA cloned in cosmids or yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs), can be isolated.
Inverse polymerase chain reaction permits amplification of DNA in which the sequence of only one end of the fragment is known.
This permits effective chromosome walking.
Vectorette polymerase chain reaction also permits amplification of regions of DNA of unknown sequence that flank known sequences.
The approach entails restriction digestion of the DNA sample then ligation of specially designed ‘vectorette’ linkers.
The amplification is performed between the known sequence and the vectorette sequence.
This method has proved generally useful in chromosome walking exercises and is particularly convenient for isolating the ends of yeast artificial chromosome clones for rapid physical genetic mapping and ordering of YACs to assemble so called‘contigs’.
Specific applications of the reaction in molecular medicine
There are three distinct types of clinical challenge for which the polymerase chain reaction is indispensable:(1) Detecting vanishingly small amounts of DNA so as not to miss even the most cryptic infection and permit analysis of single cells or single sperm and of partially degraded samples.
(2) Identifying the specific new mutation in a particular gene that causes a given inherited disease in a patient.
This is necessary to gain an understanding of the molecular basis of the resulting disease and also to allow accurate family studies for genetic counselling.
(3) Analysis to detect known mutations that always cause a particular inherited disease or polymorphism (for example, sickle cell anaemia, or the cystic fibrosis F508 deletion).
Detecting vanishingly small quantities of nucleic acid has been achieved in the diagnosis of HIV infection and in such unusual applications as detecting measles virus RNA in brain biopsy specimens from patients with subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
The nested technique is often helpful, and eventually the products of polymerase chain reactions may even be analysed by Southern blotting to gain further absolute sensitivity.
In these circumstances, the issue of sample contamination giving false positive results is usually as important as the risk of false negative results arising from ‘failure’ of the reaction.
The ability to detect negligible (a few molecules) DNA is also essential for preimplantation diagnosis in in vitro fertilisation clinics.
characterisation of gene mutations
A range of elegant techniques has been developed for characterising new genetic mutations — all the techniques rely on the generation by the polymerase chain reaction of large quantities of DNA fragments from normal and mutant alleles.
The problem is to detect as little as a single base pair difference between, say, two 500 base pair fragments.
This is often achieved by creating heteroduplexes between the two alleles and looking for modified properties in:(a ) chemical cleavage reactions;(b ) ribonuclease digestion (one fragment is RNA);(c ) denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis;(d ) single strand conformational polymorphism;(e ) reaction with carbodiimide; or (f ) automated total sequencing of both fragments.
A smaller number of techniques based on the polymerase chain reaction is available for the routine detection of known mutations.
If the mutation creates or destroys a restriction site then this can be simply examined in the products of the reaction.
The disadvantage is that two distinct operations (polymerase chain reaction and restriction cleavage) are required.
Detecting mutations by hybridising products of the reaction with allele specific oligonucleotides is possible, although again the need for two distinct procedures is a drawback.
The concept of an allele specific polymerase chain reaction, usually called ‘ARMS’(the amplification refractory mutation system), is rather more convenient and general.
Here one of the pair of reaction primers is deliberately designed so that its 3' terminal residue lies precisely at the point mutation site.
Two experiments are run in parallel: in one the allele specific primer matches the normal sequence, in the other it matches the mutant sequence.
A product is obtained from the reaction only when 3' residues form base pairs and prime synthesis correctly.
By comparing the products in the ‘normal’ and ‘mutant’reactions, normal and mutant homozygotes as well as heterozygote carriers are easily identified.
Many genetic diseases are now routinely tested for in this way.
Furthermore, several pairs of the reaction primers can be mixed in the same tube and allowed to ‘analyse’ different point mutations at the same time (all the different products of the polymerase chain reaction are deliberately designed to be different sizes).
By this ‘multiplex’ approach, for example, all of the four (or more) common mutations causing cystic fibrosis can be looked for simultaneously in a single sample.
Several similar assays based on thermostable DNA ligases rather than polymerase are also being developed.
A similar type of multiplex polymerase chain reaction analysis aimed at detecting DNA deletions has revolutionised antenatal diagnosis of Duchenne type muscular dystrophy.
Another clinical advantage of these exquisitely sensitive tests has been that sufficient DNA can be obtained from buccal washings, dried blood on Guthrie phenylketonuria test cards, or tiny chorionic villus biopsy specimens.
applications
As the technique has developed so the range of applications in clinical practice has expanded.
HLA molecular subtyping by polymerase chain reaction is straightforward, and clinicians are now attempting to develop tests that predict people at risk of developing insulin dependent diabetes mellitus on that basis.
Mutations that appear to predispose to myocardial infarction (in the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene) and hypertension (in the angiotensinogen gene) have been identified recently.
Population screening programmes may be worth while.
Both predispositions may be suppressible by treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors.
Various mutations in both oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes have been implicated heavily in the development of cancer.
Assessment of the extent of such mutation in a given tumour may permit assessment of prognosis or predict whether distant metastasis has already occurred.
Future clinical possibilities
This raft of techniques can be applied to most specialties.
Here I will limit discussion to two disciplines in which there is great activity.
antenatal diagnosis
In antenatal diagnosis much effort is directed towards methods of analysing those few fetal cells found circulating in a pregnant woman's peripheral blood.
By this approach invasive fetal sampling techniques may be avoided entirely or limited to those cases where confirmation of a positive diagnosis is desirable.
The estimate is that less than 10 000 fetal nucleated erythrocytes are present in 20 ml of maternal blood.
Fluorescence activated cell sorting with anti-CD71, anti-CD36, or anti-glycophorin A, or a combination of these three monoclonal antibodies, permits enrichment towards 90% pure fetal nucleated erythrocytes.
Trisomies can be detected direct by fluorescence in situ hybridisation.
It seems to be only a matter of time before sufficient urification is achieved routinely to permit the full range of diagnosis based on the polymerase chain reaction as above.
Indeed, this whole topic was resurrected some three years ago by the demonstration of Y chromosome specific product obtained by the technique from pregnant women with male fetuses.
This essentially confirmed that fetal tissue was in fact present in the maternal circulation.
detection of cancer
Early detection of cancers is widely regarded as clinically important in that early treatment usually improves prognosis, and curative surgery may even be possible — for example, in colorectal cancer.
The technique will have a major impact in this subject.
It is already clear that mutations in p53 genes indicative of developing bladder cancer can be detected by analysis of shed cells present in patients' urine samples.
Even more remarkably, premalignant changes in the gastrointestinal tract can be detected by testing faeces using the polymerase chain reaction.
Enough premalignant cells are present in the bulk of stool to permit the analysis of tumour suppressor gene mutations by this technique.
Patients at high risk can thus be selected for colonoscopy.
Whether this approach offers advantages over faecal occult blood testing remains to be established.
The fact that gastric Helicobacter pylori infection has been assessed from stool samples by this technique suggests that gastric malignancy may also eventually prove detectable in this way.
Detection of potentially metastatic cells in the circulation of patients with newly diagnosed primary tumours (for example, melanoma) is particularly intriguing.
The impending characterisation of a melanoma related tumour suppressor gene from human chromosome 9 should make this type of approach even more useful.
The clinical usefulness of the polymerase chain reaction thus seems to be limited only by the power of our imagination in identifying specific targets.
Outline of the procedure
A small sample of DNA is placed in a tube
Two oligonucleotides are added.
These have sequences matching two sequences of the DNA that flank the region of interest
A thermostable DNA polymerase is added
The mixture is heated to just below 100°C and the DNA dissociates into two single strands
The solution is allowed to cool and the single strands bind to the oligonucleotides, which are in excess
The oligonucleotide now acts as a primer for DNA polymerase and is extended to form a new double stranded molecule
The cycle is repeated, with the amount of DNA doubling each time
Uses of the reaction in molecular genetics
Analysis of restriction fragment length polymorphisms
Analysis of messenger RNA
Amplification of fragments for identification by Southern blotting
Assessment of genetic polymorphism in linkage analysis.
DNA sequencing
Preparation of elusive DNA fragments for cloning
Present uses of the reaction in medicine
Detection of vanishingly small amounts of nucleic acid — for example, in HIV infection
Identification of new genetic mutations
Routine detection of known mutations — for example, Duchenne type muscular dystrophy.
Assays based on the reaction allow presymptomatic or antenatal diagnosis of diseases due to microsatellite instability such as myotonic dystrophy, the fragile X syndrome, and Kennedy disease
Detection of mutations thought to predispose to disease — for example, myocardial infarction and cancer
Detection of mutations in malignant tumours to assess prognosis
HLA subtyping
Letter from Albania
A country in transition
‘That will get stolen,’ the minister of health exclaims when I show him the picture of the pressure cooker that is meant to be used as a steriliser in the dispensaries.
He immediately realises the impact of his remark and adds reassuringly: ‘We will take measures to prevent that, of course.’
Working as a medical coordinator for Médecins Sans Frontières I had the privilege to work in Albania during the period of transition since communism has been discarded.
I arrived at Christmas 1991.
There was snow and frost, and the minister received me in his fur coat because there was no heating.
During the following months we started to distribute basic medical material to dispensaries, health centres, and hospitals in a few districts.
I travelled extensively throughout the country for six months to prepare for a nationwide extension of the programme, which was funded by the European Community.
Basics to start with
The director of the district hospital in Corovoda shows me his hospital with enthusiasm.
‘Have a cigarette,’ he says, and as if to persuade me he lights one himself in the corridor.
The ash will be scattered on the floor throughout the hospital.
‘Can't you provide us with a new x ray machine, incubators, analysers, and an ultrasound machine?
These are things that every hospital needs, don't you agree?’
The director is visibly disappointed when I explain that we will start with the basics and that we will not spend the whole budget on a new x ray machine.
The building is decrepit, the doors do not shut, the windows have no glass, some taps leak continuously, the staff are too embarrassed to show me the lavatories.
The guided tour takes the form of a procession; all doctors are interested to speak to a foreigner.
Despite their isolation the doctors often speak foreign languages.
During the visit I do not get the impression that I'm keeping any of them from their work.
The reason is simple: there are hardly any patients.
‘Are the Albanians that healthy?’
I ask innocently.
He grabs me amicably by the shoulder, pinches me firmly, and explains that since the Chinese left no new equipment has been purchased.
The patients realise this and they do not expect any effective help anymore: medicines, sutures, needles are all scarce or absent.
Furthermore, it is so cold during this time of the year that, without heating, patients do not want to be admitted.
The way that doctors and other staff associate with each other is much less formal than we are used to in Western countries.
The level of their salaries is equally striking: doctors earn $14 a month and nurses $10.
At an average expenditure of $17 per head, the budget of the Ministry of Health is scarcely sufficient to pay the salaries, let alone to purchase any new equipment.
The scarcity is beyond words; even the most basic materials such as gauzes, needles, and syringes cannot be found.
The hardware, such as x ray, theatre, and laboratory equipment, is still of Chinese or even Russian origin, with some items being over 40 years old.
Autoclaves are functioning but neither the pressure gauge, thermometer, nor the timer are working.
The sterilising procedure is guided by intuition alone, the high prevalence of hepatitis B proves that this is not the best method.
In the corridor I'm addressed by another doctor.
‘Do we get a sphygmomanometer?
How can we work seriously without one?’
A sphygmomanometer, a thermometer, scales — all are rarities in the hospital.
The surgeon presses his stethoscope in my hands: ‘What is your opinion of this patient?’ he asks.
The stethoscope keeps silent.
I adjust the earplugs, with no result.
Helplessly I look up from the patient.
The doctors laugh and the surgeon says: ‘Yes we do know how to examine our patients, even without proper equipment,’ as if to convince me of their capabilities.
I examine the stethoscope instead of the patient and notice that the membrane is missing.
The statistics suggest that people's health is not too  bad.
Life expectancy at 72 years is the same as in countries where incomes are three times higher.
Without doubt a combination of lifestyle (walking and diet), a high level of education for women, and the wide access to primary health care have contributed to this favourable figure.
The reported infant mortality is 30 per 1000, and a further analysis shows that the mortality in the first week of life is unexpectedly low.
I am suspicious.
The tendency to achieve planned targets by whatever means is well known in other Eastern block countries.
The staff are unfamiliar with some of the donated materials.
We found one part of the delivery bed in the labour ward but the other part turned up in the children's ward.
The gynaecologist asks me: ‘Is this size of vaginal speculum really used in the Netherlands and are the delivery beds that wide?’
It needs a practical demonstration and the gynaecologist ends up with his legs in the stirrups.
When I told them that I was born in a similar bed and had become a doctor afterwards they were more convinced.
The doctors are proud.
‘This is not Africa,’ is an exclamation often heard.
Albania, however, definitely is a part of the developing world in the middle of Europe and it is difficult not to compare Albania with my previous experiences in Africa.
One big difference is that there are no missionary organisations involved in health care.
Once a country that forbade religion by constitution, Albania is now being flooded by all kinds of organisations that try to convert people.
The diversity in names is surprising: Save the Savable, Feed the Hungry, God Loves Albania, Foundation for the Freedom of Consciousness.
Schools and clinics destroyed
We used the opportunity of the trip to visit some remote dispensaries on the way to the district hospital.
The scenery throughout the rugged mountain areas is dramatic.
A trip of three hours to reach a dispensary from the district capital is no exception.
The road follows the river.
We cross it, again and again.
To my astonishment I find that we use the river bed as a road.
When we reach the village we cannot find the dispensary.
A small boy guides us to a heap of stones.
‘That is the clinic, doctor.
Half a year ago it was destroyed.
Shall I take you to the nurse?’ he asks me.
It turns out that nearly all dispensaries are either destroyed, looted, or too decrepit to work in.
The transition period in Albania started with anarchy when people vented their rage on government buildings such as schools and dispensaries.
We find the village nurse in her house.
‘Yes, of course I still work, I vaccinate the children, I visit the people in their homes if necessary, and give injections.’
The vaccinations are administered regularly.
Rituals are still being observed with vaccines being transported in a thermos (yet sometimes without ice) and stored in the neighbour's fridge.
On the day of vaccination the vaccines are kept in the table drawer.
‘What kind of injections are given?’
I ask the nurse.
‘Vitamins, of course, for malaise and antibiotics when the people cough.’
Inspection of the cupboard shows that these are the main categories; vitamins are available for every letter of the alphabet.
Sterilisation methods are rudimentary.
The needles are correctly boiled in water but if the water has evaporated fresh water is added and after completion of the procedure the whole pot is transported to the patient's house.
Advantages of isolation
It will take years for Albania to catch up with the standards of medicine in other European countries but not all the news is negative.
Albania does not have to start from scratch.
There are many staff with good basic training and the widespread system of primary health care forms an excellent base.
This part of the communist system has to be maintained.
Replenishment of basic medical materials has priority and should go hand in hand with teaching and retraining staff.
Community medicine, family planning, health education need emphasis.
The destroyed dispensaries need rebuilding to provide the workers with a reasonable working place.
Given the budget restraints of the government, community involvement is essential.
In some ways Albania's isolation has advantages.
It would be naive to think that HIV has not crossed the border yet, but compared with other countries Albania is in a favourable position to keep the pandemic within limits.
The abuse of intravenous drugs is still uncommon.
Introduction of a free market system seems inevitable.
Designing a proper health financing system will be a major challenge and the most important decision for guaranteeing health care for the entire population.
With the arrival of the democratic government many Albanians think that it will rain dollars.
The new government, with a cardiologist as a president and an anaesthetist as a minister of health, will raise the confidence of many people that the resuscitation of the health system is in good hands.
The transition, however, will take years, and a public health approach is essential.
LETTERS
Persistent glue ear in children
Editor ,— In the editorial on treating persistent glue ear in children Ruut A De Melker frequently refers to the recent Effective Health Care bulletin.
Regrettably, this opportunity has been missed.
The review is filled with inconsistencies and factual errors.
The authors draw attention to what seems to be a large regional variation between rates of surgical treatment for glue ear.
They do not use actual figures specific to treatment of that condition alone but figures derived from data from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys to which a correction based on figures from the Yorkshire region has been applied.
Anyone dealing with such figures will know of the enormous variation in coding practice in different areas.
The accuracy of data must be suspected when the same document reports that 22% of tonsillectomies in the Yorkshire region are performed as day case procedures.
No surgeons in the Yorkshire region perform tonsillectomy as a day case procedure.
If there is a regional variation in the rate of treatment for glue ear need this be a sign that overtreatment occurs in some areas?
I have held posts in the north of England, East Anglia, and the west of Scotland and have gained a strong clinical impression of wide regional variations in many conditions of the respiratory tract.
The authors of the bulletin reject one large controlled trial that compared the effects of different treatments applied to each ear, one ear serving as the other's control.
The reasons given for rejecting this paper are that the brain may compensate for poor hearing by enhancing hearing in the treated ear, resulting in an overestimate of the likely effects of treating both ears.
This is an interesting theory, but the authors can supply no evidence for it.
Having rejected much of the literature because of faults found in the methodology, the authors focus their attention on three relatively small  clinical trials.
One of these has not yet been published, so people are unable to satisfy themselves that its design is appropriate.
The bulletin is not a wide ranging, objective, scientific review as De Melker would have us believe.
I recommend that anyone interested in glue ear should read it, but carefully.
Editor ,— Ruut A De Melker objectively summarises the literature on the treatment of glue ear as published in the recent bulletin from the Effective Health Care Group.
One of the most striking findings to an ear, nose, and throat surgeon is the apparent focus on hearing loss to the exclusion of all other symptoms related to this condition and therefore the ignoring of the overall picture of morbidity associated with the condition of glue ear.
In clinical practice grommet insertion may be performed for a number of different indications apart from hearing loss.
These include recurrent episodes of otitis media and otalgia, often more distressing and pressing symptoms from both the child and parental viewpoint since they require frequent treatment with antibiotics.
A randomly selected sample of 159 children from this unit aged 14 years or under who underwent grommet insertion over the past six months showed that 39% (62) had the operation performed predominantly for reasons other than hearing disability, a point not even mentioned in the document.
The suggestion of using a period of ‘watchful waiting’ is accepted and in widespread clinical practice.
In Britain most children have already undergone a long period of conservative management at the hands of their general practitioners, often with trials of non-operative intervention using long term antibiotics.
The importance of symptom control in this context cannot be ignored since few adults would be prepared to tolerate long periods of disability from hearing loss, otalgia, or otitis media.
In any event most ear, nose, and throat departments have a review facility whereby patients whose symptoms had spontaneously resolved would have their operations postponed.
It behoves otolaryngology as a specialty to assess other measures of outcome for grommet insertion such as otalgia, recurrent otitis media, sleep disturbance, dysequilibrium , personality or behavioural changes, family disruption, or absence from school.
This, however, will be difficult.
Although they are welcome as an attempt to rationalise clinical practice, we believe the bulletin and leading article to be greatly misleading in implying an overperformance of surgery since it starts from the premise that grommet insertion is performed predominantly for hearing loss, which represents only one debilitating symptom of the many that glue ear may produce.
Editor ,— Otitis media with effusion is a controversial issue, as pointed out by Ruut A De Melker, but the complications of grommet insertion may have been overstated — no paper published in English suggests that grommets may cause cholesteatoma.
A review of grommet insertion into 1568 ears (2266 intubations in total) found permanent perforations in only 28 ears.
A 15 year follow up of a controlled trial of grommets versus myringotomy showed no long term impairment of hearing in the grommeted ear.
More recent data is available from a long term follow up trial in New Zealand.
The Dunedin study (quoted by De Melker as confirming that children with persistent effusions at a young age have problems with learning, language, and development until at least the age of 7–9 years has now produced follow up data (reported at the international symposium on otitis media with effusion, Fort Lauderdale, 1991) to age 16 which shows that these educational and developmental problems continued, and that reading age in untreated patients remained two years behind their treated controls.
There is further evidence that untreated middle ear disease in childhood may have permanent effects.
Moore et al showed that a history of otitis media in children was associated with abnormalities of binaural processing of sounds even when their thresholds for pure tones were normal.
Additionally, animal studies have shown that monaural occlusion early in development can influence the development of auditory receptive fields in the central nervous system.
In Britain, waiting times for being seen in an outpatient clinic, followed by those for surgery, ensure that most children have waited a considerable time before grommet insertion, adenoidectomy, or a combination can be performed.
This waiting time will in most cases select out those children whose effusions are short lived.
If doubt persists many otolaryngologists will arrange a further period of review.
Most otolaryngology departments repeat audiometry and tympanometry immediately before surgery to exclude patients whose effusions are resolving.
If Dr De Melker feels that a watch and wait policy is warranted, how long should that period be?
It is surprising, and possibly inappropriate, that a leading article on a middle ear condition should be written by someone who specialises in general practice, rather than by an otologist, and by someone who may be less well acquainted with the problems of long waiting times in Britain than a British specialist.
Editor ,— In the editorial on treating persistent glue ear in children Ruut A de Melker might also have mentioned the high rate of repeat operations to insert grommets for glue ear.
In Grampian Health Board since 1986 repeat operations have accounted for 38–40% of all such operations (data obtained from Scottish morbidity records (SMR 1), Grampian Health Board).
In 1975–90 in Scotland 25% of children had grommets reinserted within four years of their first operation, and children have had grommets inserted up to 14 times (data obtained from Scottish morbidity  records, Information and Statistics Division, Common Services Agency, Edinburgh).
Clearly, many factors influence reinsertion rates, but these factors and alternative treatments, such as hearing aids, need to be evaluated to avoid repeated operations in young children.
Editor ,— Ruut A De Melker failed to mention the important contribution of allergy to secretory otitis media (glue ear).
Successful treatment of glue ear by attention to underlying allergic disease has been previously reported.
Our experience at the Royal National Throat, Nose, and Ear Hospital over the past two years in a study of over 200 children aged 3–8 years with chronic (more than six months) or recurrent (more than three episodes) glue ear is that a high proportion (over 80%) have allergic rhinitis and that treatment of this is associated with resolution of the secretory otitis media in most cases.
With further respiratory tract infections there remains a tendency to impaired hearing, but this is transient.
Evidence in support of this comes from a further study of 80 children with perennial allergic rhinitis and no hearing complaints.
These underwent audiometry and tympanometry, which showed that only 17 (21%) had entirely normal hearing.
The children with secretory otitis media also had a high prevalence of asthma (over 35%), often previously undiagnosed, and eczema (20%), with blood eosinophilia in 35%.
Such children obviously need general assessment, not merely an examination of their ears and hearing.
Allergy, although probably not the cause of glue ear, is a factor in its persistence and recurrence and should be taken into consideration when evaluating treatment methods.
Medical education
Editor ,— The recent series of articles by Stella Lowry offers some profound insights into the problems, current and long standing, in medical education.
We are particularly struck by the concern that doctors are now expected to work in multidisciplinary teams, not automatically as their leaders.
To respond to this development in a positive way, in Southampton we have introduced multiprofessional teaching for students from physiotherapy, occupational therapy, nursing, podiatry, and medicine.
Problem based learning techniques are used, and students work in teams to define professional roles and develop management plans for patients.
Feedback suggests that students enjoy the experience, acquire knowledge about professional roles and patient management, improve their teamworking skills, and develop positive attitudes towards multidisciplinary teamworking which might serve them well in their later professional practice.
As facilitators, we have also learned a great deal about our professional roles.
If medical education is to respond to modern developments in health care, we believe that more of this sort of teaching will be required.
Editor ,— There is a general perception that change in medical education is starting to occur.
It may be difficult for a medical school, itself relatively small, to plan and implement this.
The City and East London Confederation for Medicine and Dentistry consists of Queen Mary and Westfield College, the London Hospital Medical College, and St Bartholomew's Hospital Medical College.
Cooperation between their staff and students has been extremely effective in providing a critical mass for generating ideas and implementing new teaching methods.
The students of Queen Mary and Westfield College (not of St Bartholomew's as incorrectly stated in Stella Lowry's article), which is next to the Royal London Hospital (Mile End), undertake at Queen Mary and Westfield College the innovative phase I of the curriculum which she describes.
This is taught by staff of all colleges including basic and behavioural scientists, clinicians, and community staff.
The educational content of all phases is supervised by the curriculum management committee of the City and East London Confederation, on which the three colleges are represented, and to which all local implementation groups are responsible.
During phase II (in which behavioural sciences, statistics, ethics and the law, and clinical and communication skills are taught, and further project and community experience is gained), the students go to their ‘parent’ medical colleges (the London or St Bartholomew's Colleges).
The main clinical modules constitute phase III, and their aims and teaching methods are carefully scrutinised by the phase III committee to ensure suitability and avoidance of factual overload.
This, again, includes members of all three colleges and incorporates clinicians, basic and behavioural scientists, and students.
Such cross college and interdisciplinary pressure has been found invaluable in replacing passivity and resistance to change by enthusiasm and a desire to innovate and improve.
The modules in each medical college are similar but utilise local strengths to best advantage.
For students at the London Hospital Medical College the ‘core’ attachments will be supplemented in their final year by two months of electives and three months for the study of more strictly defined ‘options.’
There is a point of particular concern.
The cheapest and easiest way of teaching subject matter is by large group lectures.
The cheapest and easiest way to teach clinically is by apprenticeship.
These are educationally unsatisfactory and unlikely to generate the deep thinking referred to by Lowry or produce caring doctors with a holistic attitude to illness and their patients.
Good education is not cheap, as we have already found, and meeting the ideals of the General Medical Council is more costly and time consuming than older methods of medical education.
Editor ,— The logistic problems that Stella Lowry associates with community based teaching could be resolved by funding in proportion to that supporting teaching hospitals.
Such teaching is certainly feasible.
As distinct from the four week experience of general practice which all of our final year students receive (with a final objective structured clinical examination (OSCE) in general practice) this university department of general practice has over many years provided generic clinical teaching for the department of medicine.
In Year 1 all 130 students now have four introductory sessions — dealing with people, professional ethics, problem solving, and population based medicine — at local practices.
General practitioner tutors are paid at NHS consultant rates for both teaching and training sessions.
Patients' expenses are reimbursed and buses are hired for students.
The total cost is about £100 per student.
This is a realistic estimate of the cost of ‘casual’ systematic teaching.
Major resources and imaginative mechanisms are, however, required to enlarge the scale.
The infrastructure of teaching hospitals is largely NHS (rather than university) funded and there has only recently been a welcome extension of this mechanism to general practice.
Including this, the combined funds in my region are about £20m a year for hospital as against £0.3m for general practice.
Per student per year, general practitioners' funding is about 50% of the hospital rate.
These differences merely reflect the current balance of locus of academic activity and the obviously higher unit costs of hospital infrastructure.
General practice based education is still a marginal activity.
Even modest expansion will need funds to provide accommodation and resources for good systematic teaching and protected academic time through enhanced staff levels.
Our vision should not be clouded by present logistic and structural constraints: the NHS reforms have shown how quickly these can be changed.
Although a fivefold increase in funding for academic general practice may seem inconceivable it is a comparatively modest sum that would drive change in the balance of clinical education and pay handsome dividends for both the patients and the profession as a whole.
Editor ,— The recent articles by Stella Lowry have highlighted several important issues in medical education arising from the recommendations of the recent GMC report.
At Manchester University, ‘core plus option’ curricular changes have already been implemented.
Most traditional style, discipline oriented lectures have been discontinued.
We anticipate that our integrated clinical practice course will encourage students to  adopt a more holistic approach.
The new ‘option’ teaching gives each student the opportunity to study a particular area of interest in depth, and may well influence their final career choice.
We hope that the enthusiasm and effort that we are investing in these options will be reflected in the recruitment of graduates into obstetrics and gynaecology.
To complement these curricular changes the nature and timing of the examinations have been changed.
Students receive their ‘core’ teaching in the fourth year, with a clinical examination in each core specialty.
In obstetrics and gynaecology we have implemented an objective structured clinical examination (OSCE).
Lowry highlighted the organisational problems associated with such examinations.
We have overcome these problems and now have what we consider to be a much fairer and more objective examination.
The examination (for each group of 90 students) starts at 9 00, and by 18 00 the final results have been confirmed at the examiners' meeting.
We have identified the ‘core’ skills which we feel are essential — these include communication skills assessed by history taking, obstetric and gynaecological examination (the latter using a dummy).
We have incorporated written short answer questions and clinically oriented slides.
The marking of the examination is weighted towards the assessment of clinical skills.
The final result awarded to each candidate takes into consideration the formative assessment results obtained during their clinical attachment, which incorporates a summative assessment obtained before the examination.
A criterion referenced marking schedule is used to assess the students at each clinical station.
We use a norm referenced method on the cumulative result to identify those students who require further tuition in our discipline.
Any student who fails the examination has a compulsory revision ‘option’ in final year.
Students who do not achieve a satisfactory pass in fourth year have a formal clinical examination and viva during their final MB examination.
The final MB now consists of three integrated papers: multiple choice questions, slides with short answers, and a paper consisting of patient management problems encompassing all disciplines.
The new curricular teaching and examinations are very labour intensive and have considerable resource implications.
University departments operating within close margins with respect to staffing and clinical resources have to rely on a large measure of good will to achieve continued high standards in teaching and evaluation, which can be difficult to sustain if, for example, reappointments of staff are delayed.
Proposals for resource allocation according to quality of teaching as well as research endeavour are undoubtedly overdue.
Editor ,— In her article ‘Teaching the teachers’ Stella Lowry points out that few medical teachers in Britain have any formal training in educational skills or theory.
Since so few doctors possess such skills, perhaps we can learn them from teachers outside the medical profession (at least until there is a sufficiently large body of trained teachers within the profession).
One possibility is the City and Guilds course 730, the further and adult education teacher's certificate.
This course is very widely available and it is pitched at the right level for the medical teacher.
It is taught in colleges of further education and polytechnics (now universities) throughout the country.
(In London courses are listed in Floodlight .)
The first term, part 1, covers lesson planning and presentation skills.
It would be suitable for any doctor, even if he or she does not specialise in teaching.
The remaining two terms cover the basic theory of education and teach how to plan an effective educational programme.
This would be ideal for any doctor who wished to be a clinical tutor, or who had a special interest in education.
When I did this course (in 1988 at Lewisham College) I went to tutorials for three hours twice a week, at which theory was taught, and we engaged in teaching exercises assessed by our peers and tutors.
There was, in addition, supervised teaching practice in the workplace.
We were expected to plan, implement, and evaluate a short teaching programme.
There was also a considerable amount of written work, with six written or practical assignments in the first term and a further 16 assignments in the rest of the course.
Anyone interested in the content and level of the course may wish to refer to one or more of the texts listed below.
I would, however, sound a note of caution.
It seems to me that the time, effort, initiative, and determination required to complete this course are equivalent to that needed to complete a research project.
As Lowry points out in her article, teaching does not have the same status as research.
The certificate has counted for little in my appointment interviews, and I was repeatedly told after failing the interview that my research record was weak.
Until the status of teaching improves in the medical profession it seems unlikely that doctors in training will choose to make the efforts necessary to acquire teaching skills.
Editor ,— Stella Lowry's article describing many ways of improving the preregistration year is thought provoking.
She mentions that Southmead Hospital is considering changing to a one year block contract as a means of empowering house officers and helping them to be recognised as an important part of the service provided.
Some of the stimulus for this came from a survey of senior medical students, yet when 30 current house officers were consulted all but two said that, though they would be happy to have the opportunity to apply for both jobs at one hospital, they would not have applied for a one year block contract that restricted them to one hospital.
The ability to gain experience in different hospitals was seen as an important part of the preregistration year, and one year block contracts could limit this.
We should be careful to avoid introducing change for change's sake and should carefully evaluate potential disadvantages as well as advantages.
Southmead Hospital has an excellent induction and core curriculum educational programme, which could be coordinated regionally or nationally; it also organises regular trouble shooting meetings between lead consultants, managers, and all levels of junior medical staff.
These measures alone may be as effective a means of recognising house officers as an important part of the service provided as restricting them to one hospital site for their preregistration year.
Editor ,— Stella Lowry underplays a striking finding of David Wilson's survey of 33 consultants in Yorkshire: he found that consultants generally did not see the preregistration year as an educational process.
This is remarkable as the universities have a statutory responsibility for this year and it is an integral part of medical education that is required before full registration with the GMC.
While I know many consultants who take supervision of preregistration house staff seriously, scheduling regular meetings and teaching sessions and using checklists to ensure that skills and techniques are mastered, it seems that these consultants are in the minority.
We are now entering the era of strict personal accountability, value for money, and survival of the fittest.
In this atmosphere one assumes that consultants who fail to educate preregistration house officers will lose the privilege of having such a colleague.
Monitoring theophylline treatment
Editor ,— J K Aronson and colleagues fail to draw attention to metabolic abnormalities, especially hypokalaemia, and their importance in relation to theophylline toxicity.
Metabolic abnormalities accompanying theophylline toxicity include hypokalaemia, hyperglycaemia, hyperinsulinaemia, raised catecholamine concentrations, increased plasma free fatty acid concentrations, stimulation of gastric acid secretion, and probably hypophosphataemia and hypomagnesaemia.
Among these hypokalaemia is the most consistent and important finding, and its magnitude correlates well with the concurrent serum theophylline concentration.
Theophylline probably causes redistribution of potassium into cells at the expense of the extracellular pool, an effect reinforced by the increased catecholamine response and mediated by an increased intracellular 3,5-cAMP concentration, hyperinsulinism, and hyperglycaemia.
The analogous hypokalaemia that may occur during treatment with β 2 adrenoceptor agonists has been explained in a similar manner.
In patients with airways obstruction hypokalaemia induced by theophylline is compounded by concurrent treatment with β 2 adrenoceptor agonists and corticosteroids and by hypoxia.
Potential lethal cardiac arrhythmias and convulsions are recognised complications of both iatrogenic and self inflicted overdoses.
Nausea, vomiting, and tachycardia are poor indicators of the severity of theophylline toxicity and do not always precede more serious cardiac and neurological effects.
Hypokalaemia may increase the predisposition to lethal cardiac arrhythmias and convulsions, especially in hypoxic patients with airways obstruction; serum potassium concentrations should therefore be monitored in every patient with established or suspected theophylline toxicity, and hypokalaemia should be corrected.
Editor ,— D J M Reynolds and J K Aronson indicate in their article on monitoring treatment with theophylline that, to achieve an optimum effect in the absence of complicating factors, plasma concentrations of theophylline must be in the range of 55–110 µmol/l.
However, this therapeutic range, obtained in studies conducted in patients with asthma, should not be used as a reference in patients with chronic obstructive airways disease, in which the use of theophylline has been a subject of controversy.
Its usefulness in this disease has been questioned, and a maximum efficacy was obtained in one report at lower plasma concentrations.
Authors' reply ,— Memon's points about metabolic abnormalities, emphasising hypokalaemia, are misleading in relation to monitoring theophylline therapy.
Hypokalaemia, as his selection of references shows, occurs after acute single overdosage of theophylline, but not during long term overdosage.
Furthermore, although there is an increase in circulating catecholamines in response to theophylline, in the one study he quoted that did not relate to overdose, the effect on blood glucose was clinically insignificant.
In contrast, the β 2 adrenoceptor agonists, with which Memon compares theophylline, can have large effects on plasma glucose, accompanied by similar changes in plasma potassium concentrations.
It is certainly important to measure the plasma potassium concentration during acute administration of theophylline (for example, after overdose or in acute severe asthma), since hypokalaemia may require treatment, but the plasma potassium concentration should not be regarded as a useful measure of the action of theophylline during long term therapy.
Sacristán and colleagues refer to chronic obstructive airways disease in the context of irreversible airways obstruction, which we did not discuss.
The evidence that theophylline is of benefit in such cases is inconclusive.
However, of the seven studies in the review they quote, three showed objective changes in lung function after theophylline, all in association with plasma concentrations in the therapeutic range.
Indeed, in one of those studies there was significant benefit when plasma concentrations were 95–120 µmol/l (17–22 µg/ml) compared with 50–70 µmol/l (9.0–12.5 µg/ml).
We do not believe that there is any good evidence that the therapeutic plasma concentration range is different in chronic obstructive airways disease than in asthma.
Liver failure induced by paracetamol
Editor ,— Gary P Bray draws attention to the fact that paracetamol is a common cause of morbidity and death in Britain and that it is the most common reason for intensive care for fulminant hepatic failure and liver transplantation.
Colleagues and I recently reported a case that may point to a possible adjunct to treatment for these patients.
A 24 year old woman presented to hospital more than 18 hours after self poisoning with over 30 g of paracetamol taken as both co-proxamol and paracetamol.
Her circulating paracetamol concentration was 943 µmol/l on admission, implying a high risk of fulminant hepatitis even if she was treated with the antioxidant acetylcysteine.
She was also profoundly hypothermic (rectal temperature 19°C).
Her condition was stabilised by resuscitation with intravenous fluids, vasoactive drugs, and active rewarming, and acetylcysteine treatment was begun.
Her condition improved, and she returned to the ward after a short period of ventilation in intensive care.
Results of liver function tests remained entirely normal despite the delay in presentation, and she recovered rapidly with no sign of hepatocellular damage.
Hypothermia is not a usual feature of paracetamol poisoning and in this case was probably due to a combination of other factors.
Hepatocellular metabolism, including conjugation, is reduced in hypothermia.
We postulated that hypothermia may have reduced formation of the toxic reactive intermediates produced by metabolism of paracetamol, and so prevented the development of hepatitis in this high risk case.
Induced hypothermia is used intraoperatively during cardiopulmonary bypass and has also been used in the intensive care management of cerebral oedema.
This case points to a possible role for moderate hypothermia in preventing hepatitis secondary to ingestion of paracetamol, when it might be used as an adjunct to treatment with acetylcysteine or haemoperfusion in high risk cases.
Editor ,— An important reason why paracetamol-methionine is rarely prescribed is that when Sterling Winthrop introduced it in 1986 under the brand name Pameton the Department of Health refused to add it to the list of medicines prescribable within the NHS because it saw ‘no clinical need.’
Pameton has been kept on the market as a means of making paracetamol available to patients who may be at risk of self harm, but only on private prescription.
Although it was promoted particularly to psychiatric units, they have shown little interest.
Pameton is little publicised because it is of value only to that small number of people who may misuse medicines.
The rest of us find paracetamol an effective analgesic with no important side effects and have no need of an antidote.
Editor ,— It is unfortunate that Gary P Bray adds to the confusion over deaths from paracetamol overdose by an apparent failure to recognise the difference between the cause of death and a coroner's verdict as to its motivation.
He quotes a figure for deaths from liver failure after an overdose of paracetamol and states this may be an underestimate as ‘many cases of liver failure may not be attributed to a suicidal overdose to alleviate bereaved relatives’ distress.’
All deaths in England and Wales from liver failure due to paracetamol are notified and recorded by the registrar general.
The coroners' verdicts for these deaths fall into the three categories of suicide, undetermined, and accidental.
The undetermined category includes those deaths referred to by Bray, thereby giving rise to an underestimate of the number of deaths attributed to suicide, but the total number of deaths is unaffected.
In 1990, the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys has told me, there were 150 deaths in England and Wales that could reasonably be attributed to liver failure after paracetamol overdosage, and of these, 119 were either certain or probable suicides.
Bray suggests that the addition of methionine to all paracetamol products ‘might prevent every death that currently occurs.’
Experience shows that this would not be so, as people bent on suicide who are denied one method will choose an alternative.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded in 31 of the 150 paracetamol deaths where an overdose was taken but death was not thought to be the intention.
The most effective way of preventing these deaths would be to convince people never to exceed the manufacturers' dosage recommendations.
To achieve the same objective by the addition of methionine to all paracetamol products would be difficult because of formulation difficulties involving a very large number of products and different manufacturers.
Furthermore, is it certain that the consumption of more than the daily requirement of methionine in this combination would be safe for all the more than 20 million adults in the United Kingdom who currently consume paracetamol each year without harm?
Certainly it will be disappointing if the number of deaths due to paracetamol overdosage continues at the current level, but it would be wise to recognise that in 1990 in England and Wales there were a further 1593 deaths due to overdosage of medicines other than paracetamol and that the prevention of such deaths should receive at least equal attention.
Treating mentally ill people in the community
Editor ,— Robert Bluglass suggests that brief readmission to hospital to extend leave of absence, a practice declared unlawful in England, persists ‘under Scots law.’
Unfortunately, the situation is far from clear.
The only reported appeal in Scotland against liability to detention while on leave of absence concerned a patient who was spending three or four days at home each week.
The sheriff (a judge in Scotland) dismissed the appeal on the ground that at least some inpatient treatment was actually, and not merely potentially, required at the time the appeal was heard.
He went on to say that this was an essential requirement to justify continued detention under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984.
No reported appeal by a patient in Scotland has exactly mirrored the circumstances of the case in England to which Bluglass refers.
I suspect that any such appeal would be successful.
The statutory form that a responsible medical officer must complete to extend detention (whether or not the patient is on leave of absence at the time) refers unambiguously to the need for treatment in hospital.
Any legal reform on this matter introduced in England will equally be necessary in Scotland.
Editor ,— Robert Bluglass sets out the views endorsed by the Royal College of Psychiatrists concerning community mental health legislation.
These proposals add little to existing, though rarely used, provisions for guardianship under the Mental Health Act 1983.
The purpose of community intervention is not simply to observe but to ensure that treatment is sustained for those whose illness, in terms of either severity or nature, warrants this.
A supervision order allows for close observation but requires evidence of deterioration before action can be taken in the form of recall to hospital to restart treatment.
This may well be appropriate for some patients but falls short of securing treatment for others whose relapses may be abrupt and catastrophic.
The current use of restriction orders (section 41) circumvents this problem and has not led to abuse.
Many patients who thereby benefit from continuation of treatment as a condition of discharge from hospital are able to resume relationships and activities that would be hazardous without such treatment.
Since the order can be made only by a crown court after prosecution for a serious offence, a considerable number of patients, who are equally dangerous or vulnerable, are denied this provision.
So too are their families, who are then subject to a greater burden of care, stress, and risk.
A commitment to statutory provision of treatment in the community would represent a considerable advance in health care.
A commitment to statutory provision alone fails those most at risk.
Editor ,— Robert Bluglass seems to bypass the essential problem in community care of mentally ill people — namely, chronic schizophrenia in which insight is lost.
This loss of insight — part of the intrinsic schizophrenic defect state — causes such loss of judgment that the sufferers, given the choice of non-compliance, will refuse to comply with treatment simply to assert their freedom.
If they could but appreciate it there is ample evidence from their repeated admissions of the deterioration, often with antisocial consequences, that results from stopping drug treatment.
Under the Mental Health Act 1959 patients maintained on guardianship orders knew that drug treatment could be enforced and therefore appeared regularly for depot injection on the right day and at the right time without pressure or demur.
They retained their status, and often jobs, in the community, and tension among relatives was relieved.
The essential weakness of the guardianship provisions under the 1983 act (sections 7 and 8) is that the guardian has the power to enforce attendance for treatment but not treatment itself.
All that is needed is two alterations to sections 7 and 8 of the current act.
Guardianship should be either to social services as now or to hospital managers.
Section 7(5) of the act should be strengthened to put the hospital managers on a par with the local social services authority.
The clause ‘and receive such medical treatment’ added to section 8(1) (b) would then make medical treatment compulsory in the community.
Those who believe that such insistence would ‘infringe civil liberties’ should appreciate that this liberty is valueless if wise judgment is so impaired by lack of insight that sufferers from the underlying illness can use this liberty only to their detriment.
Editor ,— The renewed enthusiasm shown by the secretary of state, and now the Royal College of Psychiatrists, for extending the coercive powers of psychiatry in dealing with the problems consequent on chronic underfunding of community care and the shortcomings of institutional psychiatric practice is regrettable.
The argument that, with compulsory supervision, mentally ill people in the community may be offered better service is dubious.
Instead of advocating greater restrictions and sanctions on ‘mentally ill’ people, perhaps the current debate should address the fundamental contradiction that has become all too apparent in contemporary psychiatric practice: the contradiction between care and control, cure and coercion.
Professional views of mental illness, especially when manifested in the public realm, continue to be based on nineteenth century ideas about madness as something that should be brought under control and removed from the public gaze.
When madness cannot be contained, or attempts to control it fail  repeatedly in spite of various changes in mental health policies, the answer is sought in greater powers of control and surveillance, now extended into people's homes and the community at large.
Institutional psychiatry with its reliance on hospital treatment has clearly failed and this predates the advent of community care in this country.
The notion that hospital care must remain an essential part of mental health provisions is therefore open to challenge.
Our work in Ladywood in Birmingham has shown that in the acute care of severely mentally ill people through home treatment, hospital admission can be avoided in four out of five cases.
The key to our success is the recognition by users and their families that we avoid notions of coercion and forcible treatment, that psychiatric practice involves more than ensuring compliance with medication.
Similar research elsewhere leads to better overall outcome in the long term than does hospital admission.
These new beginnings within community care would be seriously compromised if institutional models, with their emphasis on compulsion and surveillance, are simply relocated in a different guise in the community as the power base of psychiatry, namely the asylums, is run down.
The use of compulsion in psychiatric care is not just a procedural, professional matter.
There is good evidence to show that the Mental Health Act is used disproportionately against black people and other disadvantaged groups, and this element of social control that is invested in psychiatric practice is likely to be further strengthened and made more pervasive by the introduction of community supervision orders.
Such a mental health ‘sus law,’ invoked on the basis of unreliable predictions of dangerousness, will bring psychiatric practice closer to policing and will undermine the attempts to achieve cure or care, both in hospitals and community settings.
Sadly, these arguments do not seem to be uppermost in the current discussions at Whitehall or in the Royal College of Psychiatrists.
Preoperative autologous blood transfusion programme
Editor ,— Martin R Howard and colleagues report their experience of preoperative provision of autologous blood in the Northern region between December 1989 and November 1991.
Their project was preceded by a two year pilot study, also funded by Northern Regional Health Authority, from 1987 to 1989.
The pilot study was based in Sunderland District General Hospital, and its results have been published and presented at numerous international meetings.
Howard and colleagues do not compare their results with those of the pilot study, to whose success they owe their funding.
During the pilot study in Sunderland district alone 789 patients were referred, compared with 505 patients from 14 hospitals (including Sunderland) during 1989–91.
The table compares the results of the two studies.
It is evident that Howard and colleagues reduced the level of service in their attempt to extend it from Sunderland alone to 13 additional hospitals in the region.
This is an important finding and leads me to question the enthusiasm and commitment that the National Blood Transfusion Service laboratories will bring to the provision of autologous blood throughout the country.
Oral cancer in Scotland
Editor ,— Gary J Macfarlane and colleagues report the increase in the incidence of and mortality from oral carcinoma in Scotland.
Our figures for oral carcinoma in south east Scotland over the past 10 years show that 456 patients presented with these tumours; the mean age at presentation was 63.8 years for men and 68.2 years for women.
Forty nine of the patients were under 50 at presentation; this proportion has been constant for the past 10 years.
Non-smokers and non-drinkers presented much later; 39 (78%) of them were female.
Nearly two thirds of the total had a history of smoking.
Among those with carcinoma of the floor of the mouth, which was second only to the tongue as the most common site, 55 (76%) had a history of smoking.
Within this cohort 22 consumed more than 20 units of alcohol a week.
It is clear that both tobacco and alcohol are risk factors in the development of oral carcinoma.
Scotland shows some evidence for a higher alcohol consumption than England and a higher rate of admission to psychiatric institutions with alcoholism or alcoholic psychosis: in 1980 the age standardised rate per 100000 for male patients was 58.4 in Scotland and 11.0 in England.
In 1982 the general household survey showed a higher tobacco consumption in Scotland than the United Kingdom as a whole: 45% versus 38% in men and 39% versus 33% in women, respectively.
Macfarlane and colleagues suggest that the rise in incidence in Scotland in younger men could be due to a 40% increase in alcohol consumption in the United Kingdom as a whole.
We suggest that if there is a rise, which we have not seen, it is far outweighed by the higher consumption of both alcohol and tobacco north of the border.
It must also be stated, however, that although the overall incidence of oral cancer in men in Scotland is 3.9/100000, a considerable variation is found, from zero in Nairn to 11.2/100000 in Badenoch and Strathspey.
The incidence in Edinburgh was recorded as 5.3/100000.
Misuse of anabolic drugs
Editor ,— H M Perry and B N C Littlepage's editorial on the misuse of anabolic drugs prompted interesting correspondence.
Since March 1990 Mid Glamorgan's community drug team has seen a progressive increase in the number of users of anabolic steroids attending general needle exchange clinics and has therefore set up a separate service for these users.
We offer advice, needle exchanges, and monitoring of physical and psychological variables.
At present we have 45 people (all men; age range 18–50) registered with the clinic, which continues to expand.
Most of these people use intramuscular steroids, although only one admits to having shared needles at any time.
I agree with points raised in the correspondence regarding muscular build raising suspicion of abuse.
Certainly, some men of smaller than average build use the drugs to attain a ‘normal’ build.
Other benefits stated include increased weight and muscle mass, greater strength and stamina, and enhanced possibility of success in both bodybuilding competitions and potential employment in occupations in which physical size may be important — for example, as a debt collector or ‘bouncer.’
The increasing reports of potential complications of use of anabolic steroids requires not only physicians but psychiatrists to raise their awareness of this problem.
Information and research on this growing problem are at a fairly early stage, and I would be pleased to hear from anyone with similar experience.
Consensus statements
Editor ,— The Thromboembolic Risk Factors Consensus Group has reviewed the literature on venous thromboembolic disease and made several recommendations which they hope will stimulate debate and influence practice.
The authors show restraint in referencing their own work to support their conclusions but provide an extensive literature review with detailed recommendations for a wide range of surgical specialties.
The consensus group does not make clear that its recommendations are based on its interpretation of the widely available literature.
For example, in its recommendations for heparin prophylaxis in general surgery the group refers to a meta-analysis of the value of low molecular weight heparins versus heparin in thromboembolic prophylaxis in general and orthopaedic surgery as evidence that low molecular weight heparins are as effective as standard heparin in preventing venous thrombosis.
The authors of the meta-analysis put it differently: that there is no evidence that low molecular weight heparins offer any improvement over standard heparin.
It seems to me an unfortunate coincidence, therefore, that the pharmaceutical company that provided financial support for the consensus group chose to mount a postal advertising campaign within a week of the group's report, urging surgeons to use its particular low molecular weight heparin for venous thromboprophylaxis and citing the consensus group's recommendations as evidence for this.
I suggest that the BMJ should draw up clear guidelines on consensus statements designed to influence practice policy.
These should include an indication of how the participants of the consensus group were selected and whether their conclusions were based on their original research or their interpretation of the available literature.
Finally, no financial support should have been provided by a pharmaceutical company.
Saving the normal foreskin
Editor ,— No other part of the body has aroused so much passion and misconception as the foreskin, mainly because both surgical and personal considerations are concerned.
Attitudes towards the foreskin depend largely on civilisation and culture.
Muslims and Jews want to get rid of it for religious reasons; Americans want (wanted?) to get rid of it for hygienic reasons and for the hypothetical reduced risk of penile cancer in the circumcised population; Latins love to play with it, like to keep it, and are taught to mobilise it often; the British would like to ignore it, not to touch it, and eventually get rid of it when it causes too much trouble.
Though we agree that a failure to understand normal preputial physiology has led to an unacceptably high rate of circumcision, even the strictest criteria will not prevent a considerable number of these procedures from being performed.
Unfortunately, circumcision is often delegated to the most junior surgeons and its potential morbidity underestimated.
This inevitably leads to frequent and occasionally severe complications (haemorrhage, infection, amputations of the glans, urethral fistula, and disastrous cosmetic results).
In selected cases, however, a safe alternative to circumcision exists — namely, ‘preputial plasty,’ which allows complete mobilisation of the foreskin almost without discomfort and complications, even when done by inexperienced surgeons.
Longitudinal dorsal incision of the constricting band followed by transverse suture results in a fully mobile foreskin.
Early regular mobilisation of the prepuce after surgery ensures an excellent functional and cosmetic result.
Comparison of 50 patients undergoing this procedure with those having a circumcision during the same period has highlighted its advantages.
Early postoperative complications were negligible, while three patients who were circumcised required reoperation for haemorrhage.
Morbidity  was also considerably less, with 37 of 40 (93%) patients having no postoperative discomfort and being able to return to school soon after surgery compared with 16 of 35 (46%) who were circumcised.
Twenty eight of 40 responding parents whose son had had preputial plasty thought that the final appearance of their son's penis was normal.
Only two patients were unable to retract their foreskins, and in both there had been no effort at early mobilisation.
Preputial plasty is a well recognised procedure in Europe, and we think that it is a reliable option for selected patients with tight but unscarred and uninfected foreskins.
It certainly enables many more foreskins to be saved.
Child resistant containers for liquid medications
Editor ,— Like Michelle Jacobs, I have seen several instances of accidental overdose of prescribed medication in young children where the container provided no obstacle to the child.
In two cases the medicines — salbutamol in one case and paracetamol in the other — had been dispensed in a standard pharmacy bottle with no safety lid.
In neither case was a child resistant lid contraindicated.
Moreover, in both cases the labelling of the decanted medication was inadequate for those treating the children to be sure of the concentration and therefore the dose of drug ingested.
From further inquiries it seems that the policy in these two community pharmacies, and presumably in many other equally commercial establishments, is not to use the available, but more expensive, child resistant containers unless they are specifically requested by customers.
I agree with Jacobs that legislation may be the only answer as commercial forces, if left to their own devices, cannot be relied on to protect the most vulnerable members of society.
Perhaps in the meantime we should encourage parents to request child resistant containers.
Editor ,— Michelle Jacobs is right to highlight the danger to children from liquid medicines dispensed in containers that are not child resistant.
In Queen Mary's Hospital for Children we supply all dispensed medicines (liquids as well as tablets) for outpatients and casualty patients in containers with child resistant closures.
There are, however, problems in choosing suitable child resistant closures for medicine bottles.
There are at least three different types of screw threaded necks on bottles, and each needs a specific closure in order to form a seal with the top of the bottle, otherwise the bottle leaks.
The British Standard BS 6652 for child resistance is granted to specific combinations of bottle and cap and has been given only for some makes of closures on BS 1679 bottles, which are the ones we use in this hospital.
Certain types of liquids, especially those with a high sugar content, cause bottle tops to stick.
If this happens with a child resistant closure of the click-lock type the force necessary to try to undo the cap may disrupt the mechanism so that the cap cannot be removed without use of brute force and a screwdriver.
Despite the deficiencies in the present system we believe that child resistant closures should be used now for all medicines whether dispensed or bought over the counter.
Urgent attention should be given to developing British Standards for all types of closure so that legislation can be brought into force.
Editor ,— Like Michelle Jacobs, the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain wishes to see the introduction of child resistant containers for liquid medicines.
There have been problems, however, in obtaining a suitable cap that fits existing bottles: leakage and ‘cap locking’ have arrived.
Some development work has already been done by pharmaceutical companies and manufacturers of bottles and caps, and satisfactory child resistant containers are expected to be available for use with liquid medicines in the near future.
At that time the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain will advocate that all dispensed liquid medicines should be supplied in a child resistant container, as now happens for solid dose preparations.
Computer generated protocols
Editor ,— Richard J Lilford and colleagues show that structured methods of recording data can improve patient care.
We do not believe, however, that the statement ‘Computerised systems offer no further advantages’ is justified.
The benefits of using a computer should become apparent for complex protocols.
While the support documentation required for a comprehensive paper based protocol would limit its use, a computer based system would be able to generate prompts for managing infrequent clinical scenarios in a user friendly way.
In the reported study more action suggestions could be generated by the computer than the paper system (101 v 31).
This suggests that the computer assisted protocol was more comprehensive and probably covered more infrequent clinical scenarios.
We would be interested to know whether the sample was sufficiently large to detect differences between the paper and computer systems for these infrequent events; we predict that the computer would be superior.
The authors suggest that the benefits of computer generated protocols might be apparent if the computer was used to monitor progress throughout pregnancy and alert the obstetrician to deviations in management from agreed protocols.
Morgan et al observed significant improvements in antenatal care throughout pregnancy when computer generated protocols were used in this way.
This study is important in establishing that structured recording of data improves patient care.
The advantages of computer generated protocols over paper systems will become apparent only when tested in more demanding circumstances.
We believe that in future clinical computer systems will provide support for making detailed clinical decisions.
Fully computerised medical record systems exist in primary care, and projects to share information across the interface between primary and secondary care exist.
Clinical computing is developing, and it is inappropriate to write it off now.
Managing urinary tract infection
Editor ,— Martin E Wilkie and colleagues have prepared a comprehensive review on diagnosis and management of urinary tract infection in adults, but they made several statements that are not necessarily firmly established or on which recent views have changed.
The criteria for diagnosing a urinary tract infection on a midstream urine specimen in both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients have been revised and new recommendations published.
It is worth emphasising the importance of Staphylococcus saprophyticus as the second commonest pathogen causing cystitis and acute pyelonephritis in sexually active women, particularly in the spring and summer months.
This organism often grows in low numbers, and many laboratories still regard it as a contaminant.
Figure 2 in the paper looks like a classic example of unilateral reflux nephropathy rather than chronic pyelonephritis.
It is now doubtful whether urinary tract infection has any role to play in the production of this renal lesion.
Fetal ultrasound studies suggest that this damage may occur in utero.
I would not agree that augmentin has been highly effective in the management of patients infected with urinary tract pathogens resistant to amoxycillin.
Several workers have reported disappointing results in a high incidence of gastrointestinal side effects.
My and colleagues' data has shown that for uncomplicated acute pyelonephritis five days of treatment with either an aminoglycoside, a β lactam, or a quinolone is highly effective.
There is no good evidence that long courses of treatment for acute pyelonephritis are indicated.
The quinolones now seem to be the antimicrobial agents of choice for acute bacterial prostatitis.
Once again, for this unusual condition treatment need not be prolonged.
The duration of treatment for chronic prostatitis is more difficult, as a bacteriological aetiology is not always clear cut.
Single dose treatment was first used for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy.
The authors claim  that single dose treatment has not yet been proved adequate in this context.
There is good evidence from the old literature and more recent studies to show that single dose treatment is highly effective in this context and is also a useful guide as to how to manage the woman for the remainder of the pregnancy.
Authors' reply ,— We would not disagree with the more complicated criteria for the diagnosis of urine infection in different kinds of patient referred to by Dr Bailey.
They are more explicit than, but have the same implication as, the more general guidelines we made.
We also agree over the importance of Staphylococcus saprophyticus , to which we referred, and the difficulty posed by chronic prostatitis.
We do not share Dr Bailey's confidence that urinary infection is unimportant in the pathogenesis of reflux nephropathy and believe that deep tissue infection in general requires longer treatment than uncomplicated lower tract infection.
We did not recommend either long or short treatment for acute pyelonephritis, and consider that serial clinical and microbiological assessment is more important than didactic adherence to a predetermined treatment schedule.
The consequences of inadequately treated infection in pregnancy — acute pyelonephritis and premature delivery — are serious enough to warrant a cautious therapeutic approach and careful microbiological follow up.
Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms
Editor ,— We wish to reply to C P Shearman and colleagues' comments regarding our letter since they contain several inaccuracies.
In our evaluation of the case for screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms we considered over 100 publications on the subject before we chose the best available evidence for inclusion in the decision analysis — this is not the ‘narrow range’ claimed by Shearman and colleagues.
The unpublished results of the Birmingham community aneurysm screening project were considered along with those of other, larger projects.
In common with other series, the project uses a selected population and is limited in the data it provides.
While it shows good compliance with screening and good acceptability, it cannot address the fundamental question relating to this particular screening programme — that is, whether people who are positive on screening benefit from detection and elective treatment.
The ‘very strong assumptions’ in our analysis, which Shearman and colleagues mention, in fact expose genuine uncertainties that have not been addressed and which we hope will be in future.
Shearman and colleagues also claim that at 8.4% the prevalence of aneurysms in Birmingham is greater than that reported elsewhere.
We suggest that this is misleading as different workers have used different sizes of the aorta to define an aneurysm.
Indeed, according to the results for Birmingham, about 2% of people have an aneurysm large enough to be considered for surgery.
This figure is directly comparable with those reported from other parts of Britain.
Our analysis showed serious deficiencies in the case for screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm as it currently stands.
Far from jeopardising the establishment of future studies, our work points to important questions for research.
The answers should enable purchasers of health care to make an informed decision on the subject.
Decreasing quality of semen
Editor ,— We wish to respond to the correspondence concerning our report on decreasing semen quality.
One of the letters seems to support our conclusion, whereas the two others focus on possible methodological difficulties.
The data of Jean Ginsburg and Paul Hardiman confirm our findings of declining semen quality.
They suggest that the deterioration may be even greater than was apparent from our study as they found not only an appreciable and continuing decline in sperm concentration but also an increased percentage of morphologically abnormal and immotile sperm.
As we mentioned, we confined our analysis to sperm concentration because this is the most objective measure of semen quality; assessments of morphology and motility are subject to greater interlaboratory and intralaboratory variation.
We agree with Anna Brake and Walter Krause that our study does not provide evidence for a continuing decrease in mean sperm concentration.
We chose linear regression for describing the overall changes in mean sperm concentrations, but other statistical models have also been tested.
Regardless of which statistical model was applied, however, the main conclusion was the same — namely, almost a 50% reduction in sperm concentration from 1940 to 1990.
I S Tummon and David Mortimer suggest that our finding may be due simply to changes in methods of pipetting from 1940 to 1990.
We agree that such changes could theoretically cause some variation in determination of sperm concentration.
But there is no reason to believe — and the paper by Eliasson cited by Tummon and Mortimer certainly does not provide any supporting evidence — that use of white cell pipettes would introduce a systematic error giving values that are 100% higher than the sperm concentrations measured by the pipettes used today.
Scientists should always be cautious in interpreting their results.
In our view, however, the cautious approach is not to ignore the epidemiological evidence of declining semen quality.
The fact that the change in semen quality has occurred in parallel with a considerable increase in the incidence of testicular cancer and other genitourinary abnormalities reinforces our view that our findings should be considered seriously.
Nurse practitioners in accident and emergency departments
Editor ,— Mike Dudley and colleagues advise caution in extrapolating our results regarding activity undertaken by nurse practitioners in accident and emergency departments on the grounds that we made no attempt to ensure that nurse practitioners were actually on duty on the two days chosen for the census.
This omission was deliberate.
Performing a two day census of all new attendances across all regions and in various accident and emergency departments that use nurse practitioners (whether or not they were functioning fully or at all on those days) provided an accurate estimate of the volume and nature of clinical activity undertaken by nurse practitioners relative to that undertaken by doctors.
The fact that in several departments no nurse was fulfilling the role of a nurse practitioner on either or both of the census days indicated the fluctuating nature of activity undertaken by nurse practitioners generally.
As we describe in our paper, the sample of participating departments was not chosen completely at random.
Using the results from our survey, wherever possible we selected one accident and emergency department in each region from each type of hospital (general, specialist, and minor).
If there was a choice of department within a region, we chose the one that gave its nurse practitioners most responsibility as we assumed  that its nurse practitioners would fulfil the role most completely, enabling us to examine the role more effectively.
There are problems with extrapolating from this type of study design (NMBJ, Society for Social Medicine meeting, Nottingham, 1992), but, on the assumption that a higher level of responsibility is positively associated with a larger number of patients, our estimate of total activity undertaken by nurse practitioners is best interpreted as an upper limit.
Dudley and colleagues quote the proportions of patients managed by nurse practitioners in their department on the two days in question and annually, which were substantial; our census showed, however, that such proportions were by no means typical but were at the top end of the range.
Nurse practitioners in most of the participating major departments managed no more than a small fraction of the patients each day.
There is certainly scope for an increase in their activity in major departments.
Malignant melanomas in general practice
Editor ,— As a general practitioner in south east Scotland who has removed a malignant melanoma, I believe that R M Herd and colleagues have not taken into account that if general practitioners consider a lesion to be a malignant melanoma they are more likely to refer the patient urgently to a dermatologist than to excise the lesion themselves.
Thus the lesions that dermatologists see — the authors' control lesions — are perhaps different from those excised by general practitioners.
I would like to know in what proportion of the control patients the referring general practitioner considered the diagnosis of malignant melanoma.
My patient presented in March 1991 with a raised red lesion on the back of her leg, which she believed had developed after an insect bite on holiday in Malta in 1990.
There was no pre-existing naevus.
I suspected that the lesion might by pyogenic granuloma and referred her to the dermatology outpatient clinic.
A month later, however, she returned, complaining of discomfort from the lesion and still awaiting her clinic appointment.
I removed the lesion, which was a nodular malignant melanoma of Breslow thickness 3.2 mm.
I strongly agree with the authors' main point that all excised lesions should be sent for histological examination.
New clinics for HIV testing: a waste of money?
Editor ,— The Department of Health is investing £15m to establish additional sites for testing for HIV antibody.
It would be interesting to know with whom this initiative was discussed by those who advise the secretary of state.
At a time when resources are so scarce is this really money well spent?
Substantial reasons for setting up this service are absent from the Department of Health's letter announcing it, which refers to ‘anecdotal evidence’ and says that ‘experience suggests that many people would prefer to attend a clinic separate from other services.’
Separate centres have already been set up — for example, in St Albans — but no information on uptake or actual cost effectiveness is given.
A great deal of money has, rightly, been spent on upgrading genitourinary medicine clinics and providing new clinics in district general hospitals.
Access to these clinics is unrivalled in the NHS, and every step has been taken to ensure that they are user friendly, efficient, and confidential.
Provision of dedicated centres for HIV antibody testing undermines this service and can only potentiate a hypocritical morality regarding sexual behaviour.
Furthermore, the predicted heterosexual epidemic in Britain has not yet happened.
Transitory increases in the prevalence of HIV antibody have all been explained by imported infection.
The most serious consequence of this initiative is that it may threaten the diagnosis and treatment of other sexually transmitted diseases.
The overwhelming majority of HIV infection is sexually transmitted, and exposure to one sexually transmitted disease means potential exposure to all the others.
Put simply, if there is a good reason for HIV antibody testing then there is likely to be a good reason to examine for other sexually transmitted diseases.
I believe that the secretary of state would have been better advised to market the acceptability of genitourinary medicine clinics rather than to promote a facility that could impair the health of the nation.
Prisoner of conscience
Editor ,— Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is a prisoner of conscience who has been detained under house arrest, without charge or trial, by the Myanmar authorities since July 1989.
Recent information from the Amnesty International Medical Group indicates that she is held in almost complete isolation and that her health is now at risk.
She has consistently refused to accept food and other necessities from the authorities as she believes that by accepting such favours she would be condoning her illegal detention.
For two and a half years she has received no medical attention and has thus been denied one of the most basic conditions laid down by the United Nations for the detention of prisoners awaiting trial — namely, the right to choose her own doctor.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1991 for her work on human rights; she has donated the prize for the health and education of the Myanmar people through a trust.
I appeal to medical colleagues who are concerned about the persecution of this brave woman to write to General Than Shwe (salutation: Dear General), Chairman, State Law and Order Restoration Council, c/o Ministry of Defence, Signal Pagoda Road, Yangon, Union of Myanmar.
They should send a copy of their letter to His Excellency U Hla Maung, Embassy of Myanmar, 19a Charles Street, Berkeley Square, London W1X 8ER.
The letters should convey concern about the critical state of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's health, urge that she should be granted free access to a doctor of her choice, and appeal for her immediate and unconditional release.
Dentists and the NHS
Editor ,— J Michael Dixon postulates that most dental surgeons previously had both NHS and private patients and would thus have been able to act in the Robin Hood pattern that some of us remember general practitioners adopting before the introduction of the NHS.
Regrettably, the NHS dental service was in many ways so successful that most of the practices of my acquaintance depended entirely on NHS fees with only one or two patients willing to pay for the entire cost of treatment.
It is because of this dependence on the NHS that dental surgeons have to limit the care they offer under the NHS.
From the ivory tower of a teaching hospital this may seem unfair, but Dixon may be surprised to learn that of the 60 or so practitioners participating in the Gloucester Independent Dentists' Group, fewer than half were drawing more than 80% of the government's target net income before the reduction in fees, which, incidentally, was 17.5% gross rather than the publicised 7.5%.
It must be emphasised that the reduction in fees did not apply to laboratory costs, equipment costs, or staff costs.
Thus dental surgeons were to be even more out of pocket.
Dental surgeons do not even have the cheap finance available to general medical practitioners.
The politics of poverty and health
Dear Peter ,— Your personal and public letter wrongly suggests that I dismiss links between material deprivation and premature death.
It might help readers of the letter to quote the paragraph that followed the one you half quoted and half summarised:
‘What the hon gentleman [Mr David Blunkett]has failed to identify is how, in the context of many adverse social, economic, and employment factors, we can reach out and provide a decent health service.
That is what the GP contract did, what the immunisation targets have done, what the cervical cancer screening services have done, and what the deprivation payments have done.
That is what we seek to do, rather than adopting a defeatist attitude to the delivery of health care.
We must ask how we can ensure that the health service reaches ever higher targets in areas of great social difficulty.’
Rather than take up other points, may I ask people to read what you and I have written and said in our different roles and words.
There is much that unites our dedication to reducing avoidable disadvantage, distress, and handicap.