

CONTACT POINTS
MORE MAYHEM AT MICROSOFT
My latest hobby is counting how many companies Microsoft has upset in recent months.
Novell is the most crucial.
Did Microsoft tweak Windows so Novell's DR DOS wouldn't run with it without an upgrade?
Does windows for Workgroups include client software that Novell claims was only licensed to be bundled with the standalone version of windows 3.1?
And why wasn't Novell part of the word for Windows best-test program.
The two companies are still in dispute.
Novell has invoked a clause in its technology swapping agreement with Microsoft that would bar Microsoft from shipping NetWare code in future Windows products.
And Microsoft has really trod in it with MS-DOS 6 and its integral utilities.
The first company to get out the writs is Stac, which makes the data compression software Stacker.
It has filed a lawsuit against Microsoft stating that it has infringed two Stac patents.
So Bill Gates isn't having a great time at the moment and things may get worse once the US Federal Trade Commission reveals its findings about Microsoft's business practices.
It suggests that Microsoft is engaging in anti-competitive behaviour in the way it sells DOS to hardware manufacturers, and in the way it uses its lead in the operating systems business to gain advantages with its apps software.
This could mean that Bill Gates will have to restructure Microsoft.
But one thing should console him: Microsoft is now worth more than IBM!
Not bad for a company that five years ago was worth $100 billion less than Big Blue.
HOW WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER CAN HELP YOU
What Personal Computer is divided into two sections, BUYER and USER.
So what ever your needs — whether you're looking to buy, or want to make the most out of what you've got — we have it all.
To give you useful comparisons, every machine is tested according to the same criteria:
How well it's made
How easy it is to use
Performance
Value for money
The need for expansion
After sales support
PC hardware is also put through the What Personal Computer Power Tests which assess the performance of the processor, display and hard disk.
We also test the Windows performance of the PC by using a program called Wintach, developed by Texas Instruments.
What Personal Computer is here to help you.
If you've got any problems or advice for other readers, please get in touch with us, we'd love to hear from you:
Write to F1 for Help if you've got a problem with your software, hardware or peripherals that you want sorting out.
Write to the Letters page if something about the industry really winds you up.
If you've got any programming tips or problems then write to Fine Tuning.
Any problems running Windows write to Cracking Windows.
WHAT THE STAR RATINGS MEAN
You'll see the coveted Five Star logo on reviews of those products that we believe are stunning — the absolute best in their field
**** Impressive —This one's tasty
*** Reasonable —Does the job
** Not so hot —Expensive for what you get
Worthless —Major faults or way too expensive
The What Personal Computer Seal of Approval is given to the best piece of hardware or software tested in each month's Bench Test  
FRONT END
Lotus is continuing with its plans for the networking market by bringing out a group calendaring and scheduling program based around the Filofax interface of its Organizer package.
Eventually the plan is to integrate the interface more fully with Lotus Notes and its E-Mail package, cc:Mail.
It's a good idea, but rather vague at the moment; the proposed launch date for the product is some time during 1993.
And while we're on the subject of workgroup software, Apricot is offering users the chance to have Windows for Workgroups pre-installed on its S Pro and XEN-LS network-ready computers.
For an additional £35, you can buy the cabling needed to link two Apricot machines together.
Aldus is shipping an upgrade to its PageMaker desktop publishing package.
PageMaker 5 includes such new delights as text and graphics rotation, the chance to have several documents open at once, built-in colour separations and a control palette for even greater accuracy of movement.
Sounds wonderful, but the sting is the cost — look to fork out £695.
DELL LAUNCHES ITS LARGEST EVER RANGE
Dell is following the likes of Compaq and IBM by announcing 18 machines to replace its existing ones.
The new models have significant improvements over their predecessors, but cost the same.
The company's 486s have had the biggest facelifts.
Out goes the old entry-level 486/P range in comes the 486/L family.
This kicks off with a bog-standard 25MHz 486 and goes all the way up to a 66MHz 486 DX2.
(Turn to page 88 for a full review of the 33MHz 433/L.)
All the machines have local bus technology.
This lets them process graphics at the same speed as their Intel chips instead of the tardy 8MHz allowed by the traditional ISA buses.
According to Dell, this gives the machines double the Windows performance of their ancestors.
The company also claims that the 66MHz model is the fastest ever recorded by some US testing laboratories.
At the high end, the 486/M range will replace the 486/D family.
These are pitched at intensive Windows users and CAD specialists.
As well as having local bus technology, the machines have EISA expansion slots.
For users who want to set up a client/server network, the 486/T has all the features of the 486/M range, up to 64Mb of RAM and eight expansion slots.
All the machines can be upgraded with the Intel OverDrive processors and Pentium chips, if and when they arrive.
Finally, there's a note-book weighing a mere 3.6; pounds.
This makes extensive use of PCM-CIA technology and is based on the low-powered Intel 386SL chip.
Dell's new machines offer you a better deal than the old ones — they are significantly improved, yet cost the same
VIGLEN'S GENIES TO HAVE CHEAP FRIENDS
Viglen has launched the Contender series; a range of bargain-priced 486s to complement its existing Genie models.
There are two case sizes, depending on how much expandability you want.
The Executive case has six expansion slots, but little room for an extra drive.
The Professional case has five full-length 16-bit expansion slots and room for two free drive bays.
You also have a choice of two processors — the Intel 25 MHz 486SX or the slightly racier 33MHz model.
All the machines can take Intel OverDrive chips for souping up performance later on.
Prices include DOS 5, a SuperVGA monitor and Windows 3.1.
They start at £898 for a 486SX with 4Mb of RAM and a 50Mb hard disk.
A 33 Mhz 486DX with 4Mb of RAM and a 120Mb hard disk is £1,999.
Viglen's Contenders — to go hand-in-hand with Genies
FLOPPY DISKS COULD BE CLOBBERED BY EC
The price of software supplied on floppy disks from the far east could rise if the European Commission (EC) upholds a complaint from five continental companies.
The complainants including French floppy disk maker RPS and firms from Italy and Germany, claim far eastern manufacturers are flooding Europe with cut-price floppies in contravention of existing EC regulations.
Rumour suggests the EC may raise the duty on its disks from 14 per cent to 54 per cent.
Julian Smith, marketing manager of the UK arm of TDK, which makes floppy disks, is dismissive of the rumours.
‘If the duties are increased, and I don't think they will be, then whether software prices will go up will depend on the ability of individual software manufacturers to absorb duty increase.
It shouldn't affect most of them, because manufacturers tend to use disks made in the US, which won't be subject to duty, and the EC’.
However, if the EC agrees to impose these duties, then the price of blank disks and shareware may go up.
OLYMPIC'S FLAME GOES OUT
Olympic Technology is the latest in an ever-growing line of computer companies to go into liquidation.
The company owes nearly £4 million to its creditors.
Almost £500,000 is owed to customers who paid for goods they didn't get.
This figure could be higher:
‘We're still receiving letters from people who claim to have ordered machines,’ said Clare Wilson, insolvency administrator for official liquidator Neville Russell.
Customers face a long wait before they have a chance of getting any money back.
Preferential creditors include Customs and Excise, which is investigating Olympic to see how much VAT the company has neglected to pay.
The largest creditor is the company's US parent.
It initiated liquidation proceedings after the sum it was owed for components it had supplied reached £2.1 million.
The US company started an investigation into Olympic's affairs last autumn, and sacked the board of directors, including managing director David Brown, at the end of November.
His replacement, former sales manager Nils Sontag, never had enough time to lick the company into shape.
No directors were present at the creditors meeting, held on January 21.
It appears that Olympic didn't invoice customers for kit shipped.
As a result, the liquidator estimates the company is owed £1.6 million for machines that were never paid for.
If you've bought a machine from Olympic Technology and you have any queries about the company, write to the official liquidator:
TOP TEN HARDWARE ODDITIES
You'd have thought designing a computer or printer was easy.
They all use the same kit, don't they?
But as the following list shows, there's plenty of scope for eccentricity.
1.
.
The Mical Data 486SX has a 25Mhz chip spiced up to run at 40MHz.
To stop the motherboard from melting, the company put a small fan over the top of the chip.
2.
.
The Ambra mouse is odd; you need a hand like a claw to use it.
3.
.
AMT's Accel-123 dot matrix printer has what looks like an embryonic serial part protruding from the back.
It's there so you can connect the printer to an Apple Mac.
4.
.
The Packard Bell 486 has four spare DRAM slots for memory upgrades.
But you need to fill all four slots before the Ram upgrade works.
5.
.
The BlueMaq Chameleon has motherboards for both the PC and Apple Mac.
You switch between them using a memory—resident utility.
6.
.
The CompuAdd 25MHz 386SX 5.25-inch floppy button.
This is disproportionately large.
7.
.
The Amstrad NC100 notebook.
To try to convince us that anyone can use a computer within 5 minutes, Amstrad put big, brightly coloured keys on it.
8.
.
The pins on VGA monitor cables are so thin they usually bend when you're plugging them into your PC.
9.
.
Having two sorts of mouse is a pain.
The Microsoft one plugs into a serial port you may want to use for a modem, while you have to hunt for a mouse to fit into the IBM PS/2 socket.
10.
.
Olivetti printer buttons.
Pale blue and double cheeked.
AMERICAN GRAFFITI
Snippets of news and gossip from across the pond…
It's all true; computers are a waste of time.
Results of a survey conducted by SBT Accounting Systems show the average Us user squanders 5.1 working hours per week messing around with a computer.
There are 25 million PC users in the States.
That means a massive five billion hours per year.
worth $100 billion, are lost by people trying to get their PC to do something.
The top time wasters?
Waiting for programs to run, reports to print or in-house technical support to solve a problem accounted for $19 billion in lost productivity; checking printed output a further $17 billion; and helping others get to grips with applications another $16 billion.
There's a verb to describe these activities in the States: to futz.
I wonder how many hours Britons waste futzing around with their Pcs?
Microsoft could face major restructuring after a 30-month investigation by the US Federal Trade Commission (FTC) found the company guilty of distinctly unsporting behaviour.
Areas of concern include its aggressive licensing of DOS to PC manufacturers and the way it used its knowledge of operating systems to gain an unfair advantage over its rivals.
The FTC is looking at several solutions, from erecting ‘walls’ within the company to splitting it up altogether.
And in this country, Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths is calling on the Office of Fair Trading to investigate alleged Microsoft unfair business practices over here.
The launch of Lotus Freelance 2 for Windows is imminent in the US.
Early reports suggest it's pretty good, with neat transition effects and mouse click short cuts to make it easy to use.
‘I will have the most enviable job in the UK PC market in 1993.
Howard Ford, head of IBM's UK PS operation, before record-making losses were announced
Difficult problems remain ahead for IBM, including the continued pace of change in our industry and weak worldwide business environment.
John Akers, IBM chairman
We usually sourced from Olympic in the States but we had to start looking elsewhere.
I think the US is in trouble and gave us too much credit.
Ex-Olympic employee on the company's crash.
It owes £2.1 million to its US parent
I can think of some things we should have done earlier.
Our digital video strategy meandered around in the desert for 40 years.
We could have crossed the Red Sea a lot earlier if we had known then what we know now.
Intel president Andy Grove on the biggest mistake he made last year 
AST has announced a new entry-level notebook.
Based on the Intel 25MHz 386SL, the Power Exec EL has Type II PCMCIA slots — soon to be the industry standard — power management software and DOS 5.
The version with 2Mb of RAM and a 60Mb hard disk costs £1,295.
A model with 4Mb of RAM, a 120Mb hard disk, Windows 3.1 and a built in trackball costs £1,695.
Workgrouping, workgrouping…it's getting everywhere.
Now comes news of a merger between Finansa, a developer of the WinMail E-mail package, and Powercore, maker of market leading project management software in the States.
Predictably, proposed projects include integrated WinMail with Powercore's Network Scheduler package.
Dutch-based computer manufacturer Tulip has announced price reductions on its Vision Line range of PCs.
The cost of a 25MHz 486SX has been slashed from £1,240 to £990; a 386SX from £845 to £710. 50MHz and 66MHz 486DX machines have also been introduced to the range, and the warranty on all computers now extends to three years instead of one.
IBM GOES FROM BIG BLUE TO BIG RED
IBM has posted the largest ever annual loss in US corporate history — $4.96 billion.
The problem isn't falling revenue, which was $64.5 billion in 1992, but the cost of restructuring IBM — including making people redundant — was $7 billion for the final quarter alone.
This sum is reflected in the UK results — a pre-tax loss of £616 million this year, £218 million of which went on restructuring.
IBM laid off 40,000 people in 1992 and plans to lay off another 25,000 this year.
Some analysts think this may not be enough.
1,000 jobs were lost in the UK, and this year could see the end of IBM's ‘no involuntary redundancy’ policy.
The job losses reflect a longer term malaise in IBM's position.
It grew to its current size by selling mainframes in the 1960s and 1970s but since then has seen a decline in this business.
It has also been slow in reacting to the threat posed by rival PC manufacturers shipping similar machines at lower prices.
Only towards the end of 1992 did IBM start to make overtures towards the lower end of the PC market with its revamped PS/1 series and Value —Point range.
IBM is now set on breaking into smaller sections to become more competitive.
It currently has 13 semi-autonomous divisions.
‘These sometimes do rub against one another,’ admits Howard Ford, the head of IBM's UK PC operation, ‘but it's necessary to ensure we're as competitive as possible.’
In some ways, IBM is an essential part of the computer industry.
It is prepared to invest huge sums in developing new technology, money that other companies just aren't prepared to put up.
But such new technology no longer becomes tomorrow's standards, and could leave IBM customers locked into its proprietary standards.
Still, it's good news for ordinary users who should see IBM being more attentive to their needs.
Bad news for IBM could be good news for ordinary users as it should become more attentive to their needs.
TRENDS AHEAD FOR 1993
Ask a group of industry watchers for the trends to look out for in 1993, and one answer they're all sure to give you is portable computing.
as if to bear this out, there's been a flood of portables announced recently.
Look out for Viglen's new notebook.
Based on an Intel 25MHz 486SX chip and with 4Mb of RAM and a 120Mb hard disk, it costs £1,399.
And of course, pen computing is also to the fore, with TriGem announcing the first pen starter pack priced at under £2,000.
This consists of a TriGem Pen 386SX pre-loaded with Pen-Friend software, a forms application generator.
The problem with pen computing, as Nick Eades, IBM's brand manager for portables, is the first to point out, is that the handwriting recognition software needs to be a whole lot better before it can really appeal to the masses.
Still, IBM is undeterred and hopes to launch its first pen-based computer some time this quarter.
Viglen's 486SX latest in a line of notebook launches
GREEN SHOOTS APPEAR
The computer market is showing some signs of an upturn, according to the latest figures from industry analyst Wharton Information Systems (WIS).
Monthly PC sales have topped six figures for the first time, with 100,165 computers worth £111.6 million shipped in the UK during November 1992.
Although units shipped were at a record high, last year's drastic price-cutting was much in evidence.
In November 1991, manufacturers netted £142.8 million from selling fewer machines.
IBM is still selling more machines than anyone else, but for the first time Compaq overtook it in terms of revenue.
The revenues of both companies were well down on the same month in 1991, showing a large proportion of their sales coming form the cheaper ranges.
The biggest mover on the chart is Ambra, which has come from nowhere to take third place in the table of units shipped.
WIS claims all this activity wasn't confined to the PC market.
Printer and software sales also hit a peak.
The Wharton table is based on a telephone poll of 300 selected dealers and suppliers representing nearly 1,000 outlets.
The only company not represented is Elonex, which did not provide any figures.
The analyst reckons they have about 4 per cent of the market.
GUI PARADOX SHIPS AT LAST It's been a long time coming, but it's finally here — Borland is now shipping Paradox for Windows, and at a special offer price of £99.95 plus VAT.
Our database reviewer, Mark Whitehorn, has been playing around with a gamma version of the product — the last stage of testing before a a product goes into final code.
He says: ‘The main problem I found with Paradox for Windows was that it kept hanging my computer.
It also messed up some of my data files.
If the final code does that, then Borland is in deep yoghurt.
‘But apart from that, I think it's wonderful.
It's not as easy to use as Microsoft's Access, but its development tools are far more powerful.
And these things are relative — Paradox for Windows is still easier to use than dBase for DOS.’
Paradox for Windows is one of the first products to feature full-scale implementation of object orientated programming.
This means it treats everything on your screen as an object, including the desktop.
Clicking on an object with the right mouse button brings up a menu listing all the things you can do to it — a feature first seen in Borland's Quattro Pro for Windows.
You can also attach code to each object to respond to and trigger events.
This is a new way of working, and means there's a step learning curve to be negotiated for application developers.
But it's also a very powerful way of working.
Those of you who have no desire to program applications will probably be better off with Access, were it not for Borland's tasty special offer price.
The promotion also applies to Quattro Pro for Windows, which will cost £89.95 plus VAT for a limited period.
Both packages fr a shade over £200 (including VAT) looks like being a very good deal.
The special offer for the two products ends on April 30th.
Paradox for Windows involves object-orientated programming, a new, very powerful way of working
WORDPERFECT SOUPS UP OFFICE E-MAIL PROGRAM
The whole world seems to have gone network crazy.
The last few months have seen the launch of masses of small workgroup packages and E-mailing and scheduling programs, which are all designed to make it easier for people to chat to one another via their computers,
Enter WordPerfect into the fray.
It's announced an upgrade to its Office E-mail package, Office E, which should be available in the UK in the spring.
So what's new?
The company claims that it will be the first program to integrate E-Mail, scheduling and calendar functions into one package.
Office 4's features include the ability to call up a group schedule, or other users’ personal calendars — if you're allowed access to them, of course— to check for clashes in your schedules.
Among the other functions is ruled-based message management.
This allows you to redefine responses to certain types of message.
There's also task management, where you will be able to tell another user what to do, and a Workflow feature.
This will send a message to different members of your workgroup on a one by one basis.
WINDOWS SHOW — A SNEAK PREVIEW
It's showtime again.
This month's special event is the Windows Show.
The organiser, IT Events, hopes to attract over 40,000 people to Olympia, London, on 16th to 18th February to peruse the stands of 180 exhibitors.
Sad to say, major new launches from the big boys are a little thin on the ground.
Microsoft will, of course, be there in force.
It will be giving demonstrations of Windows NT and some of the applications being developed for it; Widows for Workgroups and some new multimedia programs, such as Musical Instruments.
Lotus will also make a strong showing, giving UK users the chance of a first look at Freelance Graphics 2, and showing of its new spreadsheet, Improve for Windows, which we'll be reviewing in our April issue.
Also check out the SPC stand.
The company will be showing the latest version of its Window database, Superbase 2, and the new multimedia extensions to Harvard Graphics for Windows.
The show will also give you the chance to check out Paradox for Windows.
No doubt there'll be plenty of helpful Borland staff on hand to shed some light on object orientated programming.
Remember Ti'ko, the computer company that went into liquidation last November?
Well, Computer Shops Ltd has agreed to buy Ti'ko's assets.
The company will use Ti'ko's old kit to start making its own range computers.
Computer Shops Ltd is not responsible for Ti'ko machines.
Computer World has come up with a novel addition to its Ambra/Sage Sterling Plus Two bundle.
Accountancy firm Grant Thornton will give free telephone support and possible on-site assistance to customers buying the package.
The SCS package costs £699 and features an Ambra 386SX and bundled software.
XTree, manufacturer of the excellent XTree Gold file management utility has launched XTree Tools for networks, designed to demystify LAN management.
XTree hopes this move will shove the company into the big league.
We'll have to see, though — Intel is thinking about embedding LAN management software into its network cards.
Oops.
We gave the wrong number for the Western Digital bulletin board in our January round-up.
The correct number is .
SOAPBOX
BEATTIE'S ABOUT
INSIDE INTEL
Rob Beattie had the great vision and foresight to launch What Personal Computer back in 1989.
And, despite numerous subtle hints — like hiding his desk and computer — he still won't leave us alone.
If you would like to communicate with Rob, send your letters to the What Personal Computer office, at the usual address.
Quick!
Let me look at the Video for Windows.
I can see loads of uses for it.
I'll just grab my video camera then I can include myself on all my articles, invoices and letterheads.
Oh alright, let's use the plain old alphabet one more time.
Intel finally conceded that its stampede of product announcements confounded at least as many people as it enlightened.
At the top of its latest action list is a bunch of measures designed to get closer to real users in order to find out what they really want.
Trouble is, Intel doesn't know how to do this without spending a packet.
The company has set up focus groups to talk to large US PC users, but hasn't yet hit on a magic formula that will allow it to get at users directly and in a cost effective way.
The source for all this is impeccable, by the way — I spoke to Intel boss Andy Grove, on my last visit to the US.
Interesting how quickly suppliers have jumped on the ‘features, not price’ bandwagon started by Dell and Co in the US.
It's comical to see all these people agreeing sagely with each other that users really want loads of functions rather than just a good deal, while all the time mopping their brows with relief that the price wars seemed to have petered out.
Now, they say, future battles will be waged on features and added value.
The truth is that things had reached the stage where manufacturers had no more cloth left to cut — hence the race to convince more users to buy more features than they may need.
Of course, they'll be a few exceptions to this price freeze — mostly those more old-fashioned suppliers like IBM and Hewlett-Packard who can still afford to drop their prices by a notch or two.
Having spent some time delving into the subject, I can report that pen computers are still mostly useless because of the lack of proper pen software.
But by the time you read this, it's possible that one manufacturer will have really stirred things up by announcing a sub-£500 pen computer running Microsoft Windows for Pens.
If it hasn't happened already, it's going to happen any time now, and when it does, software developers could get the impetus they need to start shifting products capable of useful work.
As Microsoft announces the developer's version of Modular Windows (the cut-down version that the company hopes will run on everything from home entertainment systems to so-called personal digital assistants) my mind recalls Geoworks, the excellent low-end GUI.
I hear the company has been closeted with parties unknown, discussing the future of this once-promising product.
Modular Windows, meanwhile, is said to preserve so many of the standard Windows APIs that you'll soon be able to run PageMaker on your TV.
It's easy to see why developers believe that Microsoft has an unfair advantage over its competitors because it produces both the GUI and the software that runs on it.
Don't forget that while third party software authors struggle to get to grips with OLE 2, Microsoft has been demonstrating how prototypes will work using its own applications software.
This result in what I call the Ami Prosyndrome.
Microsoft releases GUI along with tip-top word processor; Lotus lags with slow, ugly rival; Microsoft produces lacklustre update; Lotus leapfrogs with a brilliant version 3, so Microsoft…
Ask any laser printer user what the bane of their life is and they'll tell you — replacing the toner cartridge.
No matter how you go about it, you get ink everywhere, and end up looking like one of the Bash Street Kids.
Step forward Kyocera which has produced an 18ppm laser printer with a special drum which keeps cleaning and recycling the toner, and so never needs replacing.
Keep your eyes open for a Window drawing program called Visio from US company, Shapeware.
Before you yawn, this really is a program with a difference — it's aimed at people like me, who couldn't draw a raffle.
Previously, we've had to make do with mediocre collections of clip-art or fun things like Kid Pix.
But Visio takes the art out of being an artist, and I for one can't wait to see it.
Finally, this complaint from IBM PC supremo Jim Cannavino.
Referring to IBM's establishment of a PC standard in 1981, he said that other manufacturers were selling cars without having to invest in the highway.
This remark ignores IBM's own attempts to turn the highway into a toll-paying bridge by the introduction in 1987 of the now mostly-ignored Micro Channel Architecture.
His rousing address finished with the exciting claim that ‘IBM has been transforming itself into a solutions company’.
The solution, apparently, is to lay off 25,000 people this year.
BEYOND OUR KEN
PICK 'N' MIX
Ken Kessler is an ordinary person trying to get by in the information age.
He's a writer by trade, specializing in hi-fi and music journalism.
Like so many of us, he thought computers would make his job much easier, and so like many of us — he found that it just wasn't that simple…
This month Ken takes the plunge and sets about the daunting task of buying a new machine.
Anybody who wants to communicate with Ken should send their letters to the What Personal Computer office, at the usual address.
If a little knowledge is dangerous, then negligible knowledge might be nothing more than risky.
And the more I delve into computers, the more I realise just how negligible my knowledge is, despite reading everything I can about the subject.
And what makes me admit that I'm as hapless as the biography to the left suggests?
I'm about to invest in a brand new, superduper, anti-obsolescence computer and I feel as confident as if I were shopping for a pair of skis.
And the closest I've ever been to the slopes is flying over Switzerland.
Until this month, I thought that all anyone needs to know besides budget are such things as preferred processor (a 486DX), speed (at least 33MHz), hard disk size (as big as the bucks allow), monitor type (ditto) and a familiar brand need which would be there forever to honour a warranty.
The latter belief was the first to shatter, as the No 3 company on my shortlist went bust a few weeks ago.
The other things which threw me were graphics accelerator particulars, caches, comms packages, architecture specifics (SCSI?
MCA?
EISA?
Alphabet soup?), power supply wattage and so on as infinitum .
So I've decided to place my trust in a retailer and rely on my common sense and experience when it comes to assembling packages from a variety of sources rather than one.
Think about it.
Leading-edge camera systems, hi-fi set-ups and even tweaked auto-mobiles never come from one source.
That's because no single company makes the best of everything.
In photography, even if you buy a Leica, you buy a flashgun from someone else.
Hi-fi is such a jungle that the serious junkie even chooses each half of a CD player (transport section and digital-to-analogue converter) from different companies.
Cars?
Ever seen VW-branded petrol.
And that's the way I'm approaching my next PC, knowing that no company makes the whole shooting match, whatever the badges claim.
The keyboard on my Darius (RIP) is a Cherry, the monitor a Sony, and so on.
I'm spineless enough to be steered away from the obvious, safe, acclaimed designer label choices I had in mind, and it's already started.
The guys at ADM Computing suggested at the first meeting that I save a few quid by opting for a Phillips Brilliance monitor instead of the NEC I've coveted for a year.
They named a different brand or disk drive; a different Windows accelerator; and so it goes on.
On the other hand, they know about such things, having had longer-term experience with various brands than most reviewers, who only have the stuff for weeks or months.
They also know how paranoid I am; I'll be on the phone if the monitor so much as flickers during a thunderstorm.
To ease the pain of my parlous finances, they've listed the bits which can be called recycled from my Hyundai, including the SIMMs, sound board and keyboard.
And I'll keep the old monitor to use at home with my notebook.
As a PC depreciates faster than a catwalk model who's just turned 30, here are my tips for those of you who don't want to lose your shirts:
1.
Lots of shops will give you a few quid for a computer which an be added to their ‘loaner’ stock.
2.
Recycle as many parts as you can.
I might even see the remainder of my old Hyundai back on my desk as a loaner while ADM irons out the inevitable bugs in this Frankenstein's monster I'm creating.
I'm still nervous about the whole affair, even though I know from my own experience that NEC, Phillips, Conner, Intel and ADM are safe.
No, it's not the supplier or even the choice of hardware which worries me.
It's the nagging curse which afflicts all consumers — lingering doubts after you get it home, like ‘should I have opted for Brand X instead of Brand Y’.
This is what keeps those camera and hi-fi enthusiasts from settling on their chosen mix of bits.
It's almost an endorsement for the single-brand path which guarantees compatibility, even though— as I mentioned above — no manufacturer excels in all areas.
Fortunately, computer buyers are spared the one thing which afflicts consumers of prestige-based goods: computer brand names don't confer any status unless you're one of those nerds who hangs out with hackers and reckons that one's image is enhanced by owning Conner, ATI, Logitech or whatever.
So I have no reason, other than build quality, task suitability and performance, for purchasing components made by specific companies.
I will never, I hope, go into a pub wearing a ‘Mine's a Seagate’ T-shirt, or a baseball cap emblazoned with the Dell logo.
Letters…
IF YOU FEEL STRONGLY ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE COMPUTER INDUSTRY, DON'T BOTTLE IT UP, LET EVERYONE KNOW!
WRITE TO US AT THE USUAL ADDRESS.
MEMORY MUDDLES
I have a standard 20MHz 386SX PC with 2Mb of RAM.
However, I find that more and more software houses write programs — notably games — that demand a whopping 620Kb of free memory.
If programmers need all that RAM why don't they use Expanded or Extended memory so that they can leave a fair slice of the base memory to the system?
Software manufacturers should at least make it clear on the pack that the programme won't work if a disk compression program such as a stacker is in use, and/or you don't have ‘X’ megabytes of memory.
I think the main software houses should get together and agree on an industry standard memory configuration to which programmers should limit themselves.
That way, you could buy a computer with a standard minimum memory (with allowances for disk compression and other essential TSRs) safe in the knowledge that all MS-DOS software would work within the memory confines of your machine.
Why do games need so much Conventional RAM?
Could they be programmed more efficiently?
Responses welcome…
DIXONS REVISITED
I'm a computer consultant with some 17 year's experience in the industry.
I was recently asked by a client to recommend an upgrade to his existing small PC.
I'm very wary of buying goods from mail order outlets.
I like to see the goods before I make a decision and have a point of reference for returning them.
After visiting several suppliers and looking at various packages, I found that Dixons offered the best value, availability and longevity, so we opted for a Packard Bell 486SX.
We needed 4Mb of memory, a 100Mb hard disk and serial port.
Dixons supplied the machine with 2Mb of RAM, but assured us they would supply a 2Mb upgrade within a few days.
I specifically asked if this upgrade would be possible and they assured me that it would.
We bought the machine and I spent several hours over the next few days setting up the system.
I also had two 1Mb SIMMS which I fitted to test the viability of Dixon's proposed upgrade.
It didn't work.
But when I inserted another two SIMMS the system came up with 6Mb of RAM as expected.
I checked the documentation which implied that a 2Mb version of this machine needed to have all four SIMM sockets occupied for it to work.
Meanwhile, another piece of software owned by my client wouldn't work.
This software uses an electronic key, or dongle, in the Com 1 port as a form of copy protection.
It appeared from the documentation supplied that the serial port at the back of the Packard Bell could only be configured as Com2 or Com4.
Com1 and Com3 were preconfigured for use by internal modern cards which were hard wired.
I phoned the Packard Bell hotline and after a couple of days' wait they were very helpful.
However they confirmed my suspicion that the system couldn't be upgraded from 2Mb to 4Mb and, more importantly, the external port couldn't be configured as Com1.
I contacted Dixons and they were surprised at my findings.
They still believed that they had put a 2Mb memory upgrade into one of these machines to give it a 4Mb of RAM.
However they did replace the Packard Bell, at no extra charge, with a more expensive Acer Acros which has proved to be much better PC in several ways — it comes with 4Mb of memory, it's upgradeable to a 486DX, it's faster, and the serial port is standard Com1.
My final words would be caveat emptor — let the buyer beware.
STAR LETTER
I've been buying your magazine religiously for the last 18 months and would like to thank you for a great read.
However, the main reason for writing is to complain, not about the magazine, but about some of the companies who use your pages to advertise.
For the past three months I've been trying to buy some SIMMS for my Mesh 386SX.
Back in the October issue, most companies were advertising modules at between £18 and £22.
I phoned seven companies at the end of September and not one of them was selling at the price advertised.
I repeated my fruitless exercise at the end of October, and again at the end of November, when I finally relented and paid the cheapest price I could get.
I know there's a recession on and prices change.
I also know that sterling exchange rates don't favour those companies buying on the international market.
I don't even mind (much) that these reasons are the cause, in one case, of a 78 per cent difference in the price advertised.
But what makes me angry is that only a couple of these companies have bothered to alter their ads accordingly.
Is there any wonder customers moan when they are told the items they want now cost £32 each instead of £18?
I've been told that prices go to the publishers six weeks before publication, but in this instance the price had changed three months previously.
The only person gaining anything from this is the chairman of BT.
So come on advertisers, please get it together.
It's an interesting point Dominic, and although the poor performance of the pound against the dollar did effect many of our advertisers, we agree with you that — time permitting — the advertised prices should be kept up-to-date.
Although the Advertising Standards Authority recommends that advertisements should carry a note stating that prices are subject to change, the only time advertisers have to stick to prices as published is when the product is a special offer.
So you have to ask yourself if a company consistently advertises products for less than they're actually selling for — do you want to deal with them at all?
Microsoft Powerpoint For Windows
Dominic wins a copy of Powerpoint Microsoft's excellent Windows-based business graphics program.
Powerpoint combines a word processor and spell checker with drawing and presentation tools, so you can easily combine text, graphics and charts.
SOAPBOX
It seems that we've opened a real can of worms with these Dixon complaints.
Nevertheless, the story did have a happy ending and it does emphasize an important point.
In this case Mr Kelly made it clear to Dixons that his client needed a PC which could be upgraded to 4Mb of RAM and could take a dongle plugged into Com1.
The machine wasn't fit for this purpose so he had to good case to go back to Dixons and ask either for a replacement or his money back.
Moral of the story: make it clear to your suppliers exactly what you expect your machine to do.
And, if possible, get their assurances in writing.
TELEPHONE TRAUMA
Having used Microsoft Works 2 contentedly ever since it came out, I was most interested ti hear that the package was being upgraded to version 3.
Eagerly I awaited a detailed review, but an upgrade package arrived from Microsoft first.
This told me I could have a flight to America, if I was quick, a copy of Flight Stimulator too!
It gave me some insight into the upgraded version, but no details.
Being a cautious kind of chap, I decided to make a phone call before reaching before reaching for my cheque book.
Yes!
I phoned the Microsoft Upgrade Centre.
More than that, I persisted until I got through!
I asked my vital question: ‘Will it run on XT?’
‘I'm sorry sir’, the voice said, ‘I can't answer technical questions’.
‘I don't want any technical information’, I replied, ‘I just need to know if it will still run on my ordinary PC with 640Kb memory’.
‘I'm sorry, sir.
We really can't answer technical questions like that’.
I decided to wait for a review — you know what Microsoft's other support lines are like.
However, if Microsoft can neither be bothered to put the basic information in its literature, nor inform the people handling the upgrade, should I be looking elsewhere for an alternative?
Gillian Kent from Microsoft replies: As the Product Manager for Microsoft Works, I was very concerned to read about the difficulties you've experienced, I am able to confirm that Microsoft Works 3 will work with an 8086 (or higher) processor with 640Kb of memory.
To demonstrate my concern, I'm sending you a complimentary copy of Microsoft Works 3 for MS-DOS.
(Well done to the Microsoft Upgrade Centre — Ed.)
COSMO'S CHEAT
I have discovered a cheat for Cosmo's Cosmic Adventure by Apogee.
I've tried it with Episode 1, and it may work for the other two episodes as well.
Here's what to do:
1
When loading the game, type in ‘Cosmol cheat’ to start it up
2
Begin a new game
3
Kill yourself four times
4
When you restart the level, pass F1, then press V to view the high scores
5
Press return to exit
Now you'll have infinite lives.
And here's a hint for level 3:
1
Look for two barrels on one branch
2
Look to your left and climb to the top of the tree that you see
3
Jump to your right
and you'll find a secret area.
Thanks for the tip, Daniel, we're sure our readers will enjoy impressing their friends with this useful shortcut.
EXPANSION EXPENSE
Like your regular contributor Steve Boxer, I also have an Epson PC.
Mine, however, is an AT compatible with 640Kb of memory (upgradeable).
It gets light home use and was good value for money when I bought it.
I too have Windows 3 running in Real mode, not because I particularly like Windows, nor for multitasking (which I obviously can't do), but because I work in the computer industry and need to be able to use Windows at clients' sites and set up applications for them.
As several of these clients now have windows 3.1, I thought it would be a good idea to get this running on my Epson (once again, not for multitasking — purely for single user experience).
My PC manual says that I can add more memory in 2Mb modules.
With memory widely advertised at about £30 per Mb I thought this would be the perfect Christmas present to myself.
I duly contacted Memory Direct, who told me they couldn't supply these modules, but very helpfully gave me Epson's customer support line number.
The thought that the memory modules might not be standard began to enter my mind.
This was confirmed when Epson quoted £200 for a 2Mb memory module — that's nearly half the price I paid for the PC!
The moral of this tale — don't buy a machine that claims to be upgradeable without checking the cost of upgrades.
Needless to say, I didn't buy the memory expansion and didn't give myself a Christmas present.
So if Steve Boxer really wants to get rid of his Epson, I'd be more than happy to swap it for my even more useless paperweight.
Peter Turner, Head of UK sales, Epson (UK) Limited: Epson endeavours to use non-proprietary SIMMS where possible in the design of all their PCs.
Under such circumstances users can take advantage of the mass market industry standard SIMMS which, due to their wide availability, are consistently cheaper than proprietary memory upgrades.
All current Epson PCs now take advantage of this opportunity.
The Epson system referred to was designed at a time when it was more appropriate to use proprietary Epson upgrades.
The SIMM modules were manufactured when the price of SIMMS was in the region of £200 per module.
Discounts also effect end user pricing.
Whereas PCs are often sold at 25 per cent to 30 per cent discount, the accessories are not discounted at such high levels.
We reserve the right to edit all letters so that all the nasty, unintelligible bits get taken out.
All your suggestions may not make it into our pages, but they find a place in our hearts…
A HELPING HAND FOR DISABLED USERS
I'm a 27 year old male on kidney dialysis and am looking for a computer to use at home with the long-term objective of working in computer programming.
I'm a physics graduate but have now decided that a career in computer programming is more practical, given my condition.
Can you tell me whether any companies sell new computers at discount rates for those registered as disabled, similar to the mobility scheme for buying new cars?
Or perhaps there are schemes for the disabled to rent computers at lower rates?
I'd be most grateful if you could help me.
As far as we know, IBM is the only company which offers discount schemes for people with disabilities and charities which work with the disabled.
This scheme is only run through participating dealers, but you can get hold of an information pack from the IBM National Enquiry Centre on 
In the course of our enquiries, we also came across an organization called the Computability Centre which runs a computer helpline for disabled users on .
Alternatively, you could call Outset — a national charity providing IT training for people with disabilities — on  
MEGA DISK
This month's disk holds an impressive collection of DOS programs that should work on all PCs.
In the recent What Personal Computer reader survey we asked you what computer equipment you wanted to buy.
The vast majority of you said either a 486 or 486SX computer, so we've created an Interactive Advice program tailored to help you choose the best 486.
We've also got an excellent DOS screen saver to prevent image burn-in on your screen.
There's a choice of 29 animated displays that range from crazy fish to fractal star bursts, and you can type in a message to let your colleagues know when you'll be back at your desk.
Finally, there's a batch of useful utilities and a program that takes away the boredom of formatting floppies.
Tony Hetherington, Disk Editor
GETTING STARTED
Log on to your floppy drive, A or B, and type in ADVICE to get an on-screen description of the disk programs and to run the Interactive Advice program.
For details on how to install and run each program take a look at the instructions on the right.
5.25-INCH DISKS
On disk 1 you'll find the Interactive Advice program and the set of utilities.
On disk 2 you'll find the disk formatting and screen saving programs.
If you want to get hold of the Mega Disk on 5.25-inch format, simply send a postal order or cheque for £1 made payable to PC Wise Ltd to:
IMPORTANT!
The disk has been checked for viruses by the UK Computer Virus Certification Centre, based at the University of Bradford.
But if your machine is already infected, it can infect any disk you put into it, unless you copy protect the disk first.
You should always put a copy protect tab (or slide the lock on 3.5-inch disks) on the Mega Disk.
Make sure you have recent copies of all vital data on your PC.
If your disk is physically damaged, send it to PC Wise for a replacement:
What Personal Computer cannot take any responsibility for money sent to authors whose programs appear on the Mega Disk.
SHAREWARE
Although many if the programs on the Mega Disk are free, some are shareware.
So please register the shareware software if you find it useful.
Registration brings many benefits to users, including full instructions, upgrades and helpline support.
You'll find all the details about how to register each program in it's document files.
INTERACTIVE ADVICE — HOW TO CHOOSE A 486 PC
Interactive Advice is just like having your own computer consultant.
This month we guide you through some of the best 486-based PCs we've reviewed and help you decide which one is best for you.
The machines range from budget 20MHz SX PCs up to 66MHz DX2 speed demons
The data has been collated from past What Personal Computer reviews and each entry in the data file includes details from the actual review and a reference so you can read all about the ones that appear on your shortlist.
The program guides you through six of the most important questions you should consider when buying a PC:
How much are you prepared to pay?
What processor speed will you need?
How much RAM do you want?
How much hard disk space are you likely to need?
How highly had this machine been rated in reviews?
What performance results will it achieve?
The program allows you to rate how important each factor is for you.
For example, you might decide you want the speed of the processor to be over 33MHz but it's not essential — so you'd give this a rating of two out of five.
The program then processes these selections and produces a shortlist of five machines for you to consider.
If you then select the View File option you can compare the IA Rating for each PC.
Once you're happy with the shortlist you should try before you buy.
Check to see which deals include bundles and warranty support, and if you hang on to your back issues, look back at the full What Personal Computer review.
If you want to get hold of a specific back issue of the magazine, contact our Back Issues department on  or write to them at 
RUNNING THE PROGRAM
To run the program put the Mega Disk into your floppy drive, log on to this drive and type in the command, ADVICE.
Then select the Interactive Advice option from the on-screen menu.
DESERT FROG SCREEN SCENES 3.1
Desert Frog Scenes is a sophisticated DOS screen saver from Desert Frog Software which gives you 29 different savers (16 if you don't have a VGA system).
These include a kaleidoscope, an aquarium full of crazy fish, a hopping frog scene and a set of wild 256-colour palette-animated fractals!
A menu system makes Screen Scenes easy to control and customize.
You can set the delay time to anything between one and sixty minutes.
All the scenes can be password protected, preventing unauthorized use of your PC.
Also, you can leave multi-line messages on the screen or hit the ‘instant-on ‘key if the boss walks by at an inconvenient time!
RUNNING THE PROGRAM
To run Screen Scenes you need: a hard disk, a colour CGA, EGA or VGA video card and monitor, or a greyscale VGA monitor.
You'll also need DOS 2 or above and the program is compatible with Microsoft and Logitech mice.
INSTALLATION
Copy the file ss31.EXE from the Screen directory on your Mega Disk into a directory on your hard disk.
Log into the directory containing the file and then type in SS31.
This file is self-extracting so when you run SS31, the program automatically extracts all the files which make-up Screen Scenes.
Once you've ss31.EXE you can delete it from your hard disk.
The following set of commands creates a directory called DFSS on drive C, copies ss31.EXE into this directory from the distribution disk in drive A, extracts all the Screen Scenes files, and deletes ss31.EXE from the C: \DFSS directory:
You can now run the program.
Change into the DFSS directory and (assuming that Screen Scenes is installed in a directory called C: \DFSS) type:
For the best results you should really add Screen Scenes to your AUTOEXEC.BAT file.
For example, if you've installed Screen Scenes in the C: \DFSS directory you would add the following line to your AUTOEXEC.BAT file:
Registration costs £17 from Data Services, You'll find more details about how to register in the REGISTER.DOC file.
CWUTILS
Carl Waring enjoyed our October Mega Disk and its 100 utilities so much, he was inspired to write his own collection of utilities.
Here's what's on the disk:
ASC11 —This ASCII convertor shows you the ASCII code for any number you type in
COLOR —Changes the screen colour combinations
DAT —Gives you todays date
TIM —Gives you the time
DISKINFO —Gives details of how much space you've got left
PHONE —Calculates how much your phone calls cost
ADDRESS —A speedy address printer
ADD —A simple calculator
If you need more details on these utilities there are document files on the Mega Disk (all with DOC extensions).
The best way to view these is to load them into your word processor.
INSTALLATION
You can run these programs direct form the Mega Disk by changing into the CWUTILS directory from your DOS prompt by typing:
To run any one of the programs simply type in its name as showing in the listing above.
For , to run the DISKINFO program, just type in DISKINFO.
GAME FORMAT
This utility takes the boredom out of formatting disks by letting you play a game while you wait.
Game format is a bat and ball breakout contest in which you have to control a bat and bounce a ball against a wall.
Each time the ball hits the wall a brick disappears and you're closer to your aim of breaking down the wall.
It might not be the most complicated game to hit your screen but it's still a lot better than watching the percentage display crawl up to 100 per cent.
RUNNING THE PROGRAM
The GFORMAT directory on the Mega Disk contains three files.
GFORMAT.COM is the program, README.COM holds the instructions, and REGISTER.COM is the registration form.
This programme can run direct from Mega Disk.
To change into the GFORMAT directory type:
Then type in GFORMAT again, followed by the name of the drive you want to format, followed by the usual DOS formatting switches.
For example, if you wanted to format a floppy disk in drive A to 720Kb type in:
You can register this program for only £5 — see the file called REGISTER.COM for more details.
BUYING With Confidence
FIRST THINGS FIRST
Before you even think about spending money on a PC, printer, or software you should be clear about what you want the product to do.
If you just want to do some basic word processing, for example, you really don't need a 50MHz 486DX with 8Mb of RAM and 200Mb hard disk.
But if you want to run Windows, then the minimum specification we'd recommend is a 20MHz 386SX with 4Mb of RAM and 50Mb hard disk.
It's difficult to work out the exact specification you'll need, so check our software reviews, where we recommend the hardware you'll need to run each package.
Here are a few additional pointers:
Windows applications love memory.
The more you can afford, the better, but look for a realistic minimum of 4Mb.
Windows also puts heavy demands on the video and the processor because of all those complex screen redraws.
Database applications are heavy on the hard disk, so a fast cached hard disk will really make a difference when you're sorting and searching for files.
Spreadsheet calculations really test the processor.
If you a lot of decimal point calculations, you'll really feel the benefit of having a maths coprocessor installed.
Once you've decided on a specification, create a shortlist of machines and check out the reviews.
Use our Best Buys tables, starting on page 150, to compare the products we've reviewed over the past year.
The next step is to read the ads.
Our mock ad on page 35 shows you what to look out for.
IF THINGS GO HORRIBLY WRONG
Any purchase of goods involves a contract.
It doesn't have to be written down; if you agree to buy something over the phone you've still formed a contract with the supplier.
The goods you buy are covered by the Sale of Goods Act (1979) which boils down to three important points:
The goods should be of merchantable quality
The goods should be fit for the purpose they were bought for
The goods should be as described by the retailer
If any of these conditions is broken, then so is the contract between you and the supplier.
IF THE GOODS ARE FAULTY
If the goods have a serious fault — for example, if the hard disk is dead — make your complaint immediately by phone and then in writing.
You're entitled to a full refund because the goods aren't of merchantable quality.
But remember — if you accept a repair you may lose your right to a full refund later.
IF YOUR SUPPLIER GOES BUST
If your dealer goes under and you have maintenance insurance on your warranty, the insurance company will pass the contract to a third party maintenance company.
If the supplier goes bust and you have a third party maintenance contract, the maintenance company should still honour your warranty, as the agreement is between you and the maintenance company and not with the supplier.
If the company has cashed your cheque and not despatched the goods, but has gone into liquidation, then your best bet is to call the official liquidators and get yourself on the list of creditors.
Unfortunately, the company's bank, the tax man and employees come first; you will then be an unsecured creditor.
If you bought the goods in response to an advertisement in this magazine you may be eligible for compensation under the Mail Order Protection Scheme.
THE SAFEST WAY TO PAY
By far the safest way to pay for mail order goods is by credit card.
Under the Consumer Credit Act the credit card company is also liable for any breach of contract.
But there are certain conditions to this — provided the credit card belongs to an individual rather than a company and the amount involved is between £100 and £30,000 (including VAT) then you should be covered.
USEFUL CONTACTS
For complaints about an advertisement contact:
Advertising Standards Authority, Mail Order Complaints Department  
For complaints about a specific company contact:
Trading Standards Department
Consumer Advice Centres
Citizens Advice Bureaux Local contact details for these should be available from your town hall.
Consumers Association:
The Office of Fair Trading:
THE MAIL ORDER PROTECTION SCHEME
If you order goods as a private individual from mail order advertisements in this magazine and pay by post in advance of delivery, What Personal Computer will consider you for compensation if the advertiser should become subject to bankruptcy proceedings or go into liquidation.
These conditions only hold as long as:
You have not received the goods or had your money returned
You write to the publisher of What Personal Computer, summarizing the situation not later than three months from the official on sale date of the publication (please retain proof of payment).
Please do not wait until the last moment to inform us.
When you write, we'll tell you how to claim and what evidence is required.
We guarantee to meet claims from readers made in accordance with the above procedure as soon as possible after the advertiser has become subject to bankruptcy proceedings, or has gone into liquidation, up to a limit of £16,000 per annum for any one advertiser so affected, and up to £48,000 in respect of all advertisers.
This guarantee covers only advance payment sent in direct response to an advertisement in this magazine (not, for example, payment made in response to catalogues and so on , received as a result of answering such advertisements).
All display advertisements are covered, but only boxed trader classified advertisements are included.
Advertisements as loose inserts are not covered.
READING THE ADS
Advertising is governed by a self-regulating system over-seen by the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA).
The BCAP is the code which all advertisers must comply — if they don't, you can complain to the ASA, which will assess the case.
There were 850 complaints about computer and software advertising in 1992, so it pays to be able to read between the lines of an advert.
Here's what to look out for:
Software should state the minimum specification needed to run it.
Make sure that the software is compatible with the other applications you want to run and that it's the genuine UK version, not a grey import.
Carefully examine any photographs, especially those of PCs.
Ads shouldn't show machines performing beyond their capabilities.
Prices should refer to the pictures in the ad — so if the monitor has a colour screen, a colour screen is what you should get.
Some companies advertise kit, knowing full well that stocks are low and may not last for the full life of the ad.
This can result in buyers waiting for months for the goods to arrive or not getting them at all and being fobbed off with a different machine.
All refunds under money-back guarantees should be made within the time stated on the ad.
You should be able to get hold of the full terms of any guarantee the supplier is offering.
If maintenance is mentioned, details of terms and limitations should also be there — if they're not, ask the supplier to provide them.
According to the ASA, any goods requested by mail order should be delivered within 28 days of the order being received.
If the goods don't arrive within 28 days or within a specified delivery date, you have the right to cancel the order.
Look for details on delivery charges, they should be clearly marked in all ads.
Unless it's a special offer, companies aren't obliged to stick to the prices they display in their ads.
Also the VAT component of any price should be clearly marked.
Look for the full name and address on the ad, so you can trace the company, especially if it asks for money in advance.
Be wary of PO Box numbers.
Read the small print; you never know what you may find.
For example, it may say 72-hour delivery guaranteed but only if you pay an extra £25.
A common inclusion is E&OE (Errors and Omissions Excepted).
This means that if there's a mistake in the ad, the advertiser isn't obliged to sell at the mistaken price.
A FEW MORE USEFUL TIPS
When ordering goods be specific.
For example, if it's a PC, state details, like the hard disk and RAM size you want.
Get hold of all the information about after sales service and warranty deals.
Make it clear what you want the hardware or software to do and get an assurance, preferably in writing, that it will fulfil your needs.
Check if the product can be expanded or upgraded in the future.
If you do any of this work yourself, will it void your warranty?
Make sure that the advertised price includes all the bits you need to make it work.
Make sure you confirm the price of each item, and that the goods are in stock.
Confirm delivery date and make sure you send written confirmation of all the details.
Try to make it part of the contract that the supplier shouldn't cash the cheque or debit your credit card account until the goods are sent.
Keep copies of all correspondence, the original ad, and document any word of mouth agreement.
Once you're ready to place your order, use What Personal Computer Order Form on the tear-out card.
Using the card brings many benefits.
First, it means you've got everything in writing in case things get nasty.
Second, if the worst comes to the worst and your supplier goes into liquidation or becomes subject to bankruptcy proceedings you may get compensation through the Mail Order Protection Scheme (MOPS).
The order form will help us to trace your purchase and link it to an ad in What Personal Computer.
Make sure that you confirm the price of each item and the delivery date on the Order form.
Keep copies of all correspondence.
BUYER
BENCH TEST
33 MHz 486SXs
THE JOY of SX
THE 386 HAS BEEN PUBLISHED FURTHER TOWARDS THE CLIFF EDGE NOW THAT INTEL HAS ANOTHER ENTRY-LEVEL PROCESSOR LINED UP TO TAKE ITS PLACE.
ROGER GANN FASTENS HIS SEATBELT AND TESTS SOME OF THE FIRST 33MHz PCs TO STORM ONTO THE SCENE.
Over the past few months we've been advising you to take all the hype about the death of the 386 with a generous pinch of salt.
But the launch of Intel's new 33MHz SX processor has just put another nail in the 386 coffin.
This month I'll be looking at a new breed of 486SX machines, based on Intel's fastest SX processor yet.
The 33MHz SX chip is Intel's latest attempt to turn the 486SX PC into the new entry-level machine.
But manufacturers aren't exactly flocking to produce 33MHz 486SX machines as yet.
We managed to lay our hands on just four after much research.
In the US, however, IBM, Dell and Gateway have jumped on the 33MHz bandwagon and we can expect to see more UK manufacturers following suit.
There will also be an OverDrive processor available, which will plug into the maths coprocessor socket, turning it into a machine which runs internally at 66MHz and externally at 33MHz.
And the new chip is good news if you're considering one of the slower 20MHz or 25MHz versions, as these have been forced down in price.
SO WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS?
Performance-wise the 33MHz 486SX has a slight benefit over the 25MHz version in processor-intensive tasks.
For example, as part of the What Personal Computer Power Tests we run a Lotus 1-2-3 calculation to test processor speed.
The 25MHz PCs we looked at in October took around 7 seconds to complete the test, while the 33MHz machines reviewed here took around 5 seconds.
Other performance results are more difficult to quantify, but a basic uncached 25MHz 486SX PC turned in Power Test results of around 7,000 to 7,500, while the uncached Greenfield 33MHz machine I looked at this month came in at 8,619.
As far as price goes, these machines are still at the budget end of the market.
The Phoenix system starts at £899. for example.
But if you decide a 33MHz 486SX is the machine for you, be prepared to pay around £100 more than for a comparable 25MHz system.
The four 33MHz 486SXs on test are:
The speedy CIC Sigma 433S with a secondary cache and a cached IDE host adaptor driving the hard disk
The bargain-priced Phoenix 486SX/
The Greenfield 486SX/33 which comes with an installation service
The Western Systems 486SX-33 which is fitted with a Windows accelerator card.
CIC SIGMA 433S
The 422S comes in the familiar CIC Sigma slim tower.
We're witnessing the slow death of the 5.25-inch floppy: this is yet another machine supplied with just a 3.5-inch 1.44Mb floppy drive.
Speedwise the 433S didn't let us down.
It has 256Kb of secondary cache to hurry things along, a cached IDE host adaptor with 2Mb of RAM and local bus video; the ideal ingredients for a Windows workhorse.
The 433S has 4Mb of RAM, expandable by a further 28Mb.
The SIMM slots are located at the rear.
In most casings this makes it pretty awkward to get at, but the Sigma's casing is spacious enough to allow access to these vital sockets.
You get seven 16-bit ISA slots plus one 8-bit slot with the Sigma.
The 8-bit I/O (input/output) card can't be fitted in the 8-bit slot because it's too short and the parallel port socket would foul the CMOS battery.
Result?
One 16-bit slot is wasted.
Two of the 16-bit slots have local bus extensions.
A full-length GA-300 video card is fitted using the S3 86C911 graphics accelerator.
This supports the now dead XGA standard as well as SuperVGA.
With its 1Mb of display memory it will give you a maximum resolution of 1,280 by 1,024 in 16 colours as well as provide non-interlaced video at 72Hz in 1,024 by 768 mode.
It made short work of our Windows performance tests, WinTach, clocking up an impressive index of over 9.3.
But beware — this pair of local bus slots is proprietary, so it may prove difficult to get any other cards to work with this system.
The accompanying CTX 14-inch monitor was an adequate match.
Cached IDE host adaptors are becoming more popular and CIC has fitted the DC-600B cache controller with 2Mb of RAM.
This has its own 80188 processor on-board, so the cache relieves the main processor of some of the donkey work.
A 160Mb IDE hard disk bearing the IBM label hangs off the DC-600B.
This combination demolished our dBase Benchmark in a mere 14 seconds.
The Sigma 433S is a nice mover, and Windows users will appreciate its go-faster features.
It's a bit more expensive than the other machines I looked at but it has a bigger hard disk, local bus video and a lengthy warranty.
Some aspects are still a little scrappy — the bundled software, DOS and Windows, isn't particularly well set up and the documentation won't win a Pulitzer prize.
Nevertheless, the 433S deserves a place on your shortlist 
PHOENIX 486SX/33
The omens for the Diamond Phoenix weren't too hot.
When I first turned it on, it reported a hard disk failure.
A look under the hood revealed the cause.
Not only was the IDE host card hanging out of the slot, the securing screw having gone AWOL, but the ribbon cable was disconnected, too.
This wasn't a major catastrophe, and it only took a minute to rectify, but it's a clear case of poor quality control.
The Phoenix 486SX/33 came with the unusual Philips Multimedia SuperVGA display.
This goes up to a resolution of 1,024 by 768 in non-interlaced mode, at a flicker-free 72Hz vertical scan rate.
It has a pair of small loudspeakers fitted inside, which you can connect to your PC's sound card — much better than the Walkman speakers I normally hook up.
The image was pretty good, too.
The normal Philips 14-inch screen goes for £229, the multimedia version for an extra £40.
Inside the desktop casing you'll find a postage stamp sized motherboard, with 128Kb of secondary RAM cache.
A mass of cables obscures what would otherwise be easily accessible SIMM sockets.
The cables from the all-purpose I/O and drive controller card stretch across two slots and would make it awkward to fit any tall cards in either of them.
The motherboard had six 16-bit slots and one 8-bit slot.
Two of the 16-bit slots are special EISA-like slots.
These are local bus slots which comply with the early OPTi local bus standard.
They aren't VL Bus compliant, so they're proprietary and prone to be early orphans.
Plugged into one  of them was a local bus SuperVGA card with 1Mb of video RAM, hung around a Tseng Labs ET4000AX chip.
It isn't a graphics accelerator, but it's capable of moving at a decent lick when put on a fast bus.
Unfortunately, my review sample wasn't accompanied with any documentation.
In order for local bus video to deliver what it promises, the driver software has to be specially written to take account of it.
I had no drivers for it at all; instead I downloaded the normal ET4000  drivers from CIX.
It returned a WinTach Windows performance index of 4.5, which was OK, but not in the same league as the other local bus video machines I looked at.
Its DOS video performance was, however, remarkably fast.
Storage consists of a 120Mb Quantum Pro-Drive IDE drive.
This is a popular choice among cloners and even though it was uncached it still managed to achieve data transfer dates in excess of 900Kb/sec.
Diamond has a reputation for low prices and this machine sells for just £899, including the monitor, but excluding DOS, Windows and a mouse.
It costs £400 less than the CIC Sigma and £146 less than the slightly lower specified Greenfield machine.
Although the quality control needs tightening, the Diamond Phoenix is hard to beat on price.
GREENFIELD 486SX/33
The Greenfield 486SX/33 lacks the more sophisticated extras of its more expensive rivals, such as a graphics accelerator card or a cached IDE host adaptor.
But one thing it does have which others don't is an installation service.
Many clones are being dispatched in flimsy packaging, so minor problems which occur in transit — such as loose cables — mean that some machines are turning up dead on arrival.
But this shouldn't be a problem with Greenfield machines.
The machine comes in a desktop mini tower.
It's not too tall, so you can't expect vast expansion potential — it has two 5.25-inch and one 3.5-inch free drive bays.
All the ribbon cables and power leads were bundled up neatly, making for a clean-looking interior.
Although the SIMM sockets (eight in all, four with 1Mb SIMMs fitted) were right over the back of the board, against the power supply, access to them wasn't too bad.
The tiny motherboard is upgradeable but the processor is underneath the disk drive cage, so you might have to remove the motherboard completely to upgrade it.
Its an uncached design from Headland, with just a handful of chips onboard.
The lack of a secondary cache wasn't really exposed by our benchmarks, though the 1-2-3 spreadsheet recalc was a tiny bit slower.
It has plenty of slots — seven 16-bit and one 8-bit — with two of the former occupied by the video card and yet another minuscule component, the multi-I/O card with floppy and IDE interfaces, which is barely two inches tall.
This was an uncached design and it was unable to reach the dizzy heights attained by its rivals — compare it with the Western Systems machine which had an identical Conner drive but was cached.
The video sub-system was the venerable Trident 8900C Super VGA card.
This is quite capable, offering a variety of display resolutions with the 1Mb of video RAM it has to hand, but it's no speed demon.
The Relisys 14-inch VGA colour display delivered a bright, contrasty image.
At £1,045, the Greenfield has many of the same basic components as its rivals.
It doesn't have a secondary cache, fast video or a cached IDE card.
but these are extra cost options anyway.
The Greenfield 486SX/33 is a modest little machine with a modest price tag.
WESTERN SYSTEMS WS486SX-33
This is the second machine I've seen from Western Systems.
Back in October 1992 I looked at a 20MHz 486SX.
As before, the machine comes in a full-height ‘baby AT’ desktop casing, with a vertically mounted 3.5-inch floppy.
Three large buttons grace the front: a power stitch, a reset button and a turbo switch, though goodness knows why we still need turbo switches in this day and age.
POWER INDEX
Once again we see the powerful effect cached hard disks have on our Power Index.
Although all the machines had very similar hard disks, the ones that were cached (the Sigma, the Western Systems and the Phoenix) tower above the one that wasn't the Greenfield.
Interestingly, although all three cached designs had the same amount of RAM cache, the CIC Sigma produced the best overall performance.
WINTACH RATINGS
Although local bus video turned in the best WinTach Windows performance results, the Western Systems Paradise video accelerator produced some pretty good ones, too.
If the Diamond Phoenix had been supplied with proper drivers it most probably would have done a little better, overtaking the Western Systems.
Bringing up the rear is the Greenfield, with its slowcoach Trident-based VGA card.
The casing is neat, with plenty of space inside.
The hard and floppy drives are 3.5-inch affairs mounted on the side of the main drive cage.
Three 5.25-inch drive bays are free, so there's ample room for peripheral expansion.
However, the 3.5-inch cage projects into the expansion card space so you can only fit five full-length cards.
The motherboard in the Western Systems is one of the smallest general-purpose 486 boards I've seen.
The expansion slots, SIMM slots and cache RAM sockets take up most of the space; the gaps in between are filled with a smattering of large VLSI chips.
It also sported a true VESA Local Bus slot, which doubles as a normal 16-bit slot at other times.
The slot wasn't occupied with a high speed video or IDE host adaptor, although Western Systems will offer a VL Bus video card in the near future.
The motherboard can take a full 66MHz DX2 chip but there's no easy upgrade socket — it's a case of our with the old and in with the new.
Filling three of the six slots were some interesting cards.
Video duties were taken care of by the respected Paradise Windows accelerator card, featuring the speedy WD90C31 accelerator chip.
This returned some good Windows WinTach index scores — 6.36 at normal VGA resolution at 256 colours.
The VL Bus version ought to be a screamer.
Needless to say, the 115Mb Conner hard disk produced some excellent, if misleading, CoreTest results.
It's a pity this card can't support parallel and serial ports as it would save a slot — the multi-function I/O card duplicates the DC-600 by having floppy and hard disk interfaces.
Windows was pre-installed and Western Systems had made some effort to configure it — the permanent swap file was installed; a minor chore that's commonly overlooked.
But I also noticed that SmartDrive was active, which is wasteful, as the machine already has its own cached IDE host adaptor.
Not only is SmartDrive superfluous, it wastes almost 1Mb of RAM.
I liked the Western Systems WS486SX/33: I thought it was just a cut above the other three I tested.
At £1,115, it also offers a good combination of price and performance.
It will be interesting to see what it's like when the VL Bus video cards turn up.
THE VERDICT
The 33MHz 486SX machines I looked at covered a wide spectrum in terms of specification and price.
The dearest was the CIC Sigma 433S.
At £1,249 it costs around 50 per cent more than the Phoenix but it is the most powerful machine.
The Western Systems offered more bang per buck: £1,115 buys you a faster machine.
The slowest machine was the Greenfield, but it wasn't the cheapest.
That honour went to the Phoenix, which despite having been in the wars, returned a very respectable Power Index of 11,857.
I suspect that its performance would be even better if appropriate video drivers had been supplied.
My own favourite, putting price aside, was the Western Systems, but if you want value for money then the Phoenix is well worth a look.
JARGON BUSTERS
DISPLAY MODES —The best video cards and monitors have ‘non-interlaced’ displays which produce less flickery images.
and therefore less eyestrain, than interlaced displays.
When an image is displayed on-screen, a beam of electrons scans the screen one line at a time.
When it gets to the last line the beam shoots back to the top.
This happens many times each second.
Interlaced displays scan alternate lines, so that it takes two complete passes to display every line on-screen.
Non-interlaced systems make just one pass.
CACHE —Most Windows users use a software-based cache, SmartDrive, to make Windows run faster.
Frequently-used data is kept in a pocket of memory, called a cache.
It's faster to read data from the cache than to load it from the hard disk.
Many 486-based PCs now feature a secondary RAM cache on the motherboard.
This supplements the 8Kb of cache RAM inside the 486.
This particular cache uses very fast static RAM to cache memory, so the processor doesn't have to hang around waiting for ‘slow’ memory to deliver data to the processor.
As second type of cache is the cached IDE host adaptor.
This effectively replaces SmartDrive and acts as a dedicated hard disk cache.
The card often has its own processor, typically on 80186 or 80188, and it can relieve the main CPU of some of the donkey work of controlling a hard disk.
Cached IDE host cards can produce excellent results.
Don't forget that if you have such a card fitted, you don't need a software cache like SmartDrive.
LOCAL BUS —Processors are getting faster and faster but the clock speed of the system bus has stayed put at 8MHz for over nine years.
This means that cards plugged into an ISA expansion slot can't run any faster than this.
With processors galloping at 66MHz it means that there will be times when the processor is held back waiting for a slow peripheral to catch up.
This bottleneck has been worsened by video-intensive applications like Windows 3.1.
Local bus is a technology whereby certain peripheral cards, such as video or IDE host cards, can have their own private bus which runs at the same speed as the processor, thus enhancing overall system throughput.
Many machines now have proprietary implementations of local buses.
The video standards body, VESA, completed a local bus standard in 1992 and some machines now have VESA Locl Bus (VL Bus) slots.
As with normal ISA slots, you'll be able to take any VL Bus video card and plug it into any motherboard with VL Bus slots — something you can't do with proprietary slots.
BUYER
DOS SPECIAL
DOS LIVES!
THERE'S PLENTY OF LIFE IN THE OLD BEAST YET…
FAR FROM BEING PUT OUT TO GRASS, DOS IS SET FOR A FACELIFT.
IN THIS SPECIAL FEATURE WE GIVE YOU A SNEAK PREVIEW OF VERSION 6 AND CHECK OUT THE BEST DOS APPLICATIONS.
BUT FIRST, ANDREW JOHNSON EXPLAINS WHY DOS IS STILL GOING STRONG AND WHAT GOODIES WE CAN LOOK FORWARD TO.
You thought Windows ruled the world?
Well we've got news for you — MS-DOS is still going strong.
It has an estimated 100 million users worldwide and there's still a huge demand for DOS applications.
According to the latest figures from market researcher Romtec, between January and October 1992, DOS software accounted for six out of ten of all applications sold, beating Windows sales in three main areas — word processing, spreadsheets and databases.
It's time to put DOS applications under the microscope.
We'll be looking at the market leaders in the four most popular areas — word processing, spreadsheets, databases and utilities.
And with the launch of MS-DOS 6 due at the end of March, we'll also be giving you a sneak preview of what to expect.
HOW COME DOS IS STILL ON THE GO?
There are two big points in DOS's favour to explain its enduring popularity.
For straight text processing, it's much faster than Windows.
The other factor is that DOS applications don't take up huge chunks of RAM and hard disk space.
They'll run on some of the most basic systems — even a machine with an 8086 processor and 640Kb of RAM is fine for most DOS apps.
This is an important consideration.
Although the computer industry enjoys getting into a tizzy about the ever-increasing number of processors, anyone buying a 386SX 18 months ago would have wanted it to last at least three years.
The Romtec figures for machines in use, culled from a survey conducted last summer, show that four out of ten of the machines are based on the 286 chip or an inferior processor.
All the companies who have long-standing affairs with the DOS are still heavily committed to it.
Lotus and WordPerfect have built their empires on DOS products — one with the top selling spreadsheet, 1-2-3, the other with one of the best DOS word processors, WordPerfect 5.1.
These two packages have millions of users worldwide.
The problem Lotus and WordPerfect face is how to persuade existing users to stick with them when they buy a better machine bundled with Windows.
Both companies have arrived at the same answer.
Take some of the features from your Windows products and shove them into the DOS  ones.
So the latest version of Lotus 1-2-3 includes such delights as fully customizable Lotus Smart Icons, mouse support and better printer drivers.
The company also claims it's substantially faster than previous versions of 1-2-3.
In speed terms, it'll wipe the floor with anything running under Windows.
For more details take a look at our full review on page 56.
Andy Wyatt, product marketing manager for Lotus Spreadsheets, says: ‘There will always be a residue of DOS users.
In fact, there were more 286s sold in 1992 than there were in 1991.
There is still a future for DOS — these users aren't just going to disappear, and if people still want DOS products.
we will continue to develop them.
We have two sorts of customers — those who are happy with DOS and want to carry on using it, and those who eventually want to move to Windows.
We must support both types by giving those happy with DOS more performance, and by making it as easy to use as possible.
For those who want to move up to Windows, we must  make sure our DOS and Windows products are as compatible as possible.’
WordPerfect's plans are more radical.
The company is currently revamping its range of DOS products.
giving them a full Windows-style graphical user interface (GUI), complete with drag ‘n’ drop, pull-down menus and WYSIWYG screens.
The latest version of its graphics package, Presentations 2, reviewed in our December issue, had these features in abundance.
It also supported Bitstream's Speedo fonts, giving users a far wider choice of typefaces than they've ever had from a DOS product.
It's a remarkable achievement, given the limitations of DOS.
All the indications are that WordPerfect 6, the upgrade to version 5.1, will follow a similar path.
It seems likely the product will be split into two parts: the traditional DOS interface, giving users the benefits of speed and hotkey shortcuts, and a WYSIWYG screen.
Rumour says it'll be almost identical in looks to the company's Windows product.
WordPerfect 5.1 is reviewed on page 69.
PLANS FOR THE FUTURE
DOS made Microsoft the large and powerful company it is today.
But Microsoft isn't the only supplier of operating systems.
Novell, which brought Digital Research in 1991, makes DR DOS 6.
And IBM makes PC DOS under a licensing agreement from Microsoft.
The terms of the agreement mean the companies have to show each other the code they're using in their versions of DOS.
But this will end in September this year, giving IBM far more freedom to develop DOS the way it wants to.
Microsoft, Novell and IBM all have big plans for DOS.
By the end of 1994, you may be able to choose from three very different versions.
‘DOS 6 is the biggest upgrade we've made since DOS 2,’ says David Smith, systems marketing manager for Microsoft in the UK.
‘There's very much a future for DOS.’
The company is already working on MS-DOS 7, tentatively planned for launch in the middle of 1994.
This will see some of the greatest changes made to DOS yet.
Instead of having to go through the hoary old DOS prompt when you boot up, you'll go straight into Windows.
It will be a 32-bit operating system — DOS is presently limited to 16 bits — and will have the networking elements from Windows for Workgroups thrown in.
Microsoft recognizes compatibility with previous versions of DOS is crucial, so you'll be able to run your favourite DOS applications from under Windows.
IBM's plans for DOS are similar.
Like MS-DOS 7, its version will have a graphical interface, similar to OS/2's Program Manager.But unlike MS-DOS 7, it will be tailored towards portable computing — especially the pen systems the company is working on at the moment.
It too might be 32-bit, but IBM isn't giving anything away at the moment.
Novell hopes to have a new version of DR DOS out by the middle of this year.
It will be a combination of DR DOS 6 and the company's popular NetWare Lite program.
In effect, it will be a network operating system.
Is DOS doomed to die?
Far from it.
With the commitment the application and operating system developers are showing, DOS is going to be around for some time yet.
DOS V WINDOWS
FOR DOS
Your time and effort.
Can 100 million people be wrong?
DOS users know what they're doing, have invested a lot of time and effort in learning how to do it, and don't want the hassle of moving over to a new interface in order to do it differently.
Increased productivity — you're not surrounded by seductive frills and furbelows.
WordPerfect users type, preview and print.
The typical user of Ami Pro or Word for Windows spends more time putting in pretty fonts and graphics — and that's after they've customized the toolbars and the screen colours and…
Economy.
DOS is cheap.
You don't need to upgrade or replace your kit to run DOS apps — all you need to get started is a bare 640Kb of RAM and an anorexic 8086 machine.
To run your average Windows app you'll need 4Mb of RAM, a 100Mb hard disk and at least a 386.
It's lean.
You don't get any irrelevant features and facilities, partly because developers of DOS Software have got used to getting more out of less.
It's fast.
Scroll through a long document in a DOS word processor, then compare that to wading through a Word for Windows file.
Stability.
DOS doesn't habitually bomb out, blasting cryptic error messages on the screen like Windows often does.
It's simple.
Windows is stuffed full of things you have to configure or change before you can set up a printer, for example.
With DOS it's all clean and simple, no more than a bit of tweaking for CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT.
Choice.
There are many more DOS packages than Windows ones, not to mention all the shareware.
That's partly because DOS is easier for programmers to use, partly because of accumulated knowledge, and also, software developers have got pretty clever about squeezing the most out of DOS systems.
And DOS represents the largest market; where an ambitious software writer can get most users (and most money).
FOR WINDOWS
Consistency.
It's much easier to get started with Windows apps, as the interface is consistent.
DOS apps aren't standard: help for the best-selling WP is on F3, the best-selling spreadsheet has a menu which is pulled up by hitting the backslash key.
Where's the logic in that?
Increased productivity — all that customization can result in an easier-to-use interface, those formatting options generate info with more impact.
And Windows makes the most of your work; you can cut and paste between different programs, and information can be automatically linked between apps.
Capability.
There's a good reason why you can run DOS on such a primitive computer — you'll get primitive system.
Add more capability to a software program and you inevitably end up with something that's bigger and has more machine instructions for the CPU to execute.
It's rich.
You aren't forced into unnatural ways of doing things just to satisfy DOS's illogical structure and impoverished workarounds.
It's fast.
Can you beat the speed and precision of point-and-click or drag'n’ drop movements or sweep-the-mouse selections?
Assistance.
At least when it does bomb, Windows 3.1 usually lets you restart gracefully; you don't always have to resort to the three-finger shuffle.
It's simple.
Windows provides things like screen drivers and printer selections; you don't have to worry about setting things up for each package.
Also, DOS can't do any really useful stuff, like multi-tasking.
Choice.
You want a choice of the best software?
All the brightest ideas, the sharpest capabilities and the most up-to-date facilities are to be found in Windows packages rather than under DOS.
That's partly because Windows encourages developers to do their best, also, Windows represents the growing market; the one in which an ambitious software writer can make the most impact (and most money).
MS-DOS 6
A PREVIEW
MS-DOS HAS BEEN WHEELED OUT OF THE OPERATING THEATRE AND VERSION 6 WILL SOON BE READY TO RECEIVE VISITORS.
ROGER GANN, ARMED WITH A BUNCH OF GRAPES, PEERS UNDER THE BANDAGES TO SEE IF THE FACELIFT HAS BEEN A SUCCESS.
You'd be forgiven for thinking that Windows 3.1 is the biggest selling application of all time, with unit sales of around a million a month.
But the best seller is, in fact, MS-DOS 5 Upgrade.
Although relatively creaky as an operating system, the DOS installed base is vast — maybe over 100 million — and has been given a new lease of life by the runaway success of Windows.
We've pieced together the fragments of leaks and rumours concerning the latest version of the 10-year-old operating system, due to release at the end of March.
WHAT'S NEW?
MS-DOS 5 set the scene when Microsoft included a clutch of bought-in utilities from Central Point Software, principally Mirror and Undelete.
Version 6 sees Microsoft incorporating even more third-party offerings, covering areas such as anti-virus protection, fast back-up and disk compression.
Microsoft has lagged behind in the memory of management stakes, so you can expect to find that EMM386 has been beefed up, particularly in the optimizing department, rather like QEMM386 or 386MAX.
Windows 3.1 users will see some old friends in DOS 6: the much improved SmartDrive, with its ability to ‘stage’ writes; the diagnostic tool, MSD; and a fast file transfer utility called InterLink, previously confined to the ROM version of MS-DOS 5.
Press reports suggest that the new DOS will include a revised boot procedure, allowing you to bypass CONFIG.SYS to process it line by line.
Disk compression will be included as standard in DOS 6 but, unlike the other improvements, it won't be a bought-in product (aka Stacker).
Instead it will be a Microsoft home-brew.
Stacker proved to be the hit of 1992 and this was clearly a ‘must-have’ utility.
According to US press reports, the Microsoft version will be able to install over a ‘Stacked’ hard disk.
MS-DOS 5 was shipped with network shells and drivers and you can expect this trend to continue with version 6.
The Windows for Workgroups beta included software to permit a DOS machine to hook up to a Windows for Workgroups network, although only as a client, so it's safe to assume that the same Workgroup Connection software will find its way into version 6.
It would also make sense for Microsoft to include network mail facilities.
The Backup and Restore utilities supplied with previous versions of MS-DOS never won Microsoft any bouquets.
It appears that this sad reality has finally sunk in.
Microsoft has dragged this portion of DOS into the 1990s and has rebadged Norton Backup.
Another item borrowed from the Norton Utilities goodie bag will be Norton SpeedDisk, a disk compressor and defragmenter, also licensed by Stac and used in Stacker.
Anti-virus duties are undertaken by a version of Central Point Anti-Virus, one of the better US anti-virus products.
I suspect that Microsoft has been reluctant to grasp the virus nettle and it will be interesting to see how it copes with the continuous upgrading that such a product requires.
Expect to see a version of Norton's Backup program — it's much better than Backup and Restore
THE NEXT STEP
MS-DOS 6 will be essentially a holding operation, with no major advances.
Amazingly, it only just noses ahead of DR DOS, which has been around for over 18 months.
The big news follows in 1994, with the release of a 32-bit DPMI-based DOS, codenamed Chicago, which is much more tightly integrated with Windows.
This will let DOS apps break the 640Kb barrier on a 386 and access Extended memory, just as Windows apps do.
You can also expect to see true multi-tasking and use of the faster 386 instruction set.
THE BEST DOS SPREADSHEETS
THE LATEST DOS SPREADSHEETS REALLY NARROW THE DIVIDE BETWEEN DOS AND WINDOWS.
THEY ARE GRAPHICALLY ORIENTATED, POWERFUL AND FAST — CAN THERE POSSIBLY BE ANY DRAWBACKS?
TIM WOODWARD CHECKS OUT THREE BEST-SELLERS TO SEE IF HE SUFFERS WINDOWS WITHDRAWAL SYMPTOMS.
Virtually every spreadsheet worthy of further development has now been released in a pretty, graphical Windows version.
But does this mean the beginning of the end for non-GUI number crunching, or is there life in the old DOS spreadsheet yet?
We all expect our spreadsheets to calculate efficiently — whether they're DOS or Windows-based — with sophisticated tools like backwards goal-seeking and statistical ‘what if’ analysis commonplace under the Tools menu.
However, Windows has made ease of use and presentation-quality graphics a priority.
so how do the DOS packages cope with these requirements?
Here we look at three of the best selling DOS spreadsheets.
This should give you a good idea of what to expect if you don't have the processing power or, perhaps more importantly, the inclination, to go Windows shopping.
DOS V WINDOWS SPREADSHEETS
Typically, most Windows spreadsheets perform better doing what Windows was designed for in the first place — graphical presentation.
This include the placement and manipulation of text, formulae, graphs and picture objects on a worksheet screen to create, say, a report.
The Windows environment itself also offers facilities like automatic DDE and OLE links between applications and accurate WYSIWYG (What-you-see-is-what-you-get) representation on-screen — all designed to make working easier and more intuitive.
On the whole, DOS spreadsheets perform faster and need less in the way of resources to work properly — but that's because they don't do very much with those resources until you start to use the graphics facilities they offer.
When DOS spreadsheets like Quattro Pro 4 came onto the scene, the marked difference between DOS and Windows apps lessened significantly.
More DOS programs are becoming graphically orientated, as speed limitations are eroded with faster hardware and mouse support becomes commonplace.
If Dos survives after Windows NT matures, there will be little difference between DOS and Windows products in terms of their operation, look and feel.
The benefits of an intuitive, multi-media, multi-tasking operating system will be what tips the scales — not whether the applications themselves are prettier or faster.
LOTUS 1-2-3 VERSION 3.4
Lotus drew some flack with its Windows version of what had long been the world's number one spreadsheet.
The general opinion was that this long-awaited package definitely wasn't a good Windows product.
Lotus 1-2-3 in WYSIWYG mode.
As usual, it needs an add-in, but at least you get a few icons to play with
Lotus calls this Perspective mode — you can see three parts of one sheet or three completely separate sheets on one screen
Things start to look boring when you exit out of the WYSIWYG add-in mode — no surprises here for 1-2-3 users
Lotus 1-2-3 release 3.4, on the other hand, promises a more graphical outlook than its predecessors for the DOS user, whilst maintaining the power features that folk have come to expect.
Sure enough, Version 3.4 sports SmartIcons, like its Windows relation, which give a pictorial way to get at that power more intuitively than the still-resident backslash menus.
You get eight rows of pictures in turn, displayed down the right-hand side of the screen.
Their usefulness depends on the task you have in hand.
However, icons are only available if you use the WYSIWYG add-in.
Without it Lotus 1-2-3 just looks like, well, good old Lotus 1-2-3.
I would have thought add-ins would be less evident in this release, but they are all still here, from the goal-seeking Solver, through the Auditor work-sheet-auditing tool, to the file-interrogating Viewer from release 3.1.
In terms of presentation 1-2-3 hasn't improved much either.
The WYSIWYG add-in goes a long way to helping you see how your masterpiece will eventually print out — but only approximately (it's pretty much like Windows 1-2-3 in that respect!).
Presentation and ease of use are the most obvious areas where a DOS application has to fight hard for its existence alongside the GUI opposition, and in this respect 1-2-3 release 3.4 breaks little new ground.
It has much improved printer support, though, and with 3D graphs at long last arriving on the Lotus menu, some users will think they've picked up the wrong spreadsheet!
The real Lotus advantage, however, lies in those 3D worksheets, and in this respect version 3.4 still manages to outdo most of the GUI opposition in multi-dimensional calculating.
Linking cells in one worksheet to calculations in another is also on offer, of course, and it makes you wonder how we used to manage those multi-company consolidations without dynamic linking.
Sadly, the bundled documentation that should really help you make the most of Version 3.4 is a bit of a disaster.
Once you've left the Getting Started manual, screenshots seem to be a thing of the past and any semblance of logical order is forgotten.
I can hardly believe that this is the same company that produced the excellent Ami Pro manuals.
1-2-3 release 3.4 for DOS makes nothing easier than it would have been under Windows, but even the Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows version needs a major overhaul before many folk will take it seriously.
The basic DOS application is faster, no doubt, but if you want the graphical add-ins you'll still need plenty of RAM and a fast processor to make it work.
SUPERCALC 5.5
Computer Associates has always had a devoted following for its SuperCalc spreadsheet.
In fact, SuperCalc has become best known as a power user's tool, more likely because of its serious outlook, rather than any vast superiority in the features stakes.
SuperCalc 5.5 is Computer Associates ‘latest attempt to offer DOS users a value for money alternative to the GUI onslaught but, like Lotus 1-2-3, the text/graphical combination doesn't really pay off.
Like 1-2-3, SuperCalc offers icons as a quick means to get at frequently used facilities.
Unlike 1-2-3 these aren't pictorial in any sense of the word; they're more a menu-like collection of abbreviations down the side of the screen.
In fact you could be forgiven for thinking that SuperCalc was just like Lotus 1-2-3, except that the backslash key menus run along the bottom of the screen instead of the top!
Again, there is a WYSIWYG-type view before printing.
Although this isn't up to the standard of the Lotus add-in for placement of graphics on-screen, at least it's slightly more accurate when it comes to the final report.
Graphically speaking, SuperCalc offers the full range of bar, pie and other chart types, with, of course, 3D examples of each on the menu — without the aid of any add-ins this time!
Like 1-2-3, SuperCalc 5.5 doesn't make it easy for you to get ambitious with presentations, even though lots of printers are supported, and you have the help of Sideways.
This is an add-in which lets you turn even your widest worksheet into a kind of banner printout.
In terms of features, SuperCalc boasts similar facilities to 1-2-3, not least of which is the ability to have 3D worksheets.
Computer Associates calls them ‘pages’, but essentially multi-dimensional calculations and linked spreadsheets are all on the menu.
All the usual tools for auditing, goal seeking and statistical analysis are, of course, available.
The menu structure to get at these is slightly less confusing than 1-2-3's — but only just!
Even more documentation arrives with SuperCalc 5.5, mainly because the data manipulation features are given a book of their own and a name — Silverado.
If you really must use a spreadsheet as a database, then SuperCalc than a typical Windows spreadsheet, speed is the only advantage if your hardware is a little on the light side.
SuperCalc is more colourful than 1-2-3 in its basic livery, but the icons are just a few abbreviations on the screen
Just like Lotus 1-2-3, the SuperCalc screen can be split into three windows on separate worksheets
What about a graph in the shape of a US map?
SuperCalc can be clever, but you need to be as well
QUATTRO PRO VERSION 4
If Lotus 1-2-3 and SuperCalc have divided the market among themselves for years, they have one problem in common— Quattro Pro.
Borland became a thorn in both their sides long ago, with the very first version of what is now an extremely popular spreadsheet.
All WYSIWYG here in Quattro Pro 4 — not an add-in in sight.
Note the quick-access button bar just below the top menu
Like 1-2-3 and SuperCalc, Quattro Pro lets you see the different sheets on-screen at the same time, but you can have as many windows as you like — tiled, tiered, or whatever!
Quattro Pro virtually lets you make full presentations without the expense of a presentation package
Now we have Quattro Pro for DOS version 4 to contend with, released at virtually the same time as a Windows version that looks like causing quite a stir as well.
In no way a carbon copy of the Windows application, the DOS package has its own features and failings destined to attract a very different audience.
First on the list for discussion must be ease of use and presentation, and perhaps predictably what we have here are icons.
Like SuperCalc these aren't pictorial in content, but at least the shadowed button look makes them appear as if you should click then with a mouse — which is more than can be said for either of the other two packages.
Quattro Pro doesn't have an add-in sight, yet manages to look brilliant in WYSIWYG mode.
You can place graphs and suchlike exactly where you want on-screen (just as if you were in a Windows program!), and the bundled Bitstream fonts ensure that everything looks identical on-screen to how it will eventually print.
Like Lotus 1-2-3 and SuperCalc, Quattro Pro's printer support is very good — although having to tell all these programs individually that I had an HP LaserJet IIIsi made me realize how easy it is telling Windows just the once for all your applications.
In terms of presentation, Quattro Pro really pulls out the stops.
Once you have a graph organized (there are plenty of 3D choices here too) you can further tailor the output using the program's built-in ‘annotate’ utility.
Simply click on your graph view and you'll find yourself in something like a paint program.
Here you can edit each aspect of the presentation, from the graph itself to adding pictures, arrows, text and so on.
Once you have a fe graphs prepared, and perhaps some descriptive text views, these can be presented in a slideshow sequence, with various effects of each transition if you wish.
All this graphical wizardry isn't at the expense of spreadsheet features, either.
All the typical tools for problem solving, ‘what if?’ calculations and statistical analysis are there.
Quattro Pro also manages dynamic linking (it always has done) although 3D worksheets with multiple pages aren't on the menu.
The documentation for Quattro Pro also features plenty of screenshots, and follows a logical sequence similar to that of SuperCalc.
The built-in functions and the macro language are dealt with in a separate tome which is best left to the initiated!
THE VERDICT
Lotus 1-2-3 version 3.4 has 3D graphs now and better printer support, but most DOS spreadsheets had these features yonks ago.
Graphics plays an even lesser role with SuperCalc 5.5 than it does with Lotus 1-2-3, so if you don't like pretty pictures you might be more at home in the Computer Associates stable — and at this price, why not?
Although Quattro Pro 4 can't be said to make any task easier than in an equivalent Windows spreadsheet, what it does prove is that with very little limitation a DOS product can manage the same job as a Windows product any trouble at all.
When you compare Quattro Pro 4 to other DOS spreadsheets, you can quickly see that there's life in the old operating system yet, and that more graphical environment is where things are heading.
If you're serious about DOS spreadsheeting, then Quattro Pro must be your first port of call.
THE BEST DOS DATABASES
EVEN THE SIMPLEST DATABASE APPLICATIONS ARE PERFORMANCE-BOUND, SO SPEED IS CRUCIAL.
DOS IS, OF COURSE, FASTER THAN WINDOWS, SO A DOS DATABASE IS A GOOD BET ON THAT SCORE.
BUT WHAT ABOUT EASE OF USE?
DENNIS JARRETT PUTS THREE OF THE TOP-SELLERS THROUGH THEIR PACES.
At a time when the folks who make word processors and spreadsheets, the database guys were hanging back.
It's only recently that a reasonable range of database offerings have appeared specifically for Windows.
It isn't as though database applications aren't suited to the Windows environment.
It's so much easier to manage complex data relationships with multiple windowed screens and point-and-shoot selection, for instance.
The simple mouse-and-icons approach means putting together new forms or reports ought to be a doddle; and for functions like queries or browsing, you can't do much better than the GUI.
Windows'DDE and OLE permits much more complexity in data relationships than you'll find in character-based systems, and the same technology provides scope for the emerging goodies of multimedia computer applications.
So why would anyone look at non-Windows solution?
Well, there are some very good reasons; and right now these arguments may well tip the balance.
For a start, even the simplest database applications are performance-bound.
It's crucial that even a basic name and address system can get at a particular name, or group of names, as quickly as possible.
Imagine how much more critical performance will be for industrial-strength applications involving multiple linked files with customized applications on top.
Windows is no performer; you need a big machine, you need optimized systems, and still things churn around sluggishly.
DOS is lean by comparison.
Then there's the mountain of existing database applications.
Most of them were designed to make the most of the limitations of a character-based environment; their procedures just don't port easily into the Windows way of working.
Stick with a non-Windows solution and you'll be maximizing your existing investment — without having to waste time converting your data, and without having to relearn or reprogram.
And just because it looks easy to use a mouse and icons to develop new database applications, it doesn't mean that you can forget all about the coding side.
The same disciplines and similar techniques are still necessary for the neo-programming that all but the simplest databases require.
The current crop of non-Windows databases can knock the socks off their predecessors.
More importantly, they represent significant competition for their GUI-eyed siblings.
PARADOX 4
Sure, Paradox for Windows has just shipped to deafening applause.
But Paradox 4, which Borland unveiled last August, proved that Windows doesn't get all the best tunes — or the best development talent, or the greatest ideas, or the biggest bouquets.
This is relational database territory, which means that Paradox works primarily with tables; these are spreadsheet-like grids with vertical columns for the fields and each horizontal row contains one record.
A particular field in one table can appear in another table, even if everything else in the second table is different; this sets up a relationship between the tables — hence the name — which can be exploited by the database manager.
The tables are the basic method of holding information, but you might want to put single records by themselves on the screen and work through them rather like flipping through a card index.
This is what Paradox terms a ‘form’, which seems reasonable enough.
And when you've sorted, selected and decided which information you need for which purpose — a partial summary of the file, a form, letter or an invoice; anything really — you put it into a standardized layout called a ‘report’.
This is all standard for relational databases.
What's really remarkable about Paradox 4 is its speed, which most definitely isn't a characteristic of such products.
According to Borland, Paradox 4 is between five and ten times faster than Version 3.5 — a program that was never accused of being a slouch — and on most tasks it  reportedly matches or beats FoxPro, Microsoft's swift dBase lookalike, which previously outpaced all comers.
Certainly, if you're familiar with earlier versions of Paradox or have been benchmarking the competition, Version 4 seems remarkably swift.It's all down to a substantial rewrite, particularly of the disk caching.
Paradox 4 doesn't ignore what's been happening in the world of Windows, either.
Indeed, the new desktop is positively Windows-like.
In fact, if it weren't for the program's stunning speed, you could easily believe you were running a Windows application.
The Lotus-style menu system of version 3.5 has been replaced by pull-down menus and dialogue boxes (although if you prefer the old interface, there's a menu option that lets you switch back).
There's support for a mouse, of course, with lots of point-and-shoot selection — including a speedy keyboard-free way to move around between fields — and click-and-drag to resize column borders or whole windows.
Yes, you can now have multiple, resizable, overlapping windows on the desktop, and these windows have scroll bars so you can see all their contents.
It's attractive, and it's better, but Borland did miss out on some obvious improvements.
You don't get at the menu commands by pressing Alt, as in Windows, for example— you need the F10 key.
And when opening a table you still can't browse through directory trees to find the required file; you can specify a default directory, but for any other directory you have to spell out the name,.
Mouse support is a bit limited, too.
It has no place in designing forms or reports, for instance.
Sure, your design will appear in a movable and resizable window, but you can't use the mouse to ‘paint’ a WYSIWYG layout or click-and-drag to move fields around.
You also get more data type options, including — at long last— memo fields that can hold lots of freeform text, and BLOBs (Binary Large Objects), which are any type of binary data, including graphics, scanned images, spreadsheets, sound or video files.
If nothing else, BLOB support ensures that Paradox for DOS is fully compatible with data files created by Paradox for Windows; and Windows-specific things like OLE links and bitmapped graphics can also be accommodated because, rather cleverly, Paradox 4 will treat them as BLOBs.
For developers there's an enhanced PAL (Paradox Application Language).
This lets you produce standalone applications for end-users and it's surprisingly easy to get started with.
Compatibility with Paradox for Windows falters a bit here, though, because the Windows product uses something called ObjectPAL and that's a very different kettle of worms.
Data files are cross-compatible, however.
Paradox 4 will run on a 286 with a least 2Mb of memory; even with all the tutorial stuff it occupies less than 4.5Mb of hard disk space.
I tried it out on a modest 386SX and it still felt fast on a big test database.
It also uses Extended memory and will run in Protected mode under Windows.
Paradox 4 represents a thorough overhaul of an already well-liked product.
It's not perfect, but it's easier for end-users and more capable for developers.
Both will appreciate the performance.
In short, Paradox 4 demonstrates that there's life in the old DOS yet.
Designing a report in Paradox.
Links can be set between different tables or data files, so information from more than one file can be included
Paradox's designers have added some Windows-like features to the desktop.
The brown rectangle in front of‘Whitehorn’ is the mouse cursor
Defining relationships between two DataEase ‘forms’ or data file.
Like almost everything in DataEase it's easy to understand
DataEase's menus aren't overlaid GUI-style and don't drop down, but this makes for a simple approach to building and using your database.
DATAEASE 4.5
DataEase is one of those products that has hidden its light under the proverbial bushel.
It probably doesn't figure among the world's top ten sellers for databases, but in Britain it's been in the top three for years.
In part that reflects the promotion it's received from its UK distributor.
But DataEase is definitely a class act that deserves its position.
DataEase scores because it combines good all-round capability with genuine ease of use.
For a start, it's by no means a trivial package.
It's a full relational database with the capacities needed for heavy-duty work: 255 fields per record, 16 million records per table, 2,000 tables or 32 million records per database.
Yet you can build sophisticated applications with minimal time and effort; there isn't much you can't do.
To build these clever applications, you just select from menus or fill in the blanks on forms.
You don't need to be a programmer; there's no code to write, and you don't even have to adopt the programmer's mindset that is so often a prerequisite for building advanced database applications.
Unlike Paradox, which starts you off with its table view, DataEase is forms-based — the table view is an option.
So you create a single-record form layout on the screen, assigning names to fields and then selecting attributes from a menu.
When you come to use it, DataEase impresses in several ways.
It's a star when it comes to automating frequent tasks and it's very good at queries and reports, especially in terms of the tools it provides for non-technical users.
For instance, you can knock out a Quick Report simply by filling in the blanks on what looks like the normal data entry form.
That's Query-By-Example, with DataEase selecting records that match the criteria you've entered.
There's also a more formal and more advanced reporting procedure, based on the DataEase Query Language (DQL), as near as DataEase gets to programming.
However, it's English-like, with a clever prompting system, and DataEase can provide automatic verification for syntax and other errors.
It's difficult to write report procedures that will not run.
For real programmers, DataEase now includes a Custom Defined Functions facility which lets 4.5 applications directly reference sub-routines in a conventional programming language.
DataEase comes in three versions — all of which are supplied on the disks — and you'll need less than 4Mb of hard disk space to run it.
The basic DataEase is for 640Kb PCs with no Extended memory and will run on 8088/8086 machines; DE16MB.EXE can use up to 16Mb of Extended memory and needs at least a 286 with 1 Mb of RAM.
(With up to 16Mb of Extended memory, a large database can be entirely memory-resident, which gives a significant boost to performance on tasks such as sort/select and reporting.)
Finally, there's an OS/2 implementation.
There is a PIF file and an icon for running DataEase from Windows, but that's the end of the GUI-ness.
The mouse doesn't feature in this version (coming real soon now, though), there are no drop-down menus or dialogue boxes, and in general the character-based interface feels a bit dated.
But DataEase is still fairly easy to use, thanks to its intelligent use of plain English, and it's pretty damn powerful too.
DBASE IV VERSION 1.5
Alright, so it's been around since the year dot.
And it's always meant a notoriously steep learning curve.
And there's a famously awkward command structure.
And really, dBase is more of a programming language than a database manager.
And GUIs might never have happened, for all the impact that Windows or the Apple Mac have had on the dBase desktop.
But there are some very good reasons why dBase is the dominant DOS database, why it has outlasted many superficially more attractive competitors, and why Borland was so eager to acquire dBase's developer, Ashton Tate, just over a year ago.
The de facto standard was, and is, dBase, and there's a huge number of dBase applications being used out there.
Besides, it's pretty good.
Launched in the middle of 1992, Version 1.5 offered the converted a number of important improvements.
It has a kind of windowing system, with dialogue boxes and drop-down menus, and it now offers mouse support.
dBase IV 1.5 also includes better networking tools, the ability to have up to 40 databases open at once, improved indexing, more sort-and-select options, faster searching and generally a much easier approach to generating small applications without having to write any program code.
All in all, it means more beef for the serious database developer.
Borland wants the rest of us to stick with Paradox and like it (and we do), so most of the improvements in version 1.5 are for the pros.
The Control Center provides a relatively easy access point to dBase.
It lists the different elements of a database — data files (in table form), queries (Query-By-Example, so you fill in a data entry form with the criteria you want matched by the query), single-record forms, reports, label formats and applications.
dBase was a pioneer of QBE queries — probably the easiest way for non-experts to get information from a database — and in version 1.5 these are faster and easier to use than before.
You can now create multiple-file browse-and-edit screens for QBE searches (more about this in a minute); a lot more sophistication is now possible in calculated fields; and queries execute much faster.
For the big boys there's industry-standard SQL; the IBM standard rather than the ANSI standard.
The professionals are also applauding goodies like low-level file functions and conditional compilations, both of which fill gaps exposed by dBase competitors, like Clipper.
And they like the support for editable multi-file views, meaning that dBase lets you edit virtual records which are constructed from fields that actually belong in two or more databases.
For example, you can use QBE to build a screen from which you can both view and edit a customer mailing list along with a file that lists each customer's purchase history.
Borland has obviously found a way around the problem of maintaining data integrity, performing operations on the data in those fields without causing logical conflicts within the databases.
Overall performance in 1.5 is actually worse in previous versions.
The program comes with the HyperDisk disk cacher; Borland apparently had to balance cache speed against compatibility and stability.
But dBase is no slouch, and there have been no major bug reports, or complaints about existing files failing to run, so maybe the chosen mix is good enough.
That said, FoxPro and Paradox would streak past on most benchmarks.
dBase still isn't a good choice for the beginner.
There are too many concepts and procedures to learn, and for simpler applications, if probably won't be worth the effort.
But if you regard yourself as an experienced dBase user, if you have dBase files and you want to major on your dBase knowledge, dBase remains your best bet.
dBase IV's Control Center summarizes all the facilities available in a ‘catalog’— a particular group of files
This is dBase's Query by Example; you enter selection criteria into the same record layout used for data entry
THE VERDICT
Paradox has become the quintessential DOS relational database.
It's a genuine all-rounder, for database professionals and end-users alike.
It does everything both groups typically want, and it does it sensibly and palatably.
DataEase is a worthy contender, although it's a bit long in the tooth.
Its basic spec is fine, but the user interface could do with some updating.
dBase is well worth considering if you're a real database pro, if you've got lots of existing dBase applications, or if you've invested time and effort in building up your dBase expertise.
But beginners should steer clear of it; and even the more experienced should tread carefully.
THE BEST DOS WORD PROCESSORS
CROSS A FAST TYPIST WITH A WINDOWS WORD PROCESSOR AND THE CHANCES ARE YOU'LL SEE SOME WAILING AND GNASHING OF TEETH AS THE PROGRAM CHUGS ALONG A FEW PACES BEHIND THE USER.
GAIL ROBINSON STAVES OFF SOME GREY HAIRS BY REVIEWING THREE TOP DOS WORD PROCESSORS.
I've got two word processors on my PC — Word for Windows and Q&A.
If I need to create a fancy-looking letter, I use Word, but if I've got a lot of writing to do, then it's into DOS-based Q&A.
Yes, there's still a place in this Windows world for DOS word processing.
Crucially, it's faster; it won't take an age to scroll through a document, spell checking takes only seconds and you won't find yourself waiting for the word processor to catch up with your touch typing.
And DOS word processing has got it's priorities right — you get a clean screen, devoted to your words rather than a multitude of toolbars and menus.
I've taken a look at three big names in DOS word processing — WordStar 7, WordPerfect 5.1 and Q&A 4 — to see what they have to offer in comparison with their much-hyped Windows brethren.
WORDSTAR 7
I started up WordStar full of apprehension, thinking I'd never get to grips with all those cryptic keystroke shortcuts.
I was pleasantly surprised.
Version 7 has mouse support, pull-down menus and dialogue boxes — within five minutes you can get to grips with most of the commands you need.
For aficionados those shortcuts are still there — it's still Control+KQX to quit — goodness knows why.
The goodies you get with WordStar include a keyboard template, details of the WordStar forum on CompuServe. free technical support for the life of the product, a pull-out guide to menus, plus a mass of well written manuals.
WordStar's support for mailmerging is surprisingly comprehensive.
To create your list you get what is essentially a mini database, MailList, which comes with field names set up for details such as name, address, and so on.
There's also a couple of fields for additional notes.
Once you've got the list set up, you go back into WordStar and create a form letter to merge with.
This could be easier; you still have to insert codes to control which of your MailList fields should go where, but the manual is helpful on this topic.
One area where WordStar excels is the Page Preview mode.
Here everything you've lovingly inserted into your document, including fonts, graphics, columns, headers and footers, appears exactly as it will on the printed page.
You can zoom in and out of the preview, looking at thumbnails of your pages, or zooming in on just the one page.
You'll find you're never alone with WordStar 7 and its multifarious range of supported file formats.
Graphics are especially well handled; there's support for no less than 27 formats, including all the widely used ones such as PCX, TIFF, PIC and GIF.
The images are pulled in and then converted to PIX format.
This is all handled by a bolted on simple image editor and capture program called Inset.
But before you get the graphic into your document you need to do a bit of donkey work to place it properly, setting up your own margins and tabs to make room for the image.
A better way would be to follow the WordPerfect route which makes room for the image and runs text around it automatically.
There's an equally wide selection of spreadsheet, database and word processing formats supported: 25 word processors (including Word and WordPerfect), 13 spreadsheets (including 1-2-3 and Excel) and 13 databases (dBase, Paradox and FoxBase are all there).
As with the graphics side of things, this isn't handled from within WordStar but via another add-on, Star Exchange.
You'll find some basic DTP-style features in WordStar.
For example, you can set up paragraph styles which include settings for fonts, tabs, margins and indents.
There's also support for multiple columns, although you can't see more than one column at a time unless you're in Page Preview mode.
If you use a fax card you'll be ecstatic to see that WordStar has the capacity to create faxable files in a matter of seconds.
A utility converts whole documents, or a specified range of pages, into PCX files which most fax software can handle.
Add to this an enhanced macro language, support for over 550 printers, a thesaurus, calculator, file manager, table of contents and indexing features and you've got one heavy duty word processor.
What's more, unlike your average greedy Windows word processor, it will run on a machine with a Hercules display and only 512Kb of RAM, although you will need 7Mb of spare hard disk space for the full installation.
My criticisms are a slight lack of coherence in the product.
Because some of the features are handled by add-on software, like Inset and Star Exchange, you suddenly find yourself with a slightly different set of menu commands to learn.
And I did miss the ability that Windows word processors have to open more than two windows on-screen at once for cutting and pasting.
WordStar now has a much friendlier set of drop-down menus, which means you don't have to remember those cryptic keyboard shortcuts.
Here's the MailList.
It's like a mini database and really simplifies the process of mailmerging your documents.
WORDPERFECT 5.1
WordPerfect is the big daddy of the DOS word processing world.
It's the top-selling word processor, with over 9 million users.
So what has it got to offer?
Like WordStar, WordPerfect has a reputation for being difficult to get to grips with.
In fact, I found the interface more awkward to use than WordStar's.
Yes, WordPerfect does have drop-down menus, but they're accessed via an unmemorable key combination — Alt plus the = key, although you can change the default to something more sensible, like plain Alt — and the keyboard shortcuts are equally forgettable.
Thankfully there is full mouse control.
New users will also be comforted by an on-line tutorial, a workbook manual full of step-by-step lessons and a set of keyboard templates.
But it's not ease of use which made WordPerfect the best seller.
What is overwhelming about the product is its sheer number of features.
For example, those whose word processing needs border on the desktop publishing (DTP) side are well catered for in WordPerfect.
You could use the newspaper columns and border options to create a reasonable-looking newsletter, adorn it with bullet points, drop capitals, drop shadows, extra fonts and then pull in a piece of clip-art to run your text around.
Most of what you'd want to do in a DTP package you can do with WordPerfect 5.1, if a little awkwardly.
The program allows quote precise control over type and characters.
For example, you can alter the space between letters by using the kerning feature, usually only found in DTP packages.
And as well as the normal ASC11 character set you're provided with a load of extra sets, including icons, scientific symbols and the Cyrillic and Greek alphabets.
Table creation and editing is one of the features WordPerfect is famous for, and justifiably so.
The program creates what look like spreadsheet cells, which you simply fill in.
You can even perform some spreadsheet-like calculations on the figures using formulae.
You won't see all this fancy formatting on your document; it's all carried out by coded instructions.
But you can take a look at the instructions; if you select the Reveal Codes menu option, the screen splits in two, with the formatting codes revealed in the lower screen.
Here you can edit the codes.
Alternatively, switch into Page Review mode to get a WYSIWYG view.
This isn't as sophisticated as the one found in Wordstar — you can only view up to two pages at a time, rather than the ten that WordStar allows.
Word Perfect's document management system is clever enough to allow long filenames; they can be used up to 68 characters in length
Like WordStar, WordPerfect has drop-down menus, making it look a whole lot friendlier for the uninitiated
Another area where WordPerfect lags behind WordStar is in mailmerging.
Rather than having a separate database-style program,a la WordStar, WordPerfect stores addresses in the form of a simple text list.
However, one aspect I did like is the way you can select merge codes from menu choices rather than having to remember the correct syntax yourself.
The process of file conversion also needs a revamp.
WordPerfect comes with two external conversion utilities, for importing text and graphics files, which you have to launch from the DOS prompt.
Both are really unfriendly, as they're driven by command line switches.
I'd much prefer a menu-driven program built into WordPerfect itself.
The list of files supported is adequate, but not as long as WordStar's.
Amongst the graphic formats supported are both bitmaps and graphics, including AutoCad, CGM, EPS, PIC, PCX and TIFF.
What WordPerfect does have, though, is updatable warm links to spreadsheets and text files.
After delving deep through Control key codes you can specify the range of the spreadsheet you wish to link to — support is limited to Lotus 1-2-3 Version 2. x and Excel Version 2. x spreadsheets, which is a trifle ancient.
The links aren't constantly updated but can be set to update whenever you load the document again.
An area where WordPerfect really does excel is that of printer drivers.
It's got the best selection of any piece of software.
In fact, the drivers are so good that the Windows version of WordPerfect allows you to choose between these drivers and the lesser Windows standard printer drivers.
You're also given good control of the printer, so you can see why a document isn't being printed, or you can cancel all pending print jobs.
All in all, it behaves much like Windows ‘Print Manager
Also built into WordPerfect is a good document management system.
One of the most useful benefits of this is that it allows you to create long filenames.
Forget about DOS's weedy eight/three character limit, you can give a file a meaningful description, up to 68 characters long.
Strangely, this useful feature has been omitted from the Windows version.
From the List File options you can also copy, delete and move files.
Macros have always been a core part of WordPerfect.
You can either write them in the built-in macro editor or turn on the Record function, which will record your keystrokes as you go along.
Curiously, you can't print them out.
Added to all this are features which make working with long, complex documents much simpler.
These include footnotes, headers, table of contents, index, thesaurus and one of the best spell checkers in the business.
And another vital feature you should take into account is the excellent support that WordPerfect provides.
WordPerfect 5.1 is undoubtedly the most powerful DOS word processor I've looked at; it's packed to the brim with features.
My only word of advice would be that it might be worth waiting a couple of months or so, by which time WordPerfect 6 for DOS should be on the market.
Rumour has it that the new product will have two inferfaces — the familiar character-based screen and a GUI lookalike, with button bars and WYSIWYG editing.
Also on its way should be fax and E-mail capabilities and improved graphics manipulation.
It should be worth the wait.
Q&A 4
Including Q&A 4 in this round-up is a bit of a controversial choice.
Although it's been around since 1985 you could hardly describe it as one of the top-selling DOS word processors.
But I can justify its inclusion on a couple of points.
First, it's the word processor of choice in the What Personal Computer office and second, as well as a word processor you get a full-featured database.
In fact, Q&A is available in two versions — Q&A Write, which is just the word processing package, and the full-blown Q&A 4, which includes the database.
The main reason Q&A was introduced in the What Personal Computer office was ease of use.
We needed a word processor that anybody could sit in front of and use quickly and easily.
Q&A fitted the bill.
As you launch the program you're greeted with a friendly main menu rather than a blank screen.
From here you can set up other applications to launch from within Q&A.
For instance, the File menu deals with the database and the Write menu handles word processing.
I have to admit that after three years of using Q&A I haven't memorized all of the mainly function key-driven keyboard shortcuts, but those that I can't remember are easily brought back to mind with a tap of the F1 key which lists them.
Q&A lets you draw boxes and lines on your document and do the usual text enhancements, like bold, italic and so on.
Fonts are handled efficiently, although they don't come bundled with the package.
However, Q&A is by no means as sophisticated as either WordPerfect or WordStar.
For example, it has no real DTP-like features; you can't include graphics files in documents, and there's no provision for style sheets.
The choice of import and export options is also a bit limited — ASCII, Special ASCII, WordStar, DCA, Mac ASCII, WordPerfect, Word, MultiMate and Professional Write.
My other beef is the fact that you can only have one document open at a time, so cutting and pasting between files is cumbersome.
But if it's straight word processing you're after, Q&A has most of what you need.
A spell checker, word count feature and thesaurus are all included and the program can handle headers and footers.
You can also do basic calculations on columns and rows of numbers in a document.
Printer support is good (450 in all), there's an adequate page preview feature and you can set up macros easily and quickly.
Although Q&A is hardly a power tool, when you consider the benefits of built-in database it becomes more attractive.
And tricky topics like mailmerging and label printing are a doddle.
For example, say you want to create a standard letter to be mailed to 100 clients.
First create your name and address list in the database then type in the letter in the WP.
Place the cursor at the top of the letter and press Alt+F7 to display a list of field names from your database.
Pick the details you want included and they're automatically inserted in your document, along with the mailmerge codes.
Send the file to be printed and you're asked which files you want to merge from your database.
Make your choices and away you go.
Although the Q&A database is a flat-file it's quite powerful.
I use it to keep track of editorial costs in the office and it's perfectly adequate for my needs.
Q&A's more complex functions include the ability to be an SQL database server.
It has sophisticated reporting features, which involve taking information from the database and arranging it in tabular form.
Perhaps its most unusual feature is the Intelligent Assistant, which allows you to ask the program to carry out certain tasks asking it plain English questions.
A typical example would be ‘Find all named Jones who live in London’.
For mailmerging, basic word processing and ease of use, Q&A gets my vote.
There's no Windows version yet — although it's rumoured to be on its way — so if you want to move over to the GUI there's no upgrade path for the time being.
Q&A gives you a friendly feeling as you launch the program.
The main menu is clear and simple to use
This is Q&A's database, which is quite sophisticated and probably powerful enough for most users ‘needs
THE VERDICT
The obvious safe buy is WordPerfect.
It can't be beaten on breadth of features — it's a quality product with excellent support.
And you have the security of knowing that WordPerfect is still developing the product; Version 6 is on its way.
WordStar's print preview is the best of the three and its mailmerging is good, although Q&A handles it better.
WordStar's graphics handling is also good, but here it lags behind WordPerfect.
Q&A is your best bet for simplicity and ease of use, but beware; the word processing side is by no means as sophisticated as either WordStar or WordPerfect.
THE BEST DOS UTILITIES
ALTHOUGH MS-DOS WILL INCLUDE PLENTY OF NEW AND IMPROVED UTILITIES, THERE ARE STILL SOME EXCELLENT UTILITIES AROUND THAT WILL DO THE JOB EVEN BETTER.
GAIL ROBINSON RUNS THROUGH THE TOP CONTENDERS AND EXPLAINS WHY MS-DOS 6 WON'T MAKE THEM REDUNDANT
The impending launch of MS-DOS 6 has upset a lot of utility program developers — after all, they made their money plugging the holes Microsoft left in the operating system.
So, which utilities are going to be hardest hit by the latest version of DOS?
Here's our top three:
Compression specialists, like Stacker and SuperStor.
MS-DOS 6 will include disk compression software and even claims to convert third-party Stacker files to its own compression format.
Memory tweakers, such as QuarterDeck's QEMM.
MS-DOS 6 will contain memory optimization and more Expanded and Extended memory support.
Anti-virus software.
Version 6 will include anti-virus software, but will Microsoft be able to keep you up to date with the new viruses that appear with frightening regularity?
But utility developers shouldn't throw in the towel just yet.
There's still money to be made producing more efficient and sophisticated solutions than the ones Microsoft provides.
We've picked some of the best utilities that we believe could still find a place on your hard disk, even once you've got MS-DOS installed there.
PC TOOLS 8
Microsoft is unlikely to build into the operating system the number of invaluable features the folks at Central Point have stuffed into PC Tools 8.
So what's it got that MS-DOS 6 won't have?
PC Tools has a front-end shell which, as well as doing the usual stuff, like allowing you to play with your files and format disks, has the added benefits of being able to repair corrupted drives and to recover lost, deleted or damaged files.
The program also comes with a bundle of desktop accessories, the like of which you're unlikely to find in MS-DOS 6.
These include a notepad, calendar, database and macro editor, and it's capable of handling your fax and E-mail needs.
Task switching is also catered for in PC Tools 8.
You can load up to 10 applications and hold them in suspended animation in the background while you work on another app in the foreground.
And on the back-up side?
The excellent Central Point Backup is included.
This supports a wide range of tape back-up drives, as well as removable drives, floppy disks and network drives.
But Microsoft has borrowed from PC Tools and we can expect to see a version of Central Point's anti-virus package in DOS 6.
Nevertheless.
there's bags of useful stuff in PC Tools 8 that will still make it a must-have for many DOS users.
PC Tools 8 is crammed with quality features, some of which could make MS-DOS go green with envy
NORTON DESKTOP FOR DOS
This includes a bag of invaluable tools from Norton Utilities, all finished of with a drag and drop desktop which works rather like Windows.
It also has the most sophisticated un-erase facility around; deleted files are kept in a special directory, so you're sure to get them back.
Desktop is also particularly good at repairing things.
For example, the Norton Disk Doctor can perform miracles on a dodgy hard disk and there's a utility for repairing data files.
Desktop really can get the most out of your hard disk.
In  fact the defragmenter, Speedisk, is so good that Microsoft bought it and built it into MS-DOS 6.
You can also get Calibrate, which tests your hard disk very thoroughly and can help ward off future problems.
All this is rounded off with a graphical front-end which makes DOS feel like Windows.
XTREE GOLD 2.5.
Microsoft would be hard pushed to include a file manager as sophisticated as XTree Gold in Dos 6, I find it invaluable for keeping my files in order.
It isn't a visually exciting package — there are no fancy icons — but this lack of adornment makes it very fast: you can tag, copy or delete files in a matter of seconds.
But for those who want more familiar mouse control and drop-down menus they're there too.
And you can split the screen into two windows, which is useful for comparing the contents of two directories.
XTree Gold has a mass of file viewers which let you look at your data in its native format.
You can view archived ZIP files, several spreadsheet formats, database files with DBF or DB extensions, AutoCAD files, a file editor and an archiving function.
In short, XTree Gold is the business where file and disk management is concerned.
QEMM 6.02
The Microsoft memory manager included in DOS is good, but not that good.
Many users will still find that they need the sophistication offered by products like QEMM.
As well as the ability to install itself automatically and to give you back extra chunks of available memory, QEMM has the added benefit of Stealth.
This allows you to make even more room in Upper memory by relocating ROMs.
It's a complex process, but if you really must have the maximum Upper memory area, then QEMM is still the one for you.
QEMM is a much more sophisticated memory manager than the one included in DOS
TRUETYPE FOR DOS
TrueType — that's just of Windows 3.1 users isn't it?
Not any more.
Dos users of WordPerfect 5 and 5.1, Letter-Perfect, Microsoft Word 5 and 5.5 and Microsoft Works 2 or higher can now take advantage if the range of scalable fonts that TrueType confers.
Housed in this package are 36 TrueType typefaces which can be customized with various fills, backgrounds and outlines and can be stretched from 2 to 999 points in size.
So even if you've got an XT with a mere 640Kb of RAM you can now have TrueType fonts.
The whole process is simple.
Install the program and it searches through your hard disk, finding any other Windows 3.1 TrueType fonts you already have.
All these fonts are then set up for use by your word processor.
If you've got Windows 3.1 these extra fonts are also accessible from your Windows apps.
The program supports HP LaserJets, DeskJets, Canon BubbleJets, Epson and IBM dot matrix or any printer compatible with these, so you should be able to use almost any printer on the market.
PostScript printers aren't supported, though.
I used the fonts with WordPerfect 5.1.
Instead of loading the program by typing WP, you type in WPT and the fonts are set up for you.
Special effects, including pattern fills and shadows you handled by a separate program which also lets you view and print your fonts.
TrueType for DOS is a great idea, letting you use, in your DOS word processor, any Windows 3.1 TrueType fonts you already have.
However, I'd like to see more DOS word processors supported.
Even if you've only got an XT with a paltry 640Kb of RAM you can use TrueType fonts
The shareware world is jam-packed with utilities and some of these you'll still find invaluable.
The What Personal Computer team has picked five of the top shareware utilities.
1 List —This is the essential file viewer.
It's a replacement for the DOS Type command, except that you automatically get one screen full of information at a time and you can scroll backwards and forwards, and search for particular text.
About the only thing you can't do is edit.
2 Scan —This is by far the best and fastest shareware virus checker.
If you're checking out the bulletin boards for Scan, check the availability if a program called Update, which automates the installation of McAfee programs.
3 CopyIt —This great file copying utility is really intelligent.
For example, if you're copying files onto a few floppies, it'll work out the files that will best fit into each disk.
4 PKZIP and PKUNZIP —The What Personal Computer office would be lost without this archiving utility.
It's great for squashing files down so they'll fit on a floppy or so they take up less hard disk space.
5 Format QM —Lets you format lots of floppies without fuss and even puts a picture up on-screen while it does it.
These shareware programs should be available from most of the big shareware libraries.
Try Shareware Ltd on  
BUYER
BENCH TEST
INKJET PRINTERS
JOIN THE JET SET
LASER PRINTERS HAD BETTER WATCH OUT — IF THE MARKETING GURUS ARE TO BE BELIEVED, SALES OF INKJET PRINTERS LOOK SET TO SOAR.
PHIL EVANS FINDS OUT WHAT ALL THE FUSS IS ABOUT AND LOOKS AT FIVE MACHINES COVERING THE WHOLE SPECTRUM OF FEATURES AND PRICE.
The world of PCs is one of rapid change and technological improvement, having evolved from nothing to its current state in little more than 12 years.
But perhaps the fastest rate of change, has been achieved in printer technology.
Market analysis suggests that inkjet sales, which were virtually zilch three or four years ago, will massively exceed both laser and dot matrix printer sales over the next few years, accounting for about half of the total printer market by 1997.
The reason for this is that the technology is much simpler — and therefore cheaper — and running costs are reputedly lower (see page 96), yet the output quality approaches that of lasers.
Inkjet technology is also proving to be very versatile.
So to test some of the wild and wonderful claims made about inkjets, I looked at five machines with widely differing prices and features — from portables to full colour output.
With cheap lasers on the market, why buy an inkjet?
This depends on what you want the printer for; I can't imagine carrying a battery-powered LaserJet 4 onto a plane or train, for instance.
Colour lasers are still extremely expensive, so a colour inkjet could be the answer for those on a tight budget.
Also, for everyday mono printing, inkjets have their advantages.
Although lasers have been dropping in price, you'll still need a budget of around £500, whereas inkjets start at around £150.
Another disadvantage of laser printers is that, because they're page printers, they require the entire page to be stored in their memory before they'll start printing.
And many budget lasers need a memory implant before they'll print complex pages properly.
This can add £100 or more to the cost of the printer.
Inkjets start to print as soon as they receive data; they don't need the whole page first so they can get by with much less memory.
But inkjets have their disadvantages too.
They use ink as opposed to the plastic toner used by lasers.
This means that the result you get is a affected by the type and quality of paper used.
The ink tends to ‘bleed’ along the paper fibres, resulting in a fuzzy image.
So if you're planning to use inkjets with company letterhead, check that the printer works with the paper before you buy, or you could wind up unable to use all that expensive stationery!
In most circumstances, inkjets produce results close in quality to lasers, yet they're much cheaper, smaller, quieter and easier to maintain.
You also know that when a company like Hewlett-Packard announces that inkjet technology is the largest research and development project it has ever undertaken — except for RISC processors — the technology has a bright future.
CANON BJ-200
The Canon BJ-200 is perhaps the most intriguing machine of those tested.
From its appearance you might assume that it's a portable.
It isn't, but it's very small and compact, and can be carried easily in one hand.
Technically, the Canon's output should be the best of the printers tested, because its resolution is 360dpi, rather than the standard 300dpi.
In practice, its output is at least as good as any of the others, except the DeskJet 550C, whose graphics capabilities were noticeably better.
The BJ-200 includes an 80-sheet auto-feeder as standard, which feeds sheets from above and to the rear, with the paper emerging from a slot in the front.
One aspect I wasn't terribly impressed with was the flimsy nature of the slide-out paper guides.
On a portable, the justification for this is that it reduces the weight, but the BJ-200 isn't a portable.
To be fair, this kind of criticism can be levelled at just about every new machine, regardless of price.
The BJ-200 has three print modes; high speed, high quality and super high quality.
High speed mode results in a very creditable 248cps (characters per second), whereas high quality mode reduces the speed even further to 124 cps, but also cuts the noise level from 42 decibels (dB) to 40dB.
This may not seem much, but it makes quite a difference.
Bear in mind that a 3dB reduction is equivalent to halving the noise.
Overall, the BJ-200 is an extremely competent, desirable and stylish machine, capable of producing extremely good results.
It's quiet and very simple to use.
It isn't designed for high volume output, but I wouldn't be at all upset to have one adorning my desk.
The Canon's graphics test was good, but was lacking in detail and contrast compared to the HP DeskJet 550C
HP DESKJET 550C
The DeskJet 550C is the top of HP's DeskJet range, and without a doubt is the most sophisticated of the machines reviewed here.
What sets it apart from the crowd is its ability to produce full colour output of a quality undreamed of on a machine with this price tag a couple of years ago.
The 500C has two ink cartridges permanently installed; a black one and a tri-colour one, containing cyan, yellow and magenta inks.
Varying quantities of these colours can be blended to produce very high quality colour output.
A weakness of many low-cost colour inkjets is that they use the colour cartridge to produce black  by applying 100 per cent cyan, magenta and yellow.
Although this theoretically results in black, the inaccuracies in the ink pigments tend to result in a greenish black.
The 550C solves this by printing colour from the tri-colour cartridge, and black from the black cartridge.
The result is less wasted ink, and much better colour output.
The DeskJet 550C can, of course, be used as a black and white printer, and is a solid, well built and generally reliable machine.
It prints at 300dpi, and produces text of a quality similar to that of the Canon, albeit a little more slowly.
Unlike the Canon, it's a traditional desktop machine, with a front feed and paper exit, and a paper tray that holds 100 sheets.
Although it's easy to operate, getting the best colour output from the 550C isn't so simple.
Added to the myriad of combinations available, the ink intensity can be varied (by five levels).
But few things make as much difference as the paper used.
HP Special paper brings out a richness to colours I haven't seen with any other paper.
But be warned; it doesn't come cheap.
This gives you an idea of the DeskJet's colour abilities
The versatility of the Windows driver gives the DeskJet 550C the most detailed graphics of the group.
The DeskJet Portable matched it, but only when using the 550C driver
HOW INKJET PRINTERS WORK
Here's my favourite story about how inkjets came to be invented.
A HP engineer accidentally touched a plastic ink-filled tube with a soldering iron, and a jet of ink squirted out of the tube onto a wall.
I don't know if this is true or not, but it's a good way of visualizing how an inkjet works.
In the printhead a small reservoir of ink sits above a resistor that is heated to about 330°C.
This vaporizes a droplet of ink and forces it out of the nozzle in the printhead and onto the paper.
The main problem with inkjets is that because the ink is wet when it hits the paper, it tends to spread along the fibres, giving a distorted image.
The answer to this lies in careful selection of paper.
Paper suitable for inkjets doesn't have to be expensive — I get very good results with cheap photocopier paper.
The difference in quality produced by different papers is far more than the difference in quality between the machines tested — by a mile!
Paper also has a right side and a wrong side.
That's why the packets have an arrow showing which way up it should go.
The effect of the difference is critical with inkjets.
HP DESKJET PORTABLE
This is the latest in Hewlett-Packard's DeskJet range, and is the first portable version.
It's fully compatible with the DeskJet itself, and is capable of printing a 300dpi and at about 3ppm (pages per minute).
The basic package consists of the printer itself, power supply/charger, a special low-profile parallel cable, a cartridge and the manual.
An optional rechargeable battery is available for £40, which should last for about 100 sheets, and takes 6 hours to charge using the standard power supply.
According to HP, a standard video camcorder battery can also be used.
Other optional extras include a worldwide rapid charger, which costs an additional £80, and decreases the charge time to an hour and a half.
This unit auto-senses the mains voltage, and adjusts accordingly, so is most likely to benefit international travellers.
A carrying case, which holds the printer and a portable PC, is also available for £80.
The quality of output from the DeskJet Portable is very high, and in my view is marginally the best of all the machines tested.
Interestingly, when it printed my CorelDraw test file, the graphics quality wasn't as good as that of the DeskJet 550C.
Being somewhat surprised by this, I tried again, using the 550C Windows driver, but with the DeskJet Portable connected.
Not only did it work perfectly, but the output was indistinguishable from the 550C.
The problem would appear to be in the versatility of the driver, not the printer.
COLOUR PRINTING
Anyone who has dabbled with paint in a school art room knows that mixing two colours together results in a third colour.
The inks you use to print on paper are cyan (blue and green), magenta (red and blue), and yellow (red and green).
Applying ink to the page filters out certain colours, and you only see those reflected.
So yellow and cyan produces green, and yellow and magenta produces red.
In theory, printing yellow, cyan and magenta produces black because no colour is reflected; in practice, it's a green-black.
Producing colours beyond these eight basic ones (red, green, blue, cyan, yellow, magenta, black and white) on a DeskJet works by fooling the eye.
Very small dots are combined in various patterns to give combinations of these colours.
So although there are still only eight basic colours, the eye will see many more.
In practice, the limitation of this technique, called dithering, is 16 million colours, but the capabilities of the printer depend on the software being used.
It is largely the software that determines the dither pattern, so different software produces different effects and colours.
Although the machine is available and was shipping in the US at the end of 1992, the latest information available at the time of writing is that it ships in the UK on 1st February 1993, and the list price is £449.
There were no street prices available at the time of going to press, but my guess would be about £270.
The graphics test showed the DeskJet Portable to be competent, but no more.
Using the 550C driver, however, it produced results indistinguishable from the 550C itself
KODAK DICONIX 701
The Kodak Diconix 701 is a lightweight (3.3lb) portable printer, aimed at the same market as the DeskJet Portable.
It's about 1lb lighter than the HP machine, but is a little larger.
Like the DeskJet Portable, the Diconix can be battery-powered.
The battery takes about four and a half hours to charge.
During this time, any normal printing operation is possible, although it will suspend the charging process.
The machine doesn't have a sheet-feeder option, but the paper load slot will accommodate up to 30 sheets, and pick up single sheets on demand.
The paper support for this is a flimsy piece of plastic, and a wire loop.
This is a crude arrangement, but is reasonably effective.
However, I only put a few dozen sheets of paper through the machine, and two of them caught on the wire loop, which creased the paper and caused ink smudges where the machine was still printing.
This may not prove to be a serious problem, but having it happen twice in a short period of time makes me wonder.
The Diconix was the slowest of the tested printers, by a narrow margin.
However, a portable's speed isn't a primary requirement, as it is unlikely to be used for high volumes of work.
Although the machine supports the use of various media types, including labels and transparencies, I could find no mention of envelopes.
Testing showed that the feed and alignment of envelopes caused problems.
So, although it can be done, I wouldn't recommend it.
One unusual and noteworthy feature of the Diconix is that Kodak recognizes that the availability of the printer is likely to be critical to mobile users.
Any Diconix printer bought after 10th February will be replaced free of charge, within 24 hours, if it fails whilst under warranty.
The Diconix isn't as accomplished as the DeskJet Portable, but it is about £50 less, and has a built-in sheet-feed capability, which is a £69 option with the HP.
Which of the two you buy depends on your needs; the HP is better, but more expensive.
Results were good, except for the banding which is particularly visible towards the rear of the train.
This may be due to a print cartridge problem
THE VERDICT
It wouldn't be fair to pick a ‘best’ from this group as they're aimed at different users.
My favourite is the DeskJet 550C, as I need to use colour.
If you don't need colour, or a portable, the Canon BJ-200 is extremely impressive.
The Diconix produces good results with minimal fuss, but it can't match the quality of the DeskJet Portable.
The DeskJet Portable matches the black capabilities of the DeskJet 550C, and prints text slightly faster.
I suspect this is due to faster paper loading rather than print speed.
The only question I have regarding the DeskJet Portable concerns battery life.
Surprisingly, both the Portable and the Kodak were supplied without a battery, so I couldn't test them.
In a nutshell, be sure of your requirements before choosing a printer.
It boils down to whether you think the extra features and quality are worth the extra money.
THE EPSON STYLUS 800 — A DIFFERENT KIND OF INKJET
Although the world of PCs is superficially rather space-age, it's not often you come across a completely new technology.
Yet that's what you'll find in Epson's Stylus 800 — the company has adapted piezoelectric technology (previously found in cigarette lighters) to act as the engine for inkjet printing.
Normal inkjets use heat to form a bubble of ink which is expelled through nozzles on the printhead.
The Stylus 800 uses a piezoelectric material which changes shape when an electric current is applied to it, forcing ink through the nozzles.
Epson claims that the advantages of this method are finer control over the amount of ink delivered to the page, faster printing, lower power consumption and the elimination of the need to use heat-resistant ink.
In practice, the Stylus 800 appeared to bear out most of Epson's claims.
It's small, light and neat, takes up to 100 sheets of A4 and has a manual feed slot for envelopes.
When I first set it up, it delivered too much ink, but it settled down fairly soon.
Thereafter, print quality was as good as any inkjet I've seen — right up with the BJ-200 and slightly better than the DeskJet 500.
Particularly impressive was its handling of greyscales — it displayed more subtlety than you'd expect.
This was a surprise, as I had my doubts about the Windows driver, which offers intensity control, a number of different quality modes and not much else.
But the engine is obviously good enough to circumvent this.
I couldn't really fault the Stylus 800.
It's small, quick (a touch faster than the BJ-200), as quiet as an inkjet can be, and fairly cheap.
I'll be keeping my eye on future developments in piezoelectric inkjet technology.
MAINTENANCE COSTS
Working out the running costs of printers isn't easy.
A ‘cost per page’ figure is a rough guide only as a full page of graphics will use more ink than a letter.
Assuming a ‘page’ to mean a full page of text, then 60 lines of text will have around 3,600 characters.
The quoted life of a Canon cartridge is 700,000 characters, or 200 pages.
As the cartridge is £17, this gives a costs of about 8p per page.
A typical letter, on the other hand, might use one fifth of this amount of ink.
One way of reducing ink costs is to refill the cartridges — I understand that most cartridges are refillable.
An InkMun refill kit, for two refills, costs £15 included P&P.
Contact System Insight on .
BUYER
REVIEWS
DELL 433/L
One hell of a DELL
DELL HAS REPLACED ITS ENTIRE RANGE OF DESKTOP PCs WITH ENHANCED EQUIVALENT MODELS, AND VERY NICE THEY ARE TOO.
ROGER GANN TEST DRIVES THE 433/L, A COMPLETELY NEW DESIGN WHICH HAS HEAPS OF CLEVER AND INNOVATIVE FEATURES.
One of the best known direct sellers, Dell Computer, wiped the slate clean at the beginning of this year, replacing its entire range of desktop PCs with equivalent models with enhanced specifications.
Although they were solid and durable, the old machines were getting a bit long in the tooth.
Two ranges got the chop — the P and the D series.
They've been replaced by the L and the M series.
The former uses a brand new casing while the latter retains the old full-height chassis but with a modernized front panel.
Both ranges have moved upmarket.
The lowliest L model has an Intel 486SX/25, with the top models running a 66MHz speed-doubled 486DX2 chip.
Finally, the Deskside, or tower range, has been extended to include the ISA-based T series, essentially an M series motherboard in a bigger case.
THE 33MHz 433/L
I took a look at Dell's 33MHz 433/L machine, which comes with MS-DOS 5 and Windows 3.1 pre-installed and a mouse.
Like the series it supersedes, the L range lives in a slimline casing.
But unlike the P series, which was made entirely of metal, it makes greater use of plastic, a trend pioneered by the likes of IBM and Hewlett-Packard.
Inside, the use of metal has been limited to the disk drive cage, the hard disk mounting plate, the power supply box and a panel that takes the power switch, reset button et al .
But does this make it less sturdy?
Well, Dell has apparently run a car over one of the new machines and it still worked afterwards!
So although the new machine contains less metal than its predecessor, if offers a high standard of construction.
IMPROVED ACCESS
The 433/L is a new design from the ground up.
Internal access is much improved; only six screws remain.
To open the lid, you simply loosen two thumbscrews.
And to add a new disk drive, you just fit some drive rails and clip it into place.
The height of the casing limits the L range to three horizontal full-length 16-bit slots, the same as its predecessor.
These are held in a removable cage which makes the potentially awkward job of fitting new cards easier.
Another limitation imposed by the slim case is peripheral expansion.
This is limited to one half-height 5.25-inch floppy densities.
It's nice to have but it remains a novelty: only IBM and Epson have picked up on this new format with any degree of enthusiasm.
The 120Mb Quantum IDE hard disk provides nippy average access times (18.7ms) and achieved pretty good data transfer rates, at over 1.3Mb/sec, according to the hard disk performance program, CoreTest.
SO WHAT'S NEW?
Along with the redesigned case, the L series has lots of new features to enhance performance.
Naturally, you can upgrade the processor, but this is the first PC I've seen that has a socket for Intel's yet-to-be-released Pentium 586 processor.
Most 486 processors are seated on a 168 or 169-pin PGA socket, whereas the Dell sits in a 238-pin socket.
The Pentium is, of course, a 64-bit processor and the Dell has a 32-bit motherboard, so it will only be able to take the speed-doubled OverDrive version.
Surprisingly, Dell hasn't seen fit to include a low or zero insertion force socket in the 433/L.
It's bad enough trying to persuade 168-pin chip to part company with its socket — I can't imagine the grey hairs that'll result from trying to insert an expensive 238-pin one in its place!
In any event, Dell will wait and see what customer demand is like before releasing the upgrade; it may never happen.
Unlike most clone assemblers, Dell hasn't included an external secondary RAM cache as standard.
By default, standard models will have to rely on the 8Kb cache on the 486 chip.
An optional 128Kb secondary cache is available: a small piggyback board that plugs into two sets of pins in the motherboard.
But it's a shame that Dell couldn't have put the vacant DRAM or SIP sockets on the motherboard, as I suspect the 128Kb board might work out cheaper than loose chips.
The same criticism applies to the video RAM.
Another speed enhancement is the inclusion of buffered serial ports, driven by the 16550 UART.
Most users of fast modems have had to hold back from using maximum line speeds plus data compression because of the risk of data loss resulting from unbuffered serial ports.
The use of the superior driver chip isn't new — some IBM PS/2s have them — but it's another nice touch.
The third strand of Dell's performance enhancements concerns the video sub-system.
The second largest chip on the motherboard is S3's 82C805 graphics accelerator, which is on a local bus.
Both the L and M series feature local bus video which turns in nifty performance figures.
Using WinTach to assess the Dell's Windows performance, it managed a crisp 9.12 — better than my own 33MHz 486 fitted with a pretty fast QVision card, which clocked in at 7.33.
So Windows devotees won't be disappointed.
That said, I suspect this performance advantage could be even better with S3's more powerful graphics accelerator, the 82C928.
Also, my machine's QVision card sits in a slow 8MHz ISA expansion slot, which restrains it considerably.
Optimization of the S3 video driver software may squeeze even more performance out of it.
Clone machines are now appearing with local bus technology that complies with the VESA Local Bus (VL Bus) standard.
Dell's local bus is, by contrast, entirely proprietary and closed — you can't connect any other peripheral to it like an IDE hard disk host interface or a high-speed network card.
Dell has never been very generous on the video RAM front and the 433/L is no exception.
Its 512Kb of display memory is enough for resolutions of 800 by 600 in 16 colours, but a bit light if you want a resolution of 1,024 by 768.
Upgrades take the form of piggyback boards.
My review sample came with the low-radiation UltraScan 14C monitor, a decent display.
though mine suffered from poor screen geometry and required adjustment.
As ever, Dell's documentation is excellent and an object lesson to other manufacturers selling inexpensive kit.
The User's Guide is particularly good, with every possible expansion option clearly described and well illustrated.
It came as no shock that the 433/L turned in some good Power Test results.
It had an index in excess of 20,000, one of the highest What Personal Computer has on record.
It certainly felt fast to use and comfortably exceeded all the 33MHz 486 machines we looked at this month.
This excellent performance reflects its highly integrated modern design incorporating well matched components.
At £1,329, the Dell isn't the cheapest 33MHz 486 machine money can buy, but if you're looking for reassurance in the light of the recent spate of bad news; it's one for your shortlist.
It's a well-built machine, with a good spec, excellent documentation, and state-of-the-art technology that delivers commensurate performance.
The 433/L is very much a machine for ‘90 ‘s.
ON-BOARD DIAGNOSTICS
One of the nice features found on the D series was SmartVu, a four-digit LED display that showed various deeply technical details such as the track number currently being accessed on a floppy.
It was also useful from the point of view of fault diagnosis.
Sadly, this has gone, but it's been replaced by comprehensive diagnostic program on both the L and M ranges.
Simply press the reset button twice and the machine boots up into the diagnostic routine.
This can be accessed even if the machine won't boot.
It can also be left running continuously, to track down those faults that only occur in the absence of a service engineer.
The diagnostics are kept in flash memory and, along with the BIOS, can be upgraded from a floppy disk.
GRID CONVERTIBLE
Write ON
IS IT A NOTEBOOK?
IS IT A PEN COMPUTER?
THE GRID CONVERTIBLE THINKS IT'S BOTH.
ROB BEATTIE PICKS UP HIS PEN TO FIND OUT IF THIS SPLIT PERSONALITY MACHINE REALLY IS WHAT THE WORLD'S BEEN WAITING FOR.
Ask anyone who's had anything to do with pen computers and, unless they're trying to sell you one, they'll say the same thing.
Great idea, shame about the hardware and the software!
And they're right, because the idea of wandering around with a radio-equipped, RISC-based, flat tablet, scribbling notes and then faxing them off Star Trek-style to headquarters, is so far from the reality of poor handwriting recognition, disappointing battery life, so-so screens and skyscrapingly high prices, that most users simply haven't bothered.
Part of the problem has been the software, which has been looking for a decent hardware platform and waiting for support from a mainstream operating system vendor.
So startup software companies, like GO and Slate, have been stuck in the proverbial paddleless canoe while hardware vendors like Sanyo, IBM and NEC decided whether or not they were serious about the pen computer market.
And, of course, everyone waited to see what Microsoft would do with Windows.
At Comdex last year, all this changed.
First, Toshiba demonstrated its AND-based DynaPad 3lb pen computer.
Second, GRiD announced the Convertible — the world's first notebook that thinks it's a pen computer.
These two products look set to light a fire underneath the pen market in 1993, and of the two, the GRiD Convertible is the most significant.
The GRiD offers you the choice of using a pen or a conventional QWERTY keyboard — both of which are supplied as standard.
This is clever stuff because it rules out frustrating compromises, and you don't need to carry around any extra bits.
Instead, in a piece of design as simple and innovative as the original notebook clamshell, GRiD engineers have invented a special hinge that's enabled them to conceal a proper QWERTY keyboard beneath a machine that looks like a conventional, flat tablet pen computer.
But there's much more to it than that.
Push a couple of catches, the screen lifts up, the bottom tilts away from you and the whole lot clicks into position.
Voila!— a conventional notebook.
When you've finished, you release a single catch at the back, the screen lifts up again, the bottom tilts towards you and the whole lot folds back down over the keyboard, and reverts to a flat tablet.
This isn't a computer — it's a Transformer.
In a nutshell, that's the appeal of the GRiD Convertible.
You can use it to run all your  ordinary software, just like any other notebook (it's a bit expensive, but the price will come down).
It's also capable of running the most sophisticated pen applications available today, so you can dip into the world of pen computing without taking any chances.
There's only one problem — as you'll see from the box below — most pen programs aren't that sophisticated.
UNDER THE BONNET
The 5.5lb Convertible uses an Intel 386SL processor running at 25MHz and the Cyrix CX878SLC coprocessor.
It comes with 2Mb of memory and a 130Mb hard disk.
There's a PCMCIA version 2 slot for credit card-sized add-ins, a 9-pin serial port, VGA connector, combined floppy disk and parallel port and, of course, the pen.
To that you can add an internal 2400/9600 fax modem, more memory, or GRiD's own solid state Sundisk storage technology; the PCMCIA slot can be used to add extra memory too, or other add-ins like Ethernet or Token Ring Adaptors.
Despite the lack of a desktop expansion box, it's a very flexible machine.
Since it's also a conventional notebook, the Convertible will run all your software, whether it's DOS, Windows or OS/2.
The keyboard is fine to use and allows you to change many of the machine's settings on the fly — processor clock speed, LCD backlight, switching to an external display, the greyscale colour mapping, and so on.
You can choose between the two different batteries for the Convertible, the lighter A cell type gives around two hours use, while the heavier, larger C cell will keep going for over three.
But it's when the screen closes over the keyboard that things get interesting.
Attached to the side of the Convertible is a little electronic pen which behaves rather like a Microsoft-compatible mouse.
You can use it to point and click at things on the screen, open menus, select from lists, mark areas of text, and even edit them.
Of course, you need special software to make all this work, and of three operating systems available — PenDOS, PenPoint and Windows for Pens — GRiD has opted for the Microsoft product.
Windows for Pens is basically a set of extensions to Windows 3.1 which does two things.
It lets existing Windows programs recognize the pen as if it were a mouse.
It can also ‘sort of’ recognize your handwriting and convert it into text that can be read by any application — just as if you'd typed it in.
Navigating with a pen is surprisingly natural and certainly easier than using a mouse on a train, but the handwriting recognition is still weak.
It won't, for example, recognize joined-up writing and even with individual letters it's so hit and miss that you can't write at any speed because you have to go back to correct all the mistakes it makes.
This means it's good for applications where you're collecting data by picking from prepared lists (surveys, insurance claims, and so on), and poor if you want to enter a lot of text and numbers using the pen.
There are other problems.
Writing on an LCD doesn't come naturally, and even 5.5lbs is heavy to carry around for half a day.
It's also disorientated — the text you write doesn't appear at the point of the pen, but at the cursor point; and you must learn a range of curious ‘gestures’ in order to edit text.
Despite all these handicaps, the Convertible is an important machine because it removes the risk for those people who can see the potential of pen computing, but don't want to commit themselves completely.
It's also a find DOS/Windows notebook with a good specification, and when proper pen applications start arriving this year, it'll be ready to take advantage of them.
WHEREFORE ART THOU SOFTWARE?
The three main pen operating systems are Windows for Pens (a set of extensions to Windows), PenDOS (extensions to DOS) and PenPoint (the only ‘proper’ operating system; a big, 32-bit multi-tasking affair).
None of the operating systems has much mainstream business software to go with it.
Apart from programs designed for vertical markets or specially written for a particular job, most of the products you'll find are ‘pen aware’ which means they can recognize a pen as both a mouse and an input device, but don't have any other facilities to take advantage of the pen.
In the not too distant future, there's the promise of a different set of programs which are being dubbed ‘pen centric’ applications; that is, written specifically to take advantage of the pen.
Companies like Slate and Ink will ship products this year that will improve handwriting recognition and add features like intelligent form-filling.
Also, in the US, Lexicus has promised that Longhand will be able to understand ordinary handwriting.
For now, pen software is good for data collection where users are picking from pre-defined lists, or marking in check boxes.
It isn't much use if you need to enter lots of new information using the pen.
Look impressive doesn't it?
You can train Windows for Pens to recognize your own style of handwriting but, unfortunately, it's not very good at it.
Windows for Pens comes with a collection of pen tools.
Use these for all sorts of things from training the software to recognize your handwriting, to calling up an on-screen keyboard when your calligraphic skills fail completely.
BUYERS GUIDE
LIFTING THE LID
DON'T BE DAUNTED BY ALL THOSE GHASTLY LOOKING INNARDS!
IN THE SECOND PART OF OUR MONTHLY GUIDE TO STAYING SANE WHILE BUYING A COMPUTER, ANDREW JOHNSON EXPLAINS HOW TO TELL IF A MACHINE IS WELL BUILT AND HOW TO MAKE SURE IT WILL RUN EVERYTHING YOU WANT IT TO.
Last month's buyer's guide outlined what you need to consider when buying a computer — processor, memory hard disk requirements, and so on.
This month I'll be diving into that other crocodile pit — how to tell if a computer is well made and how to get the most from your investment.
Most computers wouldn't win any design awards.
They all look drearily similar — big, grey boxes, topped with big, grey monitors.
Quite right, too.
Performance, quality and flexibility are fare more important than mere aesthetics.
According to research conducted in the US, nine out of ten people who buy a computer end up bitterly regretting the decision.
Sure, everything is fine at first.
The problems start when they get out of the ‘All I want is a basic word processor’ frame of mind and start getting into some serious computing.
Then the dreadful truth dawns on them — the machine they've got isn't up to the job.
INTERNAL ISSUES
The solution is simple.
Buy a machine with a basic specification to begin with, but make sure it has plenty of room to grow with your experience.
Computer technology is developing all the time, and there may be some great new gizmo just around the corner that you'll want to use in your PC.
Small machines like the Olivetti PCS 33 and the Packard Bell Elite 1000 don't take up much desk space, but they don't leave you with much room for future expansion either.
Work out the largest case you can fit on your desk.
Large tower systems that sit beneath the desk are also worth considering, but check that the floppy drive isn't too low for comfort.
The case should be easy to remove.
There's not much wrong with having to undo three screws at the back, although those machines with a lever or clip system are obviously easier to get into.
The lid should be metal or plastic with a metal lining to reflect radiation back into the computer.
There should also be some metal clips around the bottom of the base that make contact with the lid to make sure the machine is earthed properly.
Always try to look inside a PC before you buy it.
Most reputable dealers will take a computer to pieces for you.
Obviously it's harder to get a peek at the innards if you're buying via mail order, but many direct sellers now have showrooms that you can visit.
To give you an idea of what to look out for, take a look at the photograph opposite.
EASY ACCESS
Everything should be within easy reach.
The most critical thing to look out for is access to the RAM slots.
You shouldn't have to remove the power supply unit or unplug any cables to slot in a few extra megabytes of RAM.
In an ideal world, no part of the motherboard should be underneath the power unit.
SPACE — THE FINAL FRONTIER
To run Windows you really need 4Mb of RAM.
For intensive Windows use you should be looking at 8Mb — so the more RAM slots the better.
The operating systems of the future, like Windows NT, may well require still more RAM once you start running a few applications on them.
You should be looking for a machine capable of being upgraded to 16Mb, preferably to 32Mb.
Also, check to see if the RAM slots on the machine can take 4Mb SIMMs (see the Jargon Busters on page 98).
Some computers can only be upgraded with 2Mb SIMMs.
The hard disk should also be easy to reach.
For ordinary DOS use, 40Mb hard drive is still just about enough.
But beware — DOS software is rapidly acquiring Windows-style trimmings, like mouse support, pull-down menus and graphical interfaces, which take up more space.
If there's a chance you might want to move to Windows later on, bear in mind that Windows apps, like some games, are real gluttons when it comes to hard disk space.
There are a number of good hard disk manufacturers around.
Conner, Seagate, Western Digital, Mitsubishi, Quantum and NEC are names to look for when poking around inside a machine, or if you're thinking about upgrading your hard disk.
One of the big advantages of larger machines is that they have more expansion slots for you to whack cards and boards into.
A good sound board, for example, will really liven up your games and multimedia applications.
And if you want to have a go at using bulletin boards, or you're sick of that hulking great fax in your office, you can buy a fax modem card.
VIDEO CARD CONCERNS
All machines with colour monitors have a video card and should have at least 512Kb of on-board RAM.
This will run graphics at resolutions of 800 by 600 with 16 colours — the best you can hope for on a 14-inch monitor.
But check that your 512Kb card has some free memory sockets so you can upgrade it to 1Mb or more later on.
For really powerful graphics performance — for handling 24-bit or video images, for example— you'll need 2.5Mb of RAM.
MONITOR MATTERS
The next thing to look at is the monitor.
For most purposes a 14-inch monitor is fine.
The monster 17-inch displays are only really worth the extra expense if you're into desktop publishing or graphic design.
To test the monitor, hold up a plain sheet of paper next to the screen.
This will give you an unchanging surface against which to compare the flickers.
To check the registration, look closely at the horizontal lines on the screen, preferably against a white background; if they have red and green edges it means that the registration is out, and you're more likely to develop eyestrain.
THREE KEY ISSUES
Have a go on the keyboard to make sure it suits you.
Is it too clacky?
Or is it too squishy?
Compare it with a really good model, like an IBM keyboard.
Take a glance at the documentation.
A hastily put together collection of components booklets may indicate a hastily put together machine.
And finally, it helps is you have the original disks for bundled software, such as DOS and Windows 3.1.
You'll need these if anything goes tragically wrong with your motherboard or hard disk and you have to start again from scratch.
BUYER'S CHECKLIST
Will the dealer let you look inside the machine?
How much RAM does the machine have?
Can it be upgraded to at least 16Mb to take advantage of future software?
Is the case big enough?
Is it easy to remove?
How well is the machine designed — can you reach everything easily?
How many drive bays does it have, and will all the cables inside the machine reach them easily?
How smoothly will existing drives come out?
How many screws are needed to fit a new one?
Are the expansion slots within easy reach?
How well is the motherboard fitted?
Where does it come from?
(If you're buying a 486) How can I upgrade the processor?
Will the old one come out easily, or is there a separate socket?
Does the computer come with all the disks for the pre-loaded software?
Does it have all the documentation?
How well does the monitor work?
Does it flicker too much?
What's the registration like?
Do you like the feel of the keyboard?
What sort of boards are already fitted?
And who makes them?
Is the hard drive from a reputable manufacturer?
THE VITAL ORGANS
1 COOLING:You shouldn't remove the metal slats at the back of the PC as it seriously affects the through ventilation.
There should be one vent at the front and one vent at the back.
The fan sucks air in through one and expels it from the other, ensuring a healthy, steady flow of air over the motherboard.
2 DRIVE BAYS:The more the merrier.
Look for drive bays of both sizes, 3.5-inch and 5.25-inch so that you can fit extra peripherals such as CD-ROM, or another hard or floppy drive.
Some bays may not be externally accessible: these are meant for hard disks.
3 THE POWER SUPPLY UNIT:Shouldn't be mounted over the motherboard, especially the processor, RAM slots or any jumper switches.
In this shot the PSU is mounted sufficiently far away for easy access.
It should also have as many power connectors as there are drive bays.
4 THE MOTHERBOARD:These are usually connected to the PC by a couple of screws and plastic standoffs poking up from the bottom of the case.
Check they're fitted properly; the standoff should overlap the hole it's poking through and the motherboard must not be bent.
Look for a clean design on the motherboard, without too many wires soldered on top.
5 UPGRADEABILITY:One of the big pluses of an Intel-based 486 PC is that you can put in a more powerful processor at a later date.
These are called OverDrive chips.
A 486 machine should have an additional socket to take these chips, or some system of removing the existing processor easily.
This machine has a socket for a Weitek coprocessor.
6 RAM (SIMM) SLOTS:Easy access to these is vital.
Most machines will have eight SIMM slots, allowing you to fit up to 32Mb of RAM.
The chances are you'll need more memory in the future.
7 HARD DISK:In general, the bigger the better.
The hard drive should be connected to its mounting by four screws or it could be mounted on drive rails.
These must be easy to reach — some designs push the drive cage against the motherboard, making it difficult to get at the drive's screws.
8 THE FLOPPY DRIVE:You ought to buy a machine with a 3.5-inch floppy drive because most new software comes on 3.5-inch floppy disks.
You might want a 5.25-inch drive too, but it's a luxury.
9 EXPANSION SLOTS:Vertically mounted boards are the best — the sharp, jagged undersides of horizontally mounted cards can scratch your hands.
The free arrangement of boards — where there's one card slotted into the motherboard with three expansion slots on it — is also awkward.
It can wobble about and be difficult to fit additional cards.
10 CABLING:Should be unobtrusive and neatly bound with plastic tabs.
Spare cables must be long enough to reach the empty drive bays.
It's very frustrating to fit a new drive, only to find you can't make it work because the cable won't reach.
11 KEYBOARD SOCKETS:For true ease of use, these should be at the front of the machine, or close to the front at the side.
It's a hassle having to stretch over the top of the system box to plug the keyboards in.
But the keyboard socket should only be near the front if the motherboard is designed that way.
Some cheaper machines have an internal arrangement where the original socket at the back is connected to an improvised socket at the front by a length of wire.
12 SERIAL AND PARALLEL PORTS:All computers come with at least one of each.
In general, serial ports are where you plug in a mouse or a modem, and you attach your printer to a parallel port.
BACK TO BASIC JARGON BUSTERS
BOARDS:There are a number of different boards you're likely to come across while foraging around inside a PC.
Many of these are designed to speed up your computer, especially the time it takes to get graphics up on-screen.
Another common type of board is a sound card.
BUS:Inside each expansion slot on your motherboard is an electrical circuit sending information between the card and the rest of the PC.
This is known as a bus — a circuit dedicated to whizzing around chunks of related data.
There are three main kinds:
INDUSTRY STANDARD ARCHITECTURE (ISA):The computing industry's first answer to expansion.
It was fine when leading-edge technology was a 12MHz 286.
But because it only ran at 8MHz, it began to lag behind as processors got faster.
These days, most ISA slots handle 16 bits of data.
EXTENDED INDUSTRY STANDARD ARCHITECTURE (EISA):Basically the same idea as ISA.
It runs at the same speed — 8.33 MHz — but can handle 32 bits of data instead of 16.
Not very popular.
LOCAL BUS:As processors get quicker — they're now at 66MHz — 8MHz ISA and EISA slots fail to keep up.
What's happening?
Well information is being whizzed around your computer at, lets say, 33MHz until — crunch!— it smashes into the board running at 8MHz, causing a massive pile-up of data.
Computer buffs call this a bottleneck.
Local bus or VL buses are designed to overcome this problem by running at the same speed as the processor.
Local bus is most often used to improve graphics performance.
But it's not to be confused with…
GRAPHICS ACCELERATOR CARDS:These cards plug into an ISA slot and have a separate processor on them, pre-programmed with certain basic routines normally found in the software, like screen scrolling.
Because these routines are already in the video processor, the main chip is spared the slog of handling this information.
Faster graphics is the result.
Many cards are based on the excellent S3 chip.
Makes to look out for include Orchid, Western Digital and ATI.
COACHING CONTROLLER CARDS:These cards are designed to speed up the pace at which you can get information from your hard disk.
The idea is that it's a lot quicker for the processor to get information from RAM than from the hard disk.
When you ask for some information from hard disk, the coaching controller grabs more information than you need from the same area of the disk.
This is because it hopes to anticipate what you want next.
It stores this additional information in its own on-board RAM chips, waiting for you to ask for it.
SINGLE INLINE MEMORY MODULES (SIMMS):RAM chips which plug into sockets on the motherboard.
When it comes to size, SIMMs range from 1Mb to 4Mb of RAM per socket.
The more RAM on the SIMMs, the more money you have to fork out.
SIMMs are simple to fit — they just plug in.
But make sure the SIMM sockets on the motherboard are easily accessible.
INPUT/OUTPUT BOARDS:Boards designed to let you input information into the computer and get information out again — usually via the keyboard or mouse — onto the screen.
PARALLEL AND SERIAL PORTS:Parallel ports send information down eight paths of data, serial parts through one.
Parallel ports are most commonly used for connecting a printer to your machine, serial ports are used for a mouse or a modem.
You'd have thought modems would be quicker on the parallel port, but no; the serial port was originally developed as a telecommunications device.
NEXT MONTH
Recent news pages have been littered with doom and gloom about company collapses, including some well-known names.
But what does all this mean for ordinary users?
In next month's Buyer's Guide I'll be looking at the pros and cons of third party maintenance contracts and insurance for your PC.
Until then, our Buying With Confidence section on page 34 explains how to protect yourself when you take the plunge.
ANTI-VIRUS SOFTWARE
GERM Warfare
HAVE YOU BEEN BITTEN BY A VIRUS YET?
IF NOT, DON'T BE TOO COMPLACENT.
THERE ARE MORE OF THEM THAN EVER, AND THEY'RE BECOMING NASTIER AND SMARTER.
THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT THERE'S SOME EFFECTIVE ANTI-VIRUS WARFARE AROUND.
ROGER GANN COMPARES THE LATEST VERSIONS OF THE WELL-KNOWN PACKAGES.
Viruses have come a heck of a long way since we last took an in-depth look at anti-virus software back in November 1990.
Not only are there many more of them, they've evolved technologically to become even mor dangerous, while at the same time becoming harder to detect.
So the risk from viruses certainly hasn't diminished — on the contrary, it has mushroomed.
It's very difficult to speak with any degree of accuracy, but there is at least 1,500 known viruses at large and this figure is increasing by around 100 per month.
That's the bad news.
The good news is that only a tiny percentage of these viruses are found in the ‘wild’, perhaps as few as 50.
But these are cropping up everywhere, and it can only be a matter of time before they become as common as the cold.
In an attempt to relieve your fears, I'll be looking at three of the best known and anti-virus packages:
Central Point Anti-Virus
The Norton Antivirus 2.1
Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit
We'll also take a look at a popular shareware alternative, McAfee VirusScan.
ANATOMY OF A VIRUS
A virus is a special type of program.
It has only two functions in life — to replicate undetected and to carry a payload, possibly destructive.
So you won't normally be able to see a virus in action — until it's too late.
Viruses fall into three broad categories: boot sector, file viruses or multi-partite.
BOOT SECTOR VIRUSES
Boot sector viruses, such as Brain and Joshi, hide themselves away in the boot sector of a hard disk and are able to go memory-resident every time the PC is booted up.
FILE VIRUSES
File viruses, such as Jerusalem, are sometimes called parasitic viruses.
They attach themselves to executable files and are able to load themselves every time the infected file is loaded.
Only COM and EXE files are affected by them.
MULTIPARTITE VIRUSES
Multipartite viruses, such as Tequila and Telefonica, are a combination of both and get the best of both worlds, making them particularly infectious.
You may have also heard of ‘stealth’ viruses.
These aren't really a type of virus; the name merely describes their extraordinary ability to hide from anti-virus software.
An example of this is a polymorphic virus, one based around the Dark Avenger Mutation Engine.
These viruses change their composition every time they load, making it impossible for conventional scanning software to find a known, fixed, virus signature.
CENTRAL POINT ANTI-VIRUS
This package has now reached version 1.4.
Like the others in this review, you get both the DOS and Windows versions in the same box.
However, strictly speaking, it's really just a DOS package that runs under Windows, using special support programs.
A true Windows version 1.4 has yet to be released.
Improvements over its predecessor include longer virus signature lists — over 1,300 — a scheduler, centralized network installations and support for Novell Netware.
Central Point Anti-Virus (CPAV) has to be one of the more feature-rich anti-virus packages around.
It offers the classic trio to protect against infection: a scanner to search files for viruses, a checksummer to check if a file has been altered, and a TSR monitor to check for suspicious activity.
The DOS scanner is available free of charge on many bulletin board systems.
Look out for the CPAV SOS package.
Installation is done from the DOS prompt, in order to ensure a ‘clean’ environment.
It checks the contents of memory and then scans every file on the hard disk before installing itself.
You get plenty of choice with the memory-resident monitors — you can opt for the enhanced protection of VSAFE, part of which can reside in Upper memory, or you can go for the smaller VWATCH.
Both come in two versions — as loadable device driver and as executable COM files.
Curiously, the latter versions are unloadable and so offer slightly less protection.
Another layer of protection is provided by BOOTSAFE.
This takes a copy of vital boot sector and hard disk partition information during installation, and checks both disk areas during boot-up to ensure they haven't changed.
Watch out if you run SuperStor or Stacker on your machine, though — unless BOOTSAFE is pointed at the ‘real’ hard disk — drive D — you'll trigger a false error message.
Finally, there's an option to create a ‘rescue’ disk; a bootable floppy containing vital hard disk info, enabling you to go back to square one if the worst comes to the worst.
The checksummer part of CPAV is relatively slow and creates a file in each directory, called CHKLIST.CPS, which contains a checksum of all the files in that directory.
The multiplicity of CPS files produced is, I guess, an attempt to deter viral attack.
You can also store the checksum data on a floppy, which offers the ultimate protection against being subverted.
The interface used in CPAV is the familiar PC Tools file manager front-end, with windows containing directory trees and file lists topped by pull-down menus.
A Windows 3.1 user would have no trouble getting the hang of this program.
The new Scheduler, pulled from the PC Tools package, now permits regular, unattended anti-virus procedures to be executed, such as scans.
The Windows side of CPAV talks to VSAFE or VWATCH via a program called TSR Manager, which must be loaded automatically when Windows loads so that error messages can be displayed.
Although you can't shrink CPAV down to an icon while it does a lengthy scan, you can use Alt+Tab to bring other Windows apps to the top of the pile.
However, this slows things down terribly — it's best to run CPAV from the DOS prompt.
I ran CPAV past my library of 3,000-plus viruses and the success rate is a reflection of the package's US origins — it detected 66 per cent of the infected files, 5 per cent up on the previous version, 1.3.
It can now detect the Dark Avenger Mutation Engine but it still can't find Necros, Word 1391, Slovakia, Slovakia-2, Starship or Todor.
Although these are ‘laboratory’ specimens, they've been kicking around for about six months and I'd expect them to be detected quickly.
Overall, its detection ability is moderately good; it detected all the most common field viruses.
The Windows version of VirusScan merely acts as a simple shell for the DOS version
THE NORTON ANTIVIRUS 2.1
The Norton Antivirus (NAV), now up to version 2.1, comes with both DOS and Windows versions.
The most recent improvements to Symantec it can recognize over 1,400 viruses in the US National Computer Security Association (NCSA) virus library, and can cope with the troublesome Mutation Engine viruses.
New features in the Windows version include a scheduler and background scanning.
Network support is also much improved.
The price is still £149 but the previous virus update service has been downgraded from monthly to quarterly intervals.
The Norton Antivirus can detect all the common viruses in the field, but while version 2.1 might claim to be able to detect all 1,400 viruses known to the NCSA, it still can't detect many old, well-known, ‘laboratory’ viruses such as Pogue, Starship, Slovakia or Slovakia-2.
Other rare viruses it failed to find include Mozkin, Necros, Sillywilly and Questo.
Overall, NAV managed to spot 1,860 infected files out of 3,105 or 60 per cent.
This isn't very high compared to shareware alternatives, such as McAfee VirusScan or F-Prot.
However, it did detect all of the following viruses: Haifa, Involunt, Maltese Amoeba, V2P2, V2P6, V2p6Z, Word-1391, Word-1485, PCFlu-2 and Tequila.
So is it worth buying?
Well, NAV does offer protection against all common ‘wild’ viruses, and at £149 it's reasonable value for money.
But I can't help feeling that this is strictly a US product and that no attempt has been made to localize it for UK or European markets.
It may be able to detect the entire NCSA virus library, but it's still oblivious to some viruses that have been common knowledge for many months.
A question mark must also hang over its ability to cope with Mutation Engine-based viruses, with a patch file available simultaneously with the launch of the product.
Symantec really needs to pay more attention to the European virus scene if NAV is to compete with commercial and shareware rivals on this side of the pond.
The Norton Antivirus for Windows is a rather straight-laced translation of the DOS version
TEN ANTI-VIRUS TIPS
1
Always back up your data.
This is still the ultimate defence against a severe virus attack.
Don't worry too much about program files — if an application gets zapped by a virus, simply re-install it from the master disks.
As some viruses have a slow gestation period before they become noticeable, it pays not to recycle your back-up disks too often, or you could wind up having infected backups.
2
Use anti-virus software.
3
Keep it updated.
Subscribe to the update service to make sure your AV software can detect the latest viruses.
4
Make sure every PC is protected by AV software — all infections start from just one source.
5
Only use floppy disks that have come from a reputable source, such as shrink-wrapped software.
6
Write-protect important floppies.
Once write-protected, a disk can't be infected by a virus.
7
Keep a write-protected bootable floppy handy; one that you know to be clean and virus-free.
This is important because if you do get infected, you can be sure that there are no viruses resident in memory by turning the PC off and rebooting from this disk.
8
Don't let your kids bring home pirated games software to load onto your machine.
Playgrounds are notorious sources of infected software.
Be suspicious of other PCs located in public access areas, such as colleges and universities.
9
Always ask service engineers whether their diagnostic disks are ‘clean’, or write-protected at the very least.
Many viruses have been innocently spread by engineers using the some disks on their daily rounds.
10
Don't be complacent — some major software houses have accidentally sent out viruses on distribution disks.
DR SOLOMON'S ANTI-VIRUS TOOLKIT
One of the first UK software houses to turn its attention to the virus menace, S&S International recently released version 6 of Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit (AVTK).
The DOS version retails at £99 while the DOS and Windows version costs and extra £26.
Once again, this product offers the classic trio of virus defences — a TSR monitor, Virus Guard; a scanner, FindVirus; and a cryptographic check-summer, ViVerify.
All three can be run from DOS or Windows, using common data files.
Virus Guard is a commendably small TSR, taking up 6Kb.
Curiously, it's an executable file and not a device driver, so it can only be initially loaded in AUTOEXEC.BAT, which could permit a virus to go into memory before Virus Guard is loaded.
Even under Windows, the operation of FindVirus was very quick; considerably quicker than its competitors.
It proved to be extremely accurate and was able to detect 93 per cent of infected files in my virus library, which is a very good result.
Both the Windows and DOS versions are front-ended by the Toolkit program, and they are both visually and functionally similar.
One important feature found in both is the Virus Encyclopedia, which gives thumbnail details of many viruses the AVTK can detect.
You also get an accompanying paperback giving virus details, but it isn't as wide ranging as the on-line encyclopedia.
One program new to this version is ViVerify which offers some of the most sophisticated checksumming to be seen in the anti-virus market.
You can choose between four levels of protection, including the DES encryption method.
The downside is that the better the protection, the slower the checking.
Running ViVerify from DOS is a command line job with a plethora of switches used to choose which function you need.
Although you can run it inside Toolkit, ViVerify has to be run from the command line to get the most from it.
Another TSR, Certify, can be used to compare a file's checksum as it is opened, with a previous calculated checksum.
One of the most common ways viruses are spread is via unauthorized floppy disks.
The AVTK includes a program called Author which works in conjunction with VirusGuard to make sure every floppy inserted has a six-character authorization code.
The attractive Windows front-end rivals Central Point's package.
One benefit of the Windows version over the DOS one is the ability to perform unattended scans.
Of all the packages I looked at, Dr Solomon's AVTK was easily the best.
Not only is it good value for money, it's clear that a great deal of thought has been given to the virus problem and how to cure it.
Quite simply, it does the job better than any other and is highly recommended.
One of the more useful and unique features of Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit is the Virus Encyclopedia
MCAFEE VIRUSSCAN
For years now John McAfee's suite of anti-virus utilities has dominated the US anti-virus scene.
It's a popular download from bulletin boards and is one of the best shareware products you can get.
The suite compromises VirusScan, a scanner; Virus Shield, a TSR monitor; and CleanUp, a disinfectant.
By itself VirusScan retails for just £25.
One of the great things about these utilities is the frequency with which they're updated.
The current version is 9.0 version 99, so it's been around for a while!
McAfee's programming origins are reflected in the rather terse style of his programs.
There's no install program; you just copy the files across to the hard disk.
Similarly, while a front-end is available, the program is designed to be run from the command line, like good old PKZIP.
Mercifully, the Windows shell offers you tick boxes instead of command line switches to make life a little easier.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating and while I found that McAfee VirusScan didn't quite live up to the advertisers ‘claims, it was able to spot over 84 per cent of the infected files in my library.
Its only major omission was a failure to spot the Starship virus.
If McAfee can achieve results like this.
I fail to see why giants like Central Point and Symantec can't do likewise.
MINI REVIEWS
This month's selection of the latest hardware and software includes a nifty encyclopedia, complete with sound effects; Olivetti's latest laser printer; a calendar creator with plenty of pre-written info; the latest version of Fingers for Windows, the typing tutor; and an extremely wacky icon maker.
KNOWLEDGE ADVENTURE
Kids, eh?
They're determined to expose your pitiful lack of knowledge at the most awkward moments.
Questions like: ‘Mummy, who was Immanuel Kant?’ or, ‘Daddy, what were Adam Smith's economic theories?’always crop up during a crisis in the kitchen.
Luckily, you can now plonk your curious infants in front of Knowledge Adventure and let them find out for themselves.
Although Knowledge Adventure is a DOS program, it has plenty of aural and graphical pizzazz, and full mouse support.
It isn't your usual dry, computerized encyclopedia; this program is designed to stimulate your curiosity by encouraging you to move beyond the subject you've chosen.
Click on the opening picture of Neil Armstrong on the moon, for example, and a picture of Leif Erikson's boat appears.
The connection is exploration.
Across the top of your screen is a picture of a globe.
Click on it, and a picture appears relating to the area of the world you've chosen.
Alongside this is a gobbet of text explaining the picture.
Pick a word, and a list of topics appears.
Select one and off you go again.
You can also pick subjects from one of six areas — art, science, literature, architecture, nature and ecology — represented by icons at the top.
A scroll bar, called the timeline, lets you grab information by date.
This method of organizing information makes Knowledge Adventure impossible for straightforward reference.
This may seem frustrating, but the package does encourage you to be inquisitive and venture into new subjects.
I found it tremendous fun, and there's even a trivia game to make things a little more exciting.
But watch out; Knowledge Adventure uses graphics and sound files and hogs 7Mb of hard disk space.
Picture quality is very good.
Sound quality suffers without a sound card, but it turns up in the unlikeliest places.
For example, information on the Great Barrier Reef is accompanied by a gloop-gloop noise.
The text is short and general, but it gives a fair introduction to the subject.
The literature section is very disappointing, with only 14 authors covered, and some of the choices are a bit bizarre.
Why choose Harriet Beecher-Stowe, the author of Uncle Tom's Cabin, over Charles Dickens?
But philosophers are well represented.
The architecture and science sections are also pretty good.
Art is biased heavily towards the Renaissance.
Sadly, mathematics hardly gets a look in.
Knowledge Adventure is very good at throwing out nuggets of information, and placing them into some sort of context.
It's great fun to use, and will appeal to trivia buffs everywhere.
For adults it's enjoyable to browse through, and kids will hopefully see it as a basis for future investigations into a wide range of subjects.
Knowledge Adventure — text, pictures and sound effects to help you thrash everyone at Trivial Pursuit
OLIVETTI PG404 LASER PRINTER
All the excitement in the world of laser printers for the past couple of months has centred around the magnificent 600dpi (dots per inch) LaserJet 4 from Hewlett-Packard.
And very nice it is too.
But with a list price of around £1,500, it may be a tad too expensive if you're just looking for a reliable workhorse. 300dpi printers are good enough for churning out letters, reports and the odd graphic, and do a lot less damage to your wallet.
At £699, the Olivetti PG404 clocks in at less than half the price of the LaserJet 4, and it ain't half bad.
It's a doddle to set up and use — all you have to do is fit the various bits of the printer together and plug it in.
The manual includes some incredibly helpful diagrams, although it does occasionally lapse into the incomprehensible jargon and figures which are common to most printer documentation.
The default printer emulation is for the LaserJet IIIP, which is supported by most software.
And this machine will also emulate the LaserJet II, IBM Proprinter, Epson FX80 and PostScript level 1.
The Olivetti has 15 resident fonts to choose from.
In effect, these are just typestyle variations on four basic typefaces, including Courier.
Selecting different fonts is a simple process, thanks to the clear LCD control panel at the front of the machine.
One especially neat feature — which I haven't seen in other laser printers — is a range of macros adding tinted underlays, lines and borders to your dreary documents.
The PG404 prints out at 4ppm (pages per minute), and the output quality is perfectly acceptable.
This printer is fine for producing text and basic graphics.
When I tried printing pictures with plenty of tones and shades, some faint vertical bars did appear, but most people probably won't want to use it for heavy graphics output.
The Olivetti is a very good printer.
It doesn't come up with irrational error messages and it's nice and simple to use.
The main problem I encountered concerned the 1Mb of on-board RAM, which wasn't enough for the more complicated graphics output.
But apart from that minor quibble, it was fine.
A good product for the price.
The Olivetti PG404 is nice and easy to use and is fine for churning out text and basic graphics
SCHEDULE EXPRESS
Running any sort of major project can be a nightmare without a computer.
You end up with walls lined with sheets of paper, or blackboards covered with artistic scrawl.
They may be pretty, but they're a pain to change if something drastic happens to upset your schedules.
Of course, with good PC project management software, this is a doddle.
But many of these packages are aimed at high-end users and are stuffed with features that you might not need.
If this scenario sounds familiar, it might be worth checking out Schedule Express.
This bargain-priced package is designed for people who want to produce basic schedules for a small project team.
Many of the features you'd expect from fully-blow programs, like Symantec Timeline, are missing.
Don't expect Schedule Express to go into the fine details of resource management.
The program looks good when you first load it up.
The screen is divided vertically into time periods ranging from minutes — for arranging a meeting — to years, presumably for scheduling your life.
Across the top are the usual pull-down menu headings.
with some of the more popular features represented as icons.
Schedule Express produces good looking schedules.
There's a wide range of boxes to mark the various stages of your project, and these can be coloured for extra emphasis.
You can link them to show that one task has to be completed before another can be started, and rearranging tasks if you make a mistake is no problem — you simply drag them to where you want them.
Boxes can be anchored into your schedule, which is ideal for taking into account compulsory holidays like Christmas and Easter.
Setting up a task involves more than just typing the job in a box and putting it onto your timescale.
You can annotate a task, write down who's responsible for seeing it through, and the names of up to three people who are involved.
Another feature is the task filter, allowing you to produce an individual schedule from the overall masterplan.
Unfortunately, this is badly implemented.
You can't make an individual schedule appear which includes both the tasks the person is responsible for and the ones he or she is merely involved in.
So if you want to organize a group meeting and include it on all the individual schedules, you can't.
Even if you could, you wouldn't be able to organize a meeting for more than three people because this is the maximum number you can fit in the user-defined fields.
These restrictions limit your ability to get information out to all the people working on your project, and undermine the program as a whole.
The other problem is that tasks honoured with a separate colour on-screen may not appear emphasized on a black and white printout.
So unless you're prepared to network the program, or invest in a colour printer, people will only be able to prioritize tasks if they see the schedule on your screen.
Schedule Express has tons of graphical glitz, but not quite enough guts.
Schedule Express — nice interface, shame about the lack of features
COMET DATA 33MHz 486DX
The Intel 33MHz 486DX is a halfway house processor.
It's not as quick as its 50MHz and 66MHz siblings, and machines using it aren't that much cheaper.
Still that's not stopping manufacturers from banging ‘em’ out.
And here's another one.
The Comet Data 33MHz 486DX is a down-to-earth, no-frills machine.
Unlike many of its rivals, it doesn't come with an exotic software bundle — no Lotus Smart-Suite, no Microsoft Office, not even a copy of somebody's Works package.
All you can look forward to when you boot up is the bog-standard mix of DOS 5 and Windows 3.1.
The machine itself is devoid of fancy trimmings, apart from the big, fat power-on button.
The case is a straight-forward vanilla-coloured desktop box, the monitor a no-nonsense 14-inch SuperVGA affair.
Along the back of the machine are all the usual things you'd expect — serial and parallel ports, keyboard socket and video input.
Undoing the three screws at the back allows you to remove the sturdy metal lid and expose the innards.
This is a solidly constructed machine.
There's room to add a 5.25-inch drive and a CD-ROM to the existing 3.5-inch floppy drive.
Four spare SIMM slots mean you can upgrade the basic 4Mb of RAM to a whopping 32Mb.
There's one 8-bit slot and seven 16-bit slots, two of which are occupied — one with an IDE/IO board with 4Mb of hard disk cache on board, the other with a WD90 Windows accelerator card.
But the five free 16-bit slots should be enough for most people.
The hard drive is a 106Mb job from Seagate.
Access to the innards of the machine is reasonably good; the only problem lies in reaching the RAM upgrade slots, which are obstructed by the wires going from the hard drive to the ISA board.
If you want to upgrade your RAM you'll have to unplug these, but that's nothing compared to the headache of removing a disk drive.
The SuperVGA monitor is fine — there are no annoying flickers or wiggles.
The only irritation is that Comet Data hasn't installed the drivers for the mouse or the graphics card, you have to do this yourself.
The general quality of the whole machine is let down by the tacky keyboard.
It has an irritatingly small backspace key and I think it has a horrible plastic feel, but this is purely subjective.
As with most machines from clone manufacturers.
there's no decent hardware documentation, just the usual collection of incomprehensible component manuals.
But Comet Data does give you all the DOS and Window disks, complete with Microsoft's manuals.
Let's hope more companies follow this lead.
The Comet 486DX gave an adequate performance.
With the drive cache disabled, it turned in a power rating of 14,203 and a WinTach rating of 3.75, which isn't bad.
However, by handling the machine with some software, Comet Data could have come up with a real bargain.
PACKARD BELL ELITE 1000
At first glance, this AND 25MHz 386SX looks northing special.
Its footprint is quite petite, but not as small as the Olivetti PCs 33 reviewed last month.
The front of the machine sports some graceful curves, but it's only when you take a peek round the back that you get some inkling that this one is different.
Here you'll find the normal serial and parallel ports, video port, PS/2 mouse socket.
And what's this?
Speaker and microphone sockets?
Ah-Ha — this machine has something to do with sound.
Opening the case to confirm this suspicion is easy.
You simply undo two screws at the front and the top slides off to reveal an 8-bit Soundblaster card, tucked into one of the three 16-bit expansion slots.
Also exposed are 2Mb of RAM attached to the motherboard, three SIMM expansion slots which you can expand to a maximum of 14Mb, and a 40Mb Seagate hard drive.
In our Bench Tests, the machine performed adequately with a power rating of 3,725.
All the innards are easily accessible and there's space for a 5.25-inch drive or CD-ROM.
The monitor is a standard 14-inch VGA, but the Elite 1000 wasn't designed as a serious Windows machine.
The speakers are good, but Packard Bell doesn't supply the eight AA batteries you need to run them, nor a 6-volt mains adaptor.
Boot up and you're greeted with a friendly introductory screen.
This needs a mouse and you'll find all the necessary drivers are pre-installed.
There's a good on-screen tutorial covering computer basics, and Lotus Works, a reasonable, DOS-based integrated package which includes a comms program as well as the usual word processor, database and spreadsheet.
And there are plenty of programs and games of varying difficulty to take advantage of the Soundblaster card.
The Elite 1000 is pitched at the home market.
The specification is fine for the bundled software, but with only 2Mb of RAM and 40Mb hard disk, you won't get too far with Windows.
The on-screen tutorial means it's easy to use, and the sound is fun, but it's not the one to buy if you plan to move into more sophisticated computing at a later date.
The Packard Bell Elite 1000 comes with plenty of bundled software and sound support, but it only has 2Mb of RAM
CALENDAR CREATOR PLUS FOR WINDOWS
Oh, what hectic lives we lead.
It's go, go, go from dawn to dusk, and getting your life in order can be a nightmare.
Just as well there're computer programs like Calendar Creator plus for Windows to help get things organized.
The program's concept is easy to understand.
It simply displays a calendar on-screen and you add useful reminders about vital viola lessons, crucial callanetics classes and your granny's birthday.
The program gives a large choice of calendars, planner and schedule styles, from daily to yearly, all tastefully laid out and ready to print.
Unfortunately, it doesn't make the greatest use of the Windows interface.
You can't type directly onto the calendar itself.
You have to open up a list of events, choose a date and type in what you plan to do.
Only then will something appear on the schedule.
This does have some advantages.
You can tailor lists of events for different parts of your life, or for different people, but it's a long-winded way of jotting stuff down.
One nice touch lets you italicize and embolden text simply by highlighting it and clicking on one of the toolbox icons.
There's also a range of pre-written lists to add to your schedule.
Trivia buffs will love these — the events covered include dates for holidays in Brazil and the French-speaking part of Canada, as well as birthday dates for film, music and historical celebrities.
I can exclusively reveal that Gail Robinson, our Associate Editor, shares a birthday with Rod Stewart and somebody called Ethan Allan.
Unfortunately, the emphasis is heavily American.
By the way, you can have more than one event list on your calendar at the same time.
And that's not all.
Calendar Creator comes programmed with 250 clip-art images, so you can add some pictorial pizzazz to your schedules, as long as you've got 9Mb of hard disk space.
Again, these are very Americanized, but you'll find some of them useful, like the picture of balloons for holidays.
To get the most from this package you need to print your finished designs so you can pin it on your wall or desk, and scrawl on it.
Don't try and put too much information into one date, or the text will flow across other boxes.
Create a personalized calendar with CCP and you need never forget granny's — or Rod Stewart's — birthday again
FINGERS FOR WINDOWS 2.3
Need to improve your hunt ‘n’ peck style of typing?
There are a few good typing tutors on the market — I learnt to touch type with Mavis Beacon.
The one on test here is a bit different as it's a Windows product.
But does the Windows interface give you any great advantage in learning how to type?
Well, not really.
Fingers has a certain visual appeal, but you do need at least a 386 and 3Mb of memory to run it.
And if you want to learn to type in German, Spanish, French, Italian or Dutch, it's all here.
The tutorial screen is full of buttons and icons.
A metronome ticks away in the background to give you a rhythm to type to.
An image of your PC keyboard sits at the top of the screen and around the edges are a variety of indicators for accuracy and speed.
If you set target accuracy and speed figures to work towards, your performance is constantly compared against these figures.
The three levels range from simple letters to complete sentences and the tutorials are sensibly structured.
At the end of each level you take an exam and you  can record your results as a graph.
I felt these exams were far too long.
What this program really lacks is a sense of fun.
There are two bundled games which are OK and provide a bit of a break, but they're not quite enough.
Learning it type is a full business and I for one need a bit more to keep me interested.
ICON MAKE-IT
Icon Make-It is the latest slab of gratuitous, but essential, silliness to escape the organized funny-farm known as Moon Valley Software.
You may well be familiar with Icon Do-It and Icon Hear-It.
Icon Make-It goes one step further towards mayhem — it's an integrated package for the sensibly challenged.
Its main raison d'etre is to let you do silly, impressive and even downright offensive things to your boring old Windows icons and the desktop.
Install it (if you don't have a sound card, it won't let you install the rather good sound package) and you find a number of apps, called the Icon Make-It Animator, Frame Editor and Clip-art, and Icon Hear-It Lite.
Flip through the wacky but informative manual (which casts you as a movie director) and you'll find that the first three programs let you construct 20-frame icon-sized movies.
There are all sorts of effects — like fade, paint and melt — along the lines of some presentation graphics packages, only better.
To create icon movies, you can pull icons in from the clip-art library, capture them off the desktop with the built-in capture program or create your own with the Frame Editor.
The latter is a classic icon editing program that lets you add recessing effects, rotate things and perform some fairly sophisticated bitmap editing.
Once your icon movie's in the can, you have to load Icon Hear-It Lite, which fastens itself to Program Manager's menu bar.
This offers some sound control (assigning WAV files to Windows events or individual icons) and will animate your cursor, and look after Windows wallpaper and screen savers.
It's from here that you get your icon movie onto the desktop.
The only note of caution I have is that you need a solid Windows setup — load too many icon movies and things slow down a bit.
I wouldn't run the package and Excel together on a 386SX with 2Mb of RAM.
Unless you're a misery (or your boss is), Icon Make-It will add a vast amount of pleasure to any time spent using Windows.
Load it up, arrange your features into a smirk and invite the nearest Mac user to come and have a butcher's.
Give Windows a sense of humour — Icon Make-It lets you do some extremely silly things to the Windows icons and desktop
CORRECT LETTERS FOR DOS
There are plenty of people who have super-efficient secretaries, but the majority of us can only dream of having someone like that to put our working lives in order.
For those of us who are less fortunate, Correct Letters could come in handy.
This is a DOS-based collection of around 200 pre-written letters which cover most business situations, ranging from condolences on redundancy to a request for delayed payment on an invoice.
Of course, the letters (which have been created for the British Institute of Management) have been generalized, but you can tweak and customize them to suit your needs.
They can be exported as ASCII files, so you simply edit them in your word processor.
When setting up Correct Letters you are prompted to enter your name, company address, telephone, fax number, and so on.
If, for example, you don't use letter-headed stationery, you can set the program to automatically insert these details into all your letters.
The main screen is simply a list of the letters, with a description of each one's contents, and a rather primitive menu running across the top.
Here you can choose to view a letter, export it to your word processor, and perform search operations.
Some of the more straightforward letters won't need much alteration, but those which do contain bracketed prompts, which tell you where to enter information which is relevant to you — for example, the amount of an invoice, points you agree with, and so on .
The documentation provides plenty of general advice about writing letters — both the general construction and some of the finer points, such as how many lines to leave for a signature.
Correct Letters is dead easy to use and its main advantage is time-saving.
Most of the letters are straightforward and written in plain English; the type that you may spend bags of time perfecting — Have I said exactly the right thing?
Do I sound offensive?
Is the letter too grovelling?
It's a handy program for anyone who needs to send a large variety of business letters and who doesn't want to faff about thinking of the right thing to say.
If no-one will write your letters for you, and you don't want to do them yourself, Correct Letters could be the answer.
BEST BUYS
top ten 486SX MACHINES
This month, our Top Ten features the best 486SX machines we've reviewed over the past 18 months, and it's all designed to make your buying decisions easier.
1
This machines lives up to Dan's reputation for solid boxes, good specifications and keen prices.
The system bx is metal throughout and there's enough room for expansion.
It has six full-length slots, two short ISA slots and an S3 graphics card.
One of the short slots contains a multi-way I/O adaptor.
The controller is a cached WD-1003-compatible card and the hard disk is a Seagate.
It's a great price for such a performer.
2
This machine has a baby AT motherboard using an UMC chipset and the AMI BIOS, and is spurred along by a 128 Kb cache.
The GXA Gaintec S3 graphics accelerator card makes it a good Windows workhorse.
The Samsung monitor and video card don't work brilliantly together; nevertheless the screen is good.
Although the documentation lets it down, there's plenty of room for expansion.
A good, value for money PC.
3
The Genie comes pre-installed with Windows and DOS.
The motherboard has a Symphony chipset with 4Mb of RAM, a 64Kb cache, and all the normal I/O ports.
There's only room for three full-length cards and three short cards.
The video card is a Paradise SuperVGA with 1Mb of RAM.
The Genie's documentation is better than most, and it would make an excellent, value for money Windows workhorse machine.
4
Unlike the first batch of Ambra machines, this 486SX is built by IBM.
It comes pre-installed with DOS 5 and Windows 3.1 on the 106Mb hard disk, inside there's an Intel vacancy socket, so the 25MHz 486SX processor can be upgraded to a 33MHz or 50MHz DX.
And the well-written manuals are a boon.
In terms of price and performance, the Hurdla is a well-built quality clone.
5
This compact machine has three drives and a 3.5-inch vertical drive bay.
The baby AT motherboard has an OPTi chipset, 64Kb of RAM cache and eight SIMM slots.
The Seagate ST3 144A hard disk is reasonable and ran a nose ahead of its uncached contenders.
It gibes an impressive Windows performance helped by the up-to-date screen drivers.
If you're looking for fast Windows performance, consider this one.
6
This is a sleek, low-profile desktop.
It's so slim there's only room for two 32-bit EISA slots and no space for additional drives.
Almost everything is built onto the motherboard — bags of memory expansion, top-notch video, Ethernet and SCSI interface.
You get two serial ports, a parallel port, and PS/2 keyboard and mouse connectors. £1,639 is a lot for an Amstrad, but it's an Amstrad with a difference — it's built by Intel.
7
This mini tower machine comes ready to run Windows and also has two mouse drivers installed — one from Microsoft for Windows 3.1 and the other for the Silicon Valley mouse.
The caching disk controller has 2Mb of memory which boosts the hard disk access times.
This machine is extremely fast on disk-intensive tasks, but the video card is less impressive.
It has two vacant 8-bit slots, and the Tatung monitor is capable of 60Hz.
8
This 486SX is a full-height desktop, fitted with both size disk drives and a pair of free 5.25-inch bays.
It ha six free 16-bit slots, but the power switch cable blocks access to one full-length expansion card.
It comes with 4Mb of RAM and the 105Mb Quantum Prodrive hard disk gives a blistering performance.
The CTX low-radiation monitor is no slouch either, but the drivers produce lousy dithered colours within Window's default colour scheme.
9
HiGrade's machine comes with a 256Kb processor cache, a 120Mb Connor hard disk and a DC-600 caching disk controller with 2Mb of SIMM RAM.
MS-DOS comes supplied, but Windows 3.1 is an option.
It has both size drives, two free half-length 16-bit slots, and a further three empty full-length slots.
Access to the drive bays and expansion slots is reasonable.
Overall, the HiGrade is a speedy mover and a good budget computer.
10
This machine has a feel of quality you don't get with a budget-priced computer and has a full 32-bit EISA bus.
The advantage is that EISA network, disk, video and sound cards can run a lot faster and handle higher throughputs, though at a cost.
It comes with a 14-inch low-radiation SuperVGA monitor, with a very fast video performance.
The hard disk is also fast, without the benefit of a cache controller.
Upgrade options are good too.
WORKSHOP
SPREADSHEETS
ONE LUMP OR TWO?
PROBLEMS, PROBLEMS…
WHEN JUGGLING YOUR FINANCES AT HOME AND WORK, WHY TOSS A COIN AND HOPE FOR THE BEST?
DENNIS JENKIN EXPLAINS HOW YOU CAN USE YOUR SPREADSHEET TO WORK IT OUT FOR YOU.
Should you buy or rent equipment?
What are the relative values of a lump sum investment or a pension?
If you lie awake at night pondering everyday dilemmas like these, why not try working things out with a spreadsheet.
Imagine you're faced with the choice of making a payment in cash lump sum or in a series of equal instalments.
You know that money earns interest in the bank, but how do you work it out?
To simplify the calculation you can take the value of each regular payment as £1 and reduce the lump sum proportionally.
For example, if I'm comparing £15,000 in cash with £1,000 per year, I insert the payments as £1 per year and the lump sum as £15.
This speeds up calculations, reduces memory requirements and often lets you use narrower columns, so you can fit more on-screen.
Any spreadsheet should be able to calculate the present value of payments made over a fixed term.
The results can be plotted in a graph, like the one below.
This shows that the present value of £1 per year for 25 years is less than £15 when the rate of return exceeds 5 per cent per year.
If you could earn more than 5 per cent by investing the money elsewhere, you'd prefer to pay £1,000 a year for 25 years instead of a lump sum of £15,000.
But if you're receiving money it would be better to go for the lump sum.
I used the worksheet at the top of the next column.
Many spreadsheets make you insert interest rates as decimals (so 1 per cent would be 0.01), but you can then format the block as a percentage.
The formula for calculating the present value of a series of equal payments is:
PV (payment amount, interest rate, term)
The spreadsheet can't handle an interest rate of 0%, so you have to insert a small number, such as 0.00000001%, in cell B9.
I'll start by describing the formula for end-year payments.
Assuming that the payments are £1 per year, you need to create a formulae like this:
1
Place the cursor in cell F9
2
Type
PV (1,
3
Move the cursor to cell B9 and type a comma
4
Move the cursor to cell F4, hit F3 (to make the reference absolute, so it won't change when the formula is copied), and type a closing bracket
5
Press Enter
6
Use the /COPY command to copy the formula into the remaining rows of column F.
The formula in cell F9 will be:
PV (1, B9, $F$4)
I put the following formula for start-year payments in cell D9:1+ PV (1, B9, $F$4–1)
Next month I'll be looking at how to use you're spreadsheet to work out whether its more cost effective to buy or rent property.
This graph shows the present value of £1 per year for 25 years
JARGON BUSTERS
Interest rate:Where spreadsheet manuals tell you to insert the interest rate into a formula, you should use the required rate of return per period.
Payment:The value of a regular instalment.
Period:The time between two payments.
Present value:If you delay paying a bill, you can earn interest on the money in the meantime.
Thus, you should reduce the value of each future payment by the profit earned before it is payed.
Rate of return:Here, the rate of return is the minimum that you require from an investment.
For private investors, it might be the forecasted growth rate of shares, units, or a building society account with all interest reinvested.
Term:The total time that the instalments are paid over.
It must be expressed as the number of periods.
Be careful — some spreadsheet manuals use the words ‘period’ and ‘term’inconsistently.
Year:In this type of evaluation, the base date is usually the day when the lump sum would be paid.
We have to call the years 1,2 and so on, instead of quoting the calendar years.
PAINTING SOFTWARE
Painting by pixels
IN THE FIRST OF OUR TWO-PART SERIES ON HOW TO USE IMAGES IN YOUR DOCUMENTS,JOHN BENNETT EXPLAINS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PAINTING AND DRAWING SOFTWARE, AND LOOKS AT SOME OF THE BEST PAINTING PACKAGES AROUND.
An image can either be a ‘supporting actor’, like the one on the left, which complements the document without being too overpowering; or it can be the ‘star attraction’, like the one on the right, dominating the page
Image-editing packages are capable of amazing photo trickery.
Here the original face has been edited to get rid of details, like the earrings.
Then a filter has been applied to give a more painted style
Graphics software is better value and more capable than ever before, thanks to recent improvements in displays, GUIs and sheer speed.
Where previously there were only a couple of worthwhile applications, there's now a mass of competing packages.
Prices have tumbles over the past two years, and to tempt you to part with your cash, software companies are bundling their packages with more and more freebies: tons of clip-art, hundreds of fonts, utilities, you name it.
But it can be confusing, and it's easy to buy the wrong package.
As it's such a broad field, I'll be concentrating on software for creating and manipulating illustrations — either to be used on their own or with DTP and word processing applications.
The packages I've looked at should, in different degrees, allow you to draw or paint as naturally as possible with a mouse.
They should also offer easy ways to create clip-art images, ready-made shapes and symbols; and let you edit and manipulate images to achieve something visually exciting.
To put computer images to work, they need to be divided into two categories.
First, the image can't be the ‘supporting actor’, helping to turn a dreary document into something much more attractive, but without hogging the limelight.
Images of this type should be fairly simple, eyecatching and quick to put together.
For example, it may be difficult to describe a brand new product adequately, but a supporting photo and technical drawing will help to get the message across.
Secondly, you want the image to be the star attraction.
If it's of equal, or greater, importance than the material it goes with, you want your image to be of the highest quality and you're prepared to spend the time to achieve something a bit special.
A PC is no substitute for artistic ability, but with the aid of a suitable package you can achieve effects that are neither too time-consuming, costly or just plain impossible by hand.
And those effects are what'll make your material stand out from the crowd.
You could have glossy colour photos on the cover of your travel firm's flyer, with a bit of clever retouching to cover the grey skies or annotated cutaway technical drawings.
That isn't to say you can't use graphics software simply for fun, or artistic purposes.
The great pleasure in creating images on a PC is the freedom to experiment and undo mistakes.
PAINTING…
Illustration software comes in two forms: bitmapped' painting' and vector ‘drawing’ applications.
Paint packages are mostly used with photographic images, and with scans alongside paint effects for creative work with a photographic feel.
The more sophisticated packages prefer to call themselves image editors, and tabloid-style photo-retouching trickery is what they do best.
Painting is popular for creating simple images because the mouse is used like a brush to colour areas and to create the effect of texture, like an impressionist painting, for instance.
So if you want to work with scans or photographs, you need a paint package.
Likewise, if you want to do a portrait or a landscape — like getting out the watercolours or acrylics — choose a paint package.
Drawing packages are just not suitable for this type of job because they work with outlines.
A specialist creative package like Factual Design Painter allows you greater control over the way the brushes, pens and ‘comms’ operate, as you can see from the Brush Behaviour palette at the bottom left corner
Painting software's most practical use is to clean up scanned-in photographs to improve the output quality.
The sepia tint ti the inset image has been achieved by altering the hue and saturation of the original
…
OR DRAWING?
Drawing packages are commonly used for graphic design, creative and technical illustration, editing clip-art and so on, and aren't intended to give a photo-realistic finish.
The basic technique is a little harder to get to grips with than painting and has a flatter, more geometric look, but it's ideal for complex illustration because it is easy to edit precisely.
And for the majority of users, vector format clip-art has proved a quick and easy way to produce simple, bright graphics to enhance a form or letterhead.
You can run clip-art through a drawing package and edit it for a more personal touch very quickly, and the printing quality is consistent, which isn't always the case with bitmaps.
HOW MUCH TO SPEND
Once you've decided whether you need to paint or to draw, the amount you spend depends on four main questions:
What do you want to do?
If it involves a specific effect, like graduated colours or 3D, it's better to pay for the features than to come up with a make-do solution.
But if it involves simple images, there's no need to buy the most complicated package.
Do you have the time and experience to master the package?
If not, be wary of the more expensive ones.
But if you have, then you'll easily outgrow the low-end packages.
What are you going to output to?
If it's to your own laser or inkjet there's not much to worry about.
If you're going to use a professional printer, you must get a package that supports separated output.
But if it's to a dot-matrix printer, the quality will be so low, so don't spend too much.
What hardware do you have?
Most of the new low-end packages run happily on a 386 with 2Mb of RAM.
A VGA card and monitor are fine if you're drawing at this level, and are okay for basic painting, although colours will be dithered and appear grainy, which is a problem for photographic retouching.
Working with top-end graphics software can be very expensive.
The files tend to be very large, so you'll need at least an 80Mb hard drive.
Some programs won't run if you have less than 4Mb of RAM; you'll also need a 386 or higher.
You'll need a video card capable of displaying over 256 colours quickly; for proper image editing it needs to be 24-bit or 32Kb.
And finally' if you can afford all this, you've got to calibrate your monitor, scanner (if you have one) and printer so that what you see on screen matches your original image and the printout.
Now all you need to do is decide on a specific package!
This month I'm concentrating on painting software.
THE WHOLE PICTURE
Painting programs work by allocating a colour to each pixel in an image, creating a ‘bitmap’.
Unlike vector graphics, the image is a single layer, so once something is painted, it becomes part of the whole picture.
It's like an oil painting; when you make a mistake you can paint over it, but you might paint over other areas too.
The other crucial thing with painting is that the printed quality of an image depends entirely on its resolution.
The higher the resolution, the smoother the curves and the sharper the lines become.
Bitmap editing is done either by covering an area with a new colour or by selecting an area with a mask tool, so that painting or special effects only apply inside it.
This is also why paint applications don't have very good text handling, because once the text is on the image, it can't be edited again in the normal way, only as an area of colour.
I mentioned earlier that graphics files are very large, and this is particularly true with bitmap images.
The more you increase   the resolution to improve the output quality, the larger the file size becomes and the slower it is to work with.
Windows 3.1 can now handle images over 16Mb in size, which is about par for the course with large four-colour, high-resolution bitmaps.
One way round this is the JPEG file format which compresses files.
The drawback is that it works be discarding colour information it thinks you don't need, so the more compression, the lower the image quality.
Even so, the difference is marginal, and JPEG is fine for use with in-house printing or on-screen images.
On the subject of bitmap file formats, like BMP, PCX, TIFF and TGA,there are no concrete rules about which to use (bar EPS for separations).
However, it's worth having a range available, because there are variations on the same file format; what one application thinks is a TIFF may not please another application.
There are a number of really low-level painting tools for creating simple bitmap images.
Slightly further up the scale are the low-end image-editing applications.
These have more sophisticated tools for creating your own images and working with scans, and often do the scanning as well.
They lack the pre-press capabilities of high-end packages, but are ideal for outputting to colour printers, or producing greyscale images for lasers.
There are two big distinctions between cheap and expensive image editing programs: the degree of sophistication they allow for selecting areas of an image, and the amount of colour balancing and pre-press control they have.
Most allow you to work in various colour modes (RGB, HLS, or CMYK) and to edit or apply changes to channels individually or collectively.
These packages are only worth looking at if you're going to print professionally or if you need precise retouching tools.
MICROGRAFX PICTURE PUBLISHER 3.1 AND PHOTOMAGIC 1
Picture Publisher's main attraction is its friendly interface.
Features like sliding-scales, graphics and previews make complicated colour adjustments easy to experiment with.
There's a full complement of painting and retouching features, with brush tools and masking options, and filters for controlling colour, distortion, texture, photographic and 3D effects.
Because it's a fully-fledged image editor, it isn't particularly cheap, and it'll face stiff competition when Adobe Photoshop 2.5 for Windows arrives this spring.
But Picture Publisher presents complex features in an accessible fashion; a likeable, powerful package.
PhotoMagic is a cut-down version of Picture Publisher, lacking the CMYK support and the more advanced selection and colour controls.
It makes use of JPEG for bitmapped clip-art and in terms of features it's on a par with PhotoFinish and CA-Paint.
It comes with over 250 images, so you can edit and use photographs, even if you don't have a scanner.
With plenty of special effects filters and reasonable retouching and painting tools, it's ideal for in-house printing and great fun to use.
FRACTAL DESIGN PAINTER
Fractal Design Painter — like its greyscale kid brother, Fractal Design Sketcher — is intended to bring real texture to bitmapped pictures.
The brushes are designed to simulate the effects of painting tools and techniques like oils, chalks, airbrushes and watercolours.
While some paint packages provide fairly crude brushstyles, Fractal Design Painter lets you go into far greater detail; it gives you more control over the effects of pen or brush and you can create and record your own styles.
One particularly useful feature is Autocloning which lets you bring in a scanned or painted image — such as an ordinary snapshot — and edit it in a particular painting style.
This can be one of the present clone types or any of the brush styles, from charcoal to Japanese watercolour.
The snag is that it's very difficult to get started, impossibly hard to master and the demands made on your system are astronomical — running Painter on a 50MHz 486 can still be painfully slow.
That said, the end result is unique and if it's computer art for its own sake that interest you, this package is a must.
PIXOFOTO
PixoFoto is a newcomer to the UK, and is an interesting DOS solution.
It's well worth a look; not just by those who can't abide Windows.
It can be rather tricky to install correctly, but once up and running, it's a straightforward' serious image editor.
It has a competent selection of retouching features and colour balancing controls, but its biggest asset is sheer speed; I guess it would top its Windows counterparts by a factor of three, if put to the test.
Next month I'll be looking at some of the techniques used in drawing software and reviewing a selection of packages.
F1 for Help
TROUBLE SHOOTING
GOT A PROBLEM?
DON'T PANIC, OUR EXPERTS ARE ON HAND TO SOLVE ALL YOUR COMPUTING PREDICAMENTS, WHETHER IT'S HARDWARE, SOFTWARE OR PERIPHERALS.
KEEP SENDING IN ANY HANDY TIPS AND THE BEST ONES, PUBLISHED EACH MONTH, WILL WIN A PRIZE.
BEGINNER'S PROBLEMS
Q: I bought my PC a month ago, so I don't know very much about it yet.
I decided to give your diagnostic utilities a try and was shocked to be told that it has a 386 processor with a 34.5 performance factor.
I bought the machine as a 486SX/25 with 8Mb of RAM and 120Mb hard drive.
Do I set lawyers on my supplier or is there an explanation?
I'd also like some advice about a couple of things.
In you review of the 486SX machines you state that ‘once again it was set up to use the MS DOS device drivers (HIMEM, MOUSE and SMARTDrive), although the ones that come with Windows 3.1 are much better’.
As my PC has exactly this configuration, what does this mean to the uninitiated?
My other problem is more of a nuisance than anything serious.
When I type some directory names at the DOS prompt, and when I type WhatPC at the A prompt., I get the message ECHO OFF.
I enclose a copy of my AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS files.
A: Hold back with that writ!
The problem with the misidentification of your processor is one we've covered in F1 before.
It's all due to the frightful rate of technological change.
If you take a look at the date of the file CPU-INFO.EXE,you'll see that if was produced in 1987, which is a little before the introduction of the Intel 80486 processor.
As it's possible to be backward compatible but not forward compatible, you can't blame the program for being unable to correctly identify a processor introduced after the program was written.
The reason it thinks your 486SX is a 386 is that the two processors do share many common features, it just that one is a lot more powerful than the other.
If it's any consolation, take a look at the old Norton SysInfo program.
This also predates the advent of the 486 and, sure enough, it gets the identity wrong too.
Don't forget, if ever you're in doubt about what processor you've actually got, it's hard to beat the naked eye!
On to your second question, all software is continually updated and improved and is very ‘version-centric’— so Windows 3.1 is better than version 3.
The same is true of the utility programs that come with MS DOS 5.
A number of them are duplicated in Windows 3.1 and these are more up to date versions.
For instance,SMARTDRV, SYS,which comes with MS DOS 5, is considerably inferior to SMARTDRV.EXE which comes with Windows 3.1.
Device drivers, such as HIMEM.SYS and EMM386.EXE have also been improved.
As you'll have both on your hard disk, it makes sense to use the latest versions.
It takes just a few seconds to alter CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT to make these changes.
I can only assume that manufacturers who don't properly configure the machines they sell are either lazy or careless.
It would appear that your PC is correctly set up.
Finally, with regard to the WhatPC problem, you must have a stray batch file from one of our free cover disks lurking on your hard disk somewhere.
Track it down from the root directory of drive C by typing:DIR WHATPC.BAT /S 
No matter what directory it's in, the /S switch will find it.
Once you know where the file is, you can delete it.
Norton SysInfo can also get the processor type wrong if the processor is older than the program.
The problem isn't restricted to CPU-INFO.EXE
ADDLED ADLER
Q: Read you mag…like your column…gotta query.
Found two of these.
Never heard of them.
Any info amongst your vast audience or from yourself would be much appreciated.
I have no books, nuffink.
1
Adler — Mod CA/P2 Alphatronic with twin 5,25-inch disk drives and two 25-way and one 37-way connectors.
2
VDU — Sanyo DM 5912 2CXA.
3
Printer — Adler DRH 80 CAD401.
I'm sure that this is going to give you some trouble, so if you can crack it, thanks a lot.
A: Read your letter…like your style…can point you in the right direction.
Your elderly machine was made by Triumph Adler.
Give them a bell on  for more information.
A: Thanks for the copious documentation — bad news for trees but good news for The Voice of the Anorak.
While it is straightforward to create High RAM or Upper memory on a 386, it isn't so easy with 286-based PCs.
Luckily, there is a back doorway with some machines and QRAM used this loophole to produce Upper memory blocks.
The PCs need to have a suitable support chipset, typically a NEAT or LEAP chipset.
This enables them to turn to Extended memory into Expanded memory.
The BIOS and the PC must be capable of shadowing — that is copying the contents of slow ROM, such as the BIOS or VGA BIOS, into faster RAM, thus speeding up the system.
QRAM can exploit these capabilities and give you access to the unused RAM that sits between 640Kb and 1,024Kb.
You're right to want more Conventional RAM as it will allow you to run bigger programs — some games won't run with less than 610Kb of free RAM.
But by and large you're putting yourself through hell just to squeeze out that last drop of RAM that you won't actually use: you run programs like WordPerfect 5.1 which can run in 512Kb, so memory isn't important here.
The first thing to do is make sure you're not wasting Conventional memory,
I note from the supplied listings that you're loading a mouse driver twice — once in CONFIG.SYS and again in AUTOEXEC.BAT.
I'd also look to trim RAM consumption by ditching things like SHARE and ANSI.SYS.
As you're using SMARTDrive, you can save 2,5Kb by reducing your BUFFERS statement from 15 to 10.
The Stacker device driver is pretty big — 40Kb — and unless this can be loaded high, it's going to take a big chunk of Conventional memory.
I would have thought that you could have got more than 32Kb of Upper memory from QRAM.
You'll lose 64Kb to the EMS page frame, which is located at address C800, and your 32Kb sits on top of that, at D800.
Normally the whole of the ‘E’ segment is for grabs — that is, from E000 to EFFF — which would add another 64Kb to your Upper memory.
You can use the DESQview utility, Manifest, to examine this area to see if it's usable.
MSD, the Microsoft Diagnostics program that comes with Windows 3.1, also does a good job.
Assuming QRAM is like QEMM386, you can most likely add an Include statement to your QRAM line in CONFIG.SYS , which forces it to use this area of RAM.
It would look like this:I=E000-EFFF 
You'll then be able to load Stacker high, plus things like Keyb.
At best I estimate that you'll be able to reduce the hit on conventional RAM to around 33Kb, leaving you with over 600Kb to play with.
MSD, the diagnostics program that comes with Windows 3.1, will scrutinize your machine and tell you which areas of memory are usable
THE LAST SYMPHONY
Q: I have a copy of Lotus Symphony, supplied by a rival mag.
Generally it works OK, apart from two problems.
First, I can't get the word processor, or anything else, to print correctly.
The printer (Panasonic KX-P2123) simply continues overprinting on the same line without any attempt to line feed.
Other programs which I run, like WordStar, work K. My printer is defined as an Epson LQ.
Secondly, whenever I go into the window mode, the system freezes and even Ctrl=Break won't work, although I have did set BREAK=ON before running the software.
Then I have to reboot the PC.
Bearing in mind that I'm still finding my way around Symphony, I fear that every next step might lock the processor.
Can you offer any suggestions?
I'd even scrap Symphony and buy MS Works if it's more reliable.
The processor I use is an unbadged 386SX IBM clone with a SuperVGA display.
A: I congratulate you on your choice of problem page.
As you so rightly say, the printer isn't issuing a line feed at the end of each line, causing the paper to stay still.
There are two ways to crack this nut.
The first involves altering the printer configuration.
Dot matrix printers usually give you a choice between CR+LF (Carriage Return and Line Feed), just CR which moves the print head from right to left, or just LF which rolls the paper up one line.
Some application software only issues a CR at the end of the line, expecting the printer to perform the LF without being told; that is, it's set to CR+LF.
In this case the printer issues a Line Feed every time it receives a Carriage Return.
And some applications prefer to control the printer explicitly, by issuing separate CR and LF commands.
So, you should be able to fix this problem at either end — either adjust the software or the printer.
If both printer and application are set to CR only, this would cause your problem.
The screen hanging is a curious problem.
Symphony is such an old program that I'd be surprised if it has any bugs in it.
This is a tricky one to diagnose at a distance but I'd put money on some kind of video configuration problem within Symphony.
Go back and check that the screen type is correctly specified — use the VGA or EGA options.
BUTTERFINGERS
Q: While saving a report to drive A using DataEase, I missed out the colon after the ‘A’.
The report started with the letter R — the rest I can't remember.
This has produced a file called ‘A’ which is marked as ‘hidden’.
It still appears in the directory as Read Only but I can't read it, copy or delete it.
How can I find the password and delete this file?
There seems to be something amiss with DR DOS 6 if it allows you to produce protected files in this way.
A: There are a number of contradictions in your letter which are confusing.
If a file has the ‘hidden’ attribute, a Dir won't reveal it.
Secondly, Read Only files are readable but that's all; you can't change or delete them, but you can copy them.
To get rid of the file from DOS, use the Attrib command to reset the file attributes, remove the R attribute and then delete it.
If you want to get shot of it through DataEase, it depends on what version you're using.
The latest version uses an encrypted password and isn't easily breakable.
Earlier versions did let you substitute the file containing the unknown password with another containing a known one.
WHERE DID ALL THE MEMORY COME FROM?
Q: I went to a computer auction and on impulse bought a boxed portable XT.
It's a Sotec PHC-16 with remote control keyboard.
The only other thing in the box is a DOS 2.11 startup disk.
I'd love to know where I could get a manual.
I ran InfoPlus to check it out.
It reported that I had an 80C88 CPU, CGA screen and 512Kb of RAM, but then another figure which seemed impossible showed up.
I rebooted using DOS 5, ran the Mem command and there it was again — 34Mb of Extended memory!
Any explanations?
A: The boffins at F1 have never heard of this model, so I think your chances of finding a manual are pretty slim.
Still, miracles do happen, so perhaps one of our readers can help?
An XT-class machine has an 8088 processor which can only address one megabyte of RAM at most.
It may be able to access Expanded RAM, given the right hardware, but it certainly can't access Extended memory.
The figure generated by your InfoPlus and by Mem software is definitely spurious.
OUT OF STEP
Q: In your October edition, David Hernon wrote regarding problems accessing his hard disk.
I feel your response —‘Bad news Dave, you've got a dicky hard disk’— was alarmist, to say the least.
I have had similar problems with my Amstrad 286–40 at home, and Opus 286–40 at work.
The problem with the Opus occurred when the machine was warm not cold, but these problems were easily solved
I would draw your attention to an item that appeared in another magazine; a response to a reader with a similar problem.
It said ‘Many of the smaller hard drives available, especially old ones, use Stepper Motor actuators and it is these that really require that a low level format be carried out on them at least once a year, as after a long period of heating and cooling it is more than possible that the heads are out of alignment with the tracks.
This is quite often the cause of the ‘1701 — hard disk error’ reported during Power On Self Test when the drive is cold which miraculously seems to cure itself when the system has been on for a while and the drive has warmed up’.
This seemed to relate closely to my problems, but I have to admit it took me a while to pluck up the courage to do that deadly and dangerous deed (that everyone tells you never to do) to my machine!
Knowing the speed that floppy disks take to format, I allowed half a day for the job, but it was done in a couple of minutes — it's the absolutely essential task of backing up files that takes the time.
The process does not require you to use Debug, as you suggest, and disk canning programs are unlikely to identify these problems if they only manifest themselves when the machine is cold.
Suffice it to say that I haven't had a single problem since on either machine, and wouldn't be surprised if David Heron's problems can be solved by the same process.
It is surely a matter for concern, however, that manufacturers fail to make any mention of this problem in their manuals.
A contract engineer called to my machine at work said that I should have a least eight inches of space all around it to prevent it from overheating or, if that did not solve the problem, it would need a new hard disk.
So perhaps your response should have started ‘Good news, Dave, your problem's easily solved’!
A: The problem with Stepper Motor hard disks is well known and the program I recommended, SpinRite, was developed specifically to deal with it.
The trouble is caused by thermal expansion and contraction, which causes the read/write head to write in slightly different positions depending on the temperature, and therefore diameter, of the disk itself.
A simple solution, not without merit, is to leave the PC on all the time, which ensures a near constant operating temperature.
The vast majority of modern — that is, IDE — drives use voice-coil driven heads.
These are immune to this thermal interference as they use servo or ‘guide’ tracks, written on an unused platter, to position the heads.
If the platters get hot, the servo tracks expand/contract as well.
As for being ‘alarmist’, it's right to be ultra cautious (even to the extent of junking an untrustworthy drive) when you're using a hard disk to store valuable data.
What's the point of using a drive you can't depend on?
It would be highly undesirable to be confident about a hard disk that has a question mark hanging over it.
Scanning programs, such as Norton Disk Doctor, are incapable of diagnosing this precise disk fault, and can only describe a general fault.
To diagnose it properly you'd have to use something like Norton Calibrate, a close clone of SpinRite.
You can use SpinRite to deal with problems caused by Stepper Motor hard disks
FREEING MORE MEMORY
Q: I'm having problems installing Quarterdeck's QRAM on my PC and would be grateful for your advice.
I'm not really computer literate, I've probably made a botch of things, and will most certainly use incorrect terminology; please forgive!
The reason for installing QRAM is that I've been repeatedly informed that one should always free up as much Conventional memory as possible.
My system is an Elonex 286–120 with a 40Mb hard disk and a 4Mb of RAM; installed are Stacker, DOS 5, Windows 3, Norton Utilities and Norton Commander.
As DOS 5 has no EMS driver suitable for 286s, I copied G2MMC.SYS from DOS 4.1 and the installation of QRAM and optimization was then straightforward.
However, all the system manages to do is create 32Kb of High RAM (D800-DFFF), load a few bits and pieces up there and leave me with 550Kb available in Conventional memory.
It was my understanding that I could expect to free up some 610–615Kb of Conventional memory and also have lots of High RAM available.
I've fiddled around with CONFIG.SYS, but the copy attached (the QRAM modified version) is the best I've found.
Starting Block
KNOW your files
OUR MONTHLY BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO COMPUTING TAKES A LOOK AT THE TWO BASIC FILE TYPES — DATA FILES AND PROGRAM FILES.
MARK WHITEHORN EXPLAINS HOW EACH ONE AFFECTS YOUR COMPUTER'S BEHAVIOUR AND HOW TO TELL THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM.
A knowledge of the different types of files found on floppy and hard disks will make it much easier to understand what your computer is up to, and what it's capable of doing.
Recently, a friend of mine who's a teacher was looking through files of exam questions stored on a floppy disk.
She wanted to get at the data, but didn't know how to go about it.
The files on the floppy were data files which cannot reveal their contents without the assistance of program files.
In this case, the exam questions (the data files) had been produced with an integrated package called Ability Plus (the program), so you need that piece of software to read them.
Data files and program files are the two basic file types, although there are also two broad subdivisions of data files.
PROGRAM FILES
Program files are computer programs which allow your machine to behave like a word processor or a spreadsheet, for example.
The program file contains a series of instructions which it sends to the Central Processor Unit (CPU) when the program is run.
To issue the instruction which starts the program running, you either type the command given in the software manual, or run a batch file (as described last month) containing this command.
The letters are usually an abbreviation of the program's name, for example, WP for WordPerfect.
You can tell when the instructions to the CPU are being carried out because your screen will clear and you'll be presented with an opening view of the package.
In the case of a word processor, there's usually a border around the working area and a menu either along the top or the bottom of the screen.
The computer can then interpret your keystrokes either as characters you want to appear on-screen, or as menu selections to allow formatting commands to be carried out.
Program files like this bear either the extension COM or EXE, standing for COMpiled and EXEcutable, respectively.
Early computer programs were that simple; the whole of the program was contained in one file.
You just ran that file which provided all the functions for that piece of software.
Software has grown a great deal, both in size and complexity.
and today it's rare to find a program existing as a single COM or EXE file.
You may have noticed when copying an application from a floppy to your hard disk that lots of files are transferred, with all manner of extensions (see Screen 1).
Some of these files contain sections of program instructions (for example, LIB) which have been split off for convenience.
When the main (COM or EXE) file reaches a stage where it needs additional instructions from a subsidiary file, it calls up that file and runs through those instructions to complete the task.
Most of these files hold data for use by the program.
and file extensions often give a clue as to the contents.
HLP files, for example, contain information used to provide the user with a  built-in help system, and CHR files contain descriptions of fonts which will appear on your screen.
Things get confusing, though, because different companies use different extensions for the same file type.
Borland uses CHR for font descriptions, while others use FON or FNT.
Clip-Art is a good example of a data file; CLP files contain data which describes a picture.
Viewed in isolation, this data appears meaningless (see Screen 2); but when viewed from an application designed to use it, all becomes clear (see Screen 3).
There are good reasons for separating clunks like font descriptions.
A company can build one character set and include it with all its software.
This process is called modularization; data is written once and used many times in different applications.
The benefits are cost effectiveness and continuity.
TWO TYPES OF DATA FILES
The one fundamental difference between program files and data files is that data files never contain instructions for the CPU.
Data files for use by computers might contain data about fonts and help systems, but nothing can be done with that information without the assistance of a program file containing the relevant instructions.
In practice this means that we don't need to concern ourselves with the contents of such data files; they're not for human consumption without previous digestion by a computer.
So, data files can contain data which is essentially used by the program.
Earlier I said there were two types of data files; the other is the type which you create using a computer program.
These can be document files containing letters produced with a word processor, database files containing addresses produced with a database, or picture files of artwork for a magazine produced with your favourite drawing package.
Again, file extensions are useful for identifying the package used: DOC files are from word processors, DBF, DB and the like are from database management systems, and the WKS, WK1, WKT family denote worksheets produced with a spreadsheet.
Through the medium of the program you can edit, add, erase and otherwise change the data to be stored in your data files.
To see the data as the author intended, you need to be running the package in which the file was originally produced.
If you view any of these files without the parent application running, the contents may not be legible.
A WP document may be readable, but a drawing file will be a long, impenetrable series of letters and numbers, like the clip-art described earlier.
READING A FILE FROM A FLOPPY
To return to the original problem, if you have an exam paper written with Ability Plus on a floppy disk, and a copy of Ability Plus itself on your hard disk, here's what you need to do to get the best from the file on the floppy.
Firstly — presuming you have a batch file to run Ability Plus — type in the batch filename.
This runs the batch file which will put you in the correct subdirectory and run the program.
The process of running a program means that it carries out the CPU instructions in the program file, some of which will involve telling the PC to look for certain data files on disk which it will use for its own ends.
Once loaded, you can give the program explicit instructions to look at drive B then you can load up the exam paper stored on the floppy as a data file.
Before next month's Starting Block, try roaming around your hard disk, looking at the different files it contains.
Screen 1 Here's a directory listing showing a typical selection of the files that make up an application
Screen 2 Yuck!
This is what is actually inside a piece of clip-art (FRANCE.CLP) if we examine the raw data.
As you can see, it's completely unreadable…
Screen 3 …but when the same piece of clip-art is used from within Quattro Pro, a map of France appears, which can be moved and resized to suit your purpose
A QUESTION OF DEFINITION
Pieces of software which run on PCs are often referred to by three different names, and the same three names are used even if the software runs under Windows.
Essentially, these three names mean the same thing —‘a piece of software’— and only differ in terms of size and complexity.
APPLICATION —A big piece of software, like a word processor or spreadsheet.
It arrives on several disks, in a box covered with glossy pictures and explanations (sometimes exaggerations) about its capabilities.
It comes with its own installation program and, once that's been run, you'll find that the application occupies its own subdirectory on the hard disk and is not just one file, but hundreds.
These will have extensions like EXE, COM, FON, CHR and so on.
Applications are usually expensive, often costing several hundred pounds; after all, someone has to pay for the advertising and the glossy box.
PROGRAM —A smaller piece of software, like a game, often written by a single person.
It will arrive on a single floppy, without an installation program — you'll have to install it manually (creating a group and maybe assigning it an icon).
It may consist of a single file although, particularly under Windows, this is becoming less common.
UTILITY —A small program which will do a single, simple job; often performing a function that Windows ought to have done in the first place.
Most utilities are written by a single person, arrive on one floppy are often found on the disks that adorn the front of computer magazines (such as our very own Mega Disk).
These definitions are fairly flexible, particularly ‘program’, which tends to be used for all three.
However, they are useful because software covers the spectrum in terms of size, and each definition gives a feel for the size and complexity of a piece of software in a single word.
Cracking Windows
WINDOWS Wizardry
OUR WINDOWS EXPERT, ROGER GANN, TACKLES YOUR GUI PROBLEMS AND OFFERS LOADS OF USEFUL TIPS AND HINTS.
IF YOU'VE GOT ANY PROBLEMS WITH WINDOWS OR WITH ANY MAJOR WINDOWS APPLICATION, WRITE TO HIM AT THE USUAL ADDRESS.
Q
I run various Windows applications on an Apricot Qi660ti (386/25 with 8Mb of RAM).
My printer is an HP LaserJet III fitted with a PostScript cartridge and 5Mb of RAM.
While printing out documents, spreadsheets and so on, I'm constantly plagued with the following error message:
The Print Manager cannot write to LPT1.
There may be a printer problem.
Resume the queue when the problem is corrected or cancel the document.
Except on the odd occasion when the paper tray is empty, the problem only seems to be the inability of the printer to handle data as quickly as the PC can send it.
Is there any way to increase the buffer used by Print Manager or any other way to stop this annoying problem?
Would changing the printer over to the serial port help?
I thought Windows would allow printing to be carried out as a full background job, but I experience quite long delays while Word and Excel send their output to the Print Manager.
Given the resources of both my PC and printer, I'm surprised at these delays.
I also have an envelope tray for my LaserJet but cannot find out how to get Word for Windows to send the right control code to the LaserJet III to set the envelope size.
Any suggestions?
A
Under no circumstances use the serial port!
Even at its fastest speed, the serial port is no match for a parallel port, especially if you selected the ‘Fast printing to printer port’ option in Control Panel Printers.
Your basic problem concerns the speed at which your LaserJet can turn the data it receives into dots on paper.
Naturally, a computer can send its data faster than a printer can handle it, and this situation is made worse by using PostScript.
The error message merely means the printer has received too much data and doesn't want the computer to send any more across.
PostScript printers are typically slow anyway and normally have beefed-up processors to make them faster.
So putting a PostScript cartridge into a LaserJet — which doesn't have a particularly quick processor — adds to the speed problems.
You might consider ditching the PostScript cartridge and buying TrueType equivalents for your Type 1 fonts.
Unless you have to use PostScript for typographic reasons, you'll find that TrueType fonts are every bit as good as PostScript ones and print much faster than PostScript, especially to a LaserJet.
Even so, given all the memory you have lying around in your PC and your printer, it does seem unfair that it isn't being used to its fullest extent.
The first thing that you should examine is the time out value set up in your PostScript printer driver.
As PostScript files can take an eternity to process — especially when PostScript resides in a cartridge — I'd increase it from 45 seconds to maybe 450 or more.
This ought to stop it ‘timing out’.
You can't do much at the Print Manager end to speed things up, aside from giving it more priority.
However, if you do this, it will have the effect of slowing everything else down.
A good idea is to get hold of the latest Windows PostScript driver.
The current version of the generic PostScript driver (PSCRIPT.DRV) is version 3.5.3 which lets you specify the amount of memory the printer has installed (that is, 5Mb): fine-tuning this value will improve printer throughput.
This driver has a host of other very useful features, including things like resolution control and halftone angles.
It also has excellent help, so it's well worth getting hold of.
An updated Windows drivers disk is available from the Microsoft Upgrade Centre on .
Micrografx also produces a customized PostScript printer driver, which also offers features over and above the Windows generic version, but it ain't cheap — it will set you back £100.
It comes as standard with Micrografx packages, such as Draw or Picture Publisher.
Turning to your last point, you'll be pleased to hear that Word for Windows 2 features specific support for envelope addressing.
All you do is highlight the address, click on the Envelope button on the toolbar, and follow the instructions.
It works really well, so I would urge you to upgrade to Word 2 at your earliest opportunity — it's well worth the £75 upgrade charge.
Word for Windows 2 takes the hassle out of printing envelopes
Q
On my computer at home I run most of my programs under Windows 3.
Flight Simulator is the one exception, as it animation is too jerky under Windows.
Windows comes with a basic painting application and I also have access to Freelance.
Can I use either of them to design icons and/or wallpaper for Windows?
If not, what graphics format are the icons stored in?
Is there a commercially available package that produces the required format?
Creating icons like this with Icon Make-It is a bit like painting by numbers — you just fill in the squares
A
There are a number of solutions to your problem, but they don't involve Paintbrush or Freelance.
Perhaps the best icon editor around is Icon Make-It, which is available for £59.95 from Guildsoft on .
There are also numerous public domain/shareware icon generators, of which Icon Tamer is probably the best.
Contact Omicron Systems on  for details.
Q
Q Having read rave reviews of the Canon BJ-10E bubblejet printer, I was very disappointed, once I'd bought one, to find that, when driven by the IBM ProPrinter X24/E driver (as recommended in the Canon manual), the resulting print quality was little better than my old Epson 9-pin dot matrix printer.
I know that Canon's native print quality is excellent, as demonstrated by the self-test page, so how can I exploit this machine to its full potential using Windows 3.1-based word processing and presentation graphics?
Do you know if a dedicated driver is available?
A
You must have been sold old stock, Robert — a driver for the BJ-10E has been available for at least eight months.
You have two ways of getting hold of this driver.
If you have a modem you can log on to a bulletin board and download it.
If you look in the Windows/Drivers area on CIX you'll stumble across a file called CANBJWIN.ZIP.
Download it, use PKUNZIP to unpack the compressed set of files and then load the Control Panel and select Printers to install it.
Alternatively you can get the driver disk from Canon UK direct.
Send a formatted blank disk to: Driver Request, Canon (UK) Ltd,.
Not possessing a BJ-10E, I can't comment on the kind of print quality it can church out using that driver, but TrueType, Windows ‘built-in scalable font feature, shouldn't disappoint you.
An external utility that does a similar job to TrueType is, of course, Adobe Type Manager.
For less than £80 it will give you PostScript quality output up to 127 points in size and you can buy outline PostScript fonts to supplement the Times and Helvetica it comes with.
Q
I run Windows 3 on an Opus 286 PC IV with 1Mb of memory.
I have a number of scanned photographs in PCX format which I'd like to edit.
The old version of Paintbrush returned an ‘Insufficient memory’ error message, but the new version displays totally black pictures.
Is there anything I can do to solve this problem?
A
What you complain of is a graphic example of insufficient memory in your PC.
If you overload your Windows system then Windows still tries to keep going.
Colour images require more memory than monochrome ones and Paintbrush will drop into mono if Windows is running low on memory.
One megabyte is totally inadequate for running Windows (version 3.1 requires a minimum of 2Mb) and you really ought to be thinking about slamming in the RAM.
I would strongly recommend that you buy 4Mb of RAM.
This sounds like a lot, but you'll be impressed with the speed improvements this extra silicon makes to Windows.
And it isn't too expensive — it shouldn't cost you more than £120.
READERS HOT TIP
THIS MONTH'S HOT TIP COMES FROM TOM HUNTER WHO HAS WORKED OUT A REMEDY FOR RELIEVING THE FRUSTRATIONS OF PRINTING FROM WINDOWS.
In the August issue you published a letter from Jonathan Taylor who had a problem using his Seikosha printer with Windows 3.
As I recall, he couldn't print out documents of more than one page in length; he had to send each page to the printer separately.
I had exactly the same problem when using Windows 3.1 with an Epson LQ400 printer.
I solved this problem by connecting the printer to LPT1.DOS instead of LPT1.
The result?
No more problems with multi-page documents.
In Windows 3.1 this is done by opening the Main group, selecting Printers, then Connect.
This is an old cure which is used mainly to force DOS applications to print correctly when running under Windows.
The changes made are quite subtle — instead of using the Windows internal print routines to access and control the printer ports directly, Windows hands control of the ports back to good old steam-powered DOS, which takes care of it.
Curiously, if you use Netware Lite and Windows, you have no choice in the matter — you can't use LPT1 to print out, you have to use LPT1.DOS.
When you print LPT1.DOS, you are in fact printing using the BIOS.
This tip can also be useful for utilities such as third party print spoolers and other programs that need to ‘see’ what you are sending to a port.
Step By Step
WINDOWS BASICS
IN THIS MONTH'S STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO RUNNING WINDOWS, MARK WHITEHORN TAKES A LOOK AT HOW TO INSTALL, RUN AND REMOVE APPLICATIONS FROM WINDOWS.
We've covered most of Windows ‘basic functions over the past 10 issues.
If you've had the courage and tenacity to run through them all, you'll have a good grasp of how to set up Windows and its groups and icons, how to manipulate windows (resizing, closing and so on), how to use the File Manager, and much more.
So the next logical step is to take a look at how to install, run and remove applications from Windows.
After all, while Windows is fun to play with, it isn't really a means unto itself; it's more a way of running applications like word processors, spreadsheets and so on.
It's tempting to think that Windows is so carefully organized that you don't have to understand much about these processes at all.
For example, if you get a new Windows application (such as Quattro Pro for Windows) all you need to do is run its Install or Setup program and it'll do everything for you.
But what happens if you come across a Windows program or application which you desperately need and it doesn't have an Install program?
Even worse, what happens when you want to remove an application from Windows?
Have you ever seen an application with a cheerful little ‘remove-me’ icon?
No — the manufacturers never believe in their wildest dreams that you'd ever want to remove their product; it's far too wonderful.
But you might; even in this day and age some programs turn out to be complete dogs.
Or suppose you have a program which is wonderful.
When the next version arrives, you might want to install it in a separate subdirectory (in case it has a hidden bug) and keep the old version for a few months.
Once assured that all is well, you need to know how to get rid of the old one.
Of course, you can just leave unwanted software on your hard disk, but with the average application taking up something between 10 and 20Mb, it doesn't take long to fill your hard disk with junk.
Removing a Windows application involves more than just deleting the icon from the Program Manager.
The process isn't difficult, but you'll need to know a little more about how Windows works in order to be able to do the job efficiently.
The good news is that the whole removal process can be done from within Windows itself, using the tools (like the File Manager and Sysedit) we've covered in previous Steps.
So over the next few months we'll be looking at the underlying organization of Windows from a practical point of view; showing you exactly how to install, run and remove applications (and other things, like printer drivers) from Windows.
The Windows Steps cover the installation of a program and illustrate the three basic stages involved:
1
Transferring the files from floppy disks to the hard disk (which may also involve unpacking them).
2
Linking the program file (EXE or COM) to an icon in Windows.
3
Making changes to the INI files.
Mainstream applications will make all these changes for you, often without you having to be aware of what's going on.
If you're installing a small program or utility, you may be left to carry out stage 2 manually, and this is illustrated in the Steps.
But what is stage 3?
And what are the INI files?
Windows has a number of files where it stores information about how it has been configured.
During installation, Windows will ask you a series of questions about the hardware you have and how you want Windows itself to run.
Once it's installed, you can use the Control Panel to customize Windows to your own taste.
Everyone's copy of Windows is likely to be slightly different; we set the cursor blink speed to different rates, use different wallpaper, printers and so on.
When we exit from Windows, we expect it to remember our own particular setting, and it obligingly does so by saving this configuration information in a set of files which have the extension INI.
Windows itself uses two of these files — WIN.INI and SYSTEM.INI — but there are more!
Not only is Windows itself configurable, but most of the applications that we use under Windows can also be tailored to your own tastes.
Each application can save its configuration information in WIN.INI; but they can also create their own INI files and store information there too.
It would be possible for Windows and its applications to store this information in a form that only they could read.
So you might be surprised to discover that most INI files contain text which can be read by humans.
Not only can we read it, we can edit it as well, which means that an understanding of the INI files allows you to take a firmer control of Windows.
Most installation programs will do all the work for you.
Here Lotus Improve has scanned all the available disk drives and is giving advice on how well Improve will fit into the available space
INSTALLING WINDOWS SOFTWARE
In the first steps we're going to look at how to install Windows software.
As an example I've chosen Quote for the Day, one of the utilities on our January Mega Disk.
The disk has ‘To start, type Install and press Enter’ written on it.
When you do that, a couple of menus appear which lets you choose the utilities you want to install and the hard drive on which to place them.
Like many installation programs, it moves the files from the floppy to the hard disk and also decompresses them.
Programs often contain repetitive information.
When they're placed on floppies we can use a program (called a ‘packer’ or ‘zipper’) to encode this information so it takes up less space.
When the programs are transferred onto a new PC, an unpacker or unzipper puts all this information back into the program file so that it can be used by the PC.
The net result of all this is that a 740Kb disk could supply you with perhaps 3Mb of programs.
Once Quote for the Day has been unpacked, it's on the hard disk, but I haven't got an icon with which to run it.
I could use File Run from the Program Manager menu, but I'd need to use that every time I wanted to run the program.
It's better to assign an icon to the program, so it can be run with a double click.
OK, here we go.
We start after the files have been unpacked by the installation program on the Mega Disk…
Step 1
During the installation.
I used the programs supplied with the Mega Disk to place the files on drive D. The Install program tells you where it's putting them, but what if you didn't notice?
Open the File Manager, select the root directory of drive D, and select Search from the File menu.
One of the files probably starts with Q, sos type in, make sure ‘Search All Subdirectories’ is selected and hit OK.
Step 2
The File Manager obligingly scans the entire disk and lists all the files beginning with Q. I can see that the ones I want have been installed under D: \WINDOWS\QUOTE, and I can use the File Manager to look at them.
Here I've arranged the Search window and the File Manager side by side (and enlarged the font), so you can see both.
Quote For The Day is actually composed of five files.
Step 3
Now that you know where the files are, you can use the Program Manager (not the File Manager) to install the program for Windows.
Pop down the File menu, select New, Program Item and click on OK.
Type in a description of the program (these words will appear under the icon) but you can leave the other three options blank.
Then click on the Browse button.
Step 4
This opens up a directory browser so that you can navigate across the disks and down through the directory structure to find the program you want (in this case QFTD.EXE).
Use the Drives list box to select drive D and the directory browser to get to D: \WINDOWS\QUOTE.
There you can double click on QFTD.EXE to select that program file…
Step 5
…this closes the directory browser and fills in the Command Line section on the Program Item Properties box.
Clicking the Change Icon button will let you choose an icon.
There's only one choice in this case, but other programs offer a bigger selection.
Once you're happy with all of the options, click on the OK button which closes the dialogue box and…
Step 6
…installs the icon into whichever Group was highlighted when you started this process.
In my case it was Main.
With this icon highlighted, you can pop down the File menu and select Properties.
You can see that some more lines have been filled in automatically for you.
In fact, the description and icon would have acquired default values if you hadn't filled them in as well.
Step 7
Close the dialogue box and click on the icon to produce a quote.
I happen to be a fan if Mr Vonnegut, so here's one of his little gems.
This utility serves no useful purpose at all, but it's great fun.
If you put it into the startup group, it will greet you with a new quote which you can in turn use to amaze your workmates during coffee breaks.
Step 8
There is another way of doing this.
Double click on the Windows Setup icon, pop down Options and select Setup Applications.
Then select ‘Ask you to specify an application’ which lets you browse for applications.
Here I'm setting up Dr Watson, which comes with Windows and records details of any system crashes.
Step 9
The only big difference in doing it this way is that you don't get to specify a name or icon for the item.
But whichever way you install these programs into Windows, you can adjust the name or icon using File Properties.
Here, the icon that you specify for a program can come from a different program if you wish.
Step 10
Here I'm using File Options to tie the icon supplied with Quote For the Day to Dr Watson.
I'm also changing the Description to read ‘NATO — The great Hack’— I show you this trick only to emphasize the control you have over Windows; not so you can sneak onto a friend's PC and swap all their icons around!
Step 11
Finally, setting up applications for Windows in this way can have other effects.
Here I'm using SysEdit to examine the WIN.INI file.
This entry, entitled Gravesend Quotes, has appeared since I installed Quote For The Day, so it's a safe bet that it's storing information for that program.
More about the INI files next month.
DESIGNING A PAGE
Style is important, but in a long document it can be very time consuming to check that the headings, subheadings and body text all conform to the same pattern.
Word for Windows lets you make the appearance of your work consistent, both within and between documents.
You can define formatted styles for different types of heading and blocks of text; once the style is defined, you simply apply it to chosen blocks of text and it will conform to your master plan.
A list of words predefined style lives in the Style box on the left side of the Ribbon.
Clicking on the down arrow to the right of the drop-down box which displays the current style opens up a list of the available styles.
Word supplies four styles of heading, but you're not restricted to these.
Part of the fun of Word's style functions is designing the look of a page for yourself.
The style you define will appear in the Style menu for that document, along with the predefined ones, but when you start a fresh letter, Word will default to its own style (called Normal).
Your work isn't lost; you just have to merge your styles in from the document in which you created them.
This is done using the Style option which you'll find under Format.
So with some basic text on your screen, let's step out in style…
Step 1
First of all, turn on the paragraph markers by clicking on the button on the far right of the Ribbon.
Styles can only be applied to whole paragraphs, and the formatting details are stored in the markers which occur at the end of each paragraph.
It helps if these are on show, and makes it easier to select text accurately without disturbing the formatting of paragraphs which need no further editing.
Step 2
Next, click on the down arrow to the right of the list box displaying the current style.
The list shows four predefined styles, but none of them looks enticing, so we'll define one of our own for a heading.
Turn your attention to the text, and highlight the first heading.
Make the text bold and centre it, using the buttons on the Ribbon.
With the heading still highlighted, go to the list box…
Step 3
…and type in a name for your new style.
Call it something short and descriptive, like Bold Centre — you can use up to 24 characters in upper or lower case, including spaces and numbers.
Press Enter, and your definition will be added to the list.
Move the highlight from the heading to see the effect, and have a quick look in the Style box to see your new style in the list.
Step 4
Now highlight the second heading, pop down the list of styles and select Bold Centre.
You'll see that these formatting commands have also been applied to this heading.
Repeat with the third heading.
Now we can choose a style for the text under each heading.
Highlight the first block, and make it italic, fully justified and indented half an inch from the left.
Return to the style list box…
Step 5
…type in a new name (Indent Justify) and press Enter.
A second style is now added to the list.
Highlight the two other blocks of text beneath the headings and apply your new style.
As styles can only be applied to whole paragraphs, you don't have to be too careful about selecting text; just pop the cursor anywhere in the block and the formatting will be applied to the whole paragraph.
Step 6
If you decide that putting the text under the headings into italics was a mistake, you can redefine that style to remove the italics.
Highlight the first block of text and get rid of the italics.
Open the Style menu — the Indent Justify style will already be highlighted — and press Enter.
A dialogue box will appear asking if you wish to redefine Indent Justify; answer yes if you're happy to do so.
Step 7
If you've defined several different types of heading and paragraphs styles for use in a complex report, those styles can be used again when you next have to work on a document in a similar format.
With the new document active on your screen, select Style from the Format menu.
Click on Define, which opens up a fuller version of the Style box, and then click on Merge.
Step 8
Select the file containing the original document and click on OK.
Reply Yes to the message which asks if you want current styles updated with the new styles of the same name.
Click on Close to complete the operation.
The list of styles now available contains all those defined for the first document, ready for use in the current document.
Step 9
If you define a style which is of use all the time, like a heading style for memos, you can attach it to Word's global template.
This template, called NORMAL.DOT,is a series of menu definitions, dialogue box settings and styles to which each Word document defaults in the absence of a customised template.
Open the Format menu…
Step 10
…select Style’ and highlight the style to be added to the global template.
Press Define, and in the bottom left corner of the box you'll see an option labelled Add To Template.
If you click on the square alongside, a cross will appear in it and the selected style will be added to the template.
Click on Change, and then on Close.
Step 11
The style is now available whenever you start a new document with the normal template.
To assign a hotkey to the style, click on Format and Style, and highlight the style name.
Choose a hotkey combination (Control+Shift+Q say) and then click on OK.
The hotkey combo will now apply the style to selected text.
Fine Tuning
TIPS & TWEAKS
WE SHOW YOU HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS.
THIS MONTH MARK WHITEHORN EXPLAINS TWO WAYS OF SAVING YOUR GRAPHS IN LOTUS 1-2-3, AND HOW TO FIND YOUR WAY AROUND A HARD DISK BURSTING WITH SUBDIRECTORIES.
Q
I've been using Lotus 1-2-3 to draw various graphs from the data I collect each week.
This is going very well, but I can't work out why there are two ways of saving graphs.
Which one should I use, or doesn't it matter?
The method of saving depends on the nature of your graphs, and using the most appropriate way will reduce the amount of repetitive work.
The first method saves the graph as a ‘picture’ of how it looks on the screen.
You can't edit this representation by calling it into Lotus and changing the parameters, but you can print out the graph.
The keystrokes necessary for this type of save are — starting with the worksheet on your screen — /(to take you to the main menu), G (for graph) and S (for save).
Then type in a name for your graph — using eight characters or less — and it will be saved when you press Enter.
The second method saves all the graph settings you define, but without making an image on disk.
This method gives you something like a template for a graph, which you can use time and time again.
If you produce a pie chart of each week's figures for Ms X and a histogram of the figures for Mr Y, then using a template is much more efficient.
The required key-strokes, again starting from your worksheet, are /GNC (for Graph, Name, Create).
Type in a filename and the graph template will be saved in memory and will only be stored to disk when you save it again.
The description is saved as part of the worksheet, not as a separate file, so the filename you choose can contain more than the regulation eight letters.
Q
I've taken note of the hints given in Starting Block and I've organized my hard disk into 19 subdirectories and up to 6 levels of sub-subdirectories.
Now I'm finding it difficult to find my way to the correct place.
Can you suggest anything that might help?
A
Six levels of subdirectories is more than I'd normally recommend, but however many you have, there are several tools which can help.
A very useful utility called NCD (Norton Change Directory — part of Norton Utilities — helps you to navigate your way around.
First, typing: will give you a text-based (though it looks graphical) map of all the subdirectories on the current drive (see the screenshot).
A complex directory structure will fit more than one screen, but NCD lets you flip around the whole map using the cursor keys.
If you want to see the directory structure of a different drive, simply type:
Secondly, if you want to move to a certain subdirectory.
type: which will place you in the subdirectory called Letters, regardless of where it is in your structure.
If it can't find an exact match it will go the closest; Litter or Lettuce, for example.
If you can't afford a copy of Norton Utilities, try using the similar (though less sophisticated) utility called Tree which comes with all versions of DOS.
It will provide a map of your directory structure but won't transport you to a chosen sub-directory.
To see the structure, just type:
Or type: to see the structure of a different drive.
If your map covers more than one screen, the first bit will scroll off the top.
To solve this you can save the diagram to a file using: and then view it using an editor.
Or you can print it by typing:
NB: Whenever you see this symbol press Enter.
NCD gives you a map of all the subdirectories on the current drive
fatal dos error
It's amazing how the propeller-heads infiltrate every aspect of computing.
Even PC games aren't safe from the influence of the anoraked hordes.
The sad fact is, there aren't that many fast shoot-'em up or platform games — like Super Mario — available for the PC.
Instead, games fanatics are confined to a diet of stodgy adventure packages and simulation of anything from building and ant hill in the back garden to creating life forms.
Conceptually brilliant they may be, but they take too long to get the hang of.
Part of the problem lies with po-faced attitudes to the PC as a serious business tool.
After a hard days slog in the office making real-life management decisions, there is nothing your average manager likes doing more than sitting down at home making pretend management decisions governing the career development of an amoeba.
Psychologists will say this is because these people lack real power at work, like the chance to drive the company into bankruptcy.
The real classics, of course, our flight simulators.
These are stuffed full of technical slang about the plane your flying and the sort of weapons it uses.
In F15 Strike Eagle from Microprose, for example, you even have to acquaint yourself with the top-gun slang used by the US air force.
It's all so complicated.
Still, it staves of the risk of an epileptic fit.
Death by boredom is far more likely.
Of course this rant has nothing to do with the fact that the Fat DOS team recently took its first flight in a F15 and Strike Eagle.
It was an ignominious failure — the plane left the runway then crashed into a ball of flames.
Up popped a short replay of the flight, and a message saying: ‘You have been killed in close combat with the enemy.
A glorious way to end your career’.
We'll just have to organize a whip-round for a Super-Nintendo.
Last year multimedia was supposed to take the industry by storm.
But nothing really happened.
This year's fad looks set to be pen computing.
By the end of 1993, we're told, you'll be the uncoolest kid on the block if you don't have a little A5 tablet to scribble idle fancies onto.
But don't get too excited.
Handwriting recognition software is still lousy, and it seems the first pen systems will just have pre-programmed forms loaded.
People doing market research, or marking off a check list will then enter data by ticking boxes.
Smart stuff.
The computer industry also demonstrates a downright un-English enthusiasm for the common market.
Nothing, it seems, comes out of Brussels without being accompanied by hundreds of press releases from the computer industry.
The Maastricht Treaty?
No problem.
It was available on a floppy disk before any paper deigned to print it.
The latest issue to get the industry in a tizzy is VAT.
This has caused accountancy specialists to send out reams of paper telling us their software is capable of handling the new EC regulations on VAT.
These are too horrendously complicated to attempt an explanation here, but if your company trades with other EC countries, get advice from your local VAT office.
Readers with humorous computing tales or handy hints are welcome to write to Fatal Dos Error at the usual address.
We'd love to hear from you and there are some rich rewards.
WILD AND WONDERFUL COMPETITION ENTRIES
For our competition in January, we asked you to answer three easy questions and complete the tie breaker: ‘JR would love a Texas TravelMate because…’
The fabbo first prize of a Texas 486SLC TravelMate notebook goes to JR of Leeds who carefully avoids mentioning a certain devious oil magnate in her round up of JRs who might need a Texas TravelMate notebook computer…
‘Johnny Rotten wants help in overcoming his pretty vacant attitude.
Jack Ruby needs the bigger bang per buck.
John  Rockafella could use it to count his millions, and Jack Reagan would be able to spend less time on his paperwork and more time smashing villains into a pulp.
No doubt Julius Reuter would have found setting up the famous news agency far easier if he had one to bash out his stories on.’
Well done Jane Raymond!
And we'll be sending Borland's Paradox 4 database to 10 runners up including Phil Davis.
Phil sent us this delightful centrefold of star columnists Rob Beattie and Ken Kessler.
We hadn't realised they had such rippling pecs and bulging biceps!
Chippendales — beware!