

1.
The Problem of Reality
There is nothing easier to understand, it seems, than what facts are; and yet there is nothing that is more elusive.
We distinguish between fact and fiction but there is, it would seem, precious little that we can say about this distinction beyond asserting it.
Facts are simply facts, the opposite of fiction.
Everyone is confident he knows what this means.
We feel sure we understand this distinction just as we feel sure we understand the distinction between truth and falsehood, or the distinction between good and evil.
It is when we make an attempt to clarify it that the confidence begins to desert us in the face of difficulties.
For what reply could we give if asked to explain the meaning of "fact" ?
In a sense, it is not unlike being asked to define the quality red.
In either case there is, it seems, little that we could do except give examples.
Thus we might look around and point to something red and say "This is coloured red" ; and then, perhaps, in order to forestall any tendency to mistake the word for the name of a particular shade of red, gesture towards another thing of a similar but not quite the same hue, and add "And that is red too" .
Analogously one might say "that the Earth is round is a fact" , "that Ruritania does not exist is a fact" .
Facts are whatever it is that is expressed by true propositions, and "The Earth is round" and "Ruritania does not exist" both happen to be true.
But this explains nothing at all.
Examples do not define, they illustrate; and they are illustrative only to those who are capable of grasping the general concept that underlies them and represents their "species-identity" .
The concept is their governing rule, their principle of unity.
Yet what "rule" do the above examples come under?
The red thing A is colour-similar — as distinct from shape-similar or size-similar, although it can be all of these to the red thing B. But their colour cannot be defined in terms of their colour-similarity.
To say that A and B are colour-similar is not to say what colour they are.
Their colour-similarity is a necessary condition of their belonging to  the same colour species, not a definition of their colour.
So how should one define that which both "The Earth is round" and "Ruritania does not exist" have in common?
They both express facts, we have said; but this reveals little.
What is required is an explication of the principle under which they both can be classified under the same species of item.
If, being true, they both portray certain aspects of reality, just what is meant by "reality" ?
That the question is not an idle one can be seen if one looks a little more closely at the second of our two examples.
On the face of it, in asserting that Ruritania does not exist we seem to be asserting something about Ruritania.
But if the asserted proposition is about Ruritania, then surely it must be false, for in that case the subject term has a reference, i.e. there is something for the proposition to be true about If, on the other hand, the proposition is true, then by the same token it cannot be about Ruritania, for Ruritania does not exist; it is fiction.
This ancient puzzle has prompted some philosophers to draw a distinction between "being" and actual existence, and to claim that what is being talked about in such cases has being, even though it does not exist in reality.
Others have criticised such a view on the grounds that it introduces an undesirable ambiguity into the concept of existence, and have argued that propositions of this kind should not be taken at their face value but should be paraphrased in such a way as to prevent spurious names from usurping the role of subjects.
Inevitably this raises a question about the logical structure of existential propositions in general.
Such propositions act as vehicles of explicit ontological claims and are as a rule informative, synthetic propositions (some, like Kant, would argue that they are necessarily synthetic) which, if true, widen our knowledge.
Yet even on the most charitable view of facts, one can hardly treat propositions like "Ruritania does not exist" as being on the same logical footing as any other synthetic true singular propositions without throwing into confusion the whole concept of existence.
But how, then, should such propositions be interpreted?
What is their logical grammar?
What kind of facts do they express?
An answer to these questions, if a satisfactory answer is to be possible at all, cannot be given except as part of a theory of reality, and my purpose in the following pages will be to sketch out the fundamentals of just such a theory.
However, I propose to begin by first exploring what might be called the "reductivist strategy" .
As often, when one is confronted with what appears an intractable philosophical problem, there is an overwhelming temptation to try to argue it out of existence by showing that the linguistic expressions with which it is linked can be modified or paraphrased into other, less problematic, expressions without any loss of truth or philosophically relevant meaning.
Might it be possible to make such a method work in the case of existential propositions?
The predicate "exists" and the verb "to be" 
Consider, to begin with, the words "existence" and "exist(s)" .
Notoriously these words have crept into ordinary usage from medieval philosophical Latin.
The Scholastics employed them as technical terms in a deliberate effort to separate the "existential" sense of to be from its "copulative" sense, i.e. its function as an auxiliary to predication.
Yet in Greek philosophy, it appears, these two senses of to be were not always very clearly distinguished from each other, and sometimes moreover there was a strong tendency to amalgamate them in a single concept."
From a reductivist standpoint, certainly, there is no justification for keeping these two senses strictly apart.
Whether or not the Scholastics misinterpreted the Ancients on this point, their insistence on separating the "existential" from the "copulative" sense of to be, a reductivist might argue, has had large and undesirable philosophical repercussions, in particular by encouraging treatment of existence as a property of objects, or a "first-level predicate" , and by inspiring faulty metaphysical arguments for the existence of God.
But the function of  to be, surely, is not to supply logically independent existence predicates, but to help turn other words into predicates.
It is a mere auxiliary verb, a syntactical instrument enabling us to specify what philosophers sometimes used to call the "essence" or "quiddity" of a thing; the verb esse, to be, acting in such cases literally as a pointer towards essentia.
If this is true, it follows of course that the use of inflected forms of to be in predicate places (as, for example, in "I think, therefore I am" ) must be rejected as ungrammatical; and similarly for the verb exist, especially in singular propositions.
 "X exists" evidently cannot be treated on a par with "x is green" , or "is fat" , or "runs" , for all their surface similarity.
Something may be green, or fat, or it may be running, and it may have all these properties or none without ceasing to exist.
But if it does not exist, it does not exist; it does not have the property"of non-existence.
And if non-existence is not a property, neither is existence.
Expressed in another way, in attributing existence to an entity one is not saying anything about that entity that has not already been said by naming it.
The predicate "exists" in such a case plays no useful role and can be safely axed.
If "Jones" is a proper name, then "Jones exists" is tautological and "Jones" does not exist"self-defeating.
What can be asserted meaningfully and non-trivially, at best, is "Men exist" and "Dragons are fictional" .
Which only goes to show (so it is said) that existential propositions are general propositions, or else they do not qualify as genuine propositions at all.
This, incidentally, at the same time seems to dispose of the view that existential propositions might be interpreted as involving an ascription of the property of existence to certain objects of thought.
For what object of thought is one referring to when one is asserting the existence of men?
Is any specific individual intended?
Manifestly not.
One is saying something about men in the plural, but no specific group of men is intended either.
What is more, there would be no need to change the statement if it turned out that only one man existed.
But, then, what might the intended object be in such a case?
What object of thought is the "property" of existence being ascribed to; a property that — one assumes — such an object may but need not possess?
(I shall revert to the topic of objects of thought later on.)
In fact, even propositions like "Men exist" and "Dragons are fictional" , despite their obvious generality, are viewed as a rule with a considerable amount of suspicion.
Their surface syntax, it is argued, involving as it does the use of "existence predicates" , tends to obfuscate their true "logical grammar" .
For a closer analysis shows that what is really being talked about in such propositions is not men or dragons, but the concept man and the concept dragon, and what is being said is that certain things fall under the former concept, whereas the latter concept is empty.
A more accurate way of conveying the thought that men exist or that dragons are fictional would be by saying "For some (at least one) x, x is a man" and "Nothing is a dragon" ; employing expressions, that is, that correspond to what logicians call, "quantifiers" , and enable us to dispel any lingering illusion that existential propositions might have a subject/predicate structure.
None of them do.
The replacement of "existence predicates" with quantifiers along the lines indicated above represents a vital opening manoeuvre in a reductivist strategy.
The intention behind it is to help unmask the metaphysical problems surrounding the "existence predicates" as essentially sham problems.
But the manoeuvre, I shall argue, fails.
The doctrine of quantification and the reductivist strategy
The doctrine that existential assertions, in effect, reduce to certain claims about relevant concepts and the doctrine of quantification both go back to Frege.
The influence of these doctrines on modern analytical thought has been profound and lasting, and so, alas, have been the philosophical misconceptions which these doctrines tended to engender.
Some of the reasons for these misconceptions will become apparent in a moment.
First, let us take a brief look at Frege's theory of concepts.
According to Frege, concepts represent a sub-class of functions; more specifically, a concept is a function "whose value is always a truth-value" .
Frege, it should be stressed at once, interprets functions basically by analogy with machines, i.e. he sees a function as a kind of logical mechanism, such that if certain numerical constants or "arguments" are "fed" into it, it will produce certain values.
Concepts, in his view, behave in very much the same manner.
Briefly, they represent a sort of propositional machine, such that if "arguments of the appropriate type are" inserted "into them — the term" argument now to be understood in the sense of any object-naming symbol — they yield significant, true or false, propositions.
Fundamental to Frege's whole approach is the assumption that  there exists an unbridgeable logical gulf between concepts and objects.
Like functions, he claims, concepts are intrinsically incomplete or "unsaturated" .
In a sentential context, they are represented by syntactically incomplete predicative expressions.
By contrast, arguments', or object-naming expressions, are possessed of a certain inherent completeness.
Unlike predicates, they have no "gaps" as part of their logical structure and are therefore naturally fitted to play the role of subjects.
Nevertheless object-words or names, on their own, despite their intrinsic "completeness" , are strictly void of significance, and it is only in combination with certain predicative symbols — viz. certain one-place, or more-than one-place, predicables, as the case may be — that they produce meaningful wholes.
Thus the propositional schema "x is a man" can be appropriately filled in by inserting a proper name, say "Jones" , in the place occupied by the variable, yielding a meaningful proposition whose truth-value happens to be true.
Which, at the same time, provides supporting evidence for the proposition that the concept man is not empty, viz. that (Ex) x is a man, or "For some x, x is a man" .
But does such an analysis of concepts enable us to gain a clearer insight into the meaning of existential propositions?
There is one problem that immediately crops up here, and may be stated as follows.
If "Jones is a man" is true, then, of course, it necessarily follows that something falls under the concept man, i.e. "For some x, x is a man" is true also.
Any meaningful singular proposition licences an "existential generalisation" of this sort, and if the former is true, so inevitably is the latter.
The existential proposition here merely expresses in a general form what we know to be the case in a particular instance, i.e. that the concept man does indeed have an application.
But suppose we don't know of any particular instances.
Suppose we begin with an existential hypothesis, without being able to point to any confirming evidence.
What makes such a hypothesis meaningful?
Should we assume that the meaningfulness of such a hypothesis necessarily depends on the possibility (in principle, at least) of turning the relevant propositional schema into a meaningful singular proposition, viz. by replacing the "bound" variable (the variable governed by the "existential quantifier" ) with an appropriate name, or a naming phrase?
We are here already in deep waters, for what needs to be decided is just what sort of existential claims can be significantly made.
If the proposition we start out with is simply that men exist — which, we are  told, should be more appropriately expressed as (Ex) x is a man — then no doubt sooner or later we shall run into Jones and will be able to proclaim the happy discovery.
But if we begin with the assumption, say, that there is at least one star in the heavens that never has been, or ever will be, discovered or talked about, then evidently no meaningful let alone true singular proposition can be produced in support of such an assumption, for no such object can be named.
So the question arises, how should the "existential quantifier" be interpreted?
What kind of claim, precisely, does it serve to convey?
Evidently it is not much use replacing existential propositions with their properly quantified "canonical" paraphrases, if the concept of existential quantification itself gives rise to obscurities and cannot be made sufficiently precise.
As a matter of fact, I do not believe that existential propositions, in particular those intended to transmit ontological claims, can be satisfactorily replaced by the relevant quantified paraphrases, in the manner suggested.
In order to see why such a replacement is not possible, consider the distinction, now widely accepted among logicians, between the "objectual" (or "referential" ) and the "substitutional" reading of the quantifiers.
On the "objectual" interpretation, the quantifiers are seen as ranging over the objects within a specified domain of discourse and generally as vehicles for rendering the "ontological commitment" underlying the statements of a theory explicit.
On the "substantial" interpretation, they are seen simply as relating to certain terms which if substituted for variables in the relevant propositional schemata yield (contextually) true propositions, irrespective of whether or not such terms stand for actually existing objects.
Unlike the objectual interpretation, the substitutional interpretation of quantifiers is ontologically non-commital (unless terms are counted as ontological items).
To illustrate this with an example, on the objectual interpretation "(Ex) x is a three-headed dog guarding the entrance is Hades' is false, because there is no such entity; but on the substitutional interpretation a replacement of x in" x is a three-headed dog guarding the entrance to Hades "with" Cerberus"yields a true proposition; which, if we are talking about Greek mythology, is of course as it should be.
This distinction has a direct bearing upon the problem under discussion; for if, as is suggested, the quantifiers can be read in two different way, then surely we shall not be able to get rid of "existence predicates" .
Briefly, if it is possible to interpret (Ex) Fx substitutionally as well as referentially, then it won't be superfluous to say that F's actually exist, for on a substitutional interpretation they need not do so.
To return to our earlier example, a consequence of this is that it will not be possible to claim on valid grounds that "Men exist" or rather "actually exist" , reduces to, and can be replaced tout court by"(Ex) x is a man.
Nevertheless, it might be argued that this merely exposes certain limitations of quantification as a logical device, but does not show that existence predicates are not eliminable.
Not only are such predicates eliminable, it might be argued, but conceivably it might be possible to devise a method of paraphrase which would enable us to dispense with quantifiers as well; and if the latter can be achieved, then the myth of the "logical independence" of existential propositions will have been exploded once and for all .
Existential propositions are not really necessary — logically necessary — for a complete description of the world.
If it were possible to compile a complete list of the basic propositions needed to say everything that essentially needs to be said about the world, existential propositions would not be among them.
But if so; if there are no "irreducibly existential" propositions, then there are no "irreducibly existential" facts; and hence no metaphysical problem of "being qua being" either.
Some further attempts to eliminate existence predicates
The reductivist argument might take three different forms, which I shall label "ontological" , "epistemological" and "syntactical" respectively.
The ontological version of the argument involves the claim that existential propositions, in the final analysis, can all be shown to be about certain concrete ontological items and attributes of such items.
It envisages, that is, the possibility of a description of the world in which all subject terms refer to actual existents, and all explicit existential assertions give way to "existential presuppositions" .
The epistemological version involves an assumption that all significant existential claims can be translated into claims about potential knowledge.
Finally, the "syntactical" version of the argument involves an attempt to circumvent the need for any direct ontological or epistemological commitment by showing that what is being primarily "talked about" in existential propositions are syntactical properties of certain linguistic expressions.
The argument, I  shall maintain, is unsuccessful in all its versions.
Nevertheless there are important factors that give a strong impetus to a reductivist reasoning.
Let us consider the ontological version first.
The world, the reductivist might argue, consists of certain entities and there properties and relations, and all facts, including 'negative' facts, are literally facts about such entities.
The notion of fact is apt to cause difficulties only if facts are treated as some special species of existences.
But there are no such existences. 'That the cat is on the mat' does not denote an entity as 'the cat' denotes a cat.
What it denotes, if anything, is the proposition 'The cat is on the mat'.
Propositions, if true, 'express' facts; they don't name them.
There is, then, no danger of investing fiction with some kind of existence by asserting a negative existential proposition, or any negative proposition for that matter, and the ambiguities allegedly inherent in the concept of fact are more imaginary than real.
The starting premiss here coincides with what is basically the common sense belief, viz. that things or entities constitute the hard core of reality.
It is assumed, in addition, that all significant propositions, irrespective of their truth or falsity, must in principle be explicable in terms of propositions about such entities as a condition of their significance.
It follows that fictional things cannot function as genuine subjects of predication, and in the strict sense cannot be 'talked about' at all.
If propositions purporting to be about fictional things are to be accepted as meaningful, then it is only on condition that they can be paraphrased into propositions about non-fictional things; for example, into propositions about persons who are thinking, alleging, claiming, etc. something fictional.
The scene is thus set for large-scale reductivist paraphrases, which in different ontological theories take on different forms, depending upon what kind of entities are regarded as basic.
A central feature of all such theories is the distinction between that which exist sin a fundamental sense, i.e. the basic entities (I should emphasise that I am here using the term 'entity' in the broadest possible sense) and that which is regarded as existing in a secondary, derivative, or parasitic sort of way.
Only the basic entities are said to qualify as genuine ontological objects; all other objects are merely quasi-objects, i.e. they are explicable as logical constructions from ontologically fundamental items, and can be treated as a sort of  convenient logical artefacts.
In general, anything that is not a basic entity is either a feature of such an entity or in some way depends upon such entities for its own existence.
This, it is claimed, provides at the same time a clue as to the meaning of fiction; for fiction really is the result of treating that which can exist only derivatively, or "parasitically" , as if it existed in its own right.
The immediate practical problem that confronts such an approach is how to determine what items do exist in an ontologically fundamental sense; or, to phrase it differently, what objects do qualify as "genuine" ontological objects?
A quick glance at any history of philosophy reveals a multitude of mutually competing ontological theories, each postulating different basic entities and wielding different arguments, and there is no obvious clue as to how, if at all, their differences could be resolved from an "impartial" point of view.
However, I shall leave this problem to one side for the moment and concentrate instead on pursuing the general line of reductivist strategy, which remains unaffected by the choice of basic entities.
Thus it might be argued that the basic premisses of an entity-oriented ontology alone, if conceded, provide a sufficient justification for maintaining that existential propositions in particular are logically dispensable.
It should be emphasised that what is meant here is not just "contextually" dispensable but "universally" dispensable.
The relevant argument might be presented as follows.
To claim that things of a certain sort exist, it might be said, is no different, truth-functionally at least, from claiming that a certain disjunction of singular propositions about entities of which the world happens to consist is true.
Thus given that the world is made up of a, l, c…n objects, "Men exist" , or more precisely "For some x, x is a man" , is coextensive with "Either a is a man or l is a man or c is a man or…n is a man" .
Every affirmative existential proposition can thus, theoretically, be replaced by a disjunction of positive singular propositions.
Similarly, negative existential propositions can be reproduced in terms of, and are theoretically interchangeable with, certain conjunctions of negative singular propositions.
For to say that entities of a certain sort do not exist is to say, in effect, that not a single entity in the world has the indicated property, or properties; or, expressed differently, that the relevant concept cannot be correctly applied to anything.
Such a reductivist analysis, however, is vulnerable to two immediate objections.
First, its underlying assumption is that the number of  entities that the world consists of is finite.
For if it were infinite, it would be logically impossible to complete the analysis of any existential proposition along the lines suggested, and hence there would be no valid grounds for claiming the equivalence between such propositions and the corresponding disjunctions (or conjunctions).
But the thesis that the set of basic entities is finite, while not altogether implausible, needs to be argued for, and as yet must be regarded as unproved.
Secondly (as was pointed out by Russell, among others), even if it were true that the number of basic entities was finite, the proposed analysis still would not yield the desired result.
For suppose "Men exist" was rendered "Either a is a man or l is a man or c is a man or…n IS a man" , with (a…n) being a finite set.
Then having completed the disjunction, one would have to indicate this by saying "And there are no more entities left in the world" , or words to this effect.
But this would mean asserting another existential proposition, and moreover one that patently cannot be analysed in the same way; so the problem of sorting out the significance of existence claims would still remain unresolved.
But let us suppose the reductivist took the epistemological option.
He might concede that it is indeed absurd to pretend that in asserting an existential proposition we are in effect talking about all the things in the world.
We are doing nothing of the sort.
All we are saying in claiming the existence of men, he might argue, is that "x is a man" , given an appropriate substitution for x, can yield a knowable proposition.
Conversely, to deny the existence of dragons is to deny that "x is a dragon" can be converted into a knowable proposition (unless, of course, "dragon" was used metaphorically, as in "Mrs Thatcher is a dragon" ).
In other words, what is really being "talked about" in existential propositions he might say, are not —not primarily, anyhow—any ontological objects and attributes of such objects, but knowledge, and the possibility of knowledge, of certain propositions.
But the objection here might be that the suggested paraphrase merely involves a surreptitious quantification over propositions.
What is being said, in effect, it might be argued, is that there exist certain propositions which can be known to be true, and if so, existential propositions will not have been "eliminated" ; only the values of the variables of quantification will have been changed, with propositions taking the place of ontological objects.
In any case, if one insists on talking about knowledge, the question that will have to be answered sooner or later is what does constitute  genuine knowledge, and if it should turn out, as it well might, that in defining the conditions of knowledge one has to make use of existential propositions of one sort or another, then the suggested reductivist paraphrase will not have achieved its purpose.
Let us now consider the third version of the argument.
There is no need, the reductivist might argue, to involve ourselves in any extra-linguistic considerations.
Existential propositions can be treated simply as metalinguistic reports concerning syntactical properties of certain "object-language" expressions.
Existence claims, after all, involve certain claims about concepts, and concepts are represented by predicative expressions.
Surely, then, we can confine ourselves to exploring the syntactical properties of such expressions and leave the ontological and epistemological issues, temporarily at least, to one side?
If we manage to sort out the syntactical problems, we might find that in the end the other issues will get sorted out of themselves.
But just how does this work in actual practice?
Take again "Men exist" , or rather its "logically regimented" paraphrase "(Ex) x is a man, or perhaps" (Ex) x is human".
The main problem here is what to do with the existential quantifier.
Now it is of course always possible to substitute (x) Fx for (Ex) Fx, replacing the existential quantifier, that is, with a universal quantifier plus negation, but there is nothing much to be gained by such a swap, for to paraphrase the proposition that something is human by saying that it is not the case that everything is non-human is merely to beg the question.
Everything and something and nothing are all logically interlinked and none of them makes clear sense without the others.
A rather more promising approach might be to treat the existential quantifier itself as a kind of predicate — a second-level predicate to be precise — which, in our example above, says something about the "first-level" predicate "is human" , namely that the latter can be completed to produce a true proposition.
The emphasis here is thus transferred from a straightforward assertion of the (ontological) existence of a certain type of things to an assertion to the effect that a given predicate can generate a true proposition.
This interpretation, in a sense, represents a further refinement on the "substitutional" interpretation of the quantifiers, and suggests the possibility of a complete elimination of quantifiers in favour of some appropriate operators on predicates.
But this flight from objects into the land of predicates really solves nothing, for the problem of "ontological commitment" soon reappears in a new guise.
To revert to our example, we shall have to account for the fact that the predicate human, or rather the predicable "— is human" , unlike the predicable "— is a dragon" , has the capacity of being turned into a true proposition, and in order to do this, we shall have to make use of our original proposition, viz. that men do actually exist (in the full-blooded sense of "exist" ), and if so, nothing of any substance will have been accomplished by the attempted "reduction" .
What can the reductivist say in reply to this?
The only possibility left to him of safeguarding his own position, it seems, is to deny not only that "Men exist" but "(Ex) x is human" too can be treated as genuine propositions.
Similarly he might reject both "Dragons do not exist" and "(Ex) x is a dragon" as ill-formed.
The kind of unqualified quantification illustrated by such examples, he might argue, does not really make clear sense.
Existential claims are more naturally expressed within the context of a specific domain of discourse.
Thus a more natural way of asserting the existence of men would be by saying "Some living creatures are men" , or something along these lines; employing, that is, a proposition of the "Some 5 are P" type.
If, however, an existential claim is expressed in such a manner, then it can be paraphrased in terms of valid inference.
Thus to assert "Some living creatures are men" , or to phrase it in a "canonical" form, "For some x, x is both a living creature and a man" , is equivalent to the  denial that the inference from the proposition of the form "x is a living creature" to the proposition of the form "x is not a man" is valid.
The concept of existence is thus shown to be essentially the same as that of valid inference.
The conclusion that follows from this is obvious.
If it is possible to show that existential propositions are equivalent to denials of the validity of inferences of a certain kind, then instead of talking about existence we can confine ourselves to talking about the validity of inference.
Existential propositions, contextually indispensable though they might be, are not logically essential for a complete description of the world.
They should be treated as place-holders for other propositions, rather than as representing a logically independent class of propositions of their own.
But if there are no logically independent existential propositions, then obviously there can be no "irreducibly existential" facts (and hence no irreducibly negative existential facts either).
In other words, there is no need to rack one's brains about the problem of "being qua being" .
Before commenting on these moves, it might be useful to consider briefly an extension of the reductivist argument.
The quantifiers, as we saw, can be interpreted in two ways: "objectually" and "substitutionally" .
The "substitutional" interpretation involves a transfer of emphasis from existence to truth.
Whereas under the "objectual" interpretation the central issue is that of "ontological commitment" , under the "substitutional" interpretation the focal problem is what "substitution instances" of the propositional schema controlled by the quantifier can be regarded as true.
The eliminability o/predicates "true" and "real" 
The spotlight is thus trained on truth; in particular on the conditions under which a given "substitution instance" can be legitimately described as "true" .
But this merely raises the problem of a definition of "truth conditions" and it is difficult to see how such a definition can steer clear of the question of "ontological commitment" .
The ghosts conjured up by the concept of existence thus reappear to haunt us.
If the reductivist is to be consistent, he will have to say not only that explicit existence claims are not a necessary constituent feature of a complete description of the world, but that  explicit truth claims aren't either.
We can hardly deny that "existence predicates" carry a logically independent descriptive content without being prepared to say the same of "truth-predicates" .
If there is no separate philosophical "problem of existence, neither is there a separate philosophical" problem of truth".
Willy-nilly one is thus forced to extend the reductivist argument and adopt the position of what has become known as the "redundancy theory of truth" .
The central thesis of the "redundancy theory" , which goes back to F.P.Ramsey, is that the predicate "true" and locutions such as"It is true that…
",
 "It is a fact that…" are all logically dispensable.
 "It is true that p" is semantically equivalent with "p" .
To say that Socrates is mortal is true is not to say anything that cannot be said by asserting that Socrates is mortal.
Truth is not a "property" that a proposition may but need not possess; nor does truth represent a "relation" between a proposition and an "external" fact.
Truth is literally what a true proposition expresses.
As for the word "true" , this word is used merely "for emphasis or for stylistic reasons" .
We say "true" , "correct" , so it is, etc., but we could just as well reiterate the proposition concerned.
Similarly to call a proposition "false" is not to provide any essential factual information about the proposition in question that cannot be provided by asserting its negation.
A possible difficulty might be thought to arise when a proposition is obliquely referred to rather than explicitly stated.
Thus one might say "What A says (i.e. the proposition A states) is true" , which, on the face of it, seems to represent a clear case of property ascription.
In fact — it is argued — any such statement can be perfectly adequately re-phrased as "A says that p, and p" , without using the word "true" .
It follows that technically it is possible to dispense with "truth-talk" altogether, and if so, the alleged puzzles surrounding the concept of truth are shown to be more artificial than real.
Or, to quote Ramsey: "…there is really no separate problem of truth but merely a linguistic muddle." 
How does this bear upon the concept of reality?
Evidently if the above theory is correct, there can be no question of explaining truth in terms of the "correspondence with (external) facts" The exponents of the theory, not unnaturally, tend to equate facts with true propositions.
It follows that if "true" is logically dispensable, so is  "fact" .
If the "truth-talk" can be avoided, so can "reality-talk" .
Neither "fact" nor "fiction" are essential for a complete description of the world.
And the same, inevitably, applies to the word "real" .
If "real" is used in the sense of "actual" or actually existent ", rather than in the sense of" genuine", say then (to re-state the familiar view) it can be paraphrased out of the relevant context without any great difficulty, and it makes no difference if whether we speak of God or the table in this room.
To say that this table "actually exists" is to say no more and no less than that this is a table; or, if preferred, that it is "tabling" in this particular spatial region.
If the word "real" in the sense of "actual" or "actually existent" has any discernible function at all, then it is only to indicate in a roundabout way that a certain proposition, or propositions, are actally true; and "true" , as we have just seen, is itself eliminable as a propositional predicate.
But if so, then the difficulties involved in an attempt to "define" the concept of truth, or the concept of reality, for the matter, need not detain us any longer.
A general definition — apart from a perfectly trivial nominal definition, such that truth is whatever is the case, or whatever true propositions  express — cannot be provided; nor, strictly speaking, is it needed.
All that one can profitably do is concentrate on weeding out the propositions with faulty grammar and those that contextually give rise to paradoxes.
What reply might be given to all this?
The first thing to note is a certain confusion of words with concepts underlying the reductivist reasoning.
Thus the tendency is to concentrate an analysis of the concept of existence or that of truth around the use of predicates such as "exists (exist)" and "true" , and their cognates; the idea being that if it can be shown that such predicates can be paraphrased out of the relevant contexts by employing a different type of idiom, then there is little that remains to be said about the concepts.
But neither do such concepts reduce to the corresponding predicates, nor indeed are such predicates entirely dispensable.
Criticism of the reductivist argument
Take the predicate "true" .
It is clear, to begin with, that the thought that p is true is not identical with the thought that p.
I can entertain a thought that p without thinking of p as true.
How else would I be able to think of states of affairs that are merely possible?
I might conceivably be interested merely in a hypothetical situation, trying to decide, say, what consequences would follow if p were true, without wishing to commit myself one way or the other (although, as will be shown later on, one cannot coherently posit the possibility of p being true except with regard to possible truth claims that might be made in respect of it).
In addition, we ordinarily assume that what is stated on one occasion may be identical with what is stated on a different occasion, even though its truth-value might change.
But this is incompatible with the "redundancy theory" .
So either we shall have to disallow such a possibility and decree that nothing qualifies as a genuine proposition unless its truth-value is fixed for all time, i.e. that all propositions are what is sometimes called "eternal" propositions, or we shall have to accept that truth-value is not an integral part of the objective propositional content.
If we take the former option, i.e. if we lay down that only "eternal" propositions shall be genuine propositions, then this threatens to blur the distinction between contingent and necessary truth.
For if p is true, then necessarily p, whatever p might be.
If it is true that Socrates (during the relevant period of his life) is bald, then to say that this could have been false is a contradiction in terms.
A proposition cannot change its truth-value without in effect becoming a different proposition.
If, on the other hand, we accept that the truth-value is not an integral part of the propositional content, then of course the predicate "true" and "false" will not be redundant.
But consider now a somewhat different version of the "redundancy thesis" .
There is no need, it might be argued, to make far-reaching metaphysical assumptions about the nature of propositions in order to justify the thesis that truth-predicates are logically redundant.
It is sufficient to consider the manner in which truth-claims may be communicated.
Thus it is clear that "true" or "false" neither add nor detract from what is actually asserted on a given occasion.
They are redundant, but not because the world can be described in terms of eternal"propositions which are true or false in virtue of being the propositions they are, but because they advertise certain claims which can equally successfully be conveyed implicitly, viz. by asserting the proposition or its negation, as the case may be.
In short, rather than worrying about "eternal" propositions we should focus on implicit-versus-explicit truth-claims.
This latter version of the redundancy thesis' certainly looks the more plausible of the two.
The transference of emphasis upon truth-claims, in particular, seems to be a move in the right direction.
Truth, as I shall argue later on  (see Chapter 14) does not reduce to "true propositions" but demands an exploration of truth-claims.
But of course it is not enough to point out that such claims can be made implicitly.
Whether they are made implicitly or explicitly, the problem still remains of clarifying their meaning.
A mere elimination of explicit truth-claims — assuming such a thing was possible — would not in itself contribute anything towards clarifying the concept of truth.
As it happens, explicit truth claims are not entirely dispensable.
Take again our earlier example "What A says is true" .
The suggestion was that this should be paraphrased as "A says that p, and p" .
But conceivably I might be particularly anxious to emphasise that A is not stating a falsehood that he is a reliable witness, say, which might be important in certain circumstances.
Or suppose I wished to challenge what A said.
I might tell him "What you say is false" .
How will he reply to this charge?
He might say "Things are exactly as I said they are" .
But suppose I insisted that he was uttering a falsehood.
Then the only defence left to him is to answer "No, what I say is the truth" .
There is no way in which he could emphasise the veracity of his testimony except by literally asserting it.
Let us now return to the topic of "existence predicates" .
The reductivist position, as we saw, was that such predicates were not only eliminable, but that moreover their elimination was a philosophical desideratum and a vital step towards a logically purified language.
Sentences like "Jones exists" were dismissed as cases of bad grammar on the grounds that the use of the proper name already dispensed with any services that the predicate "exists" might provide.
Even sentences such as "Men exist" and "Dragons are fictional" were said to offend against certain logical proprieties and were replaced by suitably quantified paraphrases.
Finally, an attempt was made to show that, theoretically at least, quantifiers themselves could be got rid of too.
I have distinguished between three different versions of the reductivist argument.
The "ontological" version, as we saw, involves an assumption that existential propositions, in the final analysis, can be reproduced in terms of propositions that do not explicitly assert but rather presuppose the existence of certain ontological objects.
In other words, the possibility is posited of a description of the world in which all subject terms refer to actual existents and all existential propositions are analysed out and replaced by "existential presuppositions" .
But this was shown to be an unattainable goal for  the simple reason that the meaning of an existential proposition cannot be made fully clear without making use of some existential proposition or other as part of the explanans.
Moreover the ontological reductivist cannot state his own philosophical position coherently.
For in order to explain the reasons for own reductivist beliefs he will have to make certain claims that are impervious to his own analysis.
Thus he will have to say: There is nothing except objects and their properties and relations (or places and qualities, or whatever).
But this means that he will have to concede that at least some propositions are "irreducibly" existential, and if he does, he will have disavowed his own argument.
But the "epistemological" version of reductivism is just as defective.
The main idea here is that existential propositions can be paraphrased in terms of propositions about knowledge.
Thus the claim that there are F-things is said to reduce to the claim that "x is an F" can be converted into a knowable proposition by substituting an appropriate object-term for x.
But a moment's reflection is sufficient to show that no such reduction is possible.
This does not mean, incidentally, that we have to accept that (Ex) Fx can be meaningfully claimed to be true irrespective of the possibility of knowledge.
We might very well take the view that "x is an F" must in principle be convertible into a knowable proposition, without thereby implicitly accepting that "(Ex) Fx" and "" x is an F "is convertible into a knowable proposition" are equisignificant.
They clearly are not.
Lastly, the reductivist argument fails in its "syntactical" version too.
The strategy employed here, to begin with, is to insist that all existential propositions of the natural language be replaced by properly quantified paraphrases; next, propositions involving unqualified or unrestricted quantification are proscribed on the grounds that they are "obscure" and are replaced by propositions involving a qualified quantification into a specified domain (corresponding to ordinary language propositions of the "Some S are P" type); finally, a paraphrase is attempted of the qualified quantification in terms of the validity of inference.
On the surface, it looks a bold and attractive programme.
In fact, if inspected more closely, it shows itself to be a rickety structure of ad hoc contrivance and ill-founded reductivist moves.
Thus there are no compelling philosophical reasons for proscribing unqualified quantification other than the fact that such a quantification resists a reductivist analysis.
Propositions like "Men exist (or actually exist)" , it is claimed, look  odd and mysterious, and their quantified "canonical" paraphrases, while admittedly helping to remove any suggestion that such propositions might have a subject/predicate structure, do not quite  succeed in alleviating the mystery.
They should be replaced by propositions such as "Some living creatures are men" .
But the difficulty, of course, is that any such replacement involves a radical change of content.
To say that men exist, or rather "actually exist" , strictly, is not to say anything either about living creatures or the nature of men.
That men are living creatures is a contingent fact.
Conceivably they might not be.
Equally conceivably I might not be aware that they are.
I might not even know what"living creature means.
 "Men actually exist" reveals nothing about who or what men are; all it says is that men are not fictional, that they are part of the actual world.
In point of fact, even if a replacement of unqualified with qualified quantification could be justified, this would still not ensure the success of the reductivist enterprise.
The main thesis, as we saw, was that existential propositions involving a qualified quantification into a specified domain can be replaced by propositions about the validity of certain inferences.
But the validity, or otherwise, of such inferences will depend upon considerations of certain matters of fact.
To take again the above example, the proposition "Some living creatures are men" carries an existential commitment, and the validity of any inference that might act as its replacement, evidently, will depend on the assumption that the respective classes of objects are non-empty.
In short, such propositions are not susceptible to a kind of analysis that might be applied, for example , to universal propositions which have no existential import.
If living creatures, or men, do not exist, then "Some living creatures are men" is false, and if so, then any corresponding inference will be invalid.
But if we have to make an explicit assumption that living creatures, or men, do actually exist in order to make an inferential paraphrase work, then a reductivist analysis fails to achieve its purpose and we are back exactly where we began.
The problem is even more acute than it appears, for singular existential propositions too resist a reductivist treatment and cannot be simply brushed off as "ungrammatical" .
Whether, in a given context, the use of "existence predicates" might be avoided, this will depend upon whether it is clear what kind of claims are being made and whether there exists a consensus about those claims.
Thus, given the way the word "I" is used, there is no startlingly new information to be derived from a person's statement "I actually exist" If "Socrates is eating an apple" is true, then clearly there is nothing that can usefully be added to this statement by saying that the apple Socrates is eating is not fictional.
To say "The chair I am sitting on actually exists" is similarly uninformative, since the chair I am sitting on already implies that a chair is there.
The predicate "actually exists" here performs no useful function and can be left out altogether.
However, this need not always be the case.
Conceivably I might be misreporting the whole situation.
It is possible that I am not sitting on a chair at all, but lying on a sofa.
In any case, it is perfectly intelligible to say in reply to someone's persistent talk about "this chair" : Look here, that chair exists only in your imagination.
But if such a retort is both meaningful and non-trivial, then surely so is the statement (that might be made, for example, in reply to a request for information from a third person) that "the chair" being talked about — the "posited chair" — is not fictional, i.e. that it actually exists, even though those who take this statement on trust might find out otherwise to their cost.
It seems, then, that in some cases at least "exists" , or rather "actually (or really) exists" does have some useful work to do in a subject/predicate context and cannot be dismissed out of hand as a "spurious" predicate.
To illustrate this with some further examples, there is surely nothing odd or unintelligible in statements such as that Dickens's Micawber was a real life character, i.e. actually existed, that Napoleon actually existed, that Carthage once existed but no longer does, etc.
Unlike "I actually exist" such statements are non-tautologous and can be significantly denied.
But even "I actually exist" , it might be argued, though trivially true as I speak it, is not entirely uninformative, for I might never have existed.
The reductivist enterprise thus inevitably comes to grief, and it is not altogether surprising that it does.
It would indeed be difficult to imagine a language that would do all the work that our ordinary language does but would not include any "existence predicates" .
Quantification evidently cannot help "eliminate" such predicates.
It is not only that quantification cannot help eliminate such predicates, but often we have to make use of such predicates in order to make clear that the given quantified sentence does indeed convey an ontological claim.
Existence predicates are prime instruments for making such claims explicit.
But this merely brings us face to face with our old problem again.
If such claims cannot be "explained away" ; if they do not reduce to ascriptions of certain attributes to certain entities; if furthermore they cannot be paraphrased simply in terms of knowledge, or translated into claims about the syntactical properties of certain expressions, the question is, how exactly should they be interpreted?
What is it that makes them intelligible?
What kind of facts do the propositions communicating such claims express?
Existential facts: an existentialist interpretation
One well-known and well-publicised attempt in recent philosophy to address this problem in a "non-reductivist" spirit has gone under the name of Existentialism, and I shall now comment briefly on what I take to be the main features of the existentialist approach before outlining my own position.
The main thesis of the existentialist approach is that in order to elucidate the full significance of ontological claims conveyed by existential propositions we ought to begin by focusing attention upon the one for whom the "problem of existence" presents itself in the first instance as a problem of his own existence.
The "subject of knowledge" , it is argued, should turn his attention to himself as a historical individual, and explore the essential aspects of his own manner-to-be.
In other words, an inquiry into the meaning of existence should begin as an "existential phenomenology" ; with the existential self-knowledge being the primary objective.
This pursuit of existential self-knowledge, however, does not yield the knowledge of a substanti al self.
Rather the opposite, it helps to show why the self cannot be known as an object.
It also helps to show that more fundamental than any knowledge of objects are certain feelings, needs and desires, and that it is upon a phenomenological elucidation of such feelings, needs and desires that an ontological description of  the world must be based.
The main result that emerges from such an existential self-analysis is that man owes his understanding of the meaning of being to the fact that he exists in an object-transcending manner, and is therefore able to conceive of the possibility of nothingness, i.e. of the world not existing at all.
It is precisely in virtue of his capacity to grasp this possibility that man is "ontologically fundamental" .
He is fundamental, that is, not as a privileged object in a world of objects, but as an existential subject; someone who can "transcend" the world of objects, and is able to understand the difference between being and not-being.
However, there are at least two problems that immediately confront such an approach.
First, the idea of an existent capable of transcending "the world of objects implies that there can be no criteria whereby such an existent might be" externally "identified in respect of its characteristic" mode of being".
That an "external" identification strictly is not possible is due to the fact that such an existent in respect of its characteristic mode of being is not object-like.
The point, in short, is that such an existent is typically someone who knows and refers to himself as "I myself" , and that all reports that identify this existent in an essential way will have to be phrased in the first person singular.
Not surprisingly, what an existentialist account of existence does not provide is a clarification of the conditions of objectivity.
Secondly, and in conjunction with the above, the old spectre of reductivism seems to enter the scene again.
Consider what is being claimed.
It is claimed that the meaning of existential assertions can be fully clarified only by clarifying the mode of being of the one who makes, and understands, such assertions.
In order to be able to explain what is involved in saying that something actually exists, it is necessary first to clarify the characteristic features of man's own  manner of existing.
This is the task of what Heidegger calls the "fundamental ontology" .
But what does such a "fundamental ontology" reveal?
It reveals that man is essentially cast in the mode of being-in-the-world, and moreover that the world itself can be made sense of only in the context of man's own "projects" .
It follows that the meaning of ontological claims becomes fully transparent only if such claims are seen in the context of certain life-modalities of those who make such claims; in effect, all such claims become interpretable as forms of man"sown self-understanding.
And here, of course, lies the rub.
For if all ontological claims are to be understood as forms of man's own self-understanding, rather than conveying, successfully or otherwise, certain objective existential facts', then existentialism itself turns out to be a form of reductivism.
The point is that the objectivity conditions for ontological claims are not provided, nor, strictly, can they be.
The "fundamental ontology" essentially paints a picture of the world from my own point of view.
I am the ultimate source of meaning of all "existential facts" ; all such facts, in the final analysis, turn out to be explicable in terms of facts about my own existence.
Everything relating to an "external" world, including the existence of "others" , is subsumed under the general aspect of my own manner-of-being.
An existentialist analysis, consistently pursued, thus yields in effect a subject-oriented description of the world, with peculiar reductivist implications of its own.
As a theory of existence it is implausible and defective, and must be rejected.
The only rational alternative, I shall argue, is to adopt a structuralist approach.
Ontological claims as made explicit in existential propositions, I shall maintain, involve certain claims about the world as a whole, and the world is not just a horizon of my "existential projects" ; nor is it a substance, or an aggregate of substances of this or that sort.
Rather it represents a configuration of several different and mutually interlocking strands, in which substances appear as objects in an intersubjective context.
It is a structure, and moreover a structure that "talks about itself" ; with existential propositions being a principal instrument of its self-reference.
A structuralist approach to an analysis of "existential facts" 
Of course, not all existential propositions are intended to carry ontological claims.
 "There are zebras in Africa" is on a different  footing from "There is gold in El Dorado" or "There are flying monkeys in the land of Oz" , although all these propositions are true.
Whether "existence" means "existence in reality" , or "in fairy-tale" , or "in mythology" , will depend on when, how and in what context the relevant proposition is asserted.
An assertion made on a stage in the context of a play will be judged by different standards from those it would be judged by if it is made in daily life.
Even an indexical phrase like "This chair" does not transmit an "ontological commitment" on each occasion of its use.
Such a phrase may feature as part of a quotation, or a paraphrase, as in indirect speech; or it may be used in respect of an object which we know to be fictional, for example in the context of a story or a fairy tale.
If, on the other hand, I point to an object in my immediate surroundings and say "this chair" , then, unless I am deliberately lying or trying to mislead, I indicate an implicit assumption on my part that there is something out there, something external to my act of pointing, which I take to be a chair.
This assumption can be made explicit by making literal use of an "existence predicate" , and sometimes any residual doubts about what is assumed on a particular occasion can be resolved only by a repeated and emphatic use of such predicates; but, as is clear from what has been said so far, the use of such predicates is not analogous to acts of property ascription, especially if "properties" are understood in the sense of "accidental properties" .
Existence is not an "accidental" property of anything.
It is clearly not a property of ontological objects, despite the fact that singular existential propositions can make perfectly good sense.
Nor can it be treated as a property of objects of thought.
That the latter view is untenable becomes apparent as soon as we consider statements such as "Men (actually) exist" .
In making such a statement, evidently, one is not addressing oneself in thought to any specific individual or group of individuals; although, as will be shown later (see Chapter 13), one does by implication say something about the class of man-like things, viz. that every single one of its members, no matter how many of them there are, is as a matter of fact man-like.
In fact, the above view cannot be sustained even in cases where the intended reference is strictly to individuals.
Thus to claim that Atlantis actually existed, or that Achilles actually existed, is not to ascribe the property of existence to Atlantis or Achilles qua objects of  thought, but simply to claim that the world contained Atlantis or Achilles.
If tomorrow someone discovered that Atlantis actually existed, he would not be adding a new property to the island state talked about in Plato's Timaeus, but dispelling the suspicion that Plato, or someone else before him, invented the legend.
That Atlantis was discussed in the Timaeus may have been significant, but it was not crucial.
Plato, after all, might never have thought of Atlantis; and similarly Homer might never have thought of Achilles; although this does not necessarily mean that if they did exist, they pre-existed thought in an absolute sense.
Finally, existence cannot be treated simply as a property of concepts either.
This too is evident from our earlier discussion.
Frege argued that in asserting an existential proposition one is in effect saying something about the relevant concept, namely that certain things fall under it, or, conversely, that nothing falls under it, i.e. that the concept is empty, as the case may be.
However, since concepts, according to Frege, are essentially predicative, this automatically excludes singular existential propositions, and I have argued that such propositions cannot be dismissed as "ungrammatical" .
But even if we subscribe to the view that all genuine existential propositions are by nature "general" propositions, Frege's theory is not entirely satisfactory.
For what remains throughout of central interest and importance are the ontological claims expressed in such propositions, and to say that such propositions communicate certain characteristics of relevant concepts does little to explain the meaning of such claims.
Thus the statement "The concept lion is not empty" obviously is not likely to convey the desired information unless it is already clear from the context, or is otherwise indicated, that what is being talked about are actual and not merely imagined or fantasized lions.
In other words, an understanding is presupposed of the distinction between the concept actual lion and the concept imagined lion (a cartoon-film lion, say).
Similarly we are expected to understand the distinction between Atlantis qua actually existing and the idea of Atlantis as conceived by this, that or other person, writer, scholar.
Yet it is precisely the rationale of this distinction that demands an elucidation.
So, ontologically speaking, there is not much enlightenment to be-gained by pursuing this road either.
Existence is not a "property of concepts" (qua functions); although ontological claims in general do entail claims about concepts.
The point is that a statement to the  effect that a given concept is non-empty presupposes an understanding of "existence" rather than enabling us to grasp its meaning; unless, of course, the concept is such that its non-emptiness analytically follows from its meaning, in which case all that is required is to understand the concept.
But, then, we shall have to devise a different theory of concepts to accommodate such a possibility.
It follows that there can be no question of the ontological claims expressed in existential proposition being explicable in terms of attribution of certain properties to certain items which may or may not possess such properties.
What such claims convey, as I hope my analysis will show, can be more appropriately interpreted in terms of part-whole relation than in terms of "properties" .
In a sense, it is precisely the vain attempts to interpret existence as a "property" and the difficulties created by such interpretations that have inspired the various reductivist moves in an effort to dispose of the whole problem, by showing that existential propositions are in principle "eliminable" , and hence that there are no "irreducibly" existential facts.
Against this, as we saw, the existentialists argued that rather than making futile attempts to "eliminate" the problem one should subject it to a different type of treatment that would help place it in a proper philosophical perspective, and this was correct as far as it went.
Unfortunately, the treatment offered was itself restrictive and inadequate, with the existentialist analysis proving utterly incapable of providing a satisfactory account of the objectivity aspects of ontological claims.
The only remedy, then, is to dig deeper into the conceptual roots of such claims and subject them to a comprehensive structural analysis.
Such an analysis, if vigorously pursued, will show, among other things, that all properties are ultimately functions of certain structures, and that reality in the most fundamental sense of the word is structure simpliciter.
It is not an "aggregate" of certain objects and attributes.
Rather it "contains" objects with attributes.
It has no "inner core" , no "hard centre" .
If it can be made intelligible, then it is only in terms of certain structural concepts which are all interdependent and mutually complementary, and together make up a logically self-subsistent whole.
My method in what follows will be to begin with an analysis of the  concept of an ontological existent and its associated categories of identity, individuality and plurality, and by pursuing the leads that such an analysis yields to their logical conclusion demonstrate that such concepts form part of a complex structure of closely inter-related ideas.
A central problem that an analysis of the concept of an ontological existent brings to the surface concerns the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity.
We distinguish between species and specimens.
Two specimens of the same species, we normally assume, are numerically distinguishable even if they are qualitatively completely alike.
Yet what are the grounds for such an assumption?
What makes such an assumption meaningful?
Traditionally, an answer to this problem has been sought by trying to define a "principle of individuation" for ontological particulars.
In Chapter 3 I discuss some of the reasons why this approach must fail and why the idea of individuality cannot be "defined" in terms of certain criteria whereby ontological particulars are re-identified and distinguished from species.
Criteria belong to an explanation of identity claims, but an explanation succeeds only in the context of what can be understood.
Any attempt to define the criteria for verifying identity claims in respect of individuals already presupposes a degree of intelligibility of the idea of individuality.
Yet what makes this intelligibility possible?
An attempt to answer this question takes us into the field of a phenomenological epistemology.
In order to clarify the conditions of intelligibility of identifying references to ontological existents it is necessary to explore the conditions under which such existents are constituted as target topics of relevant experiences.
An ontological existent while being posited in the modus per se is nevertheless an object of thought.
In Chapters 5–8 I address myself to the topic of experiences from a phenomenological point of view.
I analyse the various types of experiential modalities, and in particular the manner in which objects are targeted, and present themselves as objects to our evidential consciousness.
A phenomenological exploration of topic-directional modes of experiencing is essential to a clarification of the structure of reference.
In Chapter 8 I analyse the manner in which experiences themselves present themselves to us in a biographical context.
This analysis yields the notion of a unity of biographical time as a phenomenological precondition of any meaningful identifying references to ontological individuals.
The plan of inquiry
Another basic problem that emerges from a discussion of the concept of an ontological existent concerns numerical diversity.
How  does one explain the possibility of numerically diverse particulars?
If it is not possible to define the idea of numerical identity in terms of the criteria of re-identification, surely the idea of a plurality of particulars similarly cannot be defined in terms of the criteria under which such particulars are differentiated from each other.
But if so, what makes the idea of a pluralistically structured world intelligible?
In Chapter 4 I show that an attempt to prove the possibility of pluralism by proving the existence of irreducibly "external" relations presupposes a distinction between a subjective and an objective order.
This distinction, however, is itself analytically linked with the idea of a plurality of selves; and the latter idea, in turn, is inseparable from, and inexplicable independently of, the idea of error.
I discuss error in Chapter 9.
To have a concept of error is to accept that we can be in error on a given occasion even though we do not believe we are, and hence that we can be corrected by others.
Nevertheless the belief in our own fallibility is itself an "incorrigible" belief; i.e. if we believe that we are sometimes mistaken, then we are most certainly sometimes mistaken.
The idea of error, however, demands the possibility of public criteria for correcting error, and the concept of public criteria is unintelligible without the possibility of other witnesses, other selves.
In fact, I go further than this and argue that if there is to be public criteria, there must be other selves.
The availability of such criteria depends upon the existence, not just the possibility, of a social context.
An objective criterion is a typically social construct and presupposes a degree of inter-subjective understanding and cooperation.
In Chapter 10 I analyse the inter-subjective conditions of objective validity and the relation between objective validity and truth.
This concludes Part One.
Part Two begins with a synoptic review of the basic categories highlighted by the discussion of ontological objects, experiences and objective order in Part One, viz. identity, individuality, unity of biographical time, error and plurality.
All these categories form part of the same logical structure and none of them is intrinsically more important, or more fundamental, than any of the others.
In Chapter 12 I give additional clarifications about my use of the word "structure" and try to explain why a structural approach is incompatible with a description of the world in terms of objects and attributes.
I then go on to discuss the idea of "independence of thought" and show why a metaphysical, as distinct from a "critical" , realism cannot be coherently defended.
In Chapter 14 I sketch out the fundamentals of a structuralist theory of truth.
Analytical Basis of Philosophical Reasoning about Reality
A. Ontological Existents
2.
Ontological Existents as Topics of Discourse
Ontological existents are a sub-species of possible topics of discourse, and any topic of discourse, qua topic of discourse, is such that on different occasions it can be referred to as "the same A" ; with "A" being a descriptive expression of some sort.
Either this condition holds or the concept of a topic of discourse is unintelligible; and hence nothing whatever is intelligible.
Notice that this condition says nothing about the possibility of proving that a topic referred to on a given occasion is the same as the topic referred to on a different occasion.
It merely articulates the principle of identity embodied in the concept of a topic of discourse, and any attempt to prove (or disprove, for that matter) the identity of a topic talked about on two separate occasions already presupposes the validity of this principle.
But while all topics are necessarily subject to identity, clearly not all topics qualify as possible existents, and only a miniscule proportion of possible topics actually exist, and herein lies our problem.
For what is it that qualifies a given topic as a possible existent?
What is involved in saying that something exists in its own right, while something else does not?
Where and how do we draw a line between ontological existents and fictions?
We refer to things like chairs and tables and trees and houses as "the same" .
We make identifying references to"the same persons.
We recollect, describe "the same" experiences.
We recognise "the same" sounds, "the same" colours.
We speak of events, situations, numbers, times, as "the same" .
We expound, analyse, discuss "the same concept" , "the same proposition" , "the same problem" , "the same  theory" .
All such topics can be referred to with the help of suitable denoting phrases and used as grammatical subjects in subject/ predicate propositions.
But this alone does not qualify any of them as possible existents, let alone ensure their existence.
They may act as legitimate grammatical subjects, but they are not necessarily also the "logical" subjects of the propositions concerned, in the sense of representing the genuine basis of predication in the given instance.
Before any of them can be significantly claimed to be logical as well as grammatical subjects, and treated as denoting certain objects that exist in their own right rather than merely describing attributes of such objects, or representing something purely fictional, certain additional conditions must be fulfilled.
But what are those conditions?
We might try to approach an answer to this question by first looking at some specific features that characterise the identifying references to different kinds of topics of discourse.
Taking a very broad view, topics of discourse may be divided into two basic categories: meanings and non-meanings.
Consider meanings first.
We use language to talk about the meanings of linguistic expressions as well as about things that are not meanings.
When I say "The oldest tree in the park is an oak" , I am referring to the the tall tree of rich foliage standing half-way between the eastern gate and children's playing ground.
But if someone asked me what the "oldest tree in the park" meant, or what "oak" meant, or what the meaning of the sentence as a whole was, I would have to explain to him the meaning of these expressions with the help of some other expressions which he could understand.
Moreover we can discuss the meaning of what is being said even if it so happens that there are no trees in the park, or if all the trees happened to be the same age and none of them was an oak.
None of this renders any of the expressions meaningless.
Thus I might say to someone "Let's go and find out which is the oldest tree in the park" , without fearing that I may have said something unintelligible just because neither of us is certain what the outcome of our search will be.
The content of what I say can be analysed, commented on, communicated to third parties.
I can assert of the oldest tree in the park (if there is such a tree) that it is an oak, but I can also say of the sentence "The oldest tree in the park is  an oak" that it means the same, or that it expresses same thought as, say, its French or Chinese translation, irrespective of whether it says anything true.
Identity of meanings as topics of discourse
If by "meaning" is understood the objective content of linguistic utterances, or what might also be called their "objective thought-content" (I shall discuss later the "historical" , performative aspects of such utterances), then, on the face of it at least, there seems to be nothing odd or improper in making identifying cross-references to meanings.
After all, we do make, and claim to understand, references to "the same propositions" , "the same descriptions" , "the same arguments" .
We say things such as "I repeat what I said earlier" , or "That is not what I meant" , or "I have heard that argument before" .
Admittedly statements of this kind are occasionally challenged.
Our hearer may even reject them outright as false.
But the point is that it makes sense for him to reject such a statement as false on a given occasion, only if he is prepared to admit that in different circumstances the same statement could be true.
As it happens, such statements are very frequently accepted as true.
Nevertheless serious misgivings may persist about the wisdom of ascribing identity to meanings.
Some doubts about ascribing identity to meanings
Surely, it might be said, to interpret identificatory references to meanings in a literal sense is to treat meanings, in effect, on a par with objects.
But meanings are not objects.
There are no meanings "per se" , as distinct from meaningful expressions; and what an expression means is determined entirely by the use that such an expression may be put to within the particular language game of which it forms a part.
Meanings are functions of words; they are not some ghostly essences, capable of subsisting independently of their phenomenal embodiment.
To say of two linguistic expressions that they have the "same meaning" , at best, is to say that under the same sort of conditions, they can be used in the same way, to the same effect.
This is not a particularly happy way of phrasing the objection, though, for the question immediately arises what is meant by "can be used in the same way" , "the same sort of conditions" , "the same effect" , etc.
If we can understand the identity of the criteria of sameness of use, then we can understand the sameness of meaning.
But the identification of the criteria poses no lesser problems than the identification of what the criteria are for.
It might therefore seem that the best, and the only rational, solution is to abandon all references to identity in connection with meaning.
If it is true that meaning reduces to use, then surely all mention of "identity" is inappropriate and can only lead to confusion.
For what we are really talking about are merely linguistic symbols and the manner in which such symbols are manipulated within certain contexts, and all that can be detected here are certain similarities.
There are no recondite semantic entities over and above such similarities; and if there are no entities, there is no identity either.
It follows that, strictly, we cannot justifiably speak of the "same propositions" , or the "same concepts" .
Rather than "identical concepts" , all that is available, and can be significantly referred to, are (in Wittgenstein's famous phrase) "family resemblances" as between different uses of concept-words.
It is in these terms that an attack is often mounted on the whole idea of synonymy.
Since the precise criteria of synonymy cannot be defined, it is argued, there can be no useful work for this concept to do; unless one thinks of synonymy merely as one of "degree" .
Certainly no two expressions in any natural language are ever completely equisignificant.
Nor, for that matter, is it possible to circumscribe the meaning of an expression in an absolutely definitive fashion while this expression remains part of the living body of language.
On the other hand, an arbitrary rule of substitution whereby two expressions are decreed to be interchangeable for each other within a given context, reveals nothing about the "sameness of meaning" unless we are in a position to explain the general rule governing such substitutions, which would ensure that the truth-value of the propositions in which such substitutions are carried out remains always and necessarily unaltered.
In other words, we need certain criteria of sameness, and no such criteria can be provided.
But, then, we should give up the concept of "identical meanings" and accept that there can be only relative similarities of use, and hence only approximate, pragmatically testable, substitutability of certain expressions within similar contexts.
But the fallacious assumption underlying this reasoning is that the idea of identity of meaning makes sense only if the criteria of equisignificance can be clearly defined, whereas the simple fact is that any reference to the criteria of equisignificance already presupposes the notion of sameness of meaning.
The chief source of confusion, briefly, is a conflation of the criteria of sameness of meaning with the meaning of "sameness of meaning" .
But although connected, these two concepts are not identical.
In fact, any argument directed against the applicability of the idea of identity to meanings is really self-stultifying, for such an argument would imply, among other things, that no topic could be significantly referred to as "the same" on two separate occasions, with the inevitable consequence that the argument itself could not get off the ground.
The point is not only that we do as a matter of fact accept "the same meaning" and "a different meaning" as intelligible concepts, but that any attempt to define the criteria of interchangeability of expressions with regard to their meaning presupposes their intelligibility.
I should stress again that I am here concerned with meanings qua posited objective thought-contents of linguistic expressions.
The egocentric and performative aspects of mental and speech acts by historical individuals who use such expressions to make statements, ask questions, etc., naturally enough, often have a direct bearing on the meaning of what is said on a given occasion, and this points to an area of phenomenological problems that needs to be carefully explored if the complexity of the problem of meaning is to be fully understood.
But for the present my principal interest is in meanings qua explicitly posited topics of discourse.
The objections that are raised against identity assumptions in respect of meanings in such a context are chiefly motivated by the fear that such assumptions might commit us to accepting meanings as some kind of entities.
But this fear seems groundless.
Meanings are not onto logical existents
A description, a proposition, an argument can be referred to as "the  same" on different occasions, but only in the sense of the possibility of their being reconstituted as "the same" description, proposition, argument, etc. in acts of recollection.
What is here referred to as "the same" is not an item, or items, capable of existing per se, but rather a mode or species of thought; and a species of thought is necessarily "reconstitutable" in different thought acts, or else it is not a species.
Briefly, in talking about meanings as objective thought-contents we are talking, in effect, about certain species of (reconstitutable, re-thinkable) thought, or thought-modalities.
The concept of equisignificance can now be easily explained, for to say of two symbols that they have the same meaning is merely to say that they both express the same species of thought.
Such a statement may or may not be true in a given instance, but its meaningfulness does not depend on the possibility of supplying a foolproof criterion of sameness.
Nor are such species of thought or thought-modalities capable of existing independently of individual acts of thinking.
They can be objects of thought-acts in reflective consciousness, but they do not qualify as ontological existents.
In a sense, meanings qua species of thought or thought-modalities might be said to represent the principles of "unity" of certain historical mental acts.
What this means might perhaps be made a little clearer with reference to what Kant had to say about his "Ideas" , provided, of course, the comparison is not taken too literally.
Kant notoriously drew a distinction between what he called the "a priori concepts of the understanding" and the "a priori concepts of reason" .
The former are the categories, which, according to him, underly all objective experience and all knowledge of objects.
The latter concepts, which he dubbed "the Ideas" , have merely a regulative function, in the sense that they direct the activity of the understanding towards the ultimate goals of unity and completeness, which however remain forever outside the reach of "empirical synthesis" .
They give a sense of unity and coherence to our cognitive effort, but can never themselves be exhibited in sense experience.
The Ideas, Kant says, "have an excellent, and indeed indispensably necessary, regulative employment, namely, that of directing the understanding towards a certain goal upon which the routes marked out by all its rules converge, as upon their point of intersection" .2 And he immediately goes on to add: "This point is indeed a mere idea, a  focus imaginarius…
"
It is not an object in the phenomenal sense, and to regard it as such is to invite a profound metaphysical confusion.
We need not concern ourselves with the details of Kant's theory of Transcendental Ideas.
What is relevant to our discussion is only the conception of an Idea as a principle of unity, and the fact that an Idea cannot be a phenomenal object.
Both these characteristics are applicable to meanings qua species of thought.
Meanings are principles of unity inasmuch as they represent the same basic orientation of thought in different mental acts and different instances of use of language.
Like Kant's Ideas they have a regulative function, guiding our actions and our cognitive efforts in a certain direction.
And, like Kant's Ideas, meanings are not phenomenal objects.
But unlike Kant's Ideas the"do not represent ontological existents of a special sort.
Not only are meanings not phenomenal objects (in Kant's sense); they are not entities at all.
The reasons for this will become obvious if we compare meanings with things other than the species of thought.
The latter items, of course, like meanings, are subject to identity; i.e. a non-meaning qua topic of discourse is necessarily such that it must be possible to refer to it on different occasions with the phrase "the same A" , where A is a descriptive expression of some sort.
But there is also one further condition that must be fulfilled, and this condition has a crucial bearing upon the distinction between meanings and non-meanings.
Briefly, it is this: that if a topic happens to be a non-meaning, then it must be possible, in addition, to refer to it by means of different, non-synonymous descriptive phrases expressing different yet essential features of the non-meaning in question.
Or, to put it in another way, there must be at least two non-synonymous descriptive phrases of which it can be said both that they are co-extensive in respect of the given non-meaning and characterise this non-meaning in an essential way.
No object of thought that is not capable of being descriptively referred to in such a fashion can be significantly posited as an ontological item existing in the modus "per se" .
Notice that this condition imposes no limitations on the specific nature of ontological items.
It is sufficiently comprehensive to embrace all types of non-meanings regardless of their internal constitution or ontological status.
At the same time, it represents a  necessary condition that must be fulfilled before any references can be significantly made to non-meanings as ontological existents.
It does not, however, represent a sufficient condition of the meaningfulness of such references.
I shall consider presently some examples.
But before I do, it is necessary to forestall a possible misunderstanding regarding the applicability of the category of identity to non-meanings.
The idea of non-meanings as identical subjects of predication while implying the possibility of a framework within which references to such items can be contextually checked for truth, is not explicable in terms of any particular criteria of re-identification.
It would be  useless to pretend that identity of non-meanings, if it is to make sense, ought to be so explicable and then criticise this idea on the grounds that it cannot be so explained.
Yet this is not always clearly understood.
Consider, for example, Hume's argument against identity assumptions.
According to Hume, "the view of any one object is not sufficient to convey the idea of identity" A single object, he argues, conveys the idea of unity, not that of identity.
The notion of identity has its source in a "fiction of the imagination" , whereby an object is represented as invariable through a supposed variation of time.
But nothing can be shown to remain absolutely invariable over any length of time; so how can we be certain that identity can be legitimately applied to anything?
Non-meanings as topics of discourse
Home's criticism of identity assumptions
He continues his argument thus.
If we analyse what is involved in acts of "re-identification" , we shall find that such acts are based, and depend entirely, on the occurrence of certain similar or similarly connected perceptions.
What we in effect register when pronouncing something to be "the same x" are merely certain similarities.
All our experience of "material objects" , in the final analysis, reduces to our having series of similar, or similarly connected, perceptions.
But this means that there can be no justification for supposing that anything remains identical "per se" .
If we refer to such objects as "the same" , this is simply because we "confound the succession with the identity" .
From Hume's standpoint, it is of course precisely this tendency to mistake succession for identity that is chiefly to blame for the metaphysical doctrine of substance as an enduring and unanalysable substratum behind the observable changes.
He believes, therefore, that his criticism of identity at the same time helps to put a stop to this virulent and mystifying doctrine.
For, surely, once it is realised that all that we do have and can rely upon are series of perceptions and ideas, it becomes clear that there can be no justification for assuming the existence of any such metaphysical "substrata" , and the whole doctrine of substance falls to the ground.
Hume's argument, however, does not hold water for the simple reason that it assumes that the question of the possibility of significantly ascribing identity to objects as ontological existents can and should be decided via an analysis of the conditions of their identification, whereas the simple fact is that the concept of an entity as a potential topic of discourse is analytically linked with, and hence inseparable from, that of identity.
Without identity there can be no meaningful references to anything at all, not even to perceptions and ideas.
If Hume's argument proves anything, it is just this: that the assumption of identity cannot be explained in terms of the conditions under which the empirical things of the common sense world are re-identified; in particular, it cannot be explained in terms of similarities between perceptions and ideas.
But from this it does not follow either that we can dispense with identity or that identity is not really applicable to objects as ontological existents.
Certainly we cannot "test" the category of identity for meaning by trying to define the criteria for its use in terms of certain relations between perceptions and ideas.
It is possible, however, to look at Hume's argument from a different, and in general more acceptable, angle.
Thus one might treat it as an argument that is designed not so much to challenge the meaningfulness of applying identity to objects qua ontological existents "out there" as to expose the difficulties of drawing a clear distinction between the numerical and the qualitative (or species) identity in relation to such objects.
If viewed in this light, the argument makes better sense, although of course it acquires an entirely new complexion.
A different view of Hume's argument
More clearly, Hume's argument might be interpreted as an attack on the assumption that a distinction between numerical and qualitative identity can be reliably and unambiguously drawn on the basis of certain empirical criteria.
If all that we can rely on are certain similarities between perceptions and ideas, then surely there is no justification for assuming that existents can be unequivocally differentiated solo numero.
In other words, his argument might be seen as an attempt to confront the common sense with the disconcerting fact that references to what are assumed to be numerically identical spatio-temporal particulars inhabiting an objective world "out there" cannot be given a satisfactory justification, and consequently that one cannot claim with certainty that such particulars represent the basic material of which the world is made up.
If interpreted in this light, the argument becomes not so much an onslaught on the idea of identity as an attack on the idea of empirical things as basic particulars.
That such an interpretation, even though it deviates in important respects from Hume's own intentions, is much less vulnerable to criticism, will be seen more clearly in the next chapter, when we analyse in greater depth the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity, and its ontological significance.
The preliminary conclusion, then, that emerges from our discussion so far is this: that the concept of a topic of discourse is analytically linked with that of identity and that there can be no question of "defining" this link in terms of the conditions of re-identification of such topics, whether they be meanings or non-meanings, for the simple reason that without presupposing the identity of the topic in a given case, the question of its "reidentification" cannot even be intelligibly raised.
Non-meanings and possible existents
This is not to undervalue the importance of the conditions of re-identification.
A judgment of re-identification in a specific instance is made in the light of certain criteria, and is in principle subject to inter-subjective tests in the light of such criteria.
Nevertheless if the judgment happens to be false, it does not automatically become meaningless.
Moreover if a topic does not happen to have the ontological status ascribed to it, it is still possible to refer to it identifyingly qua topic with the phrase "the same A" .
That  a topic of discourse is such that on different occasions it can be referred to as the same is an analytic proposition setting out part of what "topic of discourse" means.
What it says is that it would be self-contradictory to posit something as a topic, while denying the possibility of referring to this something with the phrase "the same A" .
It says nothing about the actual conditions of re-identification of any such topic.
But not all topics of discourse, of course, are legitimate candidates for ontological existents.
We saw that meanings fail to qualify.
Potential ontological existents are topics that are in principle capable of existing independently of individual acts of thought of which they are objects, and meanings cannot so exist.
This leaves non-meanings; but non-meanings are a vast class, comprising logically most diverse elements and including a large sub-class of topics that come under the general heading of "fiction" .
This typewriter on my desk is a non-meaning.
But so is the number two.
And so ostensibly are the greatest cardinal number and the abominable snowman.
What has to be decided is which non-meanings may be significantly regarded as existing "in their own right" , and which cannot be so regarded; what conditions must be fulfilled before a claim that a given topic does so exist can be accepted as meaningful?
Language is sufficiently flexible to allow the construction of an infinite variety of singular terms which do not designate any entity.
In particular, through nominalisation almost any expression can be turned into a noun phrase and used in a quasi-referential function.
There are no formal restrictions limiting the construction of noun phrases and their employment as subjects in subject/predicate statements other than those implicit in the general conditions of coherence and consistency.
The only antidote to an unbridled proliferation of spurious designators is analysis, and of course we all practice analysis in some form or another, even though not always very radically or systematically.
The main aim, usually, is to show that sentences containing what are regarded as bogus designators can be adequately replaced by other sentences which do not contain such designators, and hence that the "real" topic in the given instance is in fact different to what it appears to be.
Such analytic paraphrases are usually conducted from the position of a specific (even though not always openly or clearly stated) ontological bias; and often the assumption is made that all purportive references to "non-meanings" in factual statements, in the final analysis, can be translated into references to ontological existents of the preferred sort.
But the main point is this: that irrespective of whether an analysis is embarked upon from the position of an openly stated or tacitly assumed ontological bias, or whether, on the contrary, the question of an ultimate choice of basic ontological existents is deliberately left undecided, it is usually taken for granted that the concept of an ontological existent is in general well understood.
Yet it is this very concept that is in urgent need of elucidation.
An ontological existent, we have said, is an object that exists in the modus "per se" .
But what precisely is the meaning of "per se" ?
What is involved in assuming that there are ontological objects at all?
What makes this assumption intelligible?
What exactly are we committing ourselves to by making it?
Before any programme for an elimination of"spurious designators can be properly evaluated, before its feasibility, and above all its significance, can be properly judged, it is essential that the concept of an ontological existent be clarified and made absolutely precise and this task is the most complex and most difficult of all.
Let us begin by taking a closer look at the logical structure of referential symbols.
It might seem that the most promising as well as most appropriate way to approach the task of clarifying the concept of ontological existent is to begin by exploring the logical characteristics of proper names.
Proper names are paradigm referential symbols, and it seems natural to look to them for clues.
How, then, do proper names perform their referential function?
Do they necessarily have a meaning as well as reference; and if so, to what extent, if any, is their meaning.content relevant to their designatory function?
What is the nature of the relationship between proper names and descriptive referential phrases that happen to designate the same objects?
Names and descriptions
One familiar view is that nothing qualifies as a genuine proper name unless it singles out its object in an unambiguous fashion, and that this task can be accomplished only by a logically simple symbol.
It follows that names cannot be descriptions, for descriptions are invariably complex, and (it is implied) inherently ambiguous, i.e. they do not by themselves ensure the uniqueness of the referential relation in any given case of referring.
Any complex referential  symbol, or a string of such symbols, theoretically speaking, can apply to any number of individuals, but a proper name picks out one object, and one object only, spanning, as it were, the latter's entire career.
The conclusion derived from this is that if an object is such that in principle it cannot be referred to directly and unequivocally with a simple symbol, only described, then it cannot qualify as a fundamental ontological existent.
It is by definition a complex object, and all complex objects are explicable as logical constructions out of logically simple elements.
They represent, in Russell's colourful phrase, the realm of "logical fictions" , and while the life as we know it obviously would be inconceivable without great many of such "fictions" (they include, among other things, all the spatio-temporal objects of our everyday experience), there are a large number of others which are neither very useful nor indispensable and should be carefully guarded against if we are not to end up with an ontology crowded with all sorts of phoney entities.
Does this give us the clue we need?
Can the distinction, that is, between names, conceived as purely referential simple symbols, and descriptions, enable us to gain a clearer insight into the concept of an ontological existent, i.e. an item existing "per se " , on the one hand, and the "constructed" superstructure of — convenient, and not so convenient — "fictions" , on the other?
The first, and most natural, reaction to this is to reject the suggestion that there can be such things as non-descriptive, simple referential symbols.
A referential symbol, it might be argued, refers only in virtue of what it means, i.e. it necessarily carries a descriptive content.
This does not mean that names are always replaceable in a straightforward fashion by descriptive phrases.
 "Shakespeare" and "the author of Macbeth" refer to the same person, but evidently they are not always interchangeable.
If they were, "Shakespeare is the author of Macbeth" would be a tautology, not a contingent truth.
Nevertheless this does not show that "Shakespeare" is a purely referential symbol devoid of all descriptive content, only that there is a certain difference in scope as between "Shakespeare" and "the author of Macbeth" ; with "Shakespeare" , in the final analysis, unfolding into a complex series of descriptions that uniquely characterise the individual concerned.
If, on the other hand, the condition is that the proper name, if it is to count as a proper name at all, must be non-descriptive, then we shall look in vain for suitable candidates, for there can hardly be an expression that communicates  something and yet does not incorporate, or contextually presuppose, a descriptive content.
In a sense, of course, all this is true.
It is moreover true that names are often deliberately chosen for their descriptive content.
Columbus had an excellent reason for naming the island where he first landed after crossing the Atlantic "San Salvador" .
In fact, it is fairly safe to assume that all proper names started their denotative careers as descriptions of one sort or another, although in many cases the link with the original descriptive content subsequently became severed or obscured.
What is more, proper names are normally introduced into discourse by means of descriptive phrases.
Thus I might say "The man over there is John" .
I might of course only gesture and say "John" , but unless my gesture means, or can be understood to mean, "the man over there" , or something akin to this, "John" will fail to communicate anything.
But if descriptive phrases are necessary to introduce names or things that can be seen and pointed at, they are clearly even more necessary in respect of objects that cannot be seen, or no longer exist.
Thus no amount of gesturing will help to explain the references of "Shakespeare" or "Julius Caesar" or "Socrates" .
Yet none of this obliterates the difference between the respective roles of names and descriptions.
A proper name is no less a proper name for possessing a descriptive content.
Moreover no proper name can fulfil its function as a proper name without certain descriptions that specify the conditions under which the name in question can be significantly applied, but it does not follow for this that names are ultimately "reducible" to descriptions; i.e. that, in the final analysis, there is no real difference between them at all.
Why does this not follow?
One prima facie plausible answer is provided by another theory, according to which the specific feature that marks off proper names from descriptions should be sought not in any "logical simplicity" but rather in the "rigidity of their designation" .
The central idea here is that a proper name qua proper name not only picks out one object only, but unlike a descriptive phrase designates that same object in "every possible world" ; a "possible world" being understood as representing a possible but unactualised situation, or a series of situations, of which the given object might be a feature.
Thus the name "Shakespeare" rigidly refers to Shakespeare, irrespective of whether we happen to be talking about what Shakespeare did or wrote, or did not do or write but might have done or written, i.e. about his actual or merely possible attributes.
On the other hand, "the author of Macbeth" is a non-rigid designator, because the author of Macbeth might not have been Shakespeare.
For example, he might have been Bacon.
The referential rigidity is said to be subject to a simple intuitive test.
Thus if it does not make sense to suppose that the designatum of "A" might be different from what it is, then "A" is a rigid designator, otherwise it is non-rigid.
To take again our example, Shakespeare could not have been other than Shakespeare (and, of course, Bacon could not have been other than Bacon), but — theoretically — any number of people might have written Macbeth.
It follows that, contextual substitutions apart, naming symbols can never be entirely replaced by descriptive phrases, for this would mean substituting non-rigid designators for rigid ones, which might very well result in a change of truth-value of the propositions concerned.
Thus "The author of Macbeth was born at Stratford-on-Avon" becomes a falsehood if Bacon (or some other person born elsewhere) wrote the play.
The distinction between names and descriptions remains thus of crucial importance.
A descriptive expression, it is argued, may help fix the reference of a name via some contingent characteristic of the object in question (as is the case with "the author of Macbeth" ), but it cannot provide its "definition" .
Does this give us the answer we need?
There is no doubt, of course, that when a given symbol (irrespective of its "descriptive content" ) is accorded the status of a name, it acquires the privileged position of a representative of the biographical identity of the object it names, and by virtue of this very fact it can no longer be equated with any description, or series of descriptions.
 "Shakespeare" denotes someone who might have had any number of different characteristics.
He happens to be called "Shakespeare" , but this does not make "Shakespeare" equivalent with "the man called Shakespeare" , for he might not have been called "Shakespeare" at all.
He almost certainly was not thus called by his own father.
In fact, he might have been, and very probably was, called a number of different names by different people at various times during his lifetime.
And, of course, the man referred to as "Shakespeare" might have been Bacon, or rather he might have had the attributes associated with Bacon.
The point is that "Shakespeare" , used as a name, enables us to express intelligibly all such possibilities.
But given the fact that names in such cases do behave as rigid designators, the question is, does the referential rigidity provide a sufficient criterion for distinguishing names from descriptions, and the answer to this clearly must be that it does not.
Thus it is not difficult to find descriptions that satisfy the "intuitive test" of rigidity.
 "The first positive even integer" and "the common logarithm of 100" both "rigidly" , refer to the number two.
They could not refer to anything else.
Any referential term descriptive of a genuine individuating feature of the object concerned is by definition a "rigid designator" .
I am not suggesting, of course, that such uniquely referring terms are available for any kind of objects whatever.
In particular, contingent entities cannot be individuated in an absolute sense by any kind of descriptive phrase.
No description of such entities is so precise as to exclude a priori all possibility of an ambiguous reference.
But numbers belong in a different category, and here descriptive terms evidently can refer just as "rigidly" as names can.
It follows that the difference between names and descriptions cannot be defined in terms of "referential rigidity" .
What gives a name as a name its special status is that it represents the transcendence"of the object relative to any particular description that might be given of that object.
An object can be described from an indefinite number of different perspectives.
The function of a name is to designate the common target of such descriptions.
The target sometimes may turn out to be fictional.
Sometimes, as, for example, in the context of a play or a fairy tale, it is not intended to be anything other than fictional.
Yet even in such contexts the semantic difference between names and descriptions is not entirely obliterated, although one can hardly talk here of a rigidity of reference across "all possible worlds" .
What we have to begin with, then, is the posited transcendence of the object relative to its possible perspectival descriptions.
This gives us a key to the difference between naming and describing.
The concept of referential rigidity in the sense in which it is used in the above theory, on the other hand, goes beyond this in that it already presupposes the idea of "per se" existence.
To make use again of our example, the referential rigidity of "Shakespeare" is explained, in effect, by a reference to the actual existence of Shakespeare.
If, however, Shakespeare did actually exist, then he must have possessed certain attributes that made him the kind of existent he was, even though no attributes that he may have had would have been  sufficient to individuate him in a metaphysical sense.
What this boils down to, briefly, is this: that one cannot treat "Shakespeare" as a "rigid designator" without at the same time assuming that some essence "attaches to it, and hence that certain descriptions necessarily go with it, although no such description, or set of descriptions, can fully reproduce its" meaning".
Expressed in a different way, one cannot coherently both use "Shakespeare" as a name and assume that Shakespeare literally could be "anything" .
If "Shakespeare" names an existent, it names someone with certain specific attributes, although his numerical identity, in the strict sense, cannot be defined in terms of those attributes.
(I shall return to this problem later on.)
Some logical constraints on onto logical assumptions
(a) Coherence
It is then not so much the distinction between names and descriptions as the distinction between the function of naming and the function of describing that gives some indication as to what is involved in positing something as an ontological existent.
There is no question of any "definition" of the latter idea, simply the matter of bringing out some of its central implications.
Nevertheless there are certain minimal logical conditions that must be satisfied before any references to ontological existents can be accepted as meaningful.
One such condition is a corollary of the Principle of Contradiction, and may be stated as follows.
No object can qualify as a possible ontological existent if its notion gives rise to a contradiction.
This does not mean that nothing whatever qualifies that could conceivably take "contradictory" predicates.
An object as a temporally extended existent may very well have the predicate p at time t, and the predicate not-p at time t.
In fact, most objects that we come into contact with do.
But, then, we think of such objects as temporally extended.
What is not possible is that something should exist (temporally extended or not) of which no coherent notion can be formed.
The implications of the requirement of coherence can be more easily demonstrated in relation to atemporal objects.
Take the familiar mathematical example of the greatest cardinal number.
If such a number did exist, it would be the last member of the series of cardinals arranged in the order of magnitude.
But the series of  cardinals cannot have a last member.
This follows from Cantor's proof showing that the number of possible selections from a given set of objects necessarily exceeds the number of the actual members of that set, irrespective of how many members the set happens to have.
Thus, given a set with just two members a and b, four different selections are possible:(a),(b), lab), and the empty set Q. In general, if a set has n members, there will be 2  possibilities of selection, or 2  subsets.
This remains valid irrespective of whether n is finite or infinite.
It follows that there can be no greatest cardinal number, for such a number, if it did exist, would be "greater than itself" .
A similar problem is presented by the notorious "Russell's class" .
Like the greatest cardinal number, Russell's class similarly fails to satisfy the requirement of coherence.
Classes, Russell reasoned, are normally not members of themselves.
The class of apples is not itself an apple.
If now we conceive of a class comprising all classes that are not members of themselves, would this class be a member of itself, or would it not be a member of itself?
Either supposition leads to a contradiction, and the conclusion must be that such a class cannot exist in any conceivable universe.
We have here two examples not just of non-existents but of impossible existents, and the question immediately arises, how can an "impossible existent" qualify as a genuine topic of discourse?
What, if anything, is here being "talked about" ?
We have used the phrases "Russell's class" and "The greatest cardinal number" , but such phrases not only do not, but cannot denote any ontological existent.
Should they, then, be branded as spurious designators and banished from rational discourse?
Yet if we are not allowed to use them in contextual cross-references, how can we succeed in saying what we wish to say, namely that they do not designate any existent?
Russell's own answer to this kind of problem, as is well known, was to suggest that all descriptive referential expressions without exception should be eliminated and replaced by certain predicates.
Such expressions, he argued, cannot perform a genuinely naming function, and, ideally, should not be used at all.
But this seems much too drastic.
If my analysis of the concept of topic of discourse is correct, then clearly any topic can be descriptively referred to.
In the above examples, the topics referred to are certain meanings, and meanings, as we saw, do not qualify as ontological existents in any case.
What must be possible, at the very least, is to refer to the given item by means of certain coextensive non-synonymous phrases, which form part of the essential description of that item.
But references to meanings are generally based on certain accidental characteristics that act as contextual code signals in communication, and can hardly be treated as part of the "essential description" of their referents.
(b) Determinacy I turn now to another basic logical condition of meaningfulness of describing something as an ontological existent.
This condition is a corollary of the principle of Excluded Middle and may be stated as follows.
An item cannot be significantly posited as existing in any ontological sense, without at the same time, out of every pair of contradictory predicates, one, and only one such predicate can be correctly ascribed to it.
Expressed differently, for any given existent, in any context in which this existent may be "talked about" , there is a non-arbitrary set of predicates attributable to that existent.
Yet more clearly, perhaps, by describing something as an ontological existent clearly, perhaps, by describing something as an ontological existent we are in effect committed to accepting that this something, at any given time, can be rightfully claimed to belong to one, and only one, out of each pair of mutually exclusive classed in any universe of discourse in which this existent features as a topic.
This may not be immediately obvious, and in some cases in may even appear to be contrary to what one would normally regard as "common sense" .
Surely, it will be said, it is necessary to draw a distinction between predicates which within a given context at a given time can be appropriately ascribed to a given existent, and those predicates which under the same conditions cannot be meaningfully said that either they or their contradictories are true of the existent in question.
If Jones has never heard of Tolstoy or read any of his books, it is meaningless to assert that Jones either likes Tolstoy as a writer or does not like Tolstoy as a writer.
The question of his liking or disliking Tolstoy simply does not arise.
However, this argument depends too much on the conventions governing ordinary usage.
It does indeed sound odd to say, in Jones's case, that he either likes Tolstoy or does not like Tolstoy.
Yet no great effort of imagination is required to described Jones meaningfully and accurately as either being like those who are Tolstoy-liking or not being like those who are Tolstoy-liking.
As a  matter of fact, Jones is not like those who are Tolstoy-liking (i.e. he lacks their Tolstoy-liking views and attitudes).
He is of course also not like those who are Tolstoy-disliking.
Both these statements make perfectly good sense.
Moreover they remain meaningful irrespective of whether Jones has read or even heard of Tolstoy.
To sum up, in positing an item as an ontological existent we are at the same time by implication positing this item as a potential subject of a non-arbitrary subset of predicates from among an indefinite number of meaningful predicates, and hence as completely determinate with regard to possible descriptions that may be given of it at any given time.
Notice that we have said nothing yet about the possibility of actually deciding, in a given instance, which of the two mutually exclusive classes the posited existent belongs to.
We have merely argued that such an existent belongs to.
We have merely aruged that such an existent necessarily belongs to only one such class, i.e. that it necessarily takes only one out of each pair of contradictory predicates.
This is part of what is meant by an ontological existent (qua item existing in the modus "per se" ).
In a sense, this represents the most general and at the same time the most fundamental "principle of individuation" for such items.
But does this enable us actually to decide in each case which predicates do and which don't apply to the item concerned?
It seems fairly obvious that often such a decision will not be possible either because no clear decision procedures are available, or because of certain fundamental difficulties involved in applying such procedures.
Yet while it may not be possible, in a given case, to come to a clear decision one way or the other, it cannot, I shall argue, be coherently assumed that a decision is logically impossible and at the same time insisted that the object in question exists in an ontological sense.
In other words, I shall dispute that ontological existents can be coherently treated in an uncritical metaphysical fashion as "things (existing unconditionally) in themselves" .
Evidently unless both conditions discussed above are met no references to ontological existents can make clear sense.
But although essential, these conditions are not sufficient to explain the full significance of such references.
There are at least two other central issues that must be discussed before we can obtain a clearer  insight into what is involved in regarding something as an ontological existent.
One of them concerns the possibility of a distinction between numerical and species identity, i.e. the problem of individuation of ontological particulars.
The other concerns what, by contrast, might be called the "problem of differentiation" , viz. how to explain the possibility of there being a plurality of ontological existents rather than just one.
These will be the topics of the next two chapters.
Numerical and species identity of ontological existents
The Principle of Individuation
Ontological existents as a sub-species of topics of discourse, it has been emphasised, are inseparable from identity, i.e. it must be possible in respect of any such existent to use the phrase "the same A" , with A being a descriptive expression of some sort.
However, apart from some desultory comments about spurious denoting phrases, no attempt has been made to discuss the nature of such identifying references in any great detail.
Yet depending upon what A is, the phrase in question can be used to assert the numerical identity of a particular or the qualitative identity of a species.
We say "the same man" and mean numerically the same human person; and we say "the same colour" and mean a quality that can be possessed or exemplified by different individuals.
Obviously to say that an ontological existent qua possible topic of discourse is such that on different occasions it can be referred to as "the same A" is not to say a great deal unless a clarification is given of the distinction and the relationship between these two kinds of sameness.
In the last chapter I have discussed briefly the "most general principle of individuation" , based on the principle of Excluded Middle.
But this principle on account of its very generality cannot throw light on the above distinction, and as a result the concept of individuality remains ambiguous and obscure.
It is essential but not enough to postulate that an object-topic, if it is to qualify as existing in the modus per se, i.e. in its own right and not just as an object of thought, must be a subject, at any given time, of a non-arbitrary set of predicates.
It is necessary, in addition, to explain the significance and the implications of the distinction between particularity and specificity involved in references to such topics.
What makes it possible to ask meaningfully in respect of a given existent not only in what way it qualitatively differs from any other type of existent, but what makes it numerically, existentially unique?
Where does the distinction between particularity and specificity have its roots?
In the following, I shall argue that while this distinction is a vital  conceptual ingredient in any meaningful references to object-topics qua ontological existents, it cannot be "explained" in terms of the criteria under which such existents are numerically and qualitatively re-identified and distinguished from one another.
By this I do not mean that the question of criteria is unimportant, or that the distinction remains meaningful even if there are no ontological objects at all to which it might be applied.
On the contrary, I shall maintain that this distinction demands the existence of such objects, and that moreover its applicability to such objects presupposes the possibility of certain criteria.
But no criteria are sufficient actually to explain this distinction, and in order to elucidate its meaning it is necessary to consider it in connection with certain modes of experiencing with which it forms a structural unity.
Let us begin by examining some traditional views about particular-identity.
Numerical and qualitative identity
Usually one, or both, of the following conditions are said to hold:(a) No particular can be in two places at once.
Two particulars simultaneously occupying two different places are in virtue of this very fact two different particulars.
By contrast, universals can be simultaneously exemplified by different particulars in different places.
(b) Particulars exist in time.
By their very nature they are temporal entities.
They come and go out of existence.
Universals are timeless.
Consider (a) first.
The idea of particularity is here linked with the idea of place — "place" being taken in its physical sense of "spatial location" .
It is assumed that a particular's individuality, its numerical distinctness from any other existent, is ensured by the spatial location it happens to occupy at any given time.
(The insistence on spatial location as a criterion, it should be noted, means that logical individuals, such as numbers, for example, automatically fail the particularity test.)
Universals, in contrast to particulars, are said to be merely "exemplified" or "illustrated" at various places.
This is often used as an argument in support of the view that universals (as well as logical individuals) cannot be ontological existents.
All this accords well with common sense.
Thus the tendency, normally, is to take the view that a condition of significantly  claiming x to be actually existent is that it should be possible to ask "Where is x?" .
But it clearly is not meaningful to ask "Where is the concept house?" or "Where is the quality green?" 
What can be asked meaningfully is: "Where is A's house?" and "Where is the green hat?" 
In the latter two cases the objects concerned can be given spatial co-ordinates and thereby unequivocally distinguished from any other particulars of the similar sort.
However, this view soon runs into difficulties.
First, there is the problem of change of place.
A particular, one normally assumes, can change its place without ceasing to be numerically the same particular.
Yet if spatial position is the only criterion of particularity, how can we be certain that a given particular in a different place is still numerically the same particular?
Secondly, it is necessary to explain whence and how its co-ordinates are to be assigned.
If place is to be defined in terms of co-ordinates, the assumption that no particular can be in two places at once presupposes the (logical) possibility of a unique designation by means of co-ordinates of every single position in space, i.e. the possibility, in principle, of setting up an all-embracing co-ordinate system; making it possible to differentiate unambiguously every point in space from any other from a given origin.
But what individuates the origin?
We might try to define the origin in terms of some other frame of reference.
But this will only raise the problem of a new origin, and so with every other system that we might adopt.
It follows that there can be no individuation, in an absolute sense, of any origin, and hence of any place.
Spatial determination by means of co-ordinates, alone, cannot ensure the metaphysical uniqueness of any existent.
And if so, we cannot, without qualifications, assert that no particular can be in two places at once.
This cannot be asserted as a metaphysical proposition; as something, that is, which is true of the world of existents irrespective of the manner in which existents are given in our experience.
Now consider (b).
It is maintained that whereas particulars are in time, universals are timeless.
Things like pencils and tables and houses and electronic calculators, as well as living beings, are "temporal" entities in the sense that we can meaningfully speak of their life-span, their "coming into being" and "going out of existence" or "ceasing to be" .
If, as is sometimes done, things are assimilated to events, we can speak of particulars as events, and of the latter as being "temporal" in the sense that every event exhibits a pattern of  change in some direction, and can be said to occur simultaneously with, or before, or after, some other event.
Concepts, on the other hand, cannot be meaningfully described as "temporal" in this sense.
The desk on which I am writing exists "in time" ; the concept desk does not.
This approach too creates difficulties.
But first, a brief general comment about space and time in order to forestall a possible misunderstanding.
In distinguishing between (a) and (b) I may have given the impression of wishing to maintain a strict distinction between space and time as against the physical space-time.
This distinction may be justified from a limited epistemological standpoint, it might be said, but it does not really make sense in physical terms.
Particulars qua ontological existents are not in space and in time; they are slices of physical space-time.
It is not my intention here to question the usefulness of the concept of physical space-time, or any other concept of physics, for that matter.
I am merely concerned to point out that a clarification of particular-identity is normally given in terms of our experience with things in perceptual space and perpeptual time.
As to whether four-dimensional events rather than perceptual objects should be regarded as ontologically basic particulars, this is a metaphysical decision which need not concern us at the moment.
It should be emphasised, however, that epistemologically at least any individuation of such events cannot but begin with an individuation of perceptual things, and consequently that its success or failure will inevitably depend upon the success or failure of the latter.
With regard to "temporality" (in the sense in which this concept was used above), this cannot be regarded as a sufficient condition of particularity so long as it is not shown that temporality alone (in the indicated sense) ensures numerical identity of particulars; and if we are to be able to justifiably claim that it is a necessary condition of particularity, we must first show that there can be no extra-temporal particulars."
Nevertheless, it might be argued that the problem of particular identity, at least as far as perceptual things are concerned, presents no insoluble problems.
After all, we demonstrate daily our ability to make inter-subjectively intelligible and successful identifying references to things around us.
If this were not possible, inter-subjective communication could not take place.
The "individuating force" of such references depends of course to a large extent upon the context in which they are made.
Thus if at this moment someone said something to me about "that ugly little statue on your fireplace" and accompanied this with an appropriate gesture, I should have little difficulty in identifying the object to which he is referring, but identification may not be so easy if a reference is made to an object that is not accessible to immediate perception, or of which I have no knowledge whatever.
Individuation via demonstrative identification
Basically, there are two types of identifying references to particulars: one involving the use of "demonstratives" (demonstrative pronouns, personal pronouns, adverbs such as "here" , "there" , "today" etc.); the other relying on descriptions that do not involve the use of demonstratives; one speaker-related, the other "impersonal" .
It is often argued that the latter type of identifying references are really parasitic upon the former.
The intelligibility and indeed the success of any identifying references to particulars, it is claimed, depend ultimately upon the intelligibility and the success of demonstrative references to particulars in the context of a speaker-hearer situation.
It is the individuation by demonstratives that provides a basis for a unitary system of spatio-temporal relations in which every particular has a unique place and in which we ourselves provide the main point of reference.
By comparison, impersonal descriptive references lack the same individuating force and are frequently ambiguous and misleading.
The phrase "the tallest man in England" will fail to individuate any person if the class of tallest men in England happens to have more than one member.
This is not to say that particulars cannot under any circumstances be contextually individuated via "impersonal" descriptions.
In a vast majority of cases such descriptive references are accepted as perfectly adequate.
Many particulars cannot be demonstratively identified in any case.
But if a particular is to be successfully identified non-demonstratively — it is argued — there  must be an individuating fact that relates it uniquely to the "present situation of reference" .
In other words, it must be possible to connect this particular in an unambiguous fashion with certain items that are accessible to direct, or demonstrative, identification.
The basic idea, in short, is that the problem of individuation should be approached from the horizon of ordinary everyday experience.
It is hoped that in this way the metaphysical difficulties surrounding this problem will largely melt away.
For, it is argued, it makes little sense to worry about the possibility of repetitiveness and reduplication with regard to the world "in itself" if we can establish the historical uniqueness of particulars in relation to ourselves.
There is a system of spatio-temporal relations in which we ourselves have a place and which provides that unified framework within which every particular is uniquely related to every other, and where the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity has a perfectly valid and immediately intelligible application.
But how reliable is demonstrative identification?
Consider the following example.
Suppose that while shopping in a crowded store I become temporarily separated from a friend and in reply to his anxious call shout back "I am here" .
What with the cacophony of sounds assailing us from all sides and the crowd of shoppers jostling and pressing between and around us, this reply may not give him a very clear indication of where I am standing.
But suppose that he proceeds in the general direction from where he assumed by voice came and suddenly found himself face to face with a stranger who looked very similar to myself.
In a hurry to find me and too tired to pay attention to detail, he might give him a cursory glance and exclaim, relieved, "Ah, there you are." 
Soon afterwards he may realise his mistake and continue his search.
But if the stranger was an exact replica of myself, behaved in exactly the same way, etc., he would obviously find it more difficult to make a correct identification.
In fact, he would most probably come to regard the stranger as myself.
In order to reassure himself, he might question the stranger as myself.
In order to reassure himself, he might question the stranger about things from my own past, recalling occasions  which only I could possibly remember and comparing his answers with those that I would be likely to give.
But this too might fail to expose the error, for the stranger might simply guess the right answers, or his answers might be so close to those expected of him that even the most scrupulous interrogator would be deceived.
Is there anything else that might be done to settle the issue one way or the other?
Some difficulties of demonstrative identification
Suppose my friend turned to other people for help, gathered all the crucial data about myself, consulted everyone who knew me, all my friends and acquaintances.
This still might not provide an answer to the problem, if only because he might be deceived by others as well as by the stranger himself.
The process of verification of data, theoretically, could go on for , always requiring new acts of identification.But imagine now a slightly different situation.
Suppose that my friend was not looking for me at all.
He had, in fact, just left me on a bench in a nearby park where we had spent some time together before he decided to go for a stroll.
He could then say to the impostor: "Look here, it is useless to go on pretending.
I have just left him in the park.
You can't be in two places at once."
If the stranger persisted, he might take him to the park and point at me, which in normal circumstances should be sufficient to settle the matter.
But we are now not concerned with what is normally likely to happen, but with what might happen.
The stranger might refuse to admit defeat and maintain simply that the person sitting on the bench was not I, that he was I, and that it was with him that the man who was now doubting his identity was having a conversation a moment ago.
What could my friend reply to this?
He might decide to cross-examine both of us in an attempt to detect inconsistencies in our replies, or hope for some slip-up on our part which might enable him to make the correct identification.
But if we are both determined to mislead him, he is not likely to make much headway.
In desperation, he might appeal to witnesses who had seen me sitting on the bench in the park while he was talking to my double outside.
But witnesses too could be mistaken.
Furthermore, interrogation of witnesses involves another series of identifications which raise similar problems.
In view of all this, he might finally decide that the time had come to give up further arguing and accept what each of us has told him.
Thus he might say: "All right, from now on I shall accept what you  say.
You now standing on my right are the person I left on the bench, and you on my left are someone else, and neither of you can deceive me any longer."
However, he would have to keep a close eye on our movements from now on, never allowing both of us to disappear from his sight for any length of time.
For suppose that he, tired as he must be, closes his eyes for a few moments.
Then, on opening them again, he would be confronted with the same problem: which of us is which?
If the interval during which he kept his eyes closed was very short, say one second, he could maintain that we could not have exchanged our places in so short a time and invoke the laws of physics in support of his view.
But the laws of physics are valid only until further notice", i.e. until instances are found that falsify them, and this conceivably might be such an instance.
Now it might be argued that ontologically the decisive factor is that on opening his eyes he found again two distinct individuals.
He might not be able to tell with complete certainty which is which, but he can still numerically distinguish them, and, if he so chooses, name them again.
But this clearly is not enough.
For the question is, how can he be sure that in observing two similar individuals on two different occasions he is in fact observing the same pair?
Furthermore, the fact that he sees them as two distinct individuals does not necessarily mean that they exist as two distinct individuals when they are not perceived.
Their perceptual distinguishability, alone, is no proof either of their actual existence or of their distinguishability per se.
That two such individuals are perceived as two is due simply to their occupying two different positions within the perceiver's own visual field.
Thus one might be perceived to the left of the other, or to the right of the other, or above the other.
But left, right, above conceivably might be merely qualities of the perceiver's own visual field and not at all relations in an objective space.
In other words, what is seen, or rather what is believed to be seen, as numerically distinct, need not be numerically distinct in reality.
None of these difficulties are likely to trouble us much in daily life, but they remain genuine difficulties none the less and raise issues of fundamental importance; for if there can be no absolutely reliable and unequivocal criteria for deciding whether any given existent remains numerically, and not merely qualitatively, the same from one moment in time to the next, then we cannot hope to be able to "define" the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity  in terms of the criteria of particular-identification.
But, then, what, if anything, does justify the assumption that there can be numerically (purely numerically) distinguishable particulars at all?
In what follows, I propose to pursue this question further by considering critically four different philosophical theories of particulars.
I shall then briefly outline a structural approach to the problem of the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity.
Let us begin with Kant.
Kant argued that the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity can be meaningfully drawn only in the domain of the phenomenal; i.e. within the context of space and time, which, according to him, are the "forms of our intuition" and not properties of things in themselves.
If space and time were properties of things in themselves, he argued, then if two things had the same properties, there would be no means of telling them apart, and Leibniz's "principle of indiscernibles" would hold true.
But if space and time are merely "forms of our intuition" , then the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity presents no difficulty, for in that case any two things can be numerically distinguished in virtue of their spatial position alone.
 "Thus in the case of two drops of water" he says —"we can abstract altogether from all internal difference (of quality and quantity), and the mere fact that they have been intuited simultaneously in different spatial positions is sufficient justification for holding them to be numerically different.
Four theories of particulars
(a) Kant's theory
This explanation won't do, of course.
It is inadequate, because all it does, in effect, is to transfer the problem from things to spatial positions, or places.
Thus the question that immediately arises is, what makes places numerically distinguishable?
What justifies the assumption that two qualitatively identical things can occupy simultaneously two different places, or numerically the same place in succession?
Above all, what needs to be explained is how we distinguish between places in a phenomenological space and places in  an objective space.
For it is clearly not enough to say that if two things are observed simultaneously in different spatial positions, then they are two, not one, even though they might be completely alike.
This merely amounts to saying that if two things are observed as spatially distinct, then they are not observed as spatially indistinct, which is true enough but hardly illuminating.
We need to know something quite different, viz. whether it is possible, and if so, under what conditions, for spatial positions to be an adequate individuating factor in the case of entities which are not, and cannot be, simultaneously perceived.
What is Kant's reply to this?
Briefly, his reply is that the key to the individuative power of spatial positions lies in the fact there there is only one all-embracing space, of which particular spaces, or places, are constituent parts (so that every place is almost by definition unique).
Not only is space one, but the very notion that there might be different, unconnected, spaces is really unintelligible.
The idea of space, he argues, is not obtained by abstraction from particular spatial relations; rather our ability to see things as spatially related already presupposes an idea of a unitary space.
Similarly, the idea of time is not extracted from any observation of actual coexistence and succession; on the contrary, any significant references to coexistence and succession already presuppose an idea of time.
It follows that neither space nor time can be classified as "general concepts" .
A general concept can be exemplified by any number of particular instances which need not stand in any causal relation with each other.
But individual spaces are not exemplifying instances of the concept of space; they are parts of space, just as individual times are parts of a single universal time.
But this answer is still not satisfactory, for the question remains, why is it necessary for such a unitary space and time to be other than a phenomenological space and time?
It is just not good enough to say that a spatial position in a unitary space alone ensures the numerical uniqueness of its occupier.
For what guarantee is there that it does so objectively?
Or, to change the question slightly, if space and time are (as Kant claims) "pure intuitions" , what confers objectivity upon such intuitions?
Kant's argument is of course inspired by his unshakeable belief in the synthetic character and the "apodeictic certainty" of mathematical propositions.
He asks "How are such propositions possible?" , and his answer is that this can be explained only by assuming that  space and time are a priori features of our cognitive constitution, not properties of things in themselves.
Moreover, the fact that experience of objects is to be had only under the form of space and time ensures the applicability of mathematics to the whole or the phenomenal (and hence physical) world.
But Kant's choice of examples is rather unfortunate.
Thus that no more than three lines can intersect at right angles in a point; that a line (theoretically) can be extended into infinity; that congruent figures can be superimposed upon each other, while incongruent figures can't (even though they are completely alike in all points) etc.; all of this may be phenomenologically obvious, but why should it be true of an objective world?
The question, in short, is, what confers objectivity upon such spatial intuitions?— and the only answer that Kant is able to give to this is: "The universal validity and necessity of geometrical propositions." 
In other words, his argument remains essentially circular.
But even if Kants idea of a unitary space is granted, it is still not entirely clear how places in such a space can act as a principle of individuation.
Places are determined in relation to entities, which means that if places are to perform their individuative function, it is necessary to assume the numerical uniqueness of the entities that act as our frame of reference, and so once again we seem to be caught in a circular argument.
I turn now to Leibniz.
Whereas in Kant's theory, in a sense, there still lingers the common sense conception of space and time as some kind of backcloth against which the positions of phenomenal objects can be uniquely charted and distinguished from each other, Leibniz regarded space and time as properties of entities.
It is generally accepted that this theory accords better with the view of modern science and is superior to that of Kant.
It certainly seems to escape the circularity inherent in a Kantian attempt to link the particularity of entities with the numerical identity of the places that such entities occupy in a general spatio-temporal framework, which only leads to the problem of having to presuppose the existence of numerically identical entities in order to be able to refer to identical places.
Leibniz's view is that the sources of individuation lie within the entities themselves; in other words, entities are regarded as basic, and places are said to be explicable in terms of relations between entities — "entities" meaning here "individual substances" or "monads" .
(b) Leibniz's theory
But what exactly does individuate a monad?
What is it that gives it its "existential uniqueness" ?
Leibniz's reply to this question is somewhat confusing.
He argues that a monad is fully determined by the attributes it has and, what is more, that every monad is qualitatively (not just numerically) different from every other.
If two monads coincided in all their attributes, then they would be indistinguishable and one could not properly speak of "two" monads.
This is the gist of his "principle of indiscernibles" , and it might seem that the most natural conclusion for him to draw would be that numerical identity, in the final analysis, reduces to qualitative identity and numerical distinguishability to qualitative difference.
Yet Leibniz does not draw this conclusion.
Although he maintains that every monad is distinguished from every other in virtue of the  attributes it has, he nevertheless refuses to regard monads as mere agglomerations' of attributes — or what might be more appropriately described as groups or "bundles" of qualities, without a "substratum" .
To him, monads are substances, not just bundles of qualities.
But the question is, can he both maintain that monads do not reduce to bundles of qualities and continue to adhere to his principle of indiscernibles without being guilty of a serious inconsistency?
For if the principle of indiscernibles is to be taken seriously, then there can be no other way of telling two monads apart except through their qualities.
Leibniz is clearly in some difficulty here.
On the one hand, he does not wish to say that numerical identity reduces to qualitative identity; on the other, he does not wish to abandon the principles of indiscernibles.
So in an effort to reconcile these two positions he introduces into his argument yet another metaphysical principle, viz. the "principle of sufficient reason" .
It is not logically impossible, he claims, that there should be different specimens of qualitatively indiscernible monads (even if we ourselves might not be able to discern them).
If God had so wished, he most certainly could have created duplicate worlds; it is only that in so doing God would have acted without a sufficient reason, and this would be contrary to his nature.
In other words, the numerical identity of monads is guaranteed by God's own inherent "rationality" .
But this explanation, apart from implicitly casting doubts upon the ontological interpretation of the principle of indiscernibles, hardly helps to throw much light on the whole issue.
Thus the principle of indiscernibles now seems to reduce to the thesis that if there were duplicate monads and duplicate worlds, we ourselves, relying on our own cognitive resources, would not be in a position to distinguish them.
This evidently does not apply to God, who is said to be able (although unlikely) to create duplicate worlds.
But the point is that we are not told why the distinction between particular and species-identity makes sense at all.
So the problem remains unresolved.
Leibniz was quite right, of course, to reject the view that a sufficient criterion of numerical  identity of things can be defined in terms of the conditions under which we distinguish between their respective positions in space, but he himself had no better explanation to offer.
All he did was to invoke the dubious metaphysical principle of "sufficient reason" in order to ensure the existential uniqueness of his monads and secure a basis for a meaningful distinction between numerical and qualitative identity.
The two theories to be discussed next are of more recent date and, essentially, represent attempts to modify Leibniz's and Kant's theories, respectively, in an effort to salvage what is regarded as the sound core of these theories by stripping them of their philosophically undesirable features.
Consider, first, a theory which takes its clue from Leibniz, while at the same time trying to dispense with Leibniz's dubious metaphysics.
The main effort in this theory is concentrated on exposing the logical superfluousness of the idea of substance as a "metaphysical substratum" , which still lingers on in — and complicates — Leibniz's conception of the monad.
There is no need, it is argued, to postulate any such substrata in order to account for the idea of particular identity.
Leibniz, unaccountably, still clung to the traditional idea of substance, notwithstanding his own "principle of indiscernibles" .
Yet, it is claimed, all that he really needed were attributes, or more accurately, qualities.
(c) Particulars as bundles of qualities
Consequently, in this theory (which was put forward by Bertrand Russell) 7 the place of Leibniz's monads is taken by what are called "bundles" or "complexes" of "compresent qualities" .
A bundle of qualities is said to represent a "complete complex of compresence" if all its qualities are "compresent" and if nothing external to the bundle is compresent with all the qualities within it.
It is this "completeness" that is said to individuate a particular, although not in any "absolute" sense.
For — it is argued — the assumption that such "complexes of compresence" are unrepeatable, i.e. do not occur more than once, is an empirical proposition, not an analytic truth.
Although this proposition is unlikely ever to be falsified, nevertheless one cannot maintain that it cannot in principle be false.
This leads to some perplexing conclusions.
Thus, according to Russell, since the possibility of a recurrence of the same "complexes of  compresence" cannot be excluded (there is no equivalent of Leibniz's principle of sufficient reason to ensure their numerical uniqueness) we must accept that propositions about order in time, such as "If A precedes B, B does not precede A" , "If A is before B and B is before C, then A is before C" , etc. are merely empirical propositions and not inviolable a priori truths.
Propositions about order in space too should be interpreted in the same manner.
Thus, Russell argues, although it may make good empirical sense to say that a "complete complex of compresence (a given" particular "cannot be" to the north of itself "," above itself", etc., these situations cannot be excluded on a priori grounds.
A reduplication of such complexes while empirically unlikely is not logically impossible.
But all this, to say the least, is highly confusing.
For what sense exactly can be attached to a statement that a given particular is "to the north of itself" or that it "precedes itself" ?
If the expressions "to the north of itself" or "precedes" are taken in their usual sense, then this is plain nonsense.
And if they are not taken in their usual sense, how should they be understood?
It is implied that the same particular (the same "complex of compresence" ) can be in two different places, or recur"at different times.
But this abolishes, in effect the distinction between particulars and universals, while leaving us with the problem of explaining just what is meant by "different" places and "different" times.
But there are two further objections that might be raised against this theory: one of them concerns compresence, the other completeness.
The relation of compresence, we are told, has two aspects: psychological and physical.
In physics it means "overlapping of qualities in space-time" .
In a psychological context it means the compresence of simultaneously experienced qualities — visual, acoustic, tactile, etc. — which are part of one momentary experience (referred to by Russell as "I-now" ).
Although the relation is the same in both cases, the psychological aspect of compresence has the epistemological priority and it is by considering the "private compresence" of the parts of one total momentary experience that we must begin in trying to explain the possibility of an objective order in physical space-time.
But the concept of compresence is far from clear.
If it implies that no time-lag is detectable between elements of an experienced "complex" , then this is true only in a very limited sense.
Take, for example, the perceptual experience that I have while looking at this  bunch of carnations arranged in a vase on the table in the middle of the room.
I see this "complex" as one whole.
But while I am looking at it my eyes constantly wander from one flower to the next, pausing at some, ignoring others, picking out the details of their shapes and colours.
Finally, without taking my eyes off the flowers, I may move the vase closer, or walk around the table and look at the flowers from different angles.
The scene will keep constantly changing.
As a result, I shall experience a succession of different "complexes of qualities" but I shall still be looking at the same bunch of flowers.
Yet how do we decide in such a case what is compresent with what?
Different qualities and complexes of qualities are registered by me in a temporally extended sequence; none the less, they are all part of the wider experience of looking at this same bunch of flowers which I assume to exist "out there" .
Indeed it is hardly possible to speak meaningfully of any qualities as "compresent" in such cases without positing a re-identifiable "transcendent" object.
But this merely brings back the idea of particulars as distinct from qualities or (mere) configurations of qualities, and we find ourselves up against the very difficulties the theory was trying to eliminate.
Consider now the concept of completeness.
It is assumed that a given complex of qualities owes its "individuality" to its completeness.
A complete complex, in a psychological context, is said to represent "one total momentary experience" , while in a physical context, it represents a "space-time point-instant" .
But the question is, how do we explain the possibility of change and temporal order from the point of view of such complexes?
It is difficult to see, for example, how the relation earlier/later can be made clear sense of without allowing the possibility of developing complexes, i.e. complexes which are not complete, but are rather in the "process of completion" .
But if so, the concept of compresence will have to be revised to accommodate temporal distinctions; briefly, it will have to be interpreted in such a way that it makes sense to speak of qualities occurring in a temporal sequence as part of a particular's "biography" .
However, if this is accepted, then we end up again with the concept of a particular as some kind of a temporally extended "peg" for qualities — a view which the theory was directed against in the first instance.
(d) A unitary system of re-identifiable particulars Clearly the above theory does not come anywhere near providing a plausible alternative to Leibniz's model.
Its main aim, as we saw, was to obviate the need for substances as distinct from qualities.
Accordingly, particulars were interpreted as complexes of qualities and regarded as being essentially of the same logical type as single qualities; with the implication that any significant statement about either is necessarily significant, although, it is conceded, "probably not true" , 8 about the other.
But this is a confusion.
For if such complexes' are to play the role of particulars, they cannot be regarded as being logically on a par with single qualities.
If they both were of the same logical type, then we could not hope to be able to clarify the distinction between numerical and species identity and the possibility of order in space or time.
But consider now a different theory which takes its clue not from Leibniz but from Kant, while at the same time trying to eliminate the main causes of the difficulties and problems that bedevil Kant's own approach.
This theory — proposed by P.F. Strawson (op. cit.)— rests on the premiss that we possess the idea of a single spatio-temporal system of material things in which every such thing, at any time, is spatially related in various ways to every other similar thing, and that this is in fact the "conceptual scheme" we use and rely on in making the world intelligible to ourselves.
At the same time, it is strenuously denied that the idea of such a unitary spatio-temporal framework in any way necessitates a Kantian distinction between phenomena and noumena.
Kant, as we saw, held that the unity of the phenomenal world can be accounted for only if space and time are interpreted as forms of our intuition, not as properties of things in themselves, but that for this very reason we must accept that there is an extra-phenomenal as well as a phenomenal side to reality, with things in themselves being inaccessible to cognition.
The theory under discussion rejects this as a "doctrinal fantasy" of transcendental idealism.
If noumenal things did exist, there would be no possibility of defining a "principle of individuation" for them in any case.
As regards the phenomenal world, the meaningfulness of references to identical particulars presupposes the possibility of logically adequate criteria of re-identification, and such criteria, in turn, can operate only within a unitary spatiotemporal system; conversely, the idea of such a unitary system presupposes the possibility of particular-identification.
In short, particular-identity  the logically adequate criteria of re-identification and the idea of a unitary spatio-temporal system, are all regarded as analytically interlinked concepts.
This thesis is now used as a basis for an attack on scepticism.
A sceptic wishing to challenge our belief in the existence of re-identifiable objective particulars in space and time, it is argued, cannot present his case coherently, for his doubts would amount to a rejection of the whole conceptual scheme within which alone such doubts make sense".
For suppose there is no numerical identity except in cases of continuous observation.
Then instead of a unitary spatio-temporal system we would have scores of mutually independent systems, each corresponding to a particular stretch of continuous observation.
As a result, we would no longer be able to use the concepts of material things in the way we normally use them and the question whether something observed on one occasion is identical with something else observed on a different occasion would not even arise.
In other words, the sceptic, if he is to make himself understood, cannot avoid relying on the conceptual scheme that he is overtly attacking, and if so, his argument collapses before it can even get off the ground.
It has been objected against this kind of reasoning that it really misses the point the sceptic is trying to make.
The sceptic, it is argued, may well concede that the conceptual scheme that we use and rely on makes sense only if we posit the possibility of re-identifiable particulars, while at the same time insisting that no proof can be supplied of their actual existence.
The fact that our conceptual scheme is inseparable from the idea of such particulars, he might argue, does not testify to their existence per se.
I don't think that this objection is fatal to the above theory.
If it is accepted that we are in possession of logically adequate criteria of particular-identification, I do not see how one could deny that such criteria are ever fulfilled; for how else would we know that they are indeed adequate?
In this respect, the theory seems to me to be perfectly consistent.
"y own objection is different, and concerns the attempt to make the actual availability of such criteria a condition of meaningfulness of the idea of numerical identity.
As I have argued all along, although a consideration of possible criteria is important in  a wider context, the idea of numerical identity cannot be literally "defined" in terms of the criteria of re-identification of particulars, which means that we shall have to look elsewhere for an answer to our problem.
To sum up, none of the four theories discussed above seem capable of providing a satisfactory clarification of the conditions of intelligibility of referring to something as numerically the same.
Kant tried to link the idea of numerically identical particulars with the idea of one space and one time, both conceived by him as the a priori forms of our intuition.
The theory discussed last, in a similar spirit, links the idea of particularity with the idea of a "unitary spatio-temporal framework" .
Both these theories rely on the individuating properties of place, without however offering a satisfactory clarification of the concept of place, or indeed of the origins of the idea of numerical identity.
Leibniz took a different route and looked for clues to particularity within the monads themselves, but the only "criterion" he was able to produce was his "principle of indiscernibles" , and eventually he was forced to introduce the additional metaphysical postulate of "sufficient reason" in order to safeguard the existential uniqueness of his monads.
Russell, quite properly, rejected such an artificial device, but was himself unable to offer a more credible solution.
He merely maintained that the non-recurrence of the same complexes of qualities was a probability, not a certainty.
But since the principle of indiscernibles remained in force in his theory, there was no means of telling two identical complexes apart in any case, and the whole idea of particularity remained as obscure as it had ever been.
Can we confine our interest to species-identity only?
Confronted with such a situation, with no sure indication as to how, if at all, a satisfactory clarification of particular identity might be found, we might be tempted to think that the best course to follow is to try and see if we can make do without relying on this awkward and intractable concept.
Why, it might be asked, is the concept of particular-identity, as distinct from purely species-identity, at all necessary for a complete description of the world?
Might it not be possible to interpret all references to ontological existents along Platonist lines in terms of references to species of one kind or another, and the characteristics of species; thereby providing a proof  that the basic ontological existents are, in fact, species, and that the "problem of individuality" , in the final analysis, reduces to the problem of species (or quite generally: qualitative) identity?
In order to see why this assumption is untenable, it is sufficient to consider what is involved in making identifying references to species.
In using the phrase "the same A" in relation to a species I am already implicitly acknowledging the distinction between the species in question and its exemplifying instances.
If it is meaningful to say "the same colour" , then it is so only on condition that we can meaningfully speak of different specimens of the colour in question, or, at the very least, of different occasions on which this colour is talked about, or referred to as the "same" .
In general, the phrase "the same A" , where A is descriptive of a species F, presupposes the possibility of intelligibly saying "the same instance of F" and "a different instance of F" ; or "the same F-specimen" and "a different F-specimen" .
But quite apart from this, the very concept of an ontological existent, qua "ontological" , is analytically interlinked with the concept of individuality.
To posit an object in the modus per se is to posit it as something determinate and existentially unique.
At the same time, existential uniqueness, as was shown earlier on, cannot be defined in terms of place in an objective space; rather the concept of place in an objective space presupposes the idea of existential uniqueness.
This was clear to Leibniz but not at all to Kant, although Leibniz, not  surprisingly , found it difficult to provide a satisfactory clarification of the conditions of intelligibility of the idea of existential uniqueness, or explain why should there not be duplicate universes, and was finally reduced to appealing to the idea of a rationally acting God.
So the problem before us is this: that whereas the distinction between numerical and qualitative identity is both logically and epistemologically indispensable, this distinction cannot be defined in terms of any set of criteria under which individuals are re-identified and distinguished from species.
This, it should be stressed again, does not mean that the question of the criteria of numerical identification is irrelevant to a consideration of the meaning of this distinction.
Evidently in positing a given object as an ontological individual I am at the same time committed to accepting that  contextually there must be certain criteria whereby such an individual can be meaningfully referred to as numerically the same.
Yet the meaning of individuality is not exhausted by any such set of criteria.
It is perfectly possible to conceive of different types of ontological individuals, but there is no such "principle of individuation" as might enable us to pronounce any given type as basic in an absolute sense.
structural approach to an analysis of individuality
Consequently, rather than allowing ourselves to be drawn into a metaphysical wild-goose chase we should concentrate instead on exploring the structural features of the minimal conceptual apparatus upon which any significant choice of ontological objects must depend.
This cannot be accomplished, however, without a thoroughgoing phenomenological analysis of the modes of experiencing that underly meaningful identifying references to such objects.
For an object to exist in an ontological sense is to exist in its own right and not merely as an object of thought, but it is not to exist independently of the conditions under which it may be thought of and identifyingly referred to as that particular object and no other.
Which means that ontological object-categories have to be analysed in conjunction with certain experiential modalities.
It is futile to try to clarify the idea of individuality via a "universal" principle of individuation of ontological existents.
The idea of individuality and the idea of specificity have to be seen in conjunction with such ideas as the idea of possibility and the idea of unity of biographical time, both of which point to certain experiental modalities.
All these ideas, I shall argue, are structurally interdependent, and their meaning can be fully elucidated only by exploring their structural interconnectedness.
It is towards experiences, then, that we shall have to direct our analytical gaze.
However, before embarking upon an analysis of experiences it is necessary to discuss the last of the three "ontological" categories mentioned earlier, i.e. the category of plurality.
4.
The Problem of Pluralism
Any identifying reference in respect of any topic presupposes a distinction between numerical and qualitative identity.
It also presupposes the possibility of meaningful references to different topics of discourse.
For if it is meaningful to say in respect of something "the same A" , it must equally be meaningful to say "not the same A" , "a different A" .
Moreover, if it were not possible to refer to different topics of discourse, there would be no occasion for referring to anything as "the same" .
But the question is, what is involved in the assumption that there are different ontological existents not just different topics of discourse; what conditions must be fulfilled before such an assumption can make clear sense?
And furthermore, what is the justification for making it?
Why should there be a plurality of ontological existents rather than just one?
Can the dispute between ontological monism and ontological pluralism be resolved, and how?
It is not easy to decide how best to tackle these questions, and the difficulties that we came up against in discussing the problem of individuation of particulars partly explain why.
The idea of particular-identity, as we saw, cannot be defined in terms of the conditions under which objects are re-identified as numerically the same.
In a similar way, the idea of plurality cannot be defined in terms of the conditions under which objects are differentiated from each other.
Rather, it seems, any attempt to define the conditions of differentiation already presupposes an understanding of the idea of plurality, and this is where the main problem lies; for what makes such an understanding possible?
There is no question that we normally accept that both "the same A" and "a different A" can be significantly used in relation to ontological existents.
We accept this even before we are able to formulate any criteria under which things can be correctly described as "same" or "different" .
But what conditions must be fulfilled for such references to be significant?
It is useful, but by no means sufficient to point out that if "the same A" makes sense, so must "a different A" .
This applies to any topic whatever.
What needs to be explained is, what makes a meaningful use of such phrases possible in regard to ontological existents, and such explanation cannot be provided without a detailed analysis of the problem of relations and of the concept of objectivity.
However, we shall have to begin, first, by considering certain monistic objections.
Traditionally the notion of ontological independence and self-sufficiency plays a key role in monistic arguments.
The basic premiss, usually, is that whatever exists in a fundamental sense does not depend upon anything external to itself for own existence and is in every way self-sufficient, which is regarded as analytically true.
A corollary of this, it is claimed, is that there really can be only one fundamental existent, for if there existed more than one, then the individuality of each would, at least in part, depend upon its relations with others, and hence none could strictly be regarded as ontologically independent.
The thesis that there is only one substance
The mode of presentation of this argument often varies, but not very radically.
Spinoza, for example, links the idea of independence with another principle — he calls it an "axiom" — viz. that "everything that exists exists either in itself or in another" .1 To exist "in itself" is to be self-subsistent, non-adjectival, non-parasitic, upon something else; the characteristics that traditionally have been associated with substance.
To exist "in another" , on the other hand, is a typical feature of the modes or states of substance.
Only that which exists "in itself" , he argues, exists in an ontologically fundamental sense.
Expressed differently, if a thing exists genuinely in se (i.e. if it is a true substance), then a description of its defining features cannot involve references to anything outside that thing; by the same token, if what purports to be a description of a substance involves references to different substances, then it cannot be regarded as a genuine description of any substance.
A substance, in short, is a closed, wholly self-contained and independent system, with all its attributes and modifications being explicable from its own essential nature.
It is both "in itself" and is "conceived through itself" — i.e. it is that "the  conception of which does not need the conception of another thing from which it must be formed" .
Monistic inferences are thus derived from a fusion of the idea of substance with that of independence.
Although such inferences are not always logically entirely unimpeachable, given the above premisses, the pluralist case becomes difficult to defend and on balance the only reasonable option seems to be Spinoza's own unitarist alternative, viz. that there is only one substance which is in fact identical with the whole of reality, and that the only plurality there is or can be is the plurality of "attributes and modifications" .
It will be necessary however to consider in more detail certain general logical features of monistic reasoning, and I shall do this in a moment.
First, I wish to make a few preliminary critical observations about the formulation of the monist thesis.
The immediate difficulty that one encounters is this.
If substance is identical with the whole of reality, it is not any discrete thing; but if it is not any discrete thing, it is not clear what sense can possibly be attached to the assertion that there is "only one" substance.
To claim that there is only one substance sounds like an answer to the question "How many substances are there?" and Spinoza's conception of substance is such that this question cannot be properly asked.
To ask "How many substances?" is just as ungrammatical as asking "How many rednesses?" .
Substance, being the whole of reality, cannot be "counted" .
In this respect there is a certain similarity — hinted as, incidentally, by Spinoza himself—between substance and attributes; both substance and its attributes, according to him, are "infinite" — i.e. they are (unlike discrete things) not limited by anything external that is of the same nature as themselves.
It follows that the question "How many substances?" is strictly meaningless, for given the way "substance" is defined, it is logically impossible that there should be more than one.
Nor is this all.
Thus it is an infringement of logical grammar to use phrases such as "the same substance" , for the word "substance" (in the context of Spinoza's theory) has the status similar to that of a proper name and hence strictly cannot be employed as a general term.
To speak of the "same substance" would be just as ungrammatical as to speak of the "same Socrates" .
More so, in fact.
For while "Socrates" might on occasion be deliberately turned into a general term — as  happens, for example, in sentences like "He is another Socrates" — substance"cannot be significantly used in such a way at all .
Furthermore, it is not possible to talk about the "type" of thing substance is without actually talking about the substance itself, for substance is by definition one, and any suggestion that there might be different specimens of it is incoherent.
But if so, it is not clear how substance can be regarded as an entity at all.
It is not a universal, and it is not an ontological individual in any ordinary sense.
If it can be significantly talked about, it seems, then it is only as some kind of state, or situation, an ontological "event" perhaps, certainly not as an entity.
The point is that the whole idea of substance as an entity breaks down; which is of course the opposite of what Spinoza originally intended.
But consider now more closely the structure of the monist argument, in particular the monist treatment of relations.
The principle of independence in monist reasoning is usually coupled with an attempt to interpret relations as a sub-class of properties and expressive of certain purely internal features of their terms, or what is sometimes referred to as the doctrine of the "internality of relations" .
Although there have been philosophers — Leibniz is an obvious example — who have tried to reconcile this view with the idea of a pluralist ontology, it is clear that if conjoined with the principle of independence the doctrine of the internality of relations provides a powerful support for the monist thesis.
In what follows, I shall briefly outline the monist theory of relations.
Then I shall examine some criticisms of the monist position from a pluralist point of view, trying at the same time to bring out the presuppositions that underly such criticisms and showing that a clarification of these presuppositions demands a critical exploration of certain new philosophical topics that have not been touched on hitherto.
The monistic thesis and the doctrine of the internality of relations
The problem that we are confronted with here has two aspects, and might be expressed in the form of the following two questions:(a) Is it possible to bridge the difference between relations and properties by treating all relations as "relational properties" ?, and (b) Can "relational properties" always and unconditionally be regarded as intrinsic to the terms that have them?
The doctrine of the internality of relations gives an affirmative answer to both these  questions.
It is maintained, accordingly, that an ontological existent can be fully described and distinguished from any other similar existent in terms of its properties alone, and that its "relational" no less than any of its other properties are part of its essential description.
Thus the fact, if it is a fact, that the cat is on the mat, in an ontological sense, and contrary to what ordinarily might appear, is just as essential to the identity of the cat as any other of the cat's properties.
Without the relational property of being on the mat at a particular time the cat would not be the ontological individual it is.
And the same mutatis mutandis applies to the mat, in so far as the mat qualifies as a self-subsistent ontological entity.
Speaking generally, if an ontological object x stands in a relation R to an ontological object y then it is a necessary, not a contingent fact about that it is R-related toy; with the converse being true of y in respect of x.
The key assumption here remains, of course, that the identity of an ontological existent, or, more accurately, its ontological individuality, depends upon all of this existent's properties, and hence that if any of them were different from what they happen to be, the existent itself would be different.
 "Properties" are meant here to include both relational and non-relational properties.
It is a consequence of this view that if two things are related to each other in any way, then neither of them, strictly, can be said to be ontologically independent of the other, for in such a case neither of them can be fully described without presupposing the existence of both.
If now "independence" is regarded as essential to basic existents, it is clear that nothing that depends upon a relation to something external to itself qualifies as a basic existent in the true sense of the word.
It follows that nothing short of the complete reality can be a "basic existent" , for a description of any "finite" thing inevitably involves references to things external to itself.
In other words, the doctrine of the internality of relations together with the thesis of the independence of substance seems logically to lead to the position of ontological monism; conversely, the monist thesis seems necessarily to presuppose the thesis of the internality of relations.
Before commenting, let me now briefly sketch out by way of summary the salient points of the monist argument.
The whole argument might be presented as proceeding, essentially, in three main stages.
The first stage involves an attempt to show that relations really are a class of properties, i.e. that relations do not represent a logically  independent category of their own.
The second is an attempt to demonstrate that relational properties presuppose the existence of non-relational properties of one kind or another, but that the converse is not necessarily true (a possible exception being some reflexive relations).
The third and final stage involves the claim that relational properties are merely a special class of qualitative properties of a single substance.
The first stage, it should be noted, does not necessarily rule out the possibility of ontological pluralism, unless it explicitly includes the thesis of independence of substance; it merely involves a rejection of the view that properties and relations are two mutually separate and incommensurable categories, with relations allegedly being purely extrinsic"to (and hence making no difference to the essential nature of) their terms.
There is clearly no logical inconsistency involved in claiming, on the one hand, that relations must be regarded as a sub-species of properties (in the broad sense of the latter term), and assuming that the world is an agglomerate of many different entities, on the other.
Quite the reverse, it is possible expressly to link the concept of "relational properties" with a (suitably modified) pluralist thesis by arguing, for example, that the possession of a relational property of a certain kind necessarily entails the existence of more than one thing in the world.
But consider now the second stage of the argument.
With his opening salvos the anti-pluralist has, if anything, merely forced his opponent to modify his own position somewhat, not to abandon it.
But now he goes into an all-out attack, arguing that whereas relational properties presuppose the existence of certain non-relational, or "qualitative" , properties, the latter properties do not necessarily demand the existence of any "pluralistically committed" relational properties at all.
Thus if x is round-shaped, or metal, say, x is not necessarily related to anything outside itself in virtue of being round-shaped or metal.
Nor is it necessary to know any of x's relational properties in order to understand what it is for it to be round-shaped or metal.
On the other hand, to describe a person as a "friend" , or a "colleague" , or a "cousin" , etc. is implicitly to presuppose the existence of non-relational features of some kind or other, physical and/or non-physical characteristics, actions, attitudes, etc., without which such descriptions would not be applicable, or even make sense.
The central claim in this phase of the argument, then, is that an ostensibly relational statement depends for its meaningfulness and  truth upon the meaningfulness and truth of certain "non-relational" subject/predicate statements, but that the opposite is not necessarily the case.
In order that it should be possible to assert correctly "This tree is taller than that tree" it must be possible to assert correctly "This is a tree" and "That is a tree" .
But the two latter statements do not presuppose any irreducibly relational facts as a condition of their own truth.
Nor does their intelligibility (irrespective of their truth or falsehood) necessarily depend upon the intelligibility of some other statements that might be characterised as "irreducibly relational" — in the pluralistic sense of "relational" .
The need to emphasise here the "pluralistic" sense of "relational" arises because not everything that is usually classified under the heading of "relations" involves a pluralist commitment, or allows of pluralist inferences.
The relation of identity does not, for example.
And the same applies to all relations in which the subject relates himself to himself.
Jones loves himself, blames himself, is his own severest critic, is conscious of what he is doing, etc. are all examples of reflexive relations which have no pluralist import.
Similarly no pluralist inferences can be drawn from "mental" relations such as desiring, believing, etc.
From the monist point of view, if there can be any "irreducible relations" , they can be found perhaps only among non-pluralist relations such as these.
However, it is the third and final stage of the argument that reveals fully its strategic aims.
For the idea put forward is not merely that "pluralistically committed" relational properties are not as basic as qualitative properties, but that all properties and relations can in the end be assimilated to qualitative properties of one sort or another.
The world, it is argued, can in principle be described without using any "pluralistically committed" terms at all.
But if this is possible, the conclusion must be that, basically, there can be only one ontological existent, and that all properties are merely qualities — or, using more convenient words, "states" or "modifications" — of that one existent.
If a given thing x is related to a given thing y, it is argued, this must be seen as having to do with the intrinsic nature of x, and the intrinsic nature of x can, in the final analysis, be fully understood only as a feature of the whole to which it and everything else belongs.
There is only one genuine subject — the whole — and the idea of a pluralistically structured world is an ontological misconception.
What is wrong with this argument?
A typical objection against it might be that it involves an attempt to settle a metaphysical issue without first clarifying the conditions under which such an issue can be meaningfully discussed.
Surely, it might be said, we ought to begin by asking questions not about the ontological features of properties but about the logical characteristics of predicates.
It is improper to ask whether relations can be "assimilated" to properties or whether all properties might not after all be explicable in terms of "qualitative properties" .
We should ask, rather, what kinds of predicates there are and whether it is possible to obliterate such logical differences as do exist between them.
properties and predicates
Predicates, however, fall into two main categories: one-place, or monadic, and more-than-one-place, or polyadic, predicates.
Someone asks me what cherries look like and 1 pick one from the basket and say "This is a cherry" .
My sentence consists of a demonstrative pronoun, which acts as an ersatz name and fulfils the function of the subject, and a predicative expression.
The predicative expression on its own is incomplete; it requires a name, or an ersatz name (as in our case), or some kind of designating phrase in order to yield a complete sentence.
Only one such object-referring expression is needed to make the sentence complete.
There are no other object-referring expressions involved.
One object is sufficient for "cherry" to "hook on" .
Here we have an example of a "monadic" predicate.
But evidently not all predicates are of this kind.
I can say "This is a cherry" and everyone understands what I mean, but I cannot very well say "This is an offspring" without committing a grammatical impropriety, except perhaps as a contextually forgivable elipsis when it is already clear whose offspring is being talked about.
 "Offspring" demands an answer to "Whose offspring?" .
It is a relation, a polyadic predicate, and requires more than one object to "hook on" to.
Every predicate-term falls into one of these two categories.
Which category a given term belongs to, this can be shown by explicating its internal grammar, i.e. by showing how the term in question can be  appropriately used in a sentential context.
Returning now to monism v. pluralism, the central issue, expressed in terms of predicates, reduces to the question whether we can somehow make do without any polyadic predicates, except perhaps those of the "reflexive" variety?
Why are monadic predicates not sufficient for a complete description of the world?
It might seem that it is sufficient merely to formulate such questions in order to know the answers.
For evidently we need both reflexive and non-reflexive polyadic predicates, as well as monadic predicates, if we are to be able to describe at all adequately the world around us.
To suppose that all such predicates could be replaced, or reduced, to a single type is plain nonsense.
Yet it is not nonsense.
There is no question, of course, that we make use of relational or "polyadic" predicates of the most diverse types, and that we would be hard put to it to express what we wish to express without them.
Nevertheless it is by no means certain that the use of such predicates necessarily commits us to an anti-monist stance.
The fact that we find the use of such predicates convenient and essential for our purposes does not prove that they are indispensable in an absolute sense: viz. that the world as a matter of logic cannot be completely described without them.
Briefly, what needs to be shown if the anti-monist argument is going to work is that it is in principle impossible to remove such predicates from the relevant contexts and substitute for them some other predicates without any loss of truth.
Or, to put it in another way, it is necessary to demonstrate that at least some non-reflexive relations are logically irreducible.
The alleged irreducibility of spatio-temporal relations
It is sometimes claimed, and more often tacitly assumed, that spatio-temporal relations belong in this category, and that, accordingly, relational expressions such as "to the left of" , "before" , etc should be treated as logically basic simple symbols.
Sometimes, as in Kant's theory, the idea of irreducibility of spatio-temporal relations is defended on general epistemological grounds and is regarded as being inseparably interlinked with the idea of an all-embracing unitary space."
But as is already clear from what was  said in the last chapter, the irreducibility thesis, plausible though it may appear at first sight, remains highly vulnerable to criticism and requires important additional assumptions if it is to be taken at all seriously.
More than that: it might even be argued that any attempt to "prove" the irreducibility of spatio-temporal relations already presupposes, rather than helps to vindicate, the basic principles of a pluralist ontology.
Let us now consider this a little more closely.
The irreducibility thesis, in its general outline, might be summed up thus.
Empirical statements concerning spatial and/or temporal order e.g. that x is to the left of y, or above y, or that it precedes yin a time series, etc. — do not involve attribution of certain purely intrinsic properties to x or toy, i.e. properties that might be described as part of their essential description (qua self-subsistent ontological entities).
I f they did, such statements would be analytic, not empirical.
But more important still, in making such statements one is not asserting anything that could conceivably be interpreted in terms of non-relational, or "qualitative" , properties of the objects concerned.
And if so, then, given that such statements are sometimes true, it necessarily follows that there is more than one entity in the world.
Yet this does not necessarily follow.
For even if it is accepted (ignoring, or rejecting, any arguments to the contrary) that spatio-temporal relations are not, or not wholly, explicable in terms of intrinsic and qualitative properties of related things, there still remains the problem of accounting for the objectivity of such relations.
The point is that a "pluralistic" inference is based on the assumption that such relations depict an objective order of things "out there" , not merely our own impression of such an order, and this is precisely where the main difficulty lies.
To begin with, we have to draw a distinction between spatial and temporal relations within a "phenomenological" space and time, and spatial and temporal relations within an objective framework.
Spatial and temporal relations in a subjective "phenomenologioal" context, as we saw earlier, can be interpreted in terms of certain internal characteristics  of the percipient"s own experience and are not indicative, or not necessarily, of an external objective order of things.
It is quite possible to differentiate between qualitative similarity and numerical difference with regard to items in a phenomenological space; for example, I have no difficulty in distinguishing between two qualitatively similar objects appearing simultaneously in two different regions of my visual field.
But this of course provides no proof that there are, or even could be, numerically distinguishable ontological individuals.
But if spatial relations within a phenomenological space can tell us nothing about the numerical diversity of ontological objects, there is even less that can be gleaned in this respect from temporal relations within a phenomenological time.
Before and after, within a phenomenological time, separate experiences, not ontological objects, and they do not even separate experiences by number alone.
Experiences are part of a biographical time-structure and have different "positional" values only within that structure.
As for the objects posited in individual experiences, they may or may not exist, and they may or may not be ontologically numerically distinct.
So the assumption of an objective order remains crucial to any "pluralist" argument; but the question is, what makes this assumption intelligible?
And furthermore, how do we know that relational statements purporting to depict such an order are in fact sometimes true?
If we could say with certainty that they are, then, it seems, we would already know the answer to the problem as to the possibility of a numerical diversity of ontological existents.
If, on the other hand, they depict merely a perceptual order within the percipient"s own experience, then no argument in favour of ontological pluralism can be based upon them in any case.
Now it might be argued as was done by Kant, for example— that the idea of a non-arbitrary, objective, order is built into the very concept of an external object; that one cannot significantly refer to external objects qua external without acknowledging by implication the existence of such an order; and in a sense this is of course true.
In Chapter 2 I argued in a similar vein that the concept of an ontological existent involves the idea of non-arbitrariness, in the sense that by positing something as an ontological existent, i.e. as existing in its own right and not merely as an object of someone's thought, we are by implication positing this something as a potential subject of a nun-arbitrary subset of predicates from among an indefinite number  of meaningful predicates.
Yet none of this is quite sufficient to clarify the concept of an objective order.
For what we need is not only the idea of non-arbitrariness but the idea of error and the (logical) possibility of correction of error by third persons.
The concept of an objective order demands the possibility of certain criteria of objectivity, such that I might be corrected by others on a given occasion, should I for any reason fall foul of such criteria.
The question of criteria of objectivity is a complex one, and it is not easy to decide what criteria are valid in what context.5 But if it was only I myself and no one else who could decide whether or not an error has been committed in a given instance, then the distinction between "subjective" and "objective" order would have no meaning.
In other words, in order to make sense of the concept of an objective order we have to postulate the possibility of "witnesses" other than ourselves.
Reverting now to spatio-temporal relations, the assumption of their irreducibility to monadic predicates is linked with the assumption that they depict an objective order, and if such relations are taken to depict an objective order, then it is clear that we shall have to assume the possibility of a plurality of biographically distinct points of view, occupied by different percipients, before we can make any significant inferences about the ontological distinguishability of their terms.
It follows that it is not enough simply to appeal to the "differentiating power" of spatio-temporal relations within an objective framework.
The question that has to be asked first, is: How is such a framework possible?
What makes the idea of an objective order intelligible?
To put it differently, if spatiotemporal relations are to be appealed to in support of the thesis that there can be numerically, not just qualitatively, distinguishable ontological existents, it is necessary, in the first place, to clarify the conditions under which such relations can be significantly claimed to reflect the structure of an objective world, and in trying to do so we are likely to find that in some form or other we need to assume what such relations are supposed to explain.
What is more, this remains the case even if, following Kant, numerically distinguishable external objects — i.e. objects of "outer sense — are regarded simply as phenomenal objects or" appearances ", not as" things in themselves".
Are there any logically irreducible relations?
But consider now some other polyadic predicates which, on the face of it, seem more resistant to a "reductivist" analysis, and provide what seem to be a more reliable indication of the philosophical untenability of an anti-pluralist stance.
Suppose that x and y are numbers, such that x is greater than y; then it would appear that there is no conceivable way in which such a relation could be reduced to qualitative properties of one kind or another, and re-expressed, accordingly, in a form that does not require the existence of both its terms.
Evidently it is no use to describe x as having the property of being greater than y; and, correspondingly, y as having the property of being smaller than x.
This is not explaining the relation in terms of something else merely restating it.
Nor is it much help to say that x comes after y in the number series, for this merely involves replacing one polyadic predicate with another, quite apart from the fact that "after" does not necessarily mean "greater" unless serial ordering is associated with a relation of magnitude.
Notoriously young children learn very quickly how to recite numbers in the right order without having any clear notion of their "cardinal" properties, and it is only gradually that they begin to associate their respective positions in the number series with a relation of magnitude.
But neither is it any more enlightening to say, for example, that "x is greater thany" means that if we were to set out to construct x and y by some algorithmic procedure, the construction of x would require a greater number of steps; for the question is, what is meant by "greater" ?
In short, any explanation of "x is greater than y" , it seems, still leaves us with a two-term relation whereas the reductivist, if his argument is going to work, needs a monadic predicate.
What is more, where numbers are concerned, it might be argued, any reductivist argument aimed at undermining the logical independence of relations is doomed from the start.
For the properties of numbers are determined exclusively by their relations, not by any "inherent" qualities.
The only "properties" that numbers can have are "relational properties" , and are moreover such as presuppose a basic parity in logical status as between related terms (which distinguishes them, among others, from the so-called "mental" relations).
In short, if there can be any meaningful talk of "reduction" here at all , it is perhaps only of a possible reduction of properties to (non-mental and logically independent) relations, not vice versa .
Yet clearly this is true only as long as we leave the judging subject out of the picture.
The assumption underlying the above argument that the system of numbers can be described in certain objective propositions, involving no references — implicit or explicit — to any judging subject, or subjects.
It is important to realise that the allege irreducibility of "greater than" and other similar relations to qualitative"properties turns entirely upon this assumption.
The point, is that the existence is presupposed of an objective order that enables us to distinguish meaningfully between "x is greater than y and" A judges (thinks, believes, surmises, etc.) that is greater than y".
Unless this distinction can be meaningfully drawn, the whole argument directed against the thesis of reducibility of relations fall."
to the ground.
But this merely confirms yet again that the idea of numerical diversity of ontological existents is inseparable from the idea of an objective order, and consequently that a clarification of the former idea depends upon a clarification of the sources and the conditions of intelligibility of such an order.
So the end result, as before, is that we have reached the end of a particular analytic path only to be confronted with signposts pointing in a new direction.
The aim that we set ourselves was to analyse the idea of a numerical, as distinct from a purely qualitative, diversity of existents; to clarify, that is, what is involved in assuming the possibility of there being a plurality of self-subsistent particulars that are numerically and not just qualitatively distinguishable from each other .
The monistic position, as we saw, was that such an idea, ii closely examined, does not make clear sense, because there can be no unequivocal criteria of numerical diversity.
The pluralist arguments, on the other hand, are designed to show that the possibility of such criteria is ensured by the existence of logically irreducible relations; or by the existence of irreducibly relational, and hence essentially "pluralistically committed" , properties.
The possibility of an objective order
Both sides in the dispute see the issue of criteria as being of key importance.
But, as already emphasised, the problem of meaning here as elsewhere does not reduce to the problem of criteria.
We saw earlier on that the idea of numerical identity cannot be explained in terms of the criteria of re-identification of particulars.
Similarly the  idea of numerical diversity cannot be explained in terms of the criteria of numerical differentiation of such particulars.
The point is that the idea of criteria is itself in need of elucidation, and an attempt to provide such an elucidation presupposes a basic understanding of the concept whose explanation is being sought.
In any case, the reasons for regarding the idea of numerical identity and that of numerical diversity as significant are not such as might enable us to decide unequivocally whether something observed on one occasion is numerically the same as something else observed on a different occasion, or how many ontological objects are involved in a given case.
The source of meaningfulness of these ideas lies in the logical relationships that bind together a cluster of basic ideas into a coherent pattern Thus if the idea of numerical diversity presupposes the possibility of irreducible relations, the idea of irreducible relations, in its turn, presupposes the possibility of an objective order, and the idea of an objective order (I shall argue) is unintelligible without the idea of a plurality of points of view occupied by different selves.
One of the more obvious disadvantages of the monist position is that it almost inevitably leads to an obliteration of the distinction between essential and inessential, or accidental ( "extrinsic" ) properties, or features of things.
Thus the gist of Spinoza's argument, for example, is that whereas in ordinary circumstances we may indeed find it useful and necessary to distinguish between essential and accidental properties, metaphysically such a distinction cannot be upheld.
A substance is necessarily such that all its properties are "essential" properties, in the sense that they all together define its "nature" , and if any of them were missing or were different from what they happen to be, the substance itself would be different.
Metaphysically there are no "extrinsic" as distinct from "intrinsic" properties of things.
All properties without exception must be classified as "intrinsic" .
But if this is indeed the case, it becomes difficult to explain how significant individuating references can be made to anything that is subject to change; or indeed to make clear sense of any spatiotemporal order concepts.
For it is implied that we cannot meaningfully claim that a given object might be different in certain respects without becoming a different individual.
We must accept that for any given F, if x has F, x has it necessarily; i.e. all the properties that x has are its defining properties.
But a corollary of this  is that it is in principle impossible to describe accurately any x as numerically identical at any given stage of its existence, until, that is, its life-cycle has been completed, for its numerical identity depends upon all its properties.
In short, nothing that is in the process of development or change, strictly speaking, can be claimed to be numerically the same as long as this process lasts, for existents are individuated only by their full life-cycles.
It follows that we can form no clear notion of spatial or temporal order among existents with uncompleted life-cycles; and this, in reality, means not at all.
None of this is intended to suggest, of course, that in each individual case there are certain essential properties which are sufficient to explain the numerical identity of the particular in question.
As I have already made clear before, every such particular has certain "essential" properties which it cannot shed without ceasing to be what it is; but although its having such properties is necessary to its identity, it is not quite sufficient to explain its existential uniqueness.
Understandably, perhaps, there is a strong temptation to try to avoid these difficulties by taking qualities as basic and confining oneself to the idea of a plurality of qualities, with particulars being interpreted as bundles of qualities.
But, as we saw, this will not work; for if we are to be able to make significant identifying references to qualities, we need a distinction between qualities and their existentially unique instances, and this raises the problem of determining the precise ontological status of such instances: i.e. what such instances are, and how they can be identified and distinguished from each other.
The difficulty with any kind of platonism that claims the ontological primacy of qualities — or any kind of universals — is that in presenting its case it implicitly relies on certain assumptions about existentially unique particulars, which no sooner are made explicit than the whole platonist case is shown to be built on sand.
Identifying references to qualities can be made only via the latter's exemplifying instances and the thesis that what actually exists can be described simply in terms of qualities and relations between qualities, cannot be consistently defended.
The idea of a plurality of ontological particulars, on the other hand, seems to be connected with the idea of irreducible relations, and the idea of irreducible relations, I have argued, raises the problem of objective order.
It is this problem that we shall have to investigate in some detail.
It will be shown, as was already briefly  hinted earlier on, that the concept of objective order is inseparable from the idea of a plurality of witnessing selves — a "self" to be understood here in the sense of an experienced unity of biographical time, not as some kind of substantival entity — and the idea of error; and that the latter ideas in turn can be clarified only through a careful study of the nature of language.
B. Modes of Experiencing
5.
Experiences as Evidential Events
An analysis of the concept of ontological existent, as we saw, brings certain other categories into focus with which this concept is structurally interlinked and demands that we widen the scope of our investigation.
The new array of problems that we are now confronting highlights the complexity of the task in hand, while at the same time exposing the inherent weaknesses and the general philosophical insufficiency of an object-oriented ontological approach to the "problem of reality" , the categorial basis of which has been the subject of the past three chapters.
The initial question concerned ontological existents in the broadest possible sense of this term, and the preliminary aim was simply to establish a minimal basis for a distinction between such — as yet unspecified — items and other potential topics of discourse.
After potential topics were tentatively divided into meanings and non-meanings, it soon became clear that meanings could not be included into the range of possible existents.
There followed a brief discussion of the problem of reference and the distinction between naming and describing.
After which an attempt was made to set out the most elementary logical conditions that must be satisfied before anything can qualify as a potential existent.
This, in turn, brought into focus the problem of individuation, and it became evident that the success or failure of any ontological "principle of individuation" depended upon its ability to provide a satisfactory clarification of the distinction between numerical and species identity.
Yet a close analysis of the problems seemed to indicate that there could be no foolproof criteria whereby one might decide with certainty whether anything stays numerically identical from one moment in time to the next.
In other words, there was no hope of "defining" this distinction  in terms of the criteria whereby individuals might be distinguished from species.
This did not mean that a consideration of criteria of application was altogether irrelevant to the meaning of this distinction.
It meant only that no criteria (which are always contextual, in any case) were sufficient to clarify its meaning.
But where, then, we may ask, does this distinction have its origins?
Or, to phrase the question in a Kantian style, what are the "conditions of its possibility" ?
The idea of individuality is inseparable from the assumption of the existence of individuals qua per se ontological items.
Yet this idea is not explicable in terms of the criteria of individuation of such items.
What is it, then, that makes it intelligible?
An answer to this, I shall argue, so far as an answer is possible at all, can be given only through an analysis of experiences from the point of view of the one who has the experiences; i.e. through a phenomenological analysis of the modes of experiencing.
What is significant and highly important is that a demand for such a phenomenological analysis seems to result from the logical pressures built into the very concept of ontological existent.
As a result of these pressures we are forced to modify somewhat our style of approach in order to shed light upon certain aspects of our main topic which have remained unexplored hitherto, but this modification of style, as will become clearer in the sequel, does not invalidate our earlier approach, but rather structurally complements it.
Ontological existents, I have emphasised, are a sub-class of possible topics of discourse.
But topics of discourse are constituted as topics of discourse in certain acts of thought; they are targets of certain thought-experiences and cannot be identified, analysed and discussed except in the context of such experiences.
Ontological existents are posited in the modus per se, but it is in thought that they are thus posited.
Moreover there can be no existents that cannot be objects of thought, although, clearly, not all objects of thought qualify as potential existents.
Phenomenological epistemology and the philosophy of mind
It follows that in order to clarify the background to meaningful identifying references to ontological existents, it is necessary to investigate the manner and conditions in which such existents are constituted as target-topics in relevant experiences.
This is the  province of what can be most conveniently described as the "phenomenological epistemology" .
It is an area of special problems which do not lend themselves to being handled easily by familiar logico-linguistic techniques and require a different type of treatment.
The point is that we cannot circumnavigate or dispose of these problems by resorting to the familiar logical ploy of treating questions about experiences as if they were simply questions about the logical properties of sentences in which we ordinarily talk about experiences.
On the contrary, it is only through a phenomenological clarification of the structure of experiences that the logical properties of such sentences can be made fully transparent.
However, such a clarification, as might be expected, is hardly an easy task, and requires on occasion a pictorial and "non-literal" use of words.
For we can hardly use language to throw light upon the basis from which language itself derives its meaning, without having to rely on allusion and metaphor.
It is a process analogous in some ways to story-telling, where the point is made precisely through a sacrifice of the kind of literalness and explicitness which the logician, by the nature of his training, tends to regard as the ultimate requirement of clarity, and indeed an intrinsic feature of truth.
In a sense, we all understand perfectly well what experiences are; it is when we are challenged to explain this understanding that we are at a loss how to put it into words.
To call experiences "mental state" , or "psychological states" , or "states of consciousness" , is to use different generic labels, not to give a "definition" .
The difficulties involved in trying to explicate the concept are so insidious and irksome that, understandably perhaps, one is often tempted to say that they are not crucially important and that the problems that can be profitably discussed in relation to experiences are no different  from those that arise in connection with any other "natural phenomena" ; and, consequently, that the method of investigation with regard to all phenomena, experiences included, is, or at any rate, ought to be, the same.
But evidently this cannot be true.
Experiences are not public objects like trees or pencils or clocks.
They are not accessible — not entirely, at any rate — to public inspection.
I cannot explain the meaning of "joy" by pointing to someone with glowing eyes and a smile on his face, and saying "This is an example of joy" , as I might explain the meaning of "tree" by pointing to a tree and saying "This is a tree" , or "This is an example of the kind of thing that we call a tree" .
What I can say in the former case, at best, is "This is how people tend to look when they feel joyful" or "This is the kind of physical expression (or behaviour) that we associate with the joyous state" .
But this is hardly likely to be very enlightening to someone who has never had, or is incapable of conceiving the relevant experience.
Evidently, experiences cannot be appropriately or adequately described in terms of the categories that are applicable to public objects or events.
It is not merely that they are not just another class of public phenomena; it is through nothing but experiences themselves that such phenomena become objects for us.
This photograph on my desk is now an object for me in virtue of my perceiving experience.
My registering its presence is part of what might be termed an "evidential event" .
A little later I shall address myself to it in an experience of recollection.
Moreover I can address myself retrospectively to the perceptual experience as such as well as to the photograph qua photograph, and the logic of my reports will obviously be very different in the two cases.
The photograph might be only a dreamed photograph.
On closer inspection — this time basing my judgment upon a different kind of evidential event, viz. an experience of disappointed expectation — I might decide that there is really nothing there.
But nothing can take away the pleasure that I derived from looking at what I took to be a photograph.
The experience itself was real enough, and I can retrospectively describe it and analyse it, irrespective of whether its object was real or fictional.
Similarly when I recall an experience of fear, the question of the existence or non-existence of the object of fear need not enter into my consideration, for the experience itself may be my exclusive concern.
But the distinction between experiences and non-experiences is based on a phenomenological insight, not on any "external" criteria.
We  do not distinguish experiences from non-experiences as we might distinguish oranges from apples, viz. by indicating certain characteristics that might enable anyone, including those who have never tasted either fruit, to tell one from the other.
Nor can experiences be interpreted quite simply as a species of natural states or events.
Furthermore, it is, I shall argue, no less mistaken to regard experiences, as is sometimes done, as being analogous to "logical states" of certain sophisticated machines; unless such machines are endowed with so many human characteristics (including the capacity of "empathetic imagination" ) that a comparison becomes trivial, and the word "machine" no longer means what it ordinarily means.
The point is that the concept of an experience cannot be fully clarified without an analysis of the actual modes of experiencing from the experiencer's own point of view.
And this means that rather than attempting to answer the question "What are experiences?" , in the manner of the conventional "philosophy of mind" , we ought to concentrate our attention on the question "How do experiences occur?" , and analyse them qua types of evidential events.
Whereas the former leads into a philosophical cul de sac and cannot be given any definitive answer, the latter indicates the kind of approach that promises to be illuminating and fruitful.
Yet in a majority of cases it is precisely the first of the two questions that dominates philosophical thinking about experiences.
To a large extent this is due to a natural tendency, already mentioned earlier, to simplify the whole issue by treating experiences as logically on a par with other phenomena, and hence as being tractable with the help of basically the same conceptual machinery.
Accordingly, the central task presents itself as one of deciding just what kind of thing experiences are.
Are they some kind of objects; and if so, of what kind?
Or are they properties of certain objects; and if so, what sort of properties, and of what objects?
Are they irreducibly mental, or are they, on the contrary, essentially physical.
Or are they perhaps a bit of both: a species of "braided" psycho-physical events with the two components inseparably interlinked with one another?
Or are they explicable, perhaps, in terms of certain behavioural-dispositional, or functional, or some similar properties which cannot be strictly categorised either as "physical" or "mental" , but belong rather in a  class of their own?
All these options, it should be noted, remain within the basic framework of the categorial schema of objects and attributes, and this inevitably sets limits to what can be achieved by the respective philosophies of mind".
There are, first, two basic rival metaphysical theories, mentalist and materialist, and between them a number of hybrid ontological positions, incorporating in various proportions elements from both these views.
Then there are theories which try to avoid any direct metaphysical commitment, but none the less conduct their analysis of experiences in terms of certain characteristics — albeit a special type of characteristics — of physical bodies.
None of these "philosophies of mind" , I shall argue, are able to offer a satisfactory clarification of the concept of an experience.
Given their basic categorial "frame of reference" , the central issue for most of them becomes one of defining the criteria of significant ascriptions of experiences — which in practice invariably reduces to the problem of defining the general truth-conditions of ascribing experiences to others.
But the concept of an experience cannot be satisfactorily clarified in this way.
In what follows, I propose to examine some of the reasons for this, without going into a detailed exegetical discussion of the theories concerned, my purpose being merely to establish a sufficient platform for a phenomenological analysis, which is to follow.
The categorial straitjacket of conventional philosophy of mind
Consider, first, what might be called the radically mentalist viewpoint, which is shared by both ontological idealists and ontological dualists.
The position of the ontological idealist is that the "physical world" is merely a modification of non-physical reality, and consequently that, in the strictest sense, there are no non-mental phenomena (although "mental" has to be taken here in a very broad sense); whereas the classical dualist view is that there are two fundamentally distinct types of phenomena, one physical the other mental, which though irreducibly different are nevertheless ontologically on a par.
Both sides are agreed that experiences cannot be explained in terms of physical attributes of physical bodies.
They begin with the essentially sound premiss that no physical property that one might have is a logically sufficient condition of one having a particular experience.
But having done so, they go on to argue that  experiences, being essentially mental, cannot be properly ascribed to non-mental subjects, and immediately expose themselves to a question about the true identity of their bearers and the criteria under which experiences can be ascribed to them.
If, as seems clear, such criteria cannot be defined in terms of any physical properties, how should they be defined?
When someone complains that he has a toothache, or attributes a similar condition to another person, what exactly is he saying?
This question is particularly embarrassing to the ontological dualist.
The ontological idealist, given his general metaphysical premisses, can at least argue that what we regard as "physical bodies" are really no extra-spiritual entities, for all entities are either spiritual or are explicable in terms of attributes of such entities, and although his position gives rise to all kinds of difficulties, he can, on the whole, present his case a good deal more consistently than a dualist can.
The dualist (I am here thinking primarily of the Cartesian type of dualism) insists on the ontological separation of physical from nonphysical phenomena and is led to postulate a non-physical subject distinct from the body in an effort to explain the meaning of experience ascriptions.
But the immediate problem confronting him, of course, is how to explain the assumption that we normally make about the causal link between experiences and bodily states.
If my toothache were an event analogous to, but entirely separated from the neurophysiological process that accompanies it, it would make little sense going to a dentist in search of relief.
The dentist cannot see my toothache, only my ailing tooth.
Two rival metaphysical theories of experiences
But if the dualist has difficulties explaining ascription of experiences, so does the materialist.
The materialist denies the existence of a fundamental ontological bifurcation among phenomena and interprets experiences as a species of neuro-physiological events (or, in a wider sense, as a sub-class of physical-chemical processes).
There are no phenomena, no "occult" mental properties, he argues, that cannot be analysed in a physical causal context.
The material causal links may not always be readily perceivable, but they are there all the same.
Frequently we tend to be led astray by the fanciful language of introspective psychology.
But nothing can alter the fact that all propositions about experiences can in principle be paraphrased into propositions about certain neuro-physiological events — if not without any sacrifice of meaning, then certainly without any loss of truth.
The immediate difficulty here, however, is one of explaining just why a loss of meaning that seems unavoidable in such paraphrases does  not affect the truth-value of the relevant propositions.
To put it differently, the problem is how to prove the logical adequacy of the materialist's ascription criteria.
What needs to be shown is that the given proposition and its "neuro-physiological" paraphrase do indeed have the same logical subject and express the same fact.
But how can this be shown on independent grounds, i.e. without presupposing the validity of the theory which one wishes to prove?
To take the example given earlier, it is necessary to show that the statement about the toothache can indeed be paraphrased into a statement about the corresponding neuro-physiological event (and hence that the occurrence of the latter event is a logically adequate criterion for ascribing the experience in the given instance), and this cannot be done without making use of the premisses which such a proof might be expected to underpin.
However, it is necessary to consider this in a little more detail, for it might be argued that a rather better case could be made out for the materialist theory than the dismissive remarks of the preceding section seem to suggest, provided certain additional facts are taken into consideration.
As far as the radically mentalist view is concerned, there is clearly very little that might be said in its favour.
If the mentalist position can be coherently presented at all, then, it seems, it is only in the context of an idealist ontology based on the assumption that reality as a whole is non-physical.
As part of a dualist doctrine, the mentalist theory merely becomes a source of equivocations and obscurities.
For consider again what is being claimed.
It is claimed that there exist two radically different species of phenomena, one of which is entirely inaccessible to physical observation.
The experience, it is argued, has a privileged access to his own mental states, denied to external observers; i.e. he "knows them in a sense in which no external observer can ever" know"them.
From this the inference is drawn that what he thus knows cannot be physical states, or explicable in terms of such states, for physical states are necessarily publicly accessible.
Mental phenomena are correlated with physical phenomena, but the two species of phenomena are ontologically independent of each other, and there is no direct causal interaction between them.
However, the problem is that, if this is true, there is nothing whatever that I, in my capacity as  a subject of experiences, can coherently and unequivocally say about myself as a corporeal subject (not even that I do have a body); and hence that, strictly speaking, the theory itself cannot be clearly stated!
A restatement of the materialist theory
A more effective argument, on the other hand, can (or so it seems) be constructed in support of the materialist theory.
For example, we might begin by first attacking the mentalist notion of "privileged access" .
The mentalist assumes that mental states are irreducibly mental in virtue of the fact that in all their essential aspects they can be known only by "introspection" .
But surely there are no acts of introspection "that could in any intelligible sense be said to be identifiable independently of their objects, analogous to" acts of extrospection".
To say "I am in pain" is not to enunciate the knowledge of the proposition that I am in pain.
It is to transmit a signal that is, in a sense, part of pain behaviour.
If someone makes a knowledge claim in respect of a proposition, it is meaningful to enquire about the criteria of such knowledge.
But if/ones says "I am in pain, it is inappropriate to ask" How does he know he is?"
The question of his knowing, or possibly failing to know that he is in the state he says he is in does not arise.
But if so, we are entitled to ask what sense, if any, can be attached to claims to knowledge about one's own "private" mental states?
Surely (so the argument might be continued) the interesting cases of knowledge are those which permit meaningful questions about criteria, and such cases necessarily involve states of affairs that are in some sense publicly accessible.
There is, in addition, one further point that might be made.
If there are exclusively private events, in the sense that they are in principle, and not just empirically, inaccessible to more than one observer, it might be argued that such events could not be intelligibly claimed, let alone shown to be, subject to any laws, and this means that no rational explanatory model could be constructed for them.
Laws are of the essence public; i.e. they can be intersubjectively monitored.
If a law is such that there are no criteria whereby an independent observer might decide whether it is obeyed or deviated from, the law in question cannot be called a "law" in any intelligible sense.