

Margaret?
Yes.
That sort of 
Right.
The Christmas luncheon, we've had the menu come from Mr .
But this is the menu.
Oh!
Here it is.
And erm  we've talked about it in committee and  decided on the menu that is six forty.
Which is the usual sort of Christmas menu, and then there is a choice of er starters  and also desserts, cheese and biscuits and celery, coffee, tea or dinner, and dinner mints.
Six forty plus V A T .
Yes I'm, coming to that.
Oh sorry!
Er yes, er the six forty is plus V A T.
Now they've got V A T as erm  seventeen
seventeen and a half.
Yes.
And with the wine that brings it up to about eight pounds.
But we will  subsidise it from the jumble sale, so  Amy, I hope you have a good jumble  sale !


So that the overall cost each member will be six pounds.
Oh right!
Yeah, six.
Erm  next we , er month, the tickets for the luncheon will be on sale  er, from Rose.
And when you buy your ticket, if you're a vegetarian  please tell Rose  or if you want salad instead of hot vegetables, tell her, and then we  can sort it out with Mr .
 
Right?
If you could get the right money it would be appreciated.
Yes.
Please bring the right money cos that's such a
Having just given a lot of money back    .
Yes.
That is handy if you could bring just the six pounds.
You know, and erm  then that will be fine.
And that's on erm
Second  isn't it?
The, er second of
The second of December isn't it?
Helen?
I don't know.
Yeah it must, yes.
November.
What day would that be?
I'm just coming to that.
It is on Wednesday.
It is on a Wednesday, the second of September.
I mean, December, sorry!
December.
Now, that would have been a W I committee day  so we've had to alter the committee to the Tuesday, so I'm afraid they'll be no handy craft on Tuesday the first  of December.
No handy craft  because we have to have the hall for a committee meeting.
Cos there's too many of us to go in the little room.
Well can't you send the, the handy craft in the little room Joe?
Because most of us will be on the committee.
Er committee
Right.
which could go in the other room, if they don't want 
Yes.
.
Oh well there will be handy craft.
 
Yes that's fine.
Yeah.
Fine.
Yeah?
Yes, that's great!
Fine thank you.
The Essex News to Mrs  today if you want to order it, it's ten copies for pound  and Home and County, as you well know, has gone up to ten pounds twenty pence.
Which is rather a lot I think.
It is.
Is there anything coming down?
 
Nothing.
No.
Not on offer?
Ah!
We've got nothing on offer!
The coffee morning tombola made forty pounds, which was very good!
And erm  Maisy and Freda say that they would still like a few bottles and that for the stall  please.
Er, the donation for the Lion we have sent, I dunno if you've sent it, have you ro Rose?
Fifty 
No I haven't, yet.
No.
No.
Cos erm  th the cheque book is  
Oh yes!
With the auditor.
Well we're going to donate to the Lions fifty pounds from the Victorian Fayre.
There'll be a Christmas Fayre meeting on Tuesday the third November at two thirty in the hall here.
And, that's for stall holders and anybody that would like to come and along and offer their services of help.
Please.
What date's this?
Th , Tuesday the third of November.
And if you've got any money left    er  the calendars and diaries Brenda  has taken the names today  and the money at the same time when you order.
Because the orders have to be in so that, when Rose goes to headquarters she can fix them up.
Margaret have you done the flower list?
Yeah.
Oh!
You have?
Mhm.
About the flower list erm  you know, when it comes to the winter time and you've got, you're getting flowers and they're expensive and that  a display of dried flowers is quite adequate to bring  because, come January time flowers are quite expensive.
Thank you everybody who said they would do them for next year.
Mhm.
Erm, there are five committee members retiring.
I dunno why!
 
Must be me!


They are  Janice , Win   Mrs   Margaret , and Rose .
Erm  so we wish to thank them all, or I wish to thank them all very much for all their hard work and support they've given me.
Erm  which I couldn't have managed without them.
So erm  the voting papers are out today so please erm  go round and get peoples' names.
But you must ask the person, don't put just somebody's name down, thinking they might go on the committee, erm, you must ask them first before you put their name on the  list.
And then perhaps, Margaret, you'll collect them will you?
And bring them up later?
Yes.
Thank you.
Erm  I don't know if anybody was erm  keen to go to  Denman after whe , our outing there which was most enjoyable?
Erm, so if anybody would like to erm put their hand up that would like to go to  Denman this coming  year  er, please do so or let Margaret know.
Is there any takers?
Er, will there be a bursary?
Yes.
A bursary of a hundred pounds, yes.
Oh!
There's erm
You have to be a member for two years.
Yes.
And not if you've been before.
No, that's right.
 
Well Janice   and Margaret sa 
Becky .
No , Becky .
Becky .
And we'll talk about this in committee and  let you know.
Okay?
Okay.
Vera, would you like to say som , oh!
I have to thank Vera for the holiday to Scarborough, not that I went.
It's, it's not next Saturday!


No.
No !
Never mind.
I mean it's, it was next Saturday.
Oh yes!
Well it was, it was from then.
 
Erm, we wo , I would wish to thank Vera cos it's a lot of work for erm, a lot of worry  and I do hope that you all enjoyed it.
Now, Vera you want to say a word don't you?
Thank you.
First of all, I expect  most of you have heard  that the proposed holiday to Torbay has had to be cancelled  cos we didn't have enough support.
Oh.
And er  if you'll bear with me, I'm having competition about this, with these holidays here I haven't got anything as cheap as that probably.
Oh have you?
Yes Vera!
But those holidays, they're in February!
But 
And they're only two nights.
Yes!
But we don't 
Ah!
But some 
want two nights in the middle of winter!
somebody is  a bit later on in the season  but they're overnight travel by coach I would have thought.
No good!
Vera?
Right.
Oh!
So that's sorted .
I wouldn't have thought they'd be brought forward either.
No.
I shouldn't think so.
 
It is ho , well you know, I suppose .
Anyway , I have erm  started to arrange a holiday, if you can bear it, for next September, to Newquay.
The price er wi , we depart on the eleventh of September  for eight days  the usual  additions, you know, the coach from here, and everything.
And the price is two hundred and thirty three pounds  with four pounds cancellation fee.
Er, I've got  a couple of brochures here, if you like to have a look at  but don't, please, take them away.
And I've got some itineraries  which you can take away, if you want.
If you'd like to come and get one in tea time.
Er, I should like to the names  next month  and I hope you'll all support us because  the numbers are going down  and if we don't get sufficient numbers, it'll have to cancelled like the Torbay one.
And that's rather a pity because we've been doing these holidays for a long time now, and I think, those people have enjoyed themselves?
Say yes!
Yes!
Erm, I think that's all I can say to you today.
Names next month.
And come and get an itinerary if you want one.
Okay?
Ah.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Right.
Thank you!
Essex News erm  well we couldn't really find anything very exciting in it!
  

The  club went to Bournemouth.
Er  Shakespeare and Cadbury World  and a Swiss wonder.
Well that's in February, I mean who would go in February to Switzerland?
And erm  there's a five day tour to Dunoon and the Cars of Bute on the first of March.
Half board, a hundred and nine pounds.
Getting a little competition aren't I?
But there's no takers though Vera, have you noticed?
No.
I'm only trying to sell the time then!
Ha!


But you have to do a dance when you want to fill ta time in!
Oh well!
That'll be the finish!
Erm, we've got  for friendship, Harlow's name is mentioned.
Oh!
Well I think that's about all.
I'd, I'm afraid that's all this month in Essex News.
Have you got anything else Margaret, at the moment?
No.
Erm, has the speaker come?
Yes.
Right!
We'll wait then thank you.
Did you get that message Margaret  that I shall be away?
Yes I did.
And you told    
I've put it in my diary.
Oh good!
I've just got
Looks like you won't have a 
Will she be, will she be standing there?
Er
Will she be standing there?
Yes.
Aha.
Probably won't understand a word I said!
She will.


I feel such a natural!
Yeah, it was  
 
It's  innit?
Ray .
Ray.
Oh!
Margaret this is your seat.
Just put it there cos she wants you to .
Oh is it?
Oh really?
If all these people about were to be quiet
 
I shall 
I was told the ring the bell so I did.


Yeah.
Good afternoon ladies!
It's very nice to see you all here this afternoon.
My name is Gloria   and I run a beauty salon which is at the end of the high street  by R D
 Argins the 
Mm.
jewellers.
Okay?
I've been there two years now.
And Carol has, she joined me in June.
So this is Carol .
So, if any of you would like to come and see us  at the salon  we will both be there and very happy to see  and answer any of your questions.
I would like, at this point, to say thank you for Sh , to Sheila,sh , Sheila , she popped in to ask me would I  do this er  talk for you this afternoon.
So, thank you to Sheila for asking me, and letting us come to your  meeting this afternoon.
It's been a pleasure.
Now, the topic that Sheila asked me to talk about was skin care.
Now, er, there is no  what can I say?
There is no  skin care is a very basic thing.
You don't have to worry, there is no, I can't think of the word that I want to use.
Never too late to start.
Well it's never too late to start with good skin care.
I hope so.
So what is skin care?
What we must do to have good skin is to cleanse, tone, and moisturize.
How many of us do  cleanse, tone and moisturize?
How many of us here use soap and water?
Yes.
Okay.
If you use soap and water, that's fine.
But really, soap is very drying on our skin  and if you didn't use soap and you use a cleanser  you would certainly find a difference immediately.
You don't realize how drying soap is.
So we do try to avoid using soap.
So what we use as a cleanser, is either a cleansing milk  or a cleansing cream.
Now, today I've got two types of products with me, one is Gloria M products that we're going to use as a demonstration, and the other dermatological products that we're going to use as a dem demonstration.
So I'd like two  volunteers later on to come and have their faces cleansed, toned, and moisturized.
And then you can go and tell all your friends how it feels, okay?
Now, the Gloria M products, in that range, we have a cleanser, which is cucumber cleansing milk.
Now, all these products are water soluble which means they can be rinsed off with water.
Gone are the days when you've got these thick creams that you couldn't get off unless you used an alcohol toner to remove them.
So, a cleansing milk  a little a amount in the palm of your hand  put over the face, then rinsed off with warm water and then you can dry your face with a towel  and you would feel then, perhaps, that you'd really washed your face.
Then you must cle you must  use the toner after that.
And the toner really does get rid of  any of the cleanser that you've left on  and closes the pores.
Now the fact that you've rinsed off with water anyway, you shouldn't really have any of the cleansing medium on the skin.
So really we use the toner to close the pores  so that you don't get any creams or any dirt in the pores, so that the skin is nice and clean.
So you cleanse, you tone  and the most important thing after that  okay?
Is to moisturize.
Now in the Gloria M products we do the avocado moisturizer or the vitaminized moisturizer.
Now ladies, I don't mind if you don't cleanse properly  or perhaps you don't even tone  but the moisturizer is the most important, from my point of view.
I feel that the moisturizer will keep your skin nice and soft.
You won't get any flakiness, you won't get any dryness on the skin if you use a moisturizer.
You don't have to use make up  but certainly to cleanse and moisturize is very important.
Now with the dermatological products, I actually haven't bought those with me apart from those that we're going to use as a demo  erm, the have a very nice cleanser called  special cleansing gel, and if you're used to using soap and water  it really is very similar to using soap.
You put a little of the gel in the palm of the hand, use water to lather it, put the lather over your face, and then again, rinse off with warm water  and you feel as if you've used soap and water.
We th , do then have a toner, but you don't necessarily have to use the toner because you've used to water to cleanse off the cleanser.
And then, again, a very important product is the moisturizer.
The moisturizer keeps your skin nice and soft and supple, it doesn't get dry.
Now, don't forget we're coming up to winter, we have the cold winds, we have the rain, if you're not wearing a moisturizer the skin will suffer.
Okay?
It wi , really will get dry, and possibly very red.
You know you get these little red veins on the su , on the  cheek area  if you don't wear  a moisturizer those little red veins can get worse, so we use a moisturizer to try and protect the skin.
So there's no secret about good skin care.
It really is, only, cleanse, tone, and moisturize.
It does depend on the products you use.
If you've got plenty of products at home, fine, use them  okay?
If you haven't, if you're using soap and water, just think about perhaps, whether you should use a cleanser, a toner and a moisturizer.
Alright?
Now, is there anybody here who would like to volunteer to come and have their face, cleansed, toned and moisturized?


Come on!


Yes.


Of course we go back an awful long way don't we?
Yes.
Yeah.
Are you going to tell them how much ?
Er  about .
Forty years?
Forty years!
Forty years I've known Gloria.


Miss  used to be a cam , the, what were you?
Campaigner Chief.
She was a Campaigner Chief when I was a campaigner.
My lovely little girls!
can you Margaret?
Ca , can you see?
Do you want to just  round her neck?
Ooh!
 
 
Put a band on, just so that we don't  you know, erm  squash their hair.
That's it.


Now somebody else, we need another volunteer to try the other products er 
Well I'm thinking 
erm 
about it.
Go on!
Just so that we don't get any products on  the clothes.
Right.
That's it.
So Carol is now using the  cucumber cleansing milk and she  if just show the ladies what you're doing Carol, she's just actually tipping it out into the palm of her hand, there's no water necessary, okay?
Rub it into the palm of your hand, and then spread it on to your own face.
It will be nice if you could get somebody to do this for you every day wouldn't it?
Oh yes!


So when you actually are putting it on your own face  make sure that you rub your fingers all around, especially around the nose.
Okay?
You get a build up of black heads around the nose, and around the chin.
Okay?
So, really make sure you spread it over the whole of the face, rubbing it in with your fingers.
Now Carol's doing this beautifully, and it really does feel nice!
Okay?
She's massaging in the cleanser.
And does it feel nice ?
That's lovely!
So once you've got that one, even if you're wearing make up, you can use this cleanser, okay?
It will take the make up, which you might need to use the make up, er the re , er the cleanser  possibly twice, or three times if you're wearing make up.
Okay?
We normally say cleanse twice anyway.
So you should cleanse with your cleanser twice.
If there is make up on  from the first erm removal, then you could then take off the make up with the first application and then go over twice more, so it would be three times if you've got quite a lot of base  or foundation on.
Okay?
So  now Carol's going to use damp pads  damp cotton wool to take off the cleanser.
Now you at home would actually use  warm water to splash over your face.
Now if you notice Carol's movements, they are always in a an upward direction  and the reason for this is so that you don't drag the skin, so when you're  whatever you're doing with your face,whe , when you're cleansing, toning, and moisturize, always try and keep the movements going up  because you don't want to stretch the face, you don't want to make any  any loose skin any looser than it is 
Mm mm.
or  or bring any more erm, little wrinkles or little lines that we have.
Now we're going to tone.
And the toner actually closes the pores, because we may have opened those pores slightly by using the cleanser, and also, if there is any cleanser left on the skin the toner will remove that as well.
And the toner we're using is rosemary skin tonic, and that's erm  from the herb, rosemary.
It feels nice and it's, it is very good for the skin.
It usually is cold.
Mm?
So once you've cleansed, and once you've toned  you then make sure that the face is either tissued dry or you can actually pad to your face, after the toner, with a towel.
As long as it's dry before you apply the moisturizer.
Have you gone to sleep down there?
Carol's now going to tissue dry  the toner.
And now the skin is perfectly clean  and it can be  ah, it can have  the moisturizer on it.
Carole's using the avocado moisturizer which is very creamy  it contains avocado oil, which is very good for the skin  and it's a natural product.
If you feel, ladies, that when you put your moisturizer on and the skin is still feeling quite dry, put another application of your moisturizer on.
Alright?
And do make sure you put plenty of moisturizer on the cheeks and on the nose, because they're areas that actually do hit the elements  more than the other parts of the face.
Not to forget the neck, the neck is part of the face  and this is where we show the  the lines don't we?
Around the neck.
So if you massage in the neck with your moisturizer with upward movements it will help those lines.
Okay?
It won't take them away  once they're there they don't disappear, but it does help to ease them, they don't look quite so deep.
Alright.
If you actually massage  the cream into the  the neck.
Mhm?
Right.
How does that feel?
That's fine.
Yes?
Am I finished with now?
Nearly.
And yo do you want to straighten your hair?
Mm mm.
Right.


Would you like sit down?
Yes.
Oh!
That's it!
Alright?
 
Thank you very much.
Do you have ?
Can we thank  Margaret?
Thank Margaret for being a volunteer 
 
okay?
 
Please may we have another volunteer?
And this is Molly.
So she's going to have the dermatological products used on her this afternoon.
Do you usually use soap and water on your face?
Yes.
Molly uses soap and water to wash her face so we're going to use  the cleansing gel which lathers up like soap.
Alright?
And we'll see, we'll ask her what she fe , what it feels like on her skin  to see if it feels better than soap.
So Carol's using the gel and she's making it into a lather.
Alright?
It's just a little gel that you put in the palm of your hand  use some warm water and lather it up and put the lather over your face.
And again, make sure that you use your finger to go round the nose, and over the fore head, around the eyes.
And another thing about  directions of, of your hands, upward movements all the time, and make sure with the eye area, go in towards the nose, because if you keep bringing
Mm.
your movements coming outwards you stretch the skin and you make even more lines come around that area.
Oh that's nice!
So, take your fingers from the outside and move them in towards the nose and round  so that you don't stretch the skin even more.
Look at your hands!
Perhaps we just need a little more water to make a bit more lather.
 

.
Now of course, if you went to a salon 
.
for a a facial cleanse you would actually laid on a couch, like this, and er have a head band and have a towel round you  and you have nice soft music playing  alright?
Mm.
So 
And 
sing everybody!




and then the therapist will actually cleanse, tone and moisturize.
And you would actually, in a facial, you would have a facial massage with aromatherapy oils  and that's very relaxing, that's very nice.
Sounds like .
So we've got the cleansing gel on and now we're going to remove it.
Carol's uses, using sponges to take off the gel.
 

Yes.
We haven't got any more.
.
The sponges feel nice and soft, they don't drag the skin.
And it is important, ladies, to remove all the cleanser, not to leave any on the skin.
So do make sure that whatever cleanser you're using, make sure it all comes off.
Because if it doesn't, your moisturizer, which is very important, isn't working properly.
Because there's not the ingredients in the cleanser that there is the moisturizer and if you have any cleanser on the skin it's blocking the work of the moisturizer.
So we've cleansed off the cleanser now  going to tissue dry  Now toner is in a spray bottle, so we're going to gently use the spray over Molly's face.
Close her eyes, it's a very gentle spray.
Mm mm?
It's like raindrops.
And then we're going to use a very nice cream  erm called moisture balance  and that's a dermatological product  and, and that's for keeping the skin nice and soft, and keeping the wrinkles at bay.
And again, when you're putting on the moisturizer, don't forget the neck.
And always use upward movements.


Can you do the neck?
And how's it feeling Molly?
That's really lovely!
You could do this all day long!


It is very relaxing, really.
I tell you something, it's much better than the operating table!


In fact, some people when they do come into the salon they say, ooh it's like an operating theatre!


It's not really.
It's quite pretty in there.
It's just I think, when there's a couch and there's white tissues over the couch it probably can look a little bit clinical.
But certainly, we don't operate.
 
We don't amputate.
We don't do anything in that line!
Thank goodness for that!
I can   but it is, but it is nice.
 
What was tha er tha that one??
No, this is the dermatological.
Yes.
Oh.
This has a lemon grass in
Yeah.
which you can actually smell.
Would you like sit up Molly?
Yeah.
Right.
Back down again.
The only thing, ladies, when you have a facial, your hair get slightly squashed.


with that on.
So don't go to the hairdressers before you us, alright?
Go to the hairdressers after 
Yeah.
we've seen you.
Good.
There we are.
There you go.
Can we have a clap for Molly for 
Yes!
for being our volunteer?
 
They were just very quick demonstrations, but it does take longer if you come to a salon.
But, with yourselves, do make sure you cleanse properly  I'm not too worried about your toner, but you must use a moisturizer, just to make sure that your skin is nice and soft and supple.
Okay?
And if you want to wear make up then of course, make up goes over the top of your moisturizer.
Okay?
Erm, I have brought some price lists here, and I think we've got some time, Sheila, what time am I  finishing?
Erm, well you, it really doesn't matter.
It's up to her.
About erm twenty past three.
I dunno what the time is now.
Well I said, you know 
It's three o'clock.
 
It's er  about quarter past three.
About quarter past 
Yeah.
three.
So that's a little time.
So I've got a little time to speak?
Yes.
Yes.
Erm, if you would like a price list, by all means, at the end you can come up and take one.
Erm, I'll have some brochures going around, some leaflets going round just  advertizing what we do  but if, I'd like to just mention to you that erm, there are other, other treatments that we do, of course, at the salon.
We do, a selection of facials, all  are very nice  erm, we also do eyebrow shaping, eyebrow trimming, some people would call that  erm  and removal of facial hair.
Sometimes, people have problems with doing eyebrows, if they wear glasses
Mm!
you can't see your own eyebrows can 
No.
you?
And, you take your glasses off to do your eyebrows and
You can't see them.
you can't see


you put your glasses on to try and see, and you can't  pluck the eyebrows because the glasses are in the way  so we do quite a lot of eyebrow trimming, erm  at salon.
And what we do with the eyebrows, we don't just use a pair of tweezers  we actually use wax, so if you've got quite a lot of hair underneath  your brow, we never take from above the brow, just below, if you've got quite a lot of hair, it can be painful if you're just using tweezers, so what we do now  we use a little bit of hot wax, which is pink, so we put some wax under the brow, either side, let the wax  erm, cool and set, and then pull the wax off.
Ooh!
Yes.
And everybody says,so ooh!
It's really not too painful, it sounds painful, but if you think of the eye area being very small, it really doesn't take long.
The wax is on for about two minutes, and it takes two seconds to pull it off.
And when we pull the wax off, all the hairs are in the wax  so the majority of the hair is out in one pull.
Then we use our tweezer to actually shape the eyebrow.
And then after that we have some soothing gel put on the eyebrow so that, the skin is slightly pink so that when you actually have a, erm, an eyebrow trim, the soothing gel takes away the pinkness.
And that would last six to eight weeks ladies.
Oh lovely!
It's it's  very nice treatment.
Erm  a lot of us are bothered by eyebrows  some of us have got really long coarse hair that grow in the eyebrows and we take those out as well.
So don't ever be frightened of having an eyebrow trim because it really is a very simple treatment.
And the other part of facial waxing is, on the chin, we tend to get quite a few growing on our chin, and upper lip.
There are two things we can do with hair on the upper lip, we can either bleach it so that it doesn't notice, or we can actually remove it with wax, or we can have electrolysis.
Now electrolysis is the permanent removal of hair by the insertion of a very small needle attached to a machine  and you press the button on the needle holder which releases current, and that cooks the hair, it actually cooks the root of the hair, but each hair has to be individually treated, so if you've got quite a lot of coarse hair  it can take a lot of time, and a lot of money.
Okay?
Normally, the time is fifteen minutes, and for fifteen minutes it's five fifty, so if you've got a lot of hair, it's quite coarse, it's going to go on for several months.
So if you didn't really want to embark on that treatment  we again, use the waxing treatment  as for the eyebrows, we use ca ho , hot wax on the area that you need, on the chin, on the upper lip.
A small piece of  warm, of hot wax applied to the area, it's set, pulled off, and the all the hairs come away in the wax.
And it feels really very smooth afterwards.
It doesn't take long, it's just, really, seconds.
It doesn't hurt because it's pulled off so quickly, and when we pull it off, we put our finger straight over the area and it takes the sting away.
So really, it's not ma , you know, don't be frightened about having waxing.
So we do the, waxing for the chin, and for the upper lip.
So, you see, you've got other methods, you've got waxing, you've got bleaching, you've got electrolysis.
But I would think, possibly, waxing would be the thing that, the treatment that perhaps you might consider.
If you are worried about facial hair, they're out in just seconds.
Okay?
So, along with your eyebrows, and along with your facial hair  and along with your erm  skin treatment, your facial, you'll feel a new person won't you?
Yes?


Really will feel nice!
And what else do you?
We do manicures, and we do pedicures.
Manicures are,i , are ideal for trimming your nails, pushing down the cuticles, and making your nails look into a nice shape and nice and clean.
You don't necessarily have to have bright coloured polish on at the end.
We can buff them until they shine, or you can have just a natural erm  base coat on just to give it a shine.
And then we do pedicures.
Now, pedicures is really a manicure of the toes, but what we do with a pedicure, we actually rub away the hard skin that you may have on the bottom of your feet, on the side of your big toe, that's usually where it builds up, or on the ball of the foot.
We are not chiropodists, we don't actually cut away the hard skin because that i is a chiropodist's job, but we certainly do have a good try at trying to get rid of as much hard skin as we can.
We soak the feet in nice, erm, antiseptic soapy water, and when we think the feet have soaked enough for the skin to become soft, we take the feet out and then we rub with a foot file to get rid of the hard skin.
You have a nice foot and leg massage, which really does make you feel nice.
You feel, at the end of the treatment you feel as if you're walking on air!
It's really a very nice treatment.
A after the, the foot and leg massage, erm, we actually cut the toe nails and we file the toe nails  and again, sometimes toe nails aren't terribly easy to cut yourselves, we can't always get down there can we?
And also, the toe nails get very thick, and quite hard to cut as we get older, so we actually do that for you, we've got toe nail clippers that make it a lot easier.
And once we've clipped the nails, we actually file the nail so that it's nice and smooth and it doesn't catch on your tights or it doesn't catch on the sheets at night.
So, that is another nice treatment that makes you feel better.
Okay?
So that's a, a pedicure, which helps you to have your toe nails nice and short and to get rid of the hard skin.
So what else do we do?
We do  body massage  or back and shoulder massage.
Now, if any of you get terribly tense at the back of shoulders which we all seem to do nowadays, if you come for just a back and shoulder massage, we actually work on the back of the neck and along the shoulders using massage movements which helps to relax you, which helps to actually break down the lactic acid that builds up in the muscles that causes you pain.
You don't realize, ladies, how much you sort of, keep your shoulders up  with tension.
I mean, I do the same thing, I get home at night and I'm like this!
And I think tt!
Oh!
I need a massage!
But Carol and I never seem to get time to be able to do these things on each other, but we have had the treatment so we do know that  massage really does help you to relax.
So that's another treatment perhaps, that you might like to consider.
It doesn't mean that you've got to take all your clothes off, not at all!
You lie on your front and we actually take, ask you to take either your dress or your blouse off  and we put towels over you.
If you're wearing a bra we just undo your bra, okay?
And then we work on the back.
There's nobody else there, there is nobody else looking at you.
A, a curtain is used to screen you off, and if it's a very cold day we've got infra-red heat  we've got a lamp above the he , the couch and  we actually put on the infra-red heat so we warm you up first before you start, before we start  so your body is feeling nice and warm and you're feeling relaxed, we have nice music playing and it does help  right, with the tension that builds up on the shoulders.
Oh!
So that's something else to think about.
I'm telling you all this, and perhaps you don't have to erm  pay for any of these treatments  we do gift vouchers, so if you've got anybody who wants to buy you a gift of any sort, you could always say well, I fancy erm  an eyebrow trim, or I fancy a pedicure  perhaps they would like to buy you a gift voucher and then you can come in and it could be a present for you.
So you wouldn't necessarily have to pay out for these treatments, you see.
So erm  you know, if you, if you  er, don't know what  to say to your family to buy for Christmas, why not come and have a eyebrow trim and they can buy you a gift voucher for that?
So, you know, we're always there, Carol and I will actually help you, if you'd like to pop into the salon  and ask about the  gift vouchers.
A gift voucher can be of any value.
Alright?
You don't have to actually look at the price list and say  oh well I'll have  a back and shoulder massage, which is ten pound, you don't have to have anything for ten pound, you can have it as little as five pounds, two pound fifty, we don't mind, it can go towards a treatment.
Or, if that person buys you a gift voucher and you don't necessarily want to have  a treatment that states on the gift voucher, you can come and exchange it for products.
We're not worried, we're not actually keeping you to anything that's  down on the gift voucher.
But perhaps it would be nice if somebody gave you a gift voucher for Christmas and it said an eyebrow trim, and you were dying to have an eyebrow trim but you didn't know where to come, and perhaps you were a little bit frightened about having one, so, it might, you know, get you to come into the salon.
And now that you know that Carol and I are there  erm, you know somebody to speak to, cos sometimes you go into a shop and you're not really sure who's there, and when you see a face that you recognize it helps you doesn't it?
Are there are any questions you would like to ask?
What kind of erm  aromatherapy do you pu put on your face?
A what?
Aromatherapy on your face?
Yes.
Aha.
You know the therapy oils?
Aha.
Erm, when we do a skin treatment we actually do a skin analysis  and we use the appropriate  erm, aromatherapy oils for the particular skin we're working on.
We have a selection of er three small bottles and they have a mixture of essential oils in them
Mm.
and it does depend on what skin type we're treating.
Sometimes we're se , we're treating a very sensitive skin, sometimes we're stre , we're treating a very dry skin, or it could be dry and sensitive.
So it does depend on what skin type, and we actually choose the erm  aromatherapy oils according the skin type.
Yeah.
And, I must say ladies, they do smell very nice!
And when we are actually doing the massage i the massage itself is relaxing but to have the sweet smelling  erm, essential oils being used as well, it really is very nice!
Any more questions?
.
Do you know where we are at the top of the high street?
Not really no.
I know where you are.
But I wondered if everybody else knew.
Okay.
Do you er, actually know erm  where the George is?
Or it used to be the George.
Mm.
The big white building at the other side of the er, pedestrian crossing.
Yes.
About five yards.
If you just continue five yards, that's right 
 
and then Jasmine Flowers is in the corner, and then the salon is just at  er it  joins on to Jasmine Flowers.
It has a black canopy over the front  and it says Health and Beauty Salon, with a telephone number  and at the side of the door it says Gloria M.
And please, if you come up to the door and the  times of opening says closed on there, we're not closed, it's just sometimes we've forgotten to change the closed to open.


But do come in.
You know, sometimes we walk in first thing in the morning and we start straightaway and we forget to turn the er  closed to open.
So, you know, mind you, we've left it now and it says open  and we're not, we're here with you!
 
Are you open every day?
We are open Tuesdays through to Saturdays.
We close all day Monday, Tuesday's we're there from nine thirty to five thirty.