

6 Directly Employed Labour and Sub-contractors
INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, labour in the construction industry has been employed on a casual basis.
The location of a builder's work is continuously changing, and labour is frequently engaged at the commencement of a project and laid off upon completion.
In the construction industry, as in other industries, mechanisation and industrialised systems have had, and continue to have, an important impact in reducing demand for labour.
Work on site, however, even in the 1980s remains fairly labour-intensive.
As well as changes in technique, market conditions at any particular time will, of course, affect the demand for labour.
The economic recession of the '70s and '80s has inevitably led to a fall in the recruitment and training of skilled operatives, coupled with a loss of skilled tradesmen to other, less depressed industries.
The nature of the building industry does, however, generate a resourceful, independent and adaptable labour force, with an entrepreneurial spirit.
This in turn has led to systems of employment of labour which, while not unique, yet display a measure of variety and flexibility rarely encountered in other industries.
Although many builders continue to use directly employed labour, a pronounced tendency has developed to employ labour on a sub-contract basis, particularly in southern England.
The term sub-contractor may apply equally to a private or public company, any corporate or public body, as well as any individual self employed person or partnership.
In this chapter, directly employed labour and the three classes of subcontractor — labour-only, labour and material, and nominated — are examined, together with the problems of training, and feedback of labour costs to management.
LABOUR-ONLY SUB-CONTRACTORS
Labour-only sub-contractors supply their labour and, in addition, may provide small tools and plant, but they will not be responsible for the provision of materials.
Labour-only sub-contractors may generally be viewed as a substitute for directly employed labour.
Concern has been expressed periodically by architects, trade unions, the Construction Industry Training Board and both central and local government, at the growth in use of labour-only subcontractors.
This concern has been mainly concentrated on quality of work, training, avoidance of payment of income tax or national insurance, and conditions of employment.
It could be argued that to a large extent such fears are unfounded or else that the difficulties have been overcome.
The growth of labour-only sub-contracting has been of mutual benefit to both employers and employees.
It should be emphasised, however, that one major reason for the growth in its use has been the effect in recent years of the additional legislation bearing upon employment and the increased cost and risks of employing operatives direct.
In this chapter, when examining the benefits and disadvantages of labour-only sub-contracting to both the builder and subcontractor, it will be apparent that the builder probably receives the greater benefit.
Where a labour-only subcontractor employs the work-force direct, operates the PAYE scheme and pays a set wage, the employee of the subcontractor is in a similar position to the employee of the builder.
The builder, however, will view such operatives as sub-contractors.
The main incentive for building trade workers to go on their own and become labour-only sub-contractors is the opportunity to increase their earnings.
This increase comes from improved productivity, longer working hours, higher rates, or from a percentage of the earnings of labourers and craftsmen that they themselves employ.
In addition there will be tax advantages where it may prove possible, for example, for the sub-contractor to offset against income tax telephone charges, rates, heating and lighting, car or van expenses and the payment, say, to a member of the family for the preparation of accounts.
BENEFITS TO THE SUB-CONTRACTOR
Many operatives also welcome the independence and freedom, within the limits set by the builder, to choose working hours and in certain circumstances to work unlimited overtime.
There is an added freedom to  choose the location of work, although the cost of any travelling involved will usually be the responsibility of the sub-contractor.
Many labour-only subcontractors have grasped the opportunity to expand initially to a labour and material sub-contractor and subsequently to a general contractor.
The disadvantages faced by the labour-only sub-contractor are numerous compared to those of the directly employed operative.
Not least are the risks transferred from the builder to the sub-contractor (discussed in detail later in this chapter under’ benefits to the builder’).
The subcontractor will also have an increased administrative burden in providing annual accounts for the Inland Revenue, preparing estimates and calculating and monitoring payments to employees irrespective of whether they are self-employed or engaged on the PAYE scheme.
It should be borne in mind that many labour-only sub-contractors lack administrative and management ability and therefore find themselves in financial difficulties when employing labour or expanding their gang size.
DISADVANTAGES TO THE SUB-CONTRACTOR
The sub-contractor is dependent on the builder for regular payment for the work carried out.
Occasionally the builder may raise minor maintenance problems to justify his failure to pay for work executed or to release retention.
The subcontractor then has to make the difficult choice of continuing work in the hope of being paid, or withdrawing his labour and reducing the probability of ultimate payment.
Moreover, particularly with smaller firms, the builder may be unable to pay owing to cash flow problems, receivership or bankruptcy.
Self-employed persons generally receive less help from the state in periods of unemployment or sickness.
Under the social security system no unemployment benefit is paid and entitlement to supplementary benefit will only arise when savings are below a predetermined level.
The DHSS provide sick pay contributions to the self-employed, but at a lower level than that paid to an employed operative.
State retirement pensions are also at a lower level.
Generally, builders stand to gain in a number of ways from encouraging self-employment in the construction industry.
As these factors are examined it is important to bear in mind that a major advantage to the  builder is that the financial risks of employing labour direct are transferred to the sub-contractor.
BENEFITS TO THE BUILDER
When employing labour direct the builder is committed to pay his employees, irrespective of the quantity and quality of their output.
The labour-only sub-contractor, however, although occasionally employed on an hourly rate, will invariably be allocated work on a unit rate or lump sum basis and will only be paid for the actual work produced.
This will result in effective cost control for the builder.
Responsibility for loss of earnings and production, due to inclement weather for example, will rest with the sub-contractor.
Production costs
Administration and overhead costs to the builder will be reduced for such items as national insurance contributions, holidays with pay, sick pay, tool money and redundancy payments.
Theoretically the sub-contractor should make provision for these on-costs in the rates or daywork rate agreed with the builder, but frequently the provision is inadequate.
Overheads and administration
Lack of continuity of work for labour can occur on an individual project, between one project and the next, or as a result of changes in the location of construction activity.
It is the responsibility of the sub-contractor to overcome such problems by finding alternative employment during these periods, or by bearing the cost of the unemployment.
Continuity
The sub-contractor will be responsible for transporting his work-force to the site and for any travelling time or expenses.
In general, therefore, subcontract labour will tend to be more mobile than directly employed labour.
However, the builder may be expected to make some contribution towards travelling time and costs where he has failed to obtain suitable sub-contract labour within the vicinity of the site and a subcontractor is requested to travel an excessive distance.
Transport costs
It is a commonly stated opinion that the quality of work produced by  sub-contractors is below the standard of that achieved by directly employed labour, particularly where pride in workmanship is overshadowed by a potential increase in earnings.
However, to a large extent the converse is true because:(a) There is a tendency for the more skilled tradesmen to prefer to work as sub-contractors.
Quality control
(b) Not only does the builder hold a retention of from 5% to 10%, but also up to a week's payment in hand, and the release of either will be subject to the sub-contractor achieving a satisfactory quality of work.
The builder, therefore, has the ultimate control in that no payment need be made for sub-standard work.
(c) The sense of responsibility held by most sub-contractors is such that they will be concerned to retain their reputation as tradesmen, particularly bearing in mind the need for continuity of employment.
The sub-contractor is motivated by the need to maximise his earnings.
Therefore, he will take positive steps to establish the nature of the task, the material and plant requirements, including their availability and proximity to the work place, and the contract programme and its impact on flow of work and future workload.
Moreover, the sub-contractor will probably develop the ability to work on his own initiative and will ensure that management is positive, forward thinking and alert.
(Any weakness in management is, therefore, more likely to be exposed by the use of sub-contract labour.)
Reduced supervision
Competition between sub-contractors may lead to lower rates, particularly when the market is depressed.
The opposite will also apply of course, and labour only sub-contract rates are sometimes more related to market conditions than to the actual work content.
In times of boom, any high rates which by necessity are being paid on one site, may by discussion with other sub-contractors in that trade result in a demand for similar increases on other sites.
Market conditions
The reliability of some sub-contractors may be questionable.
If they are able to’ overdraw’on their payments, or to obtain improved rates on  other sites, they may withdraw their labour without notice.
The builder can of course withhold any payment or retention outstanding, but this will probably not offset the cost of delay and disturbance in locating an alternative sub-contractor.
Equally, programming of work may be more complicated, particularly where sub-contract labour fails to conform to the contract programme, or labour is withdrawn.
DISADVANTAGES TO THE BUILDER
Sub-contract labour may be hard to obtain for certain types of work: for example, small works where both output and continuity are difficult to control.
In such cases directly employed labour may be more versatile and adaptable.
Double or treble sub-letting of the work may occasionally occur either as a deliberate policy of the sub-contractor, or where more work is acquired than can be coped with.
In either case, the work will probably be re-let at a lower rate, thus providing a profit or administration surcharge for the original sub-contractor.
The result of such practice may often be that the actual operative working on site receives substantially less than an economic rate for individual tasks, with resultant bad feeling and possibly bad workmanship.
The builder also runs the risk of facing contra-charges or requests for daywork payments for standing time, when materials or plant are not available.
The difficulties outlined above are overcome by the majority of builders in the terms and conditions under which labour-only subcontractors are employed.
These terms and conditions are discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Labour-only sub-contractors tend to operate in small gangs, using their home as an office or base.
Wives may act as secretaries but there is often difficulty in contracting sub-contractors during normal office hours.
LOCATION OF LABOUR
Builders seeking to locate and employ sub-contractors could use the following methods:(a) Check the local press columns where sub-contractors seeking work offer their services.
Similar advertisements also appear in Yellow Pages, published by British Telecom and other trade directories.
(b) Advertise in the local press.
(c) Advertise in the job centre.
(d) Ascertain from sub-contractors currently employed by the company if they could recommend any other sub-contractors.
Irrespective of which method is used, full details of the sub-contractor's background, including employment history, should be obtained by a requirement either to complete an application form or to attend an interview.
If possible, work carried out previously by the sub-contractor should be inspected.
In view of the fact that the methods of obtaining suitable labour may be time-consuming, it is preferable and more efficient to maintain a detailed register of labour-only sub-contractors.
The register could be sub-divided into trades and provide details of: sub-contractor's name, address and telephone number
LABOUR-ONLY SUB-CONTRACTOR REGISTER
work-force available, such as size and number of gangs
distance that the sub-contractor is prepared to travel
work carried out previously and the quality and level of service provided
tax position, daywork rate and whether registered for VAT
public liability and employer's liability insurance
All replies received to advertisements or casual enquiries can be entered in the register.
A careful note should be made against any sub-contractor used by the builder who subsequently proved to be unsatisfactory.
Such a register carefully maintained in a builder's organisation will within a few years provide a detailed and comprehensive list of the majority of the subcontract labour available in an area, with consequent improvement in efficiency in locating a suitable work-force.
Frequently builders appoint labour-only sub-contractors immediately following a personal interview, but it is important that work does not commence on site until the terms and conditions of employment have been agreed and confirmed in writing.
APPOINTMENT OF LABOUR ONLY SUB-CONTRACTORS — TERMS AND CONDITIONS
The terms and conditions should make provision for the following items.
The sub-contractor must be advised that all work is to be executed  in accordance with the relevant drawings and specification, in a proper and workmanlike manner.
Standard of workmanship
The sub-contractor will be expected to comply with instructions given by the general foreman, site agent or contract manager.
Usually, however, working hours will be subject to negotiation.
Terms of reference
The method of payment, cheque or cash, should be defined and the payment day agreed.
For example, work executed will be measured on a Tuesday or Wednesday and the resultant payment made on a Thursday or Friday; that is to say , two days in arrears.
Some sub-contractors, particularly when paid on the lump or a daywork basis, may expect payment on a Friday, up to and including that day, but from the builder's point of view it is preferable to keep a week in hand.
Method of payment
All payments to the sub-contractor should be subject to a retention of between 5% and 10%.
Half of the retention would be released upon the completion of the work by the sub-contractor and the balance at the end of the’ contract’maintenance period, provided that all defects in the subcontractor's work have been made good.
Retention
In the event of the sub-contractor failing to complete the initial work or failing to rectify any defective workmanship, the retention would not be released.
Many sub-contractors agree with the builder a limit of, say, £1000 on retention, particularly where the sub-contractor is exclusively employed by the builder at that time.
The sub-contractor should be advised of and have agreed to the starting and completion dates of the work for which he is responsible.
The subcontractor should also be required to co-ordinate with other trades and phase his own work to integrate with the sequence of operations in the contract programme.
This may well entail a break in continuity and a return to the site at a later date.
Commencement and completion dates
The sub-contractor should be required to produce evidence that he possesses both employer's liability and public liability insurance.
Proof should be provided at regular intervals that the amounts insured are adequate, by presentation of the policy and proof that premiums have been paid.
Alternatively the builder may prefer to provide public liability and employer's liability insurance on behalf of all sub-contractors, either without charge or by deduction of’ say 1% from the payments made.
Insurance
This latter approach does avoid any problems which may arise when, for example following a public liability claim, the contractor's insurance company claims reimbursement from either the sub-contractor or his insurance company.
In addition, not only are the employees of the sub contractor covered for employer's liability but also the sub-contractor himself.
The sub-contractor must produce a current 714 tax certificate before payments are made without deduction of tax.
(The tax deduction scheme is discussed in detail later in this chapter.)
Tax deduction scheme
Usually it will be the sub-contractor's responsibility to take delivery of, check, unload, stack and protect the material which he fixes.
The sub-contractor may also be required to unload the materials required for other trades where the relevant operatives are not on site.
Time taken in unloading should be recorded by the foreman and paid at the agreed daywork rate.
Unloading materials
Responsibility should be defined for the provision of tools, plant and equipment and the supply and erection of scaffolding, and the terms and conditions of use of standing scaffolding, site huts and general amenities.
Plant and scaffolding
The sub-contractor should not be permitted to sub-let the work as a whole, or any part of it, without the written consent of the builder.
Sub-letting
Contra-charges may arise against the sub-contractor as a result of: damage to materials, plant or completed work damage caused to the work of other trades faulty workmanship which the sub-contractor fails to rectify delays to the contract programme which may result, for example, in increased plant hire charges or claims by the client, against the builder, for liquidated damages excessive wastage of materials through negligence irrespective of whether such wastage is direct or indirect (see Chapter 5).
Contra-charges
The sub-contractor may also have claims against the builder, for example for standing time where materials or plant are not available.
Such claims may be excluded where they arise from circumstances outside the builder's control.
The sub-contractor should be required to maintain safe working conditions on the site and to operate within the current safety legislation.
Safety, health and welfare
In practice the terms and conditions of employment of sub-contractors will vary from company to company and are often drafted with a substantial bias in the builder's favour.
Some companies may use the standard form of’ Labour-only subcontract’issued by the Building Employers' Confederation, in place of or alongside their own terms and conditions.
The rates or lump sum payments agreed with the sub-contractor are usually framed to include the sub-contractor's responsibility for the following: setting out (if applicable) provision of all necessary tools for the trade concerned to ensure the proper execution of the work proper care and maintenance, including cleaning on a daily basis where necessary of all tools, plant and equipment supplied by the builder All on-costs including: overtime payments  holidays with pay contributions travelling time and expenses Construction Industry Training Board (CITB) levy national insurance contributions sick pay tool money etc.
AGREEMENT OF RATES
In order to simplify the agreement of rates and subsequent measurement of work with sub-contractors, it is common practice to use methods of measurements which conform neither with the bills of quantities nor with the standard method of measurement of building work.
STANDARD DESCRIPTIONS
Builders frequently devise standard descriptions which are omnibus and include most labour items.
For example, brickwork for residential development will usually comprise:(a) 100 mm concrete blockwork in foundations — rate per sq m .
(This rate will include mixing mortar, building in lintels over pipes and services and damp-proof course.)
Any different thickness of blockwork or hollow blocks would have a different rate.
(b) 100 mm thermal blockwork in superstructure — rate per sq m.
(This rate will include building in door and window frames, building in lintels, forming cavities and fixing ties, closing cavities including vertical damp-proof course, building in joists or joist hangers and erecting any necessary scaffolding.
The same rate will usually be applied both to blockwork in partitions and cavity walls.)
(c) Common brickwork — rate per 1000 bricks laid.
(This rate will include all labour items, i.e. fair face and piers.)
(d) Facing brickwork — rate per 1000 bricks laid.
(This rate will include building in door and window frames, pointing and fair face, and similar labours to those included in the rate for thermal blockwork.)
(e) Bedding wall plates — rate per linear m or alternatively a lump sum item.
It is also possible that the bedding of the wall plate may be included with (b) or (c) above.
(f) Daywork rate — per hour.
(This rate will be applied when difficulty is experienced in agreeing measured rates, for example time spent unloading materials, adjusting scaffolding for use by other trades and reinstating any work damaged by others.)
Due to the fact that the sub-contractor when paid on a piecework basis achieves a relatively high hourly rate, most sub-contractors either  negotiate an equivalent daywork rate per hour or resist working on daywork and agree rates or lump sums for the particular work involved.
Equally, the builder is usually anxious to keep daywork rates low and avoid daywork if possible.
The sub-contractor when agreeing rates with the builder will take account of the complexity of the work, the amount of repetition involved and the market conditions.
Similar omnibus rates may be used in other trades — groundwork, carpentry and joinery, etc.
Some builders and sub-contractors, however, retain the bill of quantities as the basis of agreeing rates.
The agreement of rates with sub-contractors may be undertaken using the following alternative methods or combinations thereof’ where appropriate:(a) A photocopied extract from the unpriced bill of quantities or internal take off is forwarded to the sub-contractor for pricing.
METHODS OF AGREEING RATES
(b) A blank copy of the builder's standard descriptions of work (i.e. omnibus and not based on the Standard Method of Measurement) is forwarded to the sub-contractors for pricing.
(c) A priced schedule of the builder's standard description of work is forwarded to the subcontractor with the option that the rates are fixed by the builder and the subcontractor has no opportunity to negotiate, or the sub-contractor is given the opportunity to quote a percentage surcharge or discount off the complete schedule or individual rates.
(d) Each rate is individually negotiated between the sub-contractor and the builder.
When comparing quotations from sub-contractors, care is necessary to assess the relationship between different items, as discussed in the section on labour and material sub-contractors later in this chapter.
Where the builder employs more than one sub-contractor of the same trade on the same site or within a confined geographical area, there will be a tendency for the builder to fix the rates to avoid any conflict or ill-feeling between the various sub-contractors employed.
STANDARDISATION OF RATES
The majority of labour-only subcontract gangs are limited in size to a maximum of six persons.
Irrespective of which method is used by the gang leader to divide payments, problems will arise if the trade skill and quality and quantity of output of the gang members is mismatched.
If members do not achieve a similar output, resentment will arise if the payment is divided equally at the end of the week.
Such pressures can be alleviated if gang sizes are kept small and either the gang members are assembled in groups of similar ability, or demarcation is identified, recognised and accepted by all gang members.
STRUCTURE OF LABOUR-ONLY SUB-CONTRACT GANGS
Either the gang leader (or leaders, where they are in partnership) will employ the gang members direct, paying national insurance contributions and operating the PAYE scheme, or more commonly, each gang member will be employed on a sub-contract basis.
The method used by the gang leader to divide payments will vary as follows:(a) The money will be divided equally between all gang members.
(b) Gang members will be employed at a fixed hourly, daily or weekly rate, whether direct or sub-contract, and the gang leader retains the balance as his own income.
Any gang member who regularly fails to break even or achieve a surplus would be laid off.
(c) The gang leader may agree rates with the builder and pay lower rates to other gang members, or alternatively sub-let the work at lower rates to other independent gangs.
When rates are discounted in this way by substantial amounts, bad feeling and discontent may well develop on the site.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, builders should if possible eliminate sub-letting to independent gangs.
(d) The gang may be constituted of two or three core members with other tradesmen or labourers employed either on daywork or discounted rates.
The gang leader will share the balance of the payment either equally or by an agreed formula between the core members.
Occasionally labour-only sub-contractors develop into large organisations or agencies with a significant control of a trade in a geographical area.
Usually such organisations are built up of a multiplicity of smaller gangs.
Advantages to the individual sub-contractors from continuity of work and reduced administration offset the marginal discount in the rates, to cover the overheads of the agency.
Moreover, these larger organisations are better equipped to arrange for training of apprentices.
The appointment of sub-contractors and agreement of rates may be the individual or joint responsibility of the contract manager, surveyor or buyer, depending on the builder's management structure.
The measurement and valuation of work completed each week, however, will usually be the responsibility of the project surveyor, with the contract manager, chief surveyor or a director authorising the payment to the subcontractor.
MEASUREMENT OF WORK EXECUTED BY LABOUR-ONLY SUB-CONTRACTORS
Measurement of sub-contractor's work is a difficult and laborious task and management controls are necessary to ensure that work is accurately measured and valued and that the surveyor has sufficient time to achieve these objectives.
Outlined below are methods of measurement commonly used by surveyors; it should be noted that some methods have more merit than others.
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT
(a) The sub-contractor is encouraged to measure the work himself and submit a detailed account to the surveyor together with any daywork sheets signed by the general foreman.
The surveyor should, but may not, check these payment requests, depending on time, ability or perseverance.
(b) The surveyor measures on site the work executed by the subcontractor each week and prepares a weekly account.
Weekly accounts should be abstracted to produce a final account.
(c) The surveyor takes off the quantities from the drawing or, less satisfactorily, extracts the relevant figures from the bill of quantities in order to calculate the total value of the sub-contract work.
Stage or interim payments are then made each week to the sub-contractor and the surveyor will make any necessary remeasurement and adjust the final quantities and payment accordingly.
Larger building companies may have reduced this operation to a form-filling exercise, particularly on repetitive projects, for example housing.
(d) The surveyor makes stage payments based on approximate quantities or related to the number of men employed, and accurately measures and values the work either on completion of relevant sections of the work or at regular monthly intervals.
Whichever method of measurement is adopted it is essential that the surveyor achieves the following:(a) That the weekly measurement is sufficiently accurate to maintain a good working relationship with the subcontractor.
PURPOSE OF MEASUREMENT
(b) That no overlap of measurement occurs, with the consequential payment of the sub-contractor twice for the same operation.
Using method (b) above this will be all too easy, particularly on a large and complicated project.
(c) That the total measured quantity and total cost of each individual item can be clearly identified and that a detailed final account is available for each subcontractor.
(d) That care is taken to ensure that overpayments do not occur, particularly when using method (c) above.
(e) That, when a subcontractor will be on site for an extensive period, detailed interim accounts are prepared at monthly intervals.
(f) That daywork hours for such items as unloading are accurately checked.
Problems may arise where the foreman is bribed or negligent and excessive hours are claimed by the sub-contractor.
The surveyor can easily assess the relationship between earnings on measured work and daywork, in order to verify the daywork hours, provided he is aware of the total hours worked each week.
It should be noted that from time to time subcontractors may be employed on’ the lump’(a fixed sum per day for each man employed).
In this case the surveyor should be careful to check for’ dead men’, e.g. 23 men claimed for, but only 22 on the site, the payment for the’dead man’being divided between the subcontractor and the site management.
It will be apparent that the surveyor could be negligent, overworked, dishonest or incompetent, and therefore fail to achieve accurate measurement.
Moreover, surveyors are sometimes pressurised by the subcontractor to overpay, particularly when output has been restricted during adverse weather conditions.
MANAGEMENT CONTROLS
It is therefore essential that the chief surveyor, director, or other member of the management team maintains a watching brief to monitor the accuracy of measurement and to ensure that the surveyor has sufficient time to achieve his objectives.
For costing and accounting purposes it is usual for payments to be supported by a payment certificate or a standard format.
The certificate should show: the gross payment to date deduction for retention to date deduction for insurance, CITB levy, etc. previous payments net payment for period
PAYMENT CERTIFICATES
(See Chapter 9, Costing.)
LABOUR AND MATERIAL SUB-CONTRACTORS
The labour and material sub-contractor is a sub-contractor who supplies not only labour, but also all the necessary materials to complete the work.
The provision of plant and scaffolding will usually be subject to negotiation and may be supplied by either the builder or the subcontractor.
Such sub-contracting firms are diverse in structure and vary in size from the one man painter and decorator to the public company with a turnover in excess of the majority of main contractors.
The use of labour and material sub-contractors is common practice in the building industry, because:(a) The builder does not possess the necessary expert technical knowledge and specialist skills in certain aspects of the construction process.
(b) Demand for specialist work may be of an intermittent nature and the builder may have difficulty in providing the operatives with continuity of work.
Equally, demand for the specialist work-force may arise simultaneously on separate projects.
(c) Competition between sub-contractors tends to reduce the cost to the builder.
In addition, the sub-contractor can achieve both economies of scale and improved efficiency from maximum use of both plant and labour.
(d) The builder has the advantages of greater control over cost and reduced administration.
Traditionally, certain specialist work such as asphalt and felt roofing, heating and ventilating, shopfitting, lift installations and piling are  usually sub-let by builders.
Other work of a less specialist nature — plumbing, plastering, roofing, flooring and wall tiling, painting and decorating — may be undertaken by the builder's own work-force, labour only sub-contractors or labour and material sub-contractors.
Where construction work is executed under a formal contract the builder may require the written approval of the architect before any part of the work can be sub-let.
The procedures used to obtain quotations are similar to those outlined in Chapter 5, relating to the purchase of materials.
QUOTATIONS
The majority of sub-contractors either price an extract from the bill of quantities or prepare an estimate from the drawings and specification.
When comparing quotations a straight forward financial check is inadequate.
Frequently relationships exist between rates.
For example, when pricing excavation, removal and disposal of excavated material on site, the sub-contractor may make enquiries regarding the ultimate disposal of the spoil and in the process identify possible variations to the stated quantities.
The rates can then be adjusted to produce an apparently low price overall which will benefit the sub-contractor on remeasurement.
It will also be difficult to compare quotations where items have been priced without the relevant quantities.
Moreover, care must be taken to ensure that the sub-contractor does not front-end load the pricing of the work, particularly where the sub-contract period is prolonged or intermittent.
Before a sub-contractor's quotation is accepted and an appointment is made, the builder must establish that:(a) The quality of workmanship achieved by the sub-contractor on previous contracts is satisfactory.
(b) The sub-contractor can meet the requirements of the contract programme.
(c) The sub-contractor has made adequate provision for public liability and employers' liability insurance.
(d) The terms and conditions of the sub-contract are clearly defined and agreed in writing.
The builder's surveyor will normally remeasure the work executed by labour and material sub-contractors, who may agree the measurements  on site or alternatively submit a formal invoice or payment request for the builder's surveyor to check and approve.
The payment details will usually be entered on a certificate with provision for deduction of previous payments and retention.
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
Payments to the smaller labour and material sub-contractor may be included with the weekly labour-only payments whereas the larger companies may be paid monthly or on a monthly account basis with or without cash discount.
NAMED SUB-CONTRACTORS
Under the term of/CT 80 the contractor is obliged to obtain the written consent of the architect to sub-let any part of the contract works.
Consent should not be unreasonably withheld and sub-contractors so employed are referred to as domestic sub-contractors.
Frequently on smaller contracts, builders do not formally obtain consent and assume that it would be granted.
The employer, or the architect on his behalf, for certain sections of a contract may provide a list, in or attached to the contract bills, of at least three sub-contractors from which the builder must select one able and willing to carry out the respective work.
Such sub-contractors, although once appointed are treated in every way as domestic sub-contractors, are referred to as named sub-contractors.
If the list of those sub-contractors willing to undertake the work is less than three in number, either the employer or the contractor may add additional names to the list.
Alternatively the contractor may sub-let the work to a domestic sub-contractor with the written consent of the architect.
In any event at any time prior to the execution of a binding sub-contract agreement, either the employer or the contractor may add additional sub-contractors to the list.
In each and every case the consent of either party to the contract should not be unreasonably withheld.
NOMINATED SUB-CONTRACTORS
The architect may choose to obtain quotations for certain areas of the work from specialist labour and material sub-contractors, under/CT 80, who will be known as nominated sub-contractors.
The builder will subsequently be instructed by the architect to place an order with the firm  selected and enter into a formal sub-contract agreement.
Usually a prime cost sum, together with a description of the subcontract work, is included in the bill of quantities, and the builder is given the opportunity to price for profit, general attendance and special attendance, as defined in clause B9 of the 6th edition of the Standard Method of Measurement.
The builder is also entitled to a cash discount of 2 ½%; on the total value of the nominated sub-contractor's account.
The term’ prime cost sum’is defined in SMM6 as’a sum provided for work or services to be executed by a nominated sub-contractor, a statutory authority or a public undertaking or for materials or goods to be obtained from a nominated supplier’.
The term’ provisional sum’is defined as’a sum provided for work or for costs which cannot be entirely foreseen, defined or detailed at the time the tendering documents are issued’.
The relationship between the architect, builder and nominated subcontractor will be defined in the terms of both the main contract and the sub-contract agreement.
Under the terms of JCT 80:(a) The contractor has the right to raise reasonable objections against the use of a particular nominated sub-contractor.
(b) The contractor has the obligation to pay the nominated subcontractor the sums directed by the architect and included in the interim certificate, less the agreed retention and cash discount.
The nominated sub-contractor must be paid within 17 days of the date of issue of the certificate.
Theoretically, under clause 30.1.1.1, the contractor is entitled to payment by the client within 14 days from the date of issue of each interim certificate, thus providing three days of grace.
(c) The contractor is obliged under clause 35.13.3, before the issue of each interim certificate, to provide the client's quantity surveyor with reasonable proof that the payments authorised to nominated subcontractors in the previous certificate have been made.
In the event of the contractor failing to provide the necessary proof of payment where he is able to do so, the employer has the right to pay the subcontractor direct and deduct the equivalent sums from other payments to the contractor.
The contractor is often in a difficult position, when payments to the nominated sub-contractor are only due to be made immediately prior to the next valuation, and insufficient time remains for receipts to be obtained.
The client's quantity surveyor may co-operate, particularly where the relationship with the contractor is well  established, either by accepting receipts one month in arrears, subject to the payment being made on time, or by a telephone enquiry to the nominated sub-contractors concerned to obtain verbal confirmation that payment has been made.
(d) The contractor has the possible opportunity to tender, with the approval of the architect, for work which is subject to a prime cost sum, provided the contractor directly carries out such work in the ordinary course of his business.
If the contractor's tender is accepted, he will not be able to sub-let the work to a domestic sub-contractor without the consent of the architect.
A TAX DEDUCTION SCHEME FOR SUB-CONTRACTORS
The continuing growth in the number of sub-contractors'’ lump’labour employed in the construction industry during the 1960s and early '70s was viewed with increasing concern and suspicion by government authorities, because of the widespread avoidance of payment of both income tax and national insurance contributions.
During this period contractors frequently made payments in cash and individual sub-contractors changed their names from time to time to avoid detection by Inland Revenue inspectors.
Moreover, as payments were commonly made to gang leaders, the contractor was unlikely to be aware of even the names of men employed on the site.
This abuse of tax legislation consequently received increasing attention and criticism from the public and was voiced in the media.
The Finance (No 2) Act 1975 made sweeping changes to the law and placed both the contractor and sub-contractor in such a position that tax avoidance was virtually halted.
A few instances of forged documentation and fraud have subsequently occurred, but only to a limited extent.
In essence the result of this change was to ensure that when a contractor made a payment to a sub-contractor holding a tax certificate issued by the Inland Revenue, the sub-contractor could be paid in full.
If on the other hand the sub-contractor did not hold a tax certificate, the contractor must deduct tax from the payment and pass the deduction over to the Inland Revenue.
The sub-contractor either employs the gang members direct, in which case the PAYE scheme will operate, or the members of the gang are employed as sub-contractors and the tax deduction scheme will operate with the gang leader functioning as both a sub-contractor and a contractor.
The purpose of the tax certificate is to permit a sub-contractor to receive payment from a builder without deduction of tax.
Each sub-contractor holding a certificate will subsequently be assessed for tax and pay the Inland Revenue direct.
SUB-CONTRACTORS TAX CERTIFICATES
There are four types of tax certificate: Form 714 I The I certificate is issued to an individual in business on his own.
Form 714 S The 5 certificate is a special certificate for sub-contractors whose history of continuous employment is too short to qualify for Form 714 I. The subcontractor is restricted to a maximum payment which may be received without deduction of tax.
Form 714 P The P certificate is issued to an individual who is a partner in a firm, and to certain companies (usually new companies whose financial background is unknown to the Inland Revenue).
Form 714 C The C certificate is issued to certain other companies.
In this case more than one certificate may be issued and marked’ original’or’official copy’.
The tax certificate will show: the name of the individual or company
the national insurance number of the individual or, if a company, the registration number
the signature of the individual or the signature of the company secretary
the date of expiry and the certificate number
the I, S and P certificates also show a photograph of the holder
Before payment is made to a subcontractor without deduction for tax, the builder must satisfy himself that the tax certificate is valid.
A sub-contractor who holds an I, S or P certificate must present the actual certificate to the builder for inspection.
PROCEDURE WHEN PAYMENT IS MADE TO A SUB-CONTRACTOR HOLDING A TAX CERTIFICATE
A sub-contractor who holds a C certificate may choose to present to the builder the’ original’and’official copy’or alternatively a special certifying document’confirming that the company holds a tax certificate.
Figure 6.1 identifies the types of certificates and shows the checks that the builder should make to establish their authenticity.
Once the contractor is satisfied that a sub-contractor holds a valid certificate no further inspection is necessary unless:(a) The date of expiry, which should have been noted in the builder's records, has passed.
(b) The builder has reason to doubt that the certificate is still valid.
On receiving payment without deduction from a builder the subcontractor holding an I, S or P certificate must within seven days give the builder a completed voucher, Form 715.
Where the payment is in cash, the voucher should be provided at the time of payment.
A sub-contractor who fails to supply the 715 voucher may have his certificate withdrawn by the Inland Revenue.
The builder is also under obligation to:(a) Make every reasonable effort to obtain fully completed 715 vouchers from sub-contractors.
(b) Forward batches of vouchers to the Inland Revenue at weekly intervals.
(c) Ensure that no voucher is retained for a longer period than 14 days from receipt.
(d) Keep records of all payments made and make annual returns to the Inland Revenue.
Sub-contractors holding a C certificate are not required to provide 715 vouchers but the builder should normally make all payments to the subcontractor by cheque.
A builder making a payment to a sub-contractor who does not have a certificate must make a deduction from the payment for tax.
PROCEDURE WHEN PAYMENT IS MADE TO A SUB-CONTRACTOR WHO DOES NOT HOLD A TAX CERTIFICATE
The net cost of any materials supplied by the sub-contractor, and, by concession, the CITB levy, may be excluded from the gross payment before tax deduction is calculated (NB The current deduction rate is 27%.)
The builder is also under obligation to:(a) Provide the sub-contractor with Form SC60 to verify that tax has been deducted from payments made.
(b) Pay over to the Inland Revenue each month all amounts that should have been deducted from uncertified sub-contractors' payments.
These payments must be made irrespective of whether or not tax has been deducted from the sub-contractors' payments.
(c) Send an annual return to the Inland Revenue immediately after 5 April each year, listing all the uncertified subcontractors and the total amount deducted.
Such detailed procedures required to be operated by builders involve an equivalent, if not greater, cost to administer than the traditional PAYE scheme for directly employed labour.
The private householder having work done to his own property is not required to make deductions from any payments he may make to subcontractors.
There are, therefore, a few sub-contractors who may choose to work exclusively in this sector and continue to avoid detection by the Inland Revenue.
In general, however, the scheme has been successful and has achieved the purposes for which it was instituted.
DIRECTLY EMPLOYED LABOUR
The analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of using labour-only sub-contractors, outlined earlier in this chapter, is of course of relevance when examining the use of directly employed labour.
Both management and operatives are locked into a closer relationship, with both mutual benefits and disadvantages.
On-costs, which have to be added to the basic labour rate, are continually rising and the breakdown of labour costs in price books such as Griffiths, Spon's or Laxton, shows a percentage addition of approximately 85%
For the builder the most significant disadvantages created by the employment of directly employed labour are the need to:(a) Create incentive or motivation which will induce the operative to achieve a production rate that will equal or better the tender or estimate.
DISADVANTAGES
(b) Counteract the tendency for the most able craftsmen preferring to work as sub-contractors.
(c) Maintain continuity of employment throughout the working day and between one project and the next.
(d) Motivate and encourage the directly employed labour force who are often given the less straightforward, more difficult or dirty tasks which have been rejected by labour-only sub-contractors.
The advantages of using directly employed labour are as follows:(a) It provides management with flexibility, particularly in coping with crisis labour demands and small works.
ADVANTAGES
(b) The development of craft and company pride and the opportunity for the directly employed operative to achieve promotion to the salaried staff.
There are three basic methods of payment to directly employed labour.
First, a calculation based on the wage rates laid down by the National joint Council for the Building Industry (NJCBI) in the national working rules.
These provide for a rate per hour, a guaranteed minimum bonus and joint board supplement to provide a basic rate.
Payment on this basis is related to hours of attendance and does not encourage operatives to increase their productivity.
METHOD OF PAYMENT
Second, a guaranteed bonus or plus rate in addition to the basic rate.
Management may monitor performance and, in times of recession when building labour is freely available, lay off operatives who fail to achieve the output required.
When the industry is expanding and labour is scarce, management will obviously have less control over productivity.
Third, an incentive scheme which in addition to the basic rate aims to offer a monetary reward in exchange for increased productivity from the operative.
Management in the building industry has devised many, varied types of financial incentive.
In each case the primary objective has been to increase both earnings and productivity.
The basic methods are profit sharing, partnership schemes and earned bonus.
INCENTIVE SCHEMES
The profit of the company is partially shared with employees and a payment made once or twice a year.
The basis on which this takes place must be defined and easily understood.
A common method is to operate a points system where the operative is awarded points related, for example, to his trade, position and length of service.
This type of scheme may also include office staff.
Success in operation will depend on the goodwill of the labour force as there is a collective rather than personal incentive.
A disadvantage of this type of incentive scheme is that in a’ bad’year the operative may work hard but, in the absence of profit, will receive no reward.
Profit sharing
The company may enter into a formal agreement with its work-force to transfer a substantial percentage of gross profits each year to a trust fund.
Each operative will receive a defined share of the income from the trust at regular intervals and on retirement will receive a pension or on death a grant will be paid.
The various benefits will be dependent on length of service with the company.
Partnership schemes
The trust fund, with mutual agreement, may also fund residential and industrial development undertaken by the company.
Partnership incentive schemes are comparatively rare but can result in a highly motivated and dedicated work-force.
Earned bonus is the most widely used form of financial incentive, because it most closely meets the objectives of an incentive scheme, which are:(a) To provide the opportunity for increased earnings in return for increased output.
Earned bonus
(b) To increase efficiency and reduce costs.
(c) To improve financial control.
There are many different forms of earned bonus.
The basic concept is that a target for a work element is set in man hours and at the end of each week the difference between the target hours, and actual hours worked is paid as a bonus to the operative.
Essential features of a bonus schemes are as follows:(a) The scheme must be easily understood by the operative.
ESSENTIAL FEATURES OF A BONUS SCHEME
(b) The targets set must be attainable and should represent the average output of the average operative or gang working under average conditions without loss of quality of work.
(c) Targets should be agreed in writing between management and operatives before the work commences on site.
Retrospective targets will obviously be ineffective.
(d) Payments should be made at regular intervals, preferably weekly.
(e) Targets should provide for a balance between craftsmen, labourers and apprentices in the make-up of a gang.
(f) Losses accruing in one bonus period should not be offset against the bonus earned by employees in another.
(g) Penalties should be introduced for excessive wastage of materials or misuse of plant.
Operatives should be advised of these penalties in advance.
(h) Safety, health and welfare regulations should be observed by both management and labour.
(i) Management must ensure that the site is well organised and materials are delivered on time.
Work must be programmed to avoid delay between tasks, and instructions issued promptly.
If unavoidable delays do occur the operative should be paid at the basic rate and the hours excluded from bonus calculations.
(j) If the work is defective the time spent by the operative in rectification should be included in the operational time.
(k) The basic wage should be paid strictly in accordance with the working rule agreement.
(I) The scheme should be honestly and fairly operated by both management and labour.
This is perhaps the most important aspect of the integrity of any scheme.
Preferably targets should be set for individuals where the bonus earned is directly related to personal effort.
The nature of building work normally necessitates the use of a gang.
The size of the gang, however, should be kept as small as possible and should not exceed six members.
DIFFICULTIES IN OPERATION
The comments made earlier in this chapter covering the balance of ability and mutual interdependence of sub-contract gangs apply equally to directly employed labour gangs.
Wherever possible all work should be subject to bonus.
This will avoid the inclination of either management or labour to wrongly allocate the  time spent on work attracting bonus to other non-bonus operations.
Moreover, there may well be reluctance or bad feeling when the operative or gang is obliged to undertake work without bonus.
Increased productivity is equally the responsibility of management, who must ensure that materials, plant and scaffolding are available and in the right location, adequate instructions are given on time, the work place is prepared and the programme of work for other trades correlated and integrated.
Setting targets that are fair and reasonable to both management and labour is perhaps the most formidable difficulty in operating a bonus scheme.
THE BONUS TARGET
The target is best expressed in hours rather than in money terms.
The operative adapts to the idea of saving time and bonus calculations are greatly simplified.
Moreover, time targets do not need recalculation when the basic rate is changed and they can also be utilised for planning and programming of the work.
In order to set the bonus targets it is necessary to establish the quantity of work to be done, the method of construction, and the calculation of the relevant man hours necessary to complete the task.
The quantity of work can be extracted from the bill of quantities if available.
Alternatively the quantities can be taken off from the drawings or extracted from the builder's estimate.
Quantity of work
The bill of quantities may be of limited use because many items of the work will be presented in a summarised form.
For example, an item billed as’ 100 sq m half brick wall in facings’may represent work in different locations on site, to be executed at various times.
Even when the work can be executed in one operation it may prove beneficial to identify stage targets, for example first lift or second lift on brickwork.
Elemental, annotated or operational bills may be of greater value but the most reliable system is to take off the quantities from the drawings.
This take off could also be utilised by the buying, planning and surveying departments.
The extent of the work to be included in the bonus target should be geared to provide the operative with the maximum incentive.
If the target time is protracted the operative may have difficulty in pacing and measuring output, and lose enthusiasm.
Work content should result in target times of preferably two to three days and definitely not more than five days.
The smaller the task the greater the incentive.
Exceptions could be made where work is of a repetitive nature, such as residential housing.
Targets can, in such cases, be set on a unit basis because the tradesmen can utilise previous experience as a guide.
Contract management in planning and programming the work will decide the method of construction.
Work content will be affected by these decisions, particularly in relation to the use of plant.
For example, concrete could be site mixed and placed by hand, or supplied ready mixed and placed by hand or by using a hoist, or tower crane or pump.
In each case the work content would be dissimilar, different sized gangs would be necessary to complete the task efficiently and continuity of work could be affected.
Planning and programming are, therefore, closely interrelated with the assessment of the work content.
Method of construction
The estimates of operational time —the actual bonus target —will be expressed in individual or gang hours, for example: Quantity of work X Labour constant = Target hours Gang size The labour constant used to calculate the bonus target must represent fairly the average output of the average operative, working under average conditions.
Work values
Labour constant
The constant to be applied may be obtained from:(a) The breakdown of the rate used by the estimator in producing the tender.
(b) Standard reference books of labour constants.
(c) Records kept by management, work-study officers or bonus surveyors for similar work on previous contracts.
(d) Personal assessment by management based on knowledge and experience.
Whichever method is used, it is essential that where doubts exist management should monitor the output of the work-force before finalising the target.
It may also be necessary to adjust accepted labour constants to the actual circumstances of the job.
For example, the estimator and standard price books use a common labour constant for brickwork; in practice the labour constant could be adjusted to provide different targets for, say, work at ground level and work in the gables.
The labour constant should provide for meal breaks, weather, site conditions, time spent receiving and understanding instructions, locating materials and plant, measuring and setting out, maintenance of plant, clearing up, and observance of safety regulations.
The constant should be adjusted to reflect fairly the nature of the actual work involved.
For example, the quality, repetition within or between tasks, working environment, relationship with other trades, and the method of execution of the work.
The labour constant should also give the operatives of different gangs or trades equal opportunity to earn a similar percentage bonus.
Work and method study is essential in the successful operation of a bonus scheme.
Most builders operating incentive schemes employ a bonus surveyor to measure and calculate the bonus paid to each operative.
MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT OF BONUS
The hours saved against the target set are not necessarily paid in full.
Some firms introduce a percentage factor into the calculation and only pay between 50% and 90% of the hours saved.
Where percentage factors are introduced the operative will receive a disproportionate amount of bonus for the effort involved and will, therefore, have a reduced incentive to increase his productivity.
It may prove acceptable for management to retain a small percentage, say 10%, as a reserve.
This reserve will be used to offset any losses which may arise for each trade or gang during the progress of the contract.
The balance remaining on completion will be shared out amongst the operatives concerned.
A typical simplified bonus calculation would, therefore, be as follows: Total hours worked 40 Target hours for completed operations 50 Actual hours booked 35 Hours saved 15 % bonus payable (90%) 13½ Hours paid 53½
The bonus surveyor would make adjustments for partially completed work and time spent working in different gangs.
Hours spent waiting for instructions, wet time, and working on unbonussed operations would be included in total hours worked, but not set against the target hours.
It will be immediately apparent that the bonus surveyor or site management responsible for completing records of hours worked must be honest, fair, competent and trusted by both management and labour for the incentive scheme to work satisfactorily.
If possible, bonus should be paid in the week in which it is earned and certainly not later than the following week.
The directly employed building operative may be motivated by factors other than money incentives.
Many craftsmen take pride in a good job well done and often friendly rivalry develops between them to achieve personal, rather than financial, objectives.
Working conditions, job security and social relationships in the work-place are also important.
NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
Incentive schemes do not compare favourably with the’ piece-work’system most commonly used in the payment of labour-only sub contractors.
The sub-contractor only receives payment in direct relationship to his productivity, thus’ no work, no earnings’.
CONCLUSION
Management when using directly employed labour may have more opportunity to conceal its own inefficiency.
Problems with planning and programming, delays in delivery of materials or plant, and double handling, are all less likely to be identified.
In the face of such difficulties the labour-only sub-contractor will withdraw his labour or raise a contra-account to cover any loss he sustains.
When directly employed labour is used on an incentive scheme, losses in one bonus period cannot be offset against gains in other periods.
However, where a bonus reserve has been created, this problem may be mitigated.
In a’ bad’week, directly employed labour used under the terms of an incentive scheme may fail to qualify for the usual level of bonus payment.
In order to maintain morale, or avoid loss of the labour force, or through other motives, management may make an ex-gratia or’ policy’bonus payment, thus destroying the cost-effectiveness of the scheme.
FEED BACK TO MANAGEMENT
In the smaller company the feedback of labour costs to management is frequently neglected.
There can be substantial pressure on the builder's surveyor in locating and engaging labour and in the measurement of bonus, or labour-only sub-contractors' work, on a weekly basis.
The surveyor may fail to abstract the available data into a suitable form to compare directly with the bill of quantities or estimate.
Equally, the estimator may have insufficient time or resources to provide a breakdown of the estimate.
Nevertheless, the feedback of accurate quantity and cost data to management is essential for accurate cost control.
The larger company may well use standard formats and their systems will provide:
(a) A breakdown of the bill of quantities or original estimate for each priced item into labour, material, plant, overheads and profit.
(b) A take off of the quantities from the drawings to provide a breakdown and check of the quantities in the bill.
The take off will be annotated with site location references.
(c) Quantities from the annotated take off must be abstracted to correspond with the basis on which the work is sub-let or bonussed.
In certain trades, e.g. brickwork, square metres would be expressed in thousands of bricks and labour items included to provide a true comparison of cost.
(d) The remeasured quantity and rates would be abstracted each week and on completion compared with the breakdown provided by the estimator.
This feedback would highlight differences in both quantities and labour rates.
The information provided will assist the surveyor in the preparation of the final account.
A system of this nature will also be valuable backup to clarify and amplify the more general indication of profit or loss on working-progress produced by the cost value reconciliation process, as discussed in Chapter 11.
It is probably unwise to feed results direct to the estimating department.
Management should first examine the data produced to ascertain whether any variance from the breakdown is due to site conditions or mismanagement.
TRAINING
Between 1974 and 1985 the number of trainees in the construction industry fell from 83.7 thousand to 49.2 thousand.
This fall in operative trainees has primarily been due to the reduced demand following the recession in construction activity since the property collapse of 1973.
The growth of labour-only sub-contracting has also resulted in reduced opportunities for training.
Many subcontractors are unwilling to accept the responsibility and initial liability of training apprentices.
A few of the larger labour-only organisations, on the other hand, have made substantial provision for training, but such instances are comparatively rare.
The’ chancer’or’bodger’in the building industry has in recent years become more of a problem.
Bricklayers' labourers, for example, may by endeavour acquire some of the necessary skills to’ get by’but, without proper training or instruction in the finer points of their craft, may prove to be a liability to the industry.
The growth of Youth Training Schemes and other government schemes may also prove to be short-term expedients.
Operatives may be produced who are, to quote Mr Leslie Kemp, the 1983 chairman of the CITB,’ general handymen, expensively trained by the taxpayer, turning up on site and giving the services of a jack-of-all-trades and master of none’.
The CITB, which was established under the Industrial Training Act of 1964, has a firm commitment to training in industry.
The Board is funded by an annual levy on builders and sub-contractors.
It assists in training by providing grants to aid apprentices and training schemes.
7 Development Land
Introduction
The contractor is always faced with the problem of getting work and maintaining turnover.
The continuity of a successful outcome of the tendering process is the springboard of a company's future growth and prosperity.
The builder engaged in development, however, is confronted with a similar, perhaps even greater, hurdle in the location, inspection, investigation and purchase of land suitable for residential development, which is fraught with difficulties and pitfalls.
If mistakes are made they can be costly, particularly when dealing with large sites.
This chapter approaches the problem from the standpoint of the developer/builder, and identifies the procedures to be adopted in locating land, investigating its development potential, and submitting a suitable offer.
Privately owned land tends to move to its most profitable use but frequently obstacles, either physical or human, delay such movements, particularly where it is necessary to assemble adjacent parcels of land to form a viable development site.
The developer or his land buyer should act as the catalyst in such situations.
Sites and their related buildings may alternate in use over the years under economic pressure to give the best possible financial return, subject to planning and other restrictions.
At any given point in time, however, such sites may offer latent potential to the developer.
Land is in fixed supply, and what is considered uneconomic to develop in one period may prove profitable at a later date.
In the early '70s, with continual inflation in land prices, development profits were guaranteed; indeed it was difficult to differentiate between development and construction profit on the one hand and inflation in land value on the other.
Since that time, however, greater care has been needed in accurately assessing land value, development and construction costs and profits.
The developer is also faced with the problem of determining the  Optimum size of his land bank.
Land is both stock-in-trade and a financial liability, particularly with the fluctuating rates of interest which are currently prevalent.
It is considered that an ideal land bank will vary between a minimum of three years' and a maximum of five years' stock.
While a detailed consideration is outside the scope of this book, it is Important to appreciate the relationship between the built environment and the demand for new housing.
The second-hand sector of the housing market represents over 90% of all house sales.
The market price of the second-hand house, therefore, to a large extent determines the sale price of new houses and hence land values.
House building has declined in Great Britain from 350392 per annum in 1970 to 198400 per annum in 1984.
The stock of dwellings has increased from 19.415 million in 1973 to 21.494 million in 1983, while population in the same period has grown from 54.671 million to 54.804 million.
The number of households, however, is the key statistic relating to housing demand.
Household formation is increasing at a faster rate than the population as a result of smaller families, increase in the divorce rate and longer life spans.
As a consequence, much of the demand for new housing is now concentrated in starter homes for single people or married couples, and one—or two-bedroom units suitable for retirement.
There is a crude housing surplus of approximately 500000 dwellings over households, but many of these houses are second homes, or are unfit for occupation, or in areas of high unemployment, where workers have migrated to other parts of the country.
Some surplus housing, however, is required to permit normal movement of the population.
The key issues in bringing land forward for development are concerned with planning approval, infrastructure and the provision of the necessary services.
Each of these areas will be examined in this chapter.
CLASSIFICATION OF LAND AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Land can be classified in a variety of ways, but perhaps the two most basic classifications are concerned first with its legal status and secondly, and of equal importance, its status under the Town and Country Planning Acts.
In England the ownership of land is usually either freehold or leasehold.
Ownership of the freehold is defined as ownership in’ fee simple absolute  in possession’and under the Crown land held by a freeholder is in perpetuity as absolute owner.
In theory the freeholder, as absolute owner, may do what he likes with his land.
In practice, however, these rights may be restricted by the Planning Acts, and by easements or restrictive covenants, although the freeholder may in turn benefit from easements or restrictive covenants imposed on adjoining land.
legal classification
The freeholder may separate and transfer certain rights inherent in the ownership of the fee simple absolute to another person for a fixed term of years.
Such an arrangement, where the freeholder, instead of occupying the land or property himself, grants the exclusive rights of possession to another party for a defined period, in consideration of the payment of a rent, is known as leasehold.
Leases may be granted for short periods of less than a year, up to 999 years.
At the termination of the lease (reversion) the freeholder will regain physical possession of the land or property.
The freeholder may of course sell the land or property subject to the leaseholder's interest being maintained.
The developer when searching for’ green field’sites suitable for development, or for redevelopment sites, will be concerned to clarify the planning classification of the land and the possibility for change of use.
planning classification
Outline planning application procedures provide both vendors and prospective purchasers with the opportunity to establish whether permission to develop land will be granted, without incurring the cost of preparing detailed plans.
Outline planning approvals will be subject to conditions (reserved matters), for example, specification of the type of development, density, means of access, approval of detailed plans and design, including external appearance, siting and landscaping.
The approval once obtained will expire within a period of three years, unless a detailed planning application is submitted to the local planning authority.
The majority of parcels of land are usually sold with the benefit of outline, rather than detailed, planning approval.
land with outline planning consent
Land with the benefit of detailed planning approval will normally provide  purchasers with the advantage of detailed plans for the development of a site.
The permission may still be subject to conditions such as choice of materials, access, turning space for vehicles and lines of sight.
Building regulation approval may also be required.
land with detailed planning consent
Development under a detailed planning approval must be commenced within a period of live years, beginning with the date on which the permission is granted or, where an earlier outline approval has been obtained, the date of that permission.
If work is not commenced within this five-year period, a fresh application with the associated risk of refusal will have to be made.
Where a’ token’start is made on site, the local planning authority may serve a completion notice advising that the planning consent will be revoked if the development is not completed within a defined period of not less than one year.
Purchasers may find that although land has detailed planning approval it may not be economically viable to develop and local planning authorities may be reluctant to embrace alternative proposals.
Such land may be zoned for immediate development or for development within a specified period of five or more years.
The local plan may include -land already developed and identify opportunities for redevelopment or change of use.
Individual landowners are, however, under no pressure to sell and in fact may wish to retain land in its present use and, where a key site is concerned, may delay or prevent development of adjoining land.
It is of course necessary for landowners or prospective purchasers to apply for planning approval in the usual way and such applications may be refused, particularly where the local planning authority is seeking to ensure comprehensive development of an area, of which the site in question forms only a part.
land included within a local or area study
Land scheduled for future development will not receive planning approval until the due date, by which time the planning policy and local plan could be substantially amended.
Land zoned for development in a local plan, although without planning approval, may well change hands at substantially above the market price in its current use, in anticipation of development taking place.
Land just outside village or city boundaries may be viewed by speculators as having’ hope’value (hope that planning approval will ultimately be granted).
Skilful assessment of the future potential of parcels of land likely to be released, under pressure, for development is common practice for many builders and speculators.
Land in this category tends to sell at inflated prices, over the current use value, varying from a marginal surcharge, to perhaps 50% over the value of building land, depending on the degree of hope that the site will receive planning approval in due course.
Land with’ hope’value
Land in this category with no apparent possibility of development will sell at agricultural value.
The only possible scope for early development is in association with its agricultural use, for example living accommodation for farm workers or owner-occupiers.
Such approvals are, however, subject to conditions.
Long-term investment over 20 to 30 years is likely to prove advantageous to those companies with surplus cash who anticipate that development may be permitted in the long-term future.
agricultural land
FINDING LAND FOR DEVELOPMENT
The developer, in identifying land for residential development, may choose between an active and a passive role in locating and bringing land into the company's land bank.
This choice will be subject to prevailing economic conditions which have a profound impact on the availability and viability of sites suitable for development.
In the early '70s viable land was difficult, if not impossible, to locate and many developers, in the scramble to acquire good land banks, paid prices which reflected demand and anticipated inflation, rather than the sale price of the completed dwellings.
Developers were obliged to adopt a highly active role in locating land.
By 1974, however, following the collapse in the property market, land was hawked from door to door by builders, estate agents, banks, speculators and private individuals.
The '80s have seen a return to a more stable market, with demand and supply in a measure of equilibrium.
The developer will need to be involved in many site investigations, in order that one or two of his entrepreneurial endeavours come to fruition.
The landowner, estate agent or speculator may make a direct approach to the developer.
For this to occur, developers should ensure that they have a good reputation for fair dealing and an established relationship with local and national estate agents.
While such contacts can be invaluable in difficult market conditions with the ensuing scarcity of land, it may prove difficult to actually find suitable sites.
passive methods of site finding
Land may be advertised in the local or national press or in trade journals by estate agents, solicitors, land-owners, banks or executors.
Developers would do well to scan as wide a selection of these publications as possible.
Often the advertisement will only provide the briefest of details, including approximate location, acreage and the method of disposal.
The developer is then left to make a response to the advertisement and approach the vendor or his agent for more information.
Once land has been advertised it may be subject to much interest, and in buoyant market conditions severe competition may develop, whichever method of sale has been adopted.
advertisement
The estate agent may be consulted by the vendor at an early stage and either he or an architect instructed to apply for any necessary planning approval, prior to putting the land on to the market.
estate agent
The agent, when instructed to sell land or property, will almost certainly appraise the development or redevelopment potential and advise his client accordingly.
The estate agent will retain a register of all builders and developers interested in land purchase, with full details of their requirements.
When land becomes available the agent will circulate the details of the site, including acreage, planning condition and possibly a photograph, together With the method of sale —auction, tender, offers or private treaty.
The circulation may on occasion be restricted to certain defined and known developers who are most likely tore-instruct the agent for the sale of the projected development.
The agent's first objective is to obtain the best possible price for his client and secondly, if possible, to generate the opportunity to market the completed units.
In normal or difficult market conditions, the agent is probably able to serve his client well by such introductions and contacts, particularly where the site will be sold by  private treaty at a fixed price or by offers over a minimum sale figure.
In good market conditions, however, auction or tender will be more likely to provide the best price for the client, but because the land has been widely advertised the purchaser will be under no moral or other obligation to re-instruct the agent.
When the market is depressed, the agent may himself, via his own contacts, prospect for land suitable for development and become involved in site assembly.
Agents may also act for purchasers in making investigations and enquiries.
From the above comments, it becomes apparent that the developer would be well advised to make regular contacts with estate agents in his own area or in areas where he wishes to extend his operations.
These visits should be at not less than three-monthly intervals, ensuring that the correct particulars are maintained on the agents' files.
Some agents automatically strike enquirers off the file if regular contact is not maintained.
Most agents circularise prospective purchasers at regular intervals, to check on their continued interest.
Failure to respond will result in deletion from their register.
The land speculator operates in two different ways, either using entrepreneurial initiative, negotiating time and ability but relatively little capital; or by investing on a long-term basis with the ultimate possibility of substantial capital growth.
land speculator
In the first case the speculator with entrepreneurial initiative may identify land with numerous problems hindering development, and attempt to resolve these by negotiation.
Frequently, development is only possible following land assembly, and agreements or options with numerous owners have to be negotiated before a viable site can be created.
Where site assembly is involved, the speculator fulfils a valuable function.
Problems and bad feeling may arise, however, when the difference between the price paid per acre to the landowner and by the developer for the overall site exceeds a reasonable level, or individual land sales have been agreed by the speculator at widely different price levels, without apparent reason.
This is particularly the case where the speculator’ sells on’options for each separate parcel of land forming the site and the developer is left to enter into formal contracts and legal completion for the purchase of the land in the usual way.
Equally, the speculator may identify a site without planning approval, enter into an option agreement with the vendor, and sell on the option once planning has been obtained.
The mark-up should be fair and reasonable, the speculator being reimbursed for both time and enterprise.
Occasionally when unsuspecting, perhaps elderly, landowners have signed option agreements without legal or professional advice, and the resulting mark-up by the speculator is excessive, the developer may feel tainted by the procedures involved.
Once the speculator has assembled and identified the land, he is often not over-anxious to draw attention to his activities and will therefore attempt to dispose of the site direct to the builder or developer without advertising or using an estate agent.
In the second case the land speculator with capital may acquire land With hope value land which may control or prevent development of adjoining land such as sight lines or access points, and key parcels of land which may ultimately form part of a larger site.
The speculator's sole intention is to secure a profit without providing any input, even if this is not achieved for many years.
Builders and developers themselves may also speculate in land in this way.
Land may be offered for sale when a builder has gone into liquidation.
Such land will usually be channelled through an estate agent.
Where personal contacts exist, sites may be offered directly to the developer by the bank or receiver (often a chartered accountant).
It would be wise to fully investigate why such sites are on the market.
bank or receiver
A private individual who is a landowner may contact a developer direct without consulting any outside agencies.
The developer may, of course, be only one of many approached.
private individual
Local authorities, particularly where there is a policy of selling off land previously compulsorily acquired (for example, for housing and schools), often form a useful source of land for the developer.
Sites are usually widely advertised and tenders invited, either directly through the local authority or via an estate agent, sometimes involving’ design competition’.
Frequently the local authority will expect some form of planning gain using a planning agreement made under section 52 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971.
The developer is then legally bound to abide by conditions in the planning permission, which may well include, for example, building roads, schools, community centres, or providing parks and other open spaces.
local authority
The majority of developers are unlikely to adopt the passive role of waiting to be advised or only investigating advertised sites.
The developer may follow a number of different avenues in his pursuit for suitable land.
The greater number of developers are not necessarily confined to any particular geographical area and will, therefore, not only investigate the market potential in the immediate locality of their home base, but Will be equally prepared to operate at a distance.
The true entrepreneur will also investigate the potential of a locality while on business trips or holidays.
This can be particularly profitable as a fresh look from an outsider may reveal untapped sales potential and markets not recognised by the local estate agent.
active methods of site finding
Market research is one key factor when assessing the potential of an area and this will be considered later in the chapter.
When actively searching for probable sites, the developer should pursue a variety of methods, including the following.
Any individual is at liberty to visit the offices of the local planning authority and ask to see the monthly or bimonthly list of planning applications that have been submitted.
It is also possible to monitor their progress through the planning process.
Where such sites are owned by private individuals (not by another builder or developer) a personal approach, together with a good offer, may pre-empt the instruction of an estate agent or advertisement by the vendor to sell the site.
An early approach to the vendor may also give the developer opportunity to assist in the planning process, possibly overcoming obstacles to the proposed development.
planning lists
Where the application has been submitted by an estate agent or other agent acting on behalf of the vendor, a direct approach at this early stage may give the developer’ the edge’(a slight advantage in any later sale or disposal arrangements).
There are specialist commercial organisations who will, in exchange for an annual subscription, provide a service listing all planning applications and decisions made by the majority of local planning authorities.
Subscribers indicate the areas in which they are interested and the relevant lists are sent each month.
Such lists are also used by contractors to indicate possible opportunities for submission of tenders.
Once a developer's attention has been drawn to a site, even though the planning approval may have been rejected, it may be possible to resolve the objections raised by the local planning authority.
Often applications are rejected because more comprehensive development proposals are required, including land not in the vendor's ownership.
In such cases the developer may be able to assemble a site including both the original and adjoining land to achieve a scheme that will be acceptable to the local planning authority.
Close study of applications and their results, including objections, enable the developer to build up a comprehensive survey of the current attitudes of the local planning authority to development proposals, and those sites likely to receive favourable consideration.
In recent years planning authorities have gradually achieved their objective of adopting a’ positive’approach to planning (although developers may find this hard to believe), and structure plans, local plans and local area studies exist for many regions, towns and villages.
Structure plans, local plans and local area studies
Close study of local plans and local area studies, together with a physical inspection of a locality, can reveal sites With potential for redevelopment, change of use, or green field sites.
It is also possible to identify land scheduled for development in future years, particularly where the development of an area is delayed due to problems with infrastructure, for example where the release of land is delayed pending improvements to sewers or sewerage disposal facilities.
Development plans show future road improvements which may affect development, for example where new access onto an existing road is not permissible.
By reading between the lines and closely studying local plans, it is sometimes possible to identify the probable expansion or pressure points on defined village or town boundaries, thus identifying land with hope value.
Due to demographic changes, such as falling population, land can be released for residential development which was previously designated for other uses, such as schools and recreation  grounds.
The owners of such land may be unaware that circumstances have changed and the developer may have the edge in being able to acquire the site.
Close study of local plans will invariably produce some results and often sites, although small, have scope for replacing one dwelling with several.
However, owners are under no compulsion to sell and although land may be identified for development, it may in fact remain undeveloped for many years.
This is the method with the greatest potential, but does involve time, perseverance, expertise and hard work.
Having initially defined the area of interest, the developer can, with the aid of Ordnance Survey maps and on-the-spot investigations, identify sites with development possibilities.
These may include infill sites or sites with low density development, which are suitable for redevelopment.
The identity and addresses of landowners can be established by talking to local people.
Contact with landowners may be made by post or by personal visits.
Owners of properties with large gardens often have no idea of the development potential and value of their land.
A reasonable offer may well be accepted, particularly where the area of the whole property is less than one acre, owner-occupied, and therefore exempt from tax.
It should be emphasised that if the reputation of the developer for fair dealing is to be maintained, offers made for land found in this manner should be fair and reasonable, as from time to time speculators have acquired sites at far below their true value, in a similar way to door-to-door antique pedlars.
personal investigation
Once an area is known it is also possible that, where houses with large gardens and potential for demolition and redevelopment are offered for sale, the developer may be able to effect a purchase.
The property may be resold with a reduced garden area and planning approval obtained for redevelopment of the remainder.
Personal investigation of areas will also undoubtedly lead to the possibility of land assembly from a variety of individual landowners, to form a viable and cohesive site.
This may be in the form of land between existing dwellings or often the assembly and foreshortening of long back gardens in order to permit development.
Before the 1947 Town and Country Planning Act, ribbon development was common along existing road patterns and land was left at the rear for agriculture, market gardens or allotments.
It may prove necessary to purchase and demolish existing dwellings to provide suitable access.
When site assembly is contemplated, options or conditional contracts will be essential.
Perhaps the most sophisticated approach to land finding is the use of the helicopter or light plane and aerial photography.
The combination of Ordnance Survey maps and aerial photographs is particularly useful in identifying undeveloped back land where ribbon development has taken place.
Access to such sites is often obscure, possibly only by a footpath which may not be noticed at ground level.
Aerial photography can also be utilised as a backup to the latest Ordnance Survey maps, to plot changes in boundaries and new development.
aerial photography
Locating land suitable for development requires tact, perseverance and a skilful expertise, linked with the experience to know when to’ push on’or pull out’!
When expending time and money on negotiations or investigations, some vendors attempt to use the developer's expertise free of charge to obtain a valuation and appraisal of the development potential of their site, even to the extent of the developer obtaining the necessary planning approval and resolving technical problems.
Some form of contract is, therefore, essential.
general principles
When dealing with landowners it is best to be known to be always fair, with offers close to market value, or an explanation made when this is not possible.
Such a reputation tends to reap its own rewards, particularly from those vendors who do not care to sell via an estate agent.
The developer, whether obtaining land from a passive or active approach, will be committed to undertake an extensive and detailed market research appraisal and investigation of the site before proceeding to purchase.
METHODS OF DISPOSAL OF BUILDING LAND
The developer introduced to or locating land suitable for development will often have no control over the method of disposal.
The vendor or his agent may already have decided to sell the land by auction, tender or highest offer.
When the developer is actively seeking land, it may be possible to conclude the negotiations by private treaty, to obtain an option or to enter into a conditional contract.
The alternative disposal arrangements have advantages and disadvantages for both vendor and purchaser, which will be revealed as each is examined in detail.
The cost to the vendor of selling land by auction is normally higher than by tender or private treaty —approximately £1000 above the standard percentage fee.
When the market is buoyant, it will normally be in the vendor's interest to sell at auction.
The site will usually be widely advertised locally, although a particularly valuable or large site will be advertised nationally.
From the developer's viewpoint, competition may be fierce and the likelihood of acquiring sites by this method is not great.
It is necessary for prospective purchasers to undertake detailed market research and a site investigation, and to prepare a feasibility study in order to identify the highest value that may safely be put on the site.
It is essential to read the small print on the auction particulars, especially where obligations are being passed to the purchasers.
It is common to include as the purchaser's responsibility such items as fencing, new roadworks, removal and reconstruction of septic tanks, connection of existing properties to new drains, and construction of garages.
auction
In the auction room discretion must be used in bidding and the developer must have a clearly defined policy if the price exceeds the value calculated: he should either withdraw or bid only a marginal percentage above the calculated value.
One danger is that prospective purchasers get carried away and on occasion acquire land on impulse without fully investigating factors which may influence the financial success of the proposed development.
Land sold at auction may have a reserve price and the site will only be sold when bidding reaches the reserve, the auctioneer advising at that point that the site is’ in the market’.
It can be disconcerting at auction if the vendor or agents acting on the vendor's behalf bid up the price from the floor in the early or even later stages of the auction.
The author recalls one occasion where the land was bought in three or four bids after his company's last bid.
The agent subsequently contacted us to advise that the company's was the highest bid and asked if we would be prepared to proceed at that figure.
The successful purchaser at the conclusion of the auction is required to sign the auction particulars and pay 10% deposit of the purchase price.
In effect this stage is equivalent to exchange of contracts in a sale by private treaty, with completion four weeks later.
There is, therefore, no opportunity to withdraw or delay the transaction.
The auction particulars must of course be both detailed and accurate, as they form part of the contract for sale, and are usually in the form of a glossy brochure.
One particular problem for prospective purchasers is  that they are obliged, prior to the auction, to undertake a full and complete site investigation, including searches through a solicitor, at their own expense.
The vendor is of course obliged to prove his title to the land in the normal way.
The vendor or his agent may request that tenders are submitted for a parcel of land; the estate agent will give wide publicity to the site and circularise prospective purchasers.
The tenders should be totally confidential and a closing time and date stated.
It is preferable if the tenders are opened publicly with the tenderers given the opportunity of being present, so that fair play can be clearly seen to have taken place.
In any event all participants should be notified of the result.
It sometimes happens that, after tenders have been submitted, tenderers are advised of the highest figures and either are asked to submit, or themselves insist on submitting, an even higher one.
This cannot be regarded as good practice.
tender
It can be argued that tendering will give the best result from the vendor's point of view, as each purchaser is likely to submit his best offer and therefore in the absence of knowledge of the level of other tenders, may pay a figure far in excess of the nearest competitor.
At auction the purchaser may have been able to acquire the site at a marginal figure above the next highest bid.
The cost of selling by tender can be fractionally greater than by private treaty (perhaps involving a glossy brochure) as it may be necessary to advertise the site more widely.
Provided there is sufficient interest, tenders should also result in certainty of sale within a defined period.
Sometimes when land is offered for sale by private treaty and there is keen interest from several prospective purchasers, tenders are introduced to resolve the competition.
On occasion one hears of unusual circumstances surrounding tenders, where neither the vendor nor tenderers are present to affirm that everything was above-board.
It may be possible, due to restricted publicity and advertising, for few tenders to be submitted and personal friends or acquaintances of the agent to be able to submit a low offer, or arrange for an offer to be submitted once all the tenders have been opened.
This is of course unethical.
The author recalls that tenders were invited for a site for 40 bungalows in the West Country, overlooking the sea and a fishing village.
The site was only advertised locally and my company only heard of the proposed sale via the foreman of a site in the same vicinity.
Our land buyer  approached the agent, who advised that tenders were expected in the region of £50 000.
Extensive market research revealed that the site was substantially undervalued and a more realistic figure would be well over £100000.
A second visit to the agent produced the same guidance of £50000.
In the event a successful tender was submitted at £54000, on the basis that all other enquiries were being similarly guided, and in fact tenders ranged from £50000 to £52500.
In normal circumstances, however, tenders are to the advantage of vendors and are the least satisfactory method of purchase from the purchaser's point of view.
The vendor may offer the site for sale himself or instruct an estate agent to act on his behalf in the disposal of his property or land.
The agent, having prepared particulars, will advertise and circularise potential purchasers, but the sale price may be presented in the following ways.
private treaty
A fixed price for the land is set marginally above market value.
The agent will then use his best endeavours to sell at this fixed price, in the meantime advising his client of any offers received.
fixed price
The agent merely states that offers should be made for the site, without providing the purchasers with any guidance regarding price.
Once the agent has received a number of offers, it may well happen that each party is advised of the offers on the table and asked if they are willing to increase their offer.
The process continues until all but one of the parties involved has withdrawn.
This is a delicate negotiation and if at a later stage the prospective purchaser who made the highest offer withdraws, the other parties may have lost interest or not wish to participate.
open to offers
This is perhaps the most common format, where prospective purchasers are asked to make offers over a guide price, minimum sale price or are advised of a range of prices within which an offer may be acceptable.
offers over a guide price
Whichever of the above methods is adopted, once the vendor and  purchaser have agreed on a sale price, the respective solicitors Will be instructed to proceed with the preparation of draft contracts.
The transaction should be subject to contract and the two parties are not legally bound until both have signed contracts setting out the terms of the sale and these contracts have been physically exchanged.
Each party will then hold the contract signed by the other.
The monetary consideration involved at exchange of contracts is usually 10% of the selling price.
Until contracts are exchanged, the parties are buying and selling’ subject to contract’and either party may withdraw from the transaction.
Conversations or agreements may however leave the parties morally if not legally bound.
In any event, from time to time vendors may receive and accept a higher offer for land after solicitors have been instructed, but before contracts are exchanged.
This is much more likely to arise where the vendor must be seen to obtain the best possible price for the land, such as a trust, bank or other institution.
Vendors may also, against the advice of their agents, enter into a contract race, where the first purchaser to sign the contract secures the land.
This is particularly likely to arise when the original purchaser is taking an inordinate length of time to proceed.
Local authorities or government departments, when disposing of important sites in inner cities or sensitive planning areas, may invite tenders for the site on the basis of a’ design competition’conforming to a planning brief.
This will involve the developer in a substantial amount of design work, including both site layout and individual house designs.
The local authority often requires some kind of planning gain in the form of roads, schools, community centres, to benefit the community at large.
competition
In deciding which tenders to accept the local authority will be influenced by the design, layout and general presentation of the scheme; the assessment as to genuine architectural merit may be subjective.
The local authority will not be bound to accept the highest, or in fact any tender.
The Writer is aware of one scheme where the planning brief was ignored by a developer, who as a result achieved an increase in density and was able to submit a substantially higher tender figure than other developers who had conformed to the planning brief.
In this case the highest tender was accepted, without other tenderers being given the opportunity to submit another offer on the basis of similar amendments to the original brief.
METHODS OF PURCHASE OF BUILDING LAND
Consideration has been given to the methods of disposal of land open to a vendor.
Where, however, the initial approach to the vendor has been made by the purchaser, a slightly different situation may exist.
The two parties may agree a price for the land or ask an agent to act on their behalf.
Once the price has been agreed solicitors will be instructed and the legal process, which should be subject to contract, will proceed in the normal Way.
It is unlikely that other offers will be submitted, as the sale of the site Will not have received publicity.
The negotiating parties will however be free to withdraw from the transaction prior to exchange of contracts.
Where the developer will be involved in a substantial commitment of time and resources in obtaining planning approval or resolving development problems, it is likely that the parties will enter into an option agreement or conditional contract.
An’ option to purchase’is a device used by many developers to secure building land during the planning and problem-solving period.
In essence the developer pays a sum of money to the landowner in exchange for the landowner agreeing to sell the land at an agreed price, within a defined period.
The advantage to the developer is that he is under no obligation to exercise the option and proceed with the purchase, whereas the landowner must sell the land to the developer if the terms of the option are met.
Typically a landowner is offered a consideration of, say, £2000 per acre to grant an Option to purchase, which may be exercised within 12 months by the developer.
The developer is then free to resolve problems with services or infrastructure, obtain planning approval and if necessary negotiate similar options with owners of adjoining land in order to assemble a site.
The developer could sell the option to a third party, or in fact exercise the Option and proceed with the purchase even though all the problems have not been solved.
The period of the option could also be extended with the agreement of the vendor in exchange for an additional payment.
Some options can be long term with the vendor receiving substantial payments, perhaps equivalent to the value of the land in its current use.
option agreement
The option is clearly to the advantage of the developer, in that: there is low initial capital commitment there is opportunity to resolve problems and obtain planning approval  The faces less competition than would be found if the land was sold at auction or tender if the scheme is abandoned the option need not be exercised On the other hand problems can arise where there is a substantial downturn in the market and it is not viable to proceed at the price agreed in the option agreement.
The landowner has the advantage of receiving a cash sum while still enjoying the possession of his land, but generally he does not have the security of knowing that the transaction will proceed.
In the meantime he can only sell his land subject to the conditions of the option agreement.
A conditional contract is similar to a normal contract to sell, except that the contract is subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions, such as planning approval being obtained, acquisition of sight lines or easements for drainage.
In effect the developer is prepared to proceed with the purchase provided the site can be developed.
The developer will be obliged to use his best endeavours to resolve outstanding problems and the vendor himself may independently attempt to meet the conditions imposed by the contract, if the developer fails to proceed with due diligence.
conditional contract
The conditional contract does give the developer the incentive to invest time and money in a project, with the background assurance that this investment will not be wasted.
This method of procedure is less advantageous to the developer but provides the vendor with more protection of his interests.
SITE INVESTIGATION AND MARKET RESEARCH
Once a potential site has been identified, irrespective of how the site has been located or the method of disposal, it is essential that a detailed site Investigation and market research is undertaken.
This is necessary not only to establish the viability of the proposed development, but also to identify any restrictions or lack of availability of infrastructure.
In practice this investigation would normally take place before an offer was made and certainly before exchange of contracts.
Following legal completion many aspects of the exercise would be repeated at the detailed design stage or when finalising sale prices.
Most companies will adopt a positive approach to site investigations and use standard forms or check-lists to ensure that no stone is left unturned in investigating every aspect of the site.
In view of the substantial sums of money involved, risks must be reduced to the absolute minimum.
Each aspect of this investigation will now be considered in detail.
The classification of land from a planning point of view was discussed earlier in this chapter, but the developer will need to establish not only that the site has a valid planning consent which has not expired, but also the conditions associated with the approval.
Some conditions influence density and layout, while others merely affect design and the subsequent cost of house construction, including choice of materials such as bricks and tiles.
Equally, other conditions under section 52 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971 are negotiated between the planning authority and the applicant for approval and are classified as planning gains.
In this case the local authority seeks to transfer a proportion of the appreciation in the value of the land as a result of planning approval being granted to the benefit of the community at large.
The planning gains or conditions may take many forms, including:(a) Dedication of part of the site as open space or parkland.
planning
(b) Contribution to costs of infrastructure and services, or construction of such facilities, whether for the benefit of the site, or adjoining land and existing properties.
(c) Provision of leisure facilities and shops.
A point could be reached where the cost of meeting such conditions may result in the development of the site being delayed or abandoned.
It is important to contact the planning authority, in order to discuss the planning history of the site with the appropriate planning officer.
The planning officer's attitude to proposals to develop a site can be assessed when only outline approval has been obtained or substantial modification is required to the detailed approval.
Some planning authorities are helpful, while others are positively obstructive, and personal contacts and the cultivation of a good relationship with planning authorities are therefore essential.
Once a developer is known as being’ sensitive’to the environment, with care and feel for both design and layout, the planning officer responsible for an area will tend to be more helpful and responsive.
In contrast, those developers whose prime objective is building houses at maximum profit and with minimum care for the environment, may experience difficulty.
Checks should also be made to establish that change of use of the land is not required and that there are no listed buildings or tree preservation orders affecting the site.
Developers, before any planning application is made, sometimes create bad relationships With the local planning authority by clearing sites, ignoring tree preservation orders and demolishing listed buildings.
Relationships once broken in this way may take a long time to heal.
Planning delays are legion and it is essential to know the track record and attitudes of the planning office responsible for the area in which the site is situated.
The author has experienced such extremes as the time lapse from date of submission to receipt of detailed planning approval varying from five days to 18 months.
The cost of planning delays With current levels of interest can rapidly erode profit margins.
The building regulations do not impose the same degree of restriction on the developer as the planning authority; nevertheless, their implications in the development of proposed sites must be taken into account when Investigating viability.
The majority of the building regulations have little or no impact on the financial potential of a site, with one or two notable exceptions.
building regulations
When mains drainage or a private drainage scheme is not available, drainage to each individual property will need to be either to a cesspool or a septic tank.
Both require desludging from time to time, which is normally by pumping out using a tanker.
The maximum effective length for pumping is 30 metres and the regulations therefore require that the cesspool or septic tank should be sited within this distance of a vehicular access.
Any emptying should not involve the contents being taken through a dwelling place or place of work other than an open covered space.
It is also necessary to obtain approval from the water authority to discharge the effluent of a septic tank, by means of land drains into the ground.
The length of the land drains is governed by the absorption capacity of the ground.
The water authority will reject applications for the use of septic tanks when absorption tests are unsatisfactory or where the  siting of the tank could result in pollution to a spring, stream or well used for drinking purposes.
The use of septic tanks or cesspools may have a significant impact on maximum permissible density of dwellings per hectare.
Cesspools and septic tanks
If approval for septic tanks cannot be obtained, the only alternative will be sealed cesspools of a capacity not less than 4000 gallons.
These cesspools will require emptying at approximately six-week intervals.
The cost per annum, which will be borne by the purchaser of the completed property, may well exceed £500 —which may affect sale prices and hence the land value.
The foundations of a building will vary in design and cost depending on the bearing capacity and nature of the sub-soil.
Both the building control department of the local authority and the National House-Building Council have become meticulous over foundation design, particularly since the drought of 1976, when substantial claims for subsidence were made.
At that time many buildings, even those built 30 or 40 years ago, suffered subsidence damage, particularly on clay sub-soils.
Where trees such as large poplars exist on the site, they absorb copious amounts of moisture from the soil, which may affect the water table locally.
When trees are cut down, some sub-soils re-absorb moisture and expand, causing heave and structural damage to property.
It is considered that after large trees are felled it may take up to I 2 months for the sub-soil to achieve stability.
foundations
Where trees are to be retained on site, or are outside the site boundary and therefore cannot be removed in order to avoid possible subsidence in clay or similar sub-soils, part of the site may be sterilised (designated’ unusable’) in order to keep buildings at a safe distance.
The building control officer will usually give advice in this area and careful layout and design can usually maximise site usage.
It is useful to obtain permission to execute trial holes at various locations on the site to establish the nature of the sub-soil, bearing capacity of the ground, and the water table.
One trial hole may prove inadequate, as ground conditions often change dramatically between one part of the site and another.
There are specialist firms who will provide this service.
The result of these tests will determine, for example, depth of foundations or need for special design such as raft construction or piles, problems associated with high water table for both foundations and  drainage, need for de-watering, sulphate content of the soil and need to use sulphate-resistant cement.
The building control officer will often be aware of local ground conditions and at the early stage of site investigation his advice will be invaluable in determining probable additional costs.
The building regulations require that walls to buildings should be so constructed as to prevent fire reaching the boundary and, as a consequence, possibly endangering adjoining property.
The degree of fire protection needed is reduced as the distance from the boundary increases until no protection is needed (i.e. external walls may consist entirely of unprotected area).
Generally speaking, walls within I metre of the relevant boundary should be entirely protected, except for small openings.
distance from boundaries
The plans for high-rise buildings and buildings for public use, when submitted for building control approval, will also be scrutinised by the fire prevention officer of the local fire brigade.
Requirements will include access for equipment and fire escapes, which may well affect layout of the site and space around buildings.
fire precautions
Access to the site is an important part of the site investigations.
Planning approval is often granted subject to satisfactory access being provided and it is therefore essential to approach the highways department of the local authority to establish both the status quo and the effects and requirements of any proposed development.
Problems are sometimes difficult to spot and are certainly unlikely to be highlighted by the vendor or his solicitor.
It will be useful to discuss some of the more common problems.
access to the site
’ Ransom strips’arise in a number of situations where land for development can only be reached by crossing land not in the vendor's or developer's ownership.
Perhaps the most common situation is where planning approval has been granted for development of land adjoining an  existing earlier development.
Access to the adjoining land may well have been provided by means of a road or’ hammerhead’and the road will almost certainly have been adopted by the local authority.
The access road, however, may not actually reach the boundary of the site and the original developer may have retained a strip as narrow as 1 m.
The purchaser will, therefore, need to acquire this strip before the site can be developed, or find an alternative access.
Ransom strips are so called because they change hands at high values, often up to one third of the total site value.
It could of course be argued that the original developer is entitled to some remuneration for the cost involved in constructing the original road and associated services.
The alternative situation is that the owner of the adjoining land may be forced to sell the site to the original developer at a price well below normal market value, but above the price of any competitor who would have to buy the ransom strip as well as the proposed site.
ransom strips
Planning authorities have become aware of these practices and often now include conditions that roads are taken to the boundary of adjoining land, where future development is anticipated.
The developer, however, may be able to circumvent this situation by making no provision for access roads within the layout, but leaving plots adjoining possible future building land undeveloped in anticipation of change in planning policy.
When access is required onto a classified road, approval must be obtained from the Department of Transport or local authority acting as their agent.
Frequently no further or new access will be allowed onto classified roads until bypasses or other road improvements have been completed.
Land scheduled for development may remain undeveloped for many years, pending solutions to traffic problems.
Access to classified roads
The planning and highway authorities will require sight lines at the junction of estate roads with other roads.
Where the road is curved away from the junction on both sides, very long and wide sight lines will be required.
Within the zone of space contained within the sight line, no construction or vegetable growth will be permitted over 500 mm high.
Problems arise where the sight lines required cannot be achieved within the curtilage of land owned by either the vendor or proposed purchaser, and run onto adjoining land.
It will then be necessary to negotiate with  the adjoining owner, either to acquire the land in question or to obtain an easement to conform to the conditions in perpetuity.
The position will, therefore, be very similar to that described for ransom strips in that the adjoining owner may demand a high price for the land in question or even refuse to sell.
In the final analysis the only solution will be to find alternative access, or buy the whole of the adjoining property, if it comes onto the market.
sight lines
Local authorities usually produce design guides for roads within their administrative areas, laying down minimum standards of width, widths of footpaths and radius of bends, depending on the design, speed and type of road.
Equally, if the access road is a cul-de-sac the design guide may provide for a maximum permissible length of up to, say, 300 m or a limit on the number of dwellings using the road.
There is usually a maximum number of dwellings permitted off a private drive on new estates.
road widths and lengths
The local authority may insist that existing access roads are improved and widened before allowing development to proceed.
When local authorities do not own the necessary land, and frontages of adjoining property are involved whose owners refuse to sell, the developer may be willing to pay, but be unable to achieve the desired improvements.
The access to a site or any part of the site may be over a private or unadopted road.
Such roads may or may not be subject to a public right of way or rights of way to specific landowners.
Some local authorities may refuse to accept development of the site unless the section of the access road that is private has been adopted by the local authority.
Although the local authority has powers to adopt private roads, it may be reluctant to apply them as the cost of the road construction will fall on the landowners proportionate to their road frontage.
If, however, all the relevant landowners with road frontage request adoption the local authority are obliged to do so.
private roads
It is, therefore, essential that the developer obtains the necessary easement or rights of way from the respective owners, when access roads are to remain unadopted.
The usual procedure for roads within the curtilage of the development site is that they are dedicated to the local authority and adopted.
The local authority therefore lays down the specification for the road construction  and in view of the long-term maintenance obligations, insists on high standards of workmanship and materials.
These high standards in rural areas, with kerbs, footpaths and parking bays, can result not only in high cost, but in aesthetic problems.
On high quality developments, therefore, it is sometimes advantageous to leave the roads in private ownership to provide a rural feel, with grass verges rather than kerbs.
A maintenance agreement with the owners of the site or a management company will be necessary.
Where the local authority is to be required to adopt the roads, the developer will be given the alternative of either:(a) Depositing with the local authority a cash deposit covering the full estimated cost of the work.
The deposit will be returned once the roads have been completed to the satisfaction of the local authority and adopted; or (b) Entering into a section 38 agreement which will entail obtaining a road guarantee bond from a bank or insurance company.
Unfortunately many smaller developers find such bonds difficult to obtain, since so many development companies failed in the property crash following the economic problems of the early 70s.
adoption of roads
If a section 38 agreement is not available, in due course the house purchaser's solicitors are likely to hold a retention from the sale proceeds, pending adoption of the roads by the local authority.
When the land buyer is investigating a potential site, it is essential to walk over every part of the land.
Site dimensions and levels should be checked, as dimensions on legal documents are often obscure or non-existent or classed as for identification purposes only.
physical problems and constraints
Some aspects of the nature of the site have already been discussed when looking at the effect of the building regulations.
Certain other physical problems and constraints will now be identified.
Perhaps the most obvious physical constraint is the shape of the site and Its effect on layout and density.
In its simplest concept a site would have  an optimum width of, say, 70 metres, comprising a 6-metre road, two 2-metre footpaths and plot on either side of 30 metres.
If the site is too narrow, development may only be possible on one side of an access road and equally, where the site is marginally wider than 70 metres, the backland will be undeveloped and therefore relatively uneconomic.
Each site must of course be judged on its merits and with skilful layout used to its best advantage.
shape of the site
The site may only be viable if adjoining land is included and in fact the planning authority may insist that only a comprehensive planning application will be considered.
It may prove either impossible or too costly to acquire the adjoining land and the proposed scheme will therefore have to be aborted.
The contours of a site are obviously important and may add or detract from its development potential.
Level sites are generally more economic to develop although deep sewers may be required and care with layout must be exercised to give interest and variety.
Sloping sites, on the other hand, tend to offer more potential to the architect in both layout and design, but will invariably involve increased foundation cost and possibly pumps and rising mains to overcome drainage problems.
contours
Steeply sloping sites may be totally or partially unsuitable for development and the writer can recall a site where only two thirds of the land was developable and the remainder barely suitable for inclusion in the gardens of the completed dwellings.
It is important to trace the history of a site as far as possible, and identify its present and previous uses.
A useful step is to inspect old Ordnance Survey maps, and the cinch 1906 survey will be found useful.
Present and previous use of land
If the original and present contours are studied it is possible to identify suspect areas, where filling may have occurred.
Trial holes may also disclose made-up ground but odd pockets may be difficult to identify.
Often whole sites have been filled which will inevitably result in expensive foundation design.
Previous land use for industry in particular should be studied, as the soil may be contaminated with noxious substances, such as lead and asbestos.
Previous development may also have left old foundations, concrete slabs and basements which must be identified and quantified for additional cost.
The most common problem encountered, however, is subsidence, either in areas of mineral extraction or, more often, when buildings are constructed on made-up ground.
Circumstances can arise which are difficult to anticipate; for example, one site with which the author was involved was situated over a mile from the sea, but part of the site was on ground made up from Elizabethan times and included a harbour wall.
The nature of the problem was only identified by studying early maps showing the mediaeval town and harbour at the Archivist Department of the local authority.
It is often difficult to establish if a site is liable to flooding and it can be easily overlooked during the site investigation.
A quiet river on a summer's day may be a raging torrent in February.
The local authority or water authority will be aware of sites which are subject to flooding at regular intervals, such as low-lying land in river valleys.
Flooding
Some knowledge of the geography of an area is important.
A chalk stream, for example, may flow at a virtually constant level summer and winter, while flash floods may occur miles from a water course or in hollows well above the water table.
The most useful sources of information are the oldest local inhabitants who are usually aware of the circumstances regarding flooding in their area.
On one site the author recalls contacting the oldest locals, who advised that a site had only flooded once in living memory and they were only too pleased to point out a’ flood line’still just visible on a number of buildings in the area after 30 years.
Overhead electricity and telephone lines, although clearly visible and therefore easily assessed for their effect on a proposed development, may be overlooked.
The public utilities concerned will advise on the possibility and cost of diversion.
existing services
Underground services are more difficult to locate and identify — the claim of the British Gas advertisement on television that’ you would not believe our main crossed here’is only too true.
Easements for both gas and water mains may restrict development for a 4—to 10 -metre swathe through a site, depending on the size and pressure of mains, and both are very expensive or impossible to divert.
(Incidentally, if such mains are broken during the progress of the work, the developer will rapidly be  aware of the necessity for an easement restricting development to within the stated distance.)
The presence of mains services and their location will generally arise from the solicitors' enquiries and searches, but their significance on layout can be underestimated.
It is important to contact the relevant authority if the site is subject to an option agreement and solicitors therefore not instructed.
When making enquiries with the public utilities regarding availability of services it is essential to identify the position of existing services affecting the site.
Often services are redundant but still live and in a different position to where they are shown.
Test holes to identify the location of all existing mains and services are useful in the design of the proposed layout.
It should be noted that although gas or electricity mains pass across or near the site, this may have no relevance to availability of the respective services.
In conclusion, therefore, it is essential to investigate thoroughly the exact location of all mains services affecting the site and to assess the financial implications on layout and density or the cost of removal or diversion.
The position of boundaries can be very important when fences or markers have deteriorated or been removed.
It may be difficult to identify a precise boundary and it is essential that they are defined not only legally but practically on site in the presence, and with the agreement, of adjoining owners.
Where boundary fences are in poor condition, the estimated cost of rectification should be assessed as part of the financial appraisal.
Ownership, location and condition of site boundaries
Existing’ defined’boundaries sometimes need monitoring: the author on one occasion was involved with a site where development was delayed pending completion of a sewerage scheme and one boundary advanced a few feet a year, flower beds, lawn and all.
The effect of trees on foundation design was discussed earlier but a physical inspection of the site should include the location of all major trees, particularly where they are required to be retained under a tree preservation order and may therefore affect layout and density.
trees and vegetation
market research and aesthetic considerations
general site appreciation
When assessing the value of a site it is essential to walk over it and get a feel for the market potential.
The majority of factors relating to site inspection will consist of legal, practical or factual matters, but we are now considering the aesthetics of the site.
The developer will use all the senses —seeing, hearing and smelling -when assessing the environment.
The solar aspect may be important in determining the layout both of individual units and the whole development.
Trees and contours all add to a sylvan setting and any attractive existing features may well be incorporated in a proposed scheme with advantage.
It is useful to photograph the site from a variety of angles, obtaining views both into and out of the proposed development; photographs often reveal factors overlooked at an initial inspection.
The nature of the environment surrounding the site is of obvious importance, including possible future uses of the land.
In a rural situation proximity to motorways, pig farms, sewage disposal works and unsightly light industrial operations such as scrap or builders' yards, have a significant impact on site value.
In the built environment the exact nature of surrounding development is equally important, including the relative market level, proportion of private or local authority housing and its density, and whether high—or low-rise.
The level of vandalism and dereliction should also be noted.
In addition it may be necessary to investigate the nature of any industrial development, and the direction of the prevailing wind, to verify that the site will not be affected by effluent, smoke, fumes or smell.
This may be necessary even if the industry is situated many miles from the site.
nature of surrounding environment
Some adverse factors can be mitigated by mature tree planting, fencing or other screening and careful layout and design.
The nature of the access road to the site and adjoining development can be influential with regard to market potential.
If the access to an up-market development is via a local authority housing estate or area lacking in amenities it may prove more difficult to sell the completed units.
access to site
Conversely, if the access passes through high quality housing to a less ostentatious scheme, sales will be positively aided.
Although of little importance in most parts of the United Kingdom, prevailing wind and rainfall may be a very important consideration when developing exposed sites, near the coast or in the Highlands of Scotland and the Western Isles.
Wind speeds are accelerated in valleys and building in exposed locations can invite structural damage both during and after construction.
Dwellings should be designed and constructed to higher standards, particularly with regard to water penetration.
The author can recall one development on the West Coast of Scotland, where tiles were stripped from the roofs several times a year, in spite of each time being nailed and clipped.
Prevailing wind and rainfall
Local rainfall variations in hilly areas can also be significant and potential sites should be selected with care after discussion with local people or local weather experts.
Nuisance caused by noise, whether from roads, railways, aircraft or adjoining owners, must form part of the investigation.
Each source may vary with weather conditions or time of day, week, month or year.
Aircraft, for example, may use different flight paths depending on wind direction and road noise tends to be more noticeable in certain weather conditions.
If in doubt, the developer should check the levels of noise at different times and make enquiries with local people.
Noise
Double glazing, although increasing cost, can be very effective in reducing noise levels.
Legal Restrictions
The solicitor acting on behalf of the purchaser will have the opportunity to examine the conditions prior to exchange of contracts.
Any legal restrictions that may have been imposed by the vendor or already have been included in earlier conveyances of the land or property can be identified.
Before signing the contract the purchaser should in any event read the document carefully and arrive at a full and clear understanding of any restrictions imposed.
The legal restrictions which affect the value and development potential of land can broadly be included under the headings of restrictive covenants, rights of way, and easements.
Where land is bought at auction it is essential that the purchaser or his solicitor undertakes the necessary searches and reads carefully the smallprint in the brochure.
Restrictive convenants are the most common legal restriction imposed on the purchaser and often go back over many years.
Where the vendor has a continued interest in adjoining land, each time any part of the land is sold, he may impose virtually any condition which is acceptable to the purchaser.
These conditions may not only be for the vendor's own benefit, but for his’ successors in title’.
The most common restrictive covenants are as follows.
Restrictive Covenants
Land is sold subject to only one property, or a defined number of properties, being built on the site.
This restriction will apply irrespective of the view expressed by the planning authorities.
Limited Density
The vendor reserves the right to approve the designs of the proposed buildings.
This restrictive covenant is often included in village or rural sites and can result in lengthy delays and extreme frustration.
One site with which the author was involved was delayed for two years, with constant revision to the proposed design.
Designs to be approved
Furthermore, the vendor's views on the design may conflict with the planning authority and meeting the requirements of both can be fraught with difficulty.
The addition of the term in the contract’ such approval not to be unreasonably withheld’, or time stipulations on approval, may assist the purchaser.
Where the vendor was attempting to define quality, a common restriction included in conveyances earlier in this century was that houses must cost not less than, say, £1000.
With the relatively low levels of inflation in that period, such conditions may well have sufficed, but would be a short-term  and unrealistic method of quality definition in these days.
Such a restriction on land coming onto the market is irrelevant, but nostalgic.
House of a certain value, size or type
Currently, to define quality, the floor area or number of bedrooms may be stipulated; a restriction may also be imposed on the proportion of detached, semi-detached or terraced dwellings.
Where a vendor wishes to protect his own interests, those of his’ successor in title’or of an adjoining owner, a restriction may be imposed that no development will be permitted within a defined distance of a certain boundary or existing dwelling.
Boundaries
Proposed dwellings on the land will not be permitted to incorporate windows at either first floor level or both ground and first floor levels, facing in a certain direction or overlooking adjoining property.
No overlooking
The number of storeys or height of buildings may be restricted, for example by defining the maximum height of the ridge above ground level.
Height
Certain restrictions are often imposed for the common good of inhabitants in an area.
For example, development must comprise private dwelling houses only, with no trade or business (other than perhaps a doctor or dentist), no caravans or boats to be stored, no dogs, pigs or poultry, no sheds or sheds over a certain height, no loft conversions or extensions.
Restrictions on the use of land or dwellings
The author has encountered a covenant on a site bounding the River Test in Hampshire, where from the back of the house to the boundary no construction of any sort was permitted above ground level and trees and vegetation could not exceed 6 feet in height.
The above and similar restrictions will of course affect both the value of the land and its viability for residential development.
Restrictions can be removed by consent from the original vendor or’ his successors in title’.
Applications can also be made to the Land Tribunal to modify or discharge the restrictive covenant, but this will of course take time.
Covenants may be included in the contract and conveyance imposing an obligation on the purchaser, which has both cost and value implications.
Examples would include the provision and maintenance of fences, roads, drains, sewers and private sewage disposal works.
The site may of course benefit from such covenants which have previously been imposed on adjoining landowners.
Positive Covenants
An easement is a right to use another person's land in some way.
The most common easements affecting sites are rights of way, restrictions imposed by public utilities for passage of gas, water, electricity and telephones, rights of support, discharge of water and rights of light.
The site may, of course, benefit from easements imposed on adjoining land.
Easements
An easement can come into existence by express grant or by contract, but it can also arise in at least three other ways.
At common law, it can arise if the right has been exercised from’ time immemorial’.
In this context,’ time immemorial’means from the year 1189.
However, it is not necessary for the user to prove conclusively that the right has been exercised back to this date.
If he can prove that it has been exercised for 20 years before the date of an action, it will be presumed that it has existed from’ time immemorial’.
In addition to that, the common law will presume that there is a’ lost modern grant’if the right has been exercised for 20 years.
Finally: the Prescription Act 1832, still in force, provides that easements other than rights to light become absolute if enjoyed for 20 years.
Where the right has been enjoyed for 40 years, it is to be considered’ absolute and indefeasible’.
In the case of easements of light, the right is’ absolute and indefeasible’after 20 years.
Public rights of way of any width are classified as highways.
The term’ highway’includes roads, carriage ways, cartways, horseways, bridleways, footpaths, causeways and pavements.
Public rights of way
The Rights of Way Act 1932 provides that where a way over land had been actually enjoyed by the public as of right and without interruption for a full period of 20 years, the way shall be deemed to have been dedicated as a highway, unless there is sufficient evidence that there was no intention during the 20-year period to dedicate it.
When considering the development potential of land incorporating bridleways or footpaths and the cost associated with overcoming the problems, there are two alternative options: either to incorporate the footpath within the layout of the development, or to apply to the local authority for the footpath to be diverted.
The procedure to be followed will usually involve the parish council and the placement of public advertisements in order that any objections or representations can be made.
This procedure will take upwards of six months to complete and may result in costs, if a potential scheme is delayed.
Private rights of way apply to an individual or group of individuals and not to the public at large.
Care must be taken to establish the facts surrounding the right of way, especially where the use appears to have lapsed, but the right of way still exists.
Rights of way may be extinguished like any other easement, by negotiation and formal deed between the respective parties, probably in exchange for monetary considerations.
Alternatively, it is possible to mitigate against any loss by arranging insurance cover.
private rights of way
Rights of way are often played down by vendors and appear dormant but once negotiations have been legally completed, or work commences on site, are vigorously enforced by the beneficiary.
Mistakes can be costly and the author recalls one scheme where the beneficiary of a right of way waited until a house purchaser was due to move in before exercising his rights, thus deliberately causing the maximum disruption to the developer.
Public utilities have a statutory right to be granted easements to cross land, and although such easements are usually obtained by negotiation, where landowners object, the courts will ultimately override any objections.
In rural locations, where development may not have been envisaged, such utilities may cross sites in unfavourable positions, severely restricting the layout.
Easements for services
Easements for large water mains and high pressure gas mains will restrict the use of the land within a defined distance of up to 3 metres from the main.
Building, tree planting or change of ground levels will be totally forbidden.
Deep main sewers can similarly’ sterilise’land as many local authority engineers draw 45-degree lines from the sewer to the underside  of foundations to determine minimum distance of buildings.
The cost of diverting mains services and public utilities can be very expensive and in certain situations virtually impossible.
Where adjoining owners enjoy benefits from the indirect use of land such as’ right of support’or’right of light’, the developer may be obliged to ensure that such rights are maintained both during the development period and in perpetuity.
Such rights will obviously affect the use of a site and the lay-out of development upon it.
Rights of support, water and light
Where restrictive covenants and rights of way appear to have lapsed and extensive investigations fail to locate any individual able to enforce or enjoy the benefit from such rights, it is possible to take out indemnity insurance against the remote possibility that anyone emerges with the legal right to enforce the covenant or right of way.
The insurance policy must cover the total cost of any possible claim, plus an allowance for inflation.
Premiums are usually reasonable, provided the investigation is thorough and well documented and supported by affidavits.
Insurance
The vendor may have agreed to sell land with vacant possession, but at the date set for completion be unable or unwilling to provide it.
Agricultural land, for example, may be subject to a tenancy agreement or grass keep.
Vacant possession will be delayed and will prove costly, if not virtually impossible, to obtain.
VACANT POSSESSION
In the built environment property may be squatted or sub-let.
To obtain an eviction order through the courts could mean a lengthy legal process, possibly entailing adverse publicity.
SERVICES
Availability of mains services is a key part of the site investigation.
If any mains services are not available, even though the proposed development has planning approval, it may prove impossible to develop the site.
It is not enough to visit or telephone the offices of the local authority, water authority and public utilities, to verify the availability of services.
It is  essential to obtain confirmation in writing not only that services are available on or adjacent to the site, but in addition that they are adequate in capacity, and the cost of connection.
The water authority now have the responsibility for foul sewers, but they often delegate certain aspects of administration and maintenance to the engineer and surveyor's department of the local authority.
Inspection of the water authority sewer maps will reveal sizes of the mains, manhole positions and the relevant invert depth and cover level.
The relationship between the sewer or sewers and the site should be examined and checked to ensure that access to the sewer is possible without requiring easements from adjoining owners.
If easements are required, the identity of the adjoining owner and the difficulties likely to be encountered should be verified.
FOUL SEWER
The presence of a sewer does not necessarily imply that connection is possible.
The size of the sewer may be of insufficient capacity to take the additional effluent from the proposed development, or the capacity of the sewage works itself may be insufficient to cope.
Many developments have been delayed for years pending completion of new or improvements to existing sewage works.
Where invert levels are not suitable for the site to be drained by gravity, the additional cost of a rising main and pumps will need to be quantified.
Excessively deep sewers in bad ground conditions or below the water table must also be taken into account.
An essential factor to establish is whether the sewer is public or private.
Local authorities do not automatically adopt sewers and when development has taken place, sewers have to be specifically dedicated by the developer.
Where the sewers are private an easement will be required from the original developer to effect a connection.
There is normally no problem in arranging connection to a public sewer, subject to capacity.
If main foul drainage is not available and a private sewage disposal scheme is to be included with the development, permission will be required to discharge any effluent into water courses or underground strata.
If the sewage disposal works is to be situated off-site, a suitable site must be located and purchased and easements obtained from any owners whose land the sewer crosses.
Septic tanks and cesspools were discussed earlier under’ building regulations’.
Where main drainage is not available additional costs are certain to arise.
The previous observations regarding foul sewers apply equally to surface water sewers, except that the water authority has no statutory power to obtain easements for storm water sewers.
SURFACE WATER SEWERS
In many cases soakaways are used as an alternative to storm water sewers.
Approval is required from the water authority to use soakaways and before acceptance it may be necessary to prove by absorption tests that ground conditions are satisfactory.
Soakaways to the roads and houses of a development will usually be cheaper than surface water sewers.
Where the water authority refuses permission for their use the onus is on the developer to secure a satisfactory outfall for a sewer to a ditch, stream or river, and obtain the necessary easements.
Often the outfall will be off-site and it may be necessary to provide a storm water sewer of over a mile to achieve an outfall acceptable to the water authority.
The actual design and construction of the outfall will also necessitate approval by the water authority in order to ensure that erosion does not occur.
The cost of provision of such sewers and the associated easements can be very high and therefore affect site value.
Electricity is usually available, except in extremely remote areas.
The electricity board should always be contacted, however, to confirm the availability of the supply and the cost of connection, to establish whether a substation will be required and any delays expected in meeting the project programme.
If the substation is located within the curtilage of the site, it will be necessary for the developer to dedicate the land to the board.
ELECTRICITY
Connection charges are often mitigated if electric cookers, immersion heaters, or electric central heating are installed in the proposed dwellings on the development.
Gas is a desirable but not essential service.
British Gas should be contacted to check if a service is available on or adjacent to the site, and the cost to the developer of provision of any new or extension to existing mains.
The developer will normally bear the full cost of the supply.
GAS
The water authority must be contacted to establish if a mains water  supply is available and that it is of an adequate size and pressure to serve the development.
The water authority has statutory rights to obtain easements to run water mains across adjoining property, but obviously if adjoining owners object delays may arise.
WATER
Water mains are expensive and the water authority will charge the full cost of any extension to the developer.
It is possible to enter into a guaranteed revenue agreement with the water authority whereby the income from the water charge over a 12-year period is offset against the capital cost and the developer is only liable for any shortfall on an annual basis.
If the individual service to a property (not mains) will need to cross the land of an adjoining owner, an easement will be required.
If mains water is not available, permission will be required from the water authority to extract water from a well or borehole.
The additional cost of the borehole pumps and storage tanks will of course be borne by the developer.
Overhead telephone services are free (to the developer).
The charges for underground services, however, vary in different areas.
The developer will normally be given the opportunity to tender for the excavation work and laying of ducts and cables in association with the development.
TELEPHONE
Negotiations will be necessary with the local authority, frequently at parish council level, regarding the provision of street lights.
The capital cost involved will be borne by the developer.
STREET LIGHTING
MARKET RESEARCH
The appraisal of the actual site, including aesthetic considerations, has already been discussed.
It is worth emphasising the necessity to walk or drive around an area to get the feel of a district.
Visits should be made on more than one occasion and at different times of the day or week.
The final aspect of the site-finding exercise is to assess the market potential of the area and investigate those external factors which will affect sales and site desirability.
It is also important to assess the general economic situation, including the cost and availability of finance, not  only for the developer, but also ultimately for the individual house purchaser.
The market research exercise may be carried out independently of the actual site investigation.
Discussion with the local estate agents up to a 10-to 20-mile radius of the site, the local authority and local people, will be helpful as they are usually only too aware of the advantages and drawbacks of a locality.
As many people as possible should be interviewed to obtain a cross-section of response and opinion to the questions outlined below.
Employment prospects in an area and the type of work available should be verified.
Investigation should be made of the distance and ease of access including the estimated travelling times to all towns and cities within commuting distance.
There may also be a possibility of a demand for retirement or starter homes.
EMPLOYMENT
An accurate report should be made of all public transport facilities including ease of access to the nearest railway station, motorway or airport.
The times and frequency of services of trains and buses should be included.
PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND GENERAL AMENITIES
Ease of access to the beach or countryside may also be a factor ultimately affecting sales potential.
The location of village shops, post office, churches, doctors' surgeries and the nearest town and hypermarkets should all be noted.
With the wide availability of private transport their location may be of little significance unless tile primary demand is for retirement homes, when prospective purchasers will be heavily dependent on local services.
SHOPS, DOCTORS' SURGERIES AND OTHER LOCAL FACILITIES
The distance of the site from primary and secondary schools, and their reputations, may be a consideration.
Where there is more than one secondary school the method of pupil selection or the identification of catchment areas may be all-important.
In some localities market prices of residential property are directly linked to and affected by school catchment areas, where a school has a very good or very bad reputation.
EDUCATION
It is also useful to undertake a survey of the existing stock of dwellings both overall and currently on the market, together with a detailed appraisal of the other developments in progress and their respective sale prices.
Part of the skill of successful development is in identifying and satisfying gaps in the market which offer higher than usual returns.
SURVEY OF EXISTING DEVELOPMENT
FEASIBILITY STUDY
When the site investigation and market research have been completed, before making an offer to purchase the site it is essential to undertake a financial appraisal or feasibility study.
The structure of the development or construction company will affect the nature of the feasibility study, depending on whether the functions of funding, construction and marketing are all undertaken by one company or are subdivided between several different companies.
Assuming that only one company is involved, the first step is to prepare a sketch layout and quantify the house types and prices of the proposed development, to provide a gross financial return.
Offset against this return will be all the various costs involved in the development, including: Professional fees Architects' fees Planning and building regulation fees National House-Building Council fees Services Foul and storm water sewers Electricity Gas Water Telephone and street lighting Roads and footpaths House and construction costs Types and floor area and price per square metre Plot siteworks Drainage Fences Drives and paths Landscaping  Marketing costs Legal fees Agents' fees and advertising costs Administration and overheads General overheads Interest calculated from projected cash flow Profit expected
The above costs and profit deducted from the gross return will provide a residual valuation of the site.
As with all residual methods of valuation, any error in the calculation will be directly reflected in the land valuation, for example when the land value is 20% of gross return, a marginal error of 5% in cost will affect the land value by 25%.
The residual valuation should of course be crosschecked against a valuation made on the comparative basis before any offer is made.
The cost associated with any of the problems discussed above, including the costs of any delay, should be incorporated in the feasibility study.
CONCLUSION
Site finding is a skilful and difficult undertaking, fraught with pitfalls and blind alleys.
The landbuyer should intuitively distinguish those opportunities worth pursuing from those where time and resources will be expended to no effect.
Theory is no substitute for practical experience and this experience is often only bought at a high price.
This chapter should form a basis of a comprehensive check-list for successful site investigation, but is certainly not exhaustive.
The developer should prepare a standard site investigation and market research format, which leads the landbuyer through a series of comprehensive procedures.
This site-finding format should be continually updated as new problems are encountered.
8 Valuation of Trading and Land Stock
INTRODUCTION
It will be apparent from even a cursory glance at the preceding chapter that with relative ease, and often with no lack of management application, an apparently valuable asset can rapidly revert to a financial liability.
On the other hand, land stock of low initial cost may rise a hundredfold in value upon receipt of planning approval or solution of other problems restricting its development.
In the building industry land stock is perhaps more significant in the balance sheet of the majority of builders than trading stock.
This is particularly the case where builders do not maintain a stores department or utilise a yard, and in fact many builders function only on the basis of direct delivery from the builders' merchant to the site.
In such circumstances either credits are arranged with merchants for surplus materials less a restocking charge, or they are sold or scrapped.
Nevertheless, some builders do maintain their own stores, particularly when the company is engaged in small works.
VALUATION OF TRADING STOCK
The valuation of trading stock will normally take place only once or twice a year to coincide with the date of the end of the builder's financial year or half-year, although larger companies may prepare quarterly accounts.
This valuation will be undertaken by the storekeeper, assessed and verified by management and checked by the auditor.
If the’ prudence’concept is followed there should be a tendency to undervalue rather than overvalue stock in the building industry.
The Statement of Standard Accounting Practice No. 9: Stocks and Work  in Progress (commonly known as SSAP9) was issued in May 1975, and revised in August 1980, by the Accounting Standards Committee of the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies, CCAB Limited.
This consists of: The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales The Institute of Chartered Accountants in Scotland The Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland The Chartered Association of Certified Accountants The Institute of Cost and Management Accountants The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy Although there is no legal requirement for companies to comply with SSAP9, auditors will expect the financial accounts of companies to meet the guidelines laid down.
Failure to do so may well lead to the qualifying of the published accounts.
ACCOUNTING POLICY
A revision is proposed to SSAP9, details of which are set out in’ Exposure Draft 40’(ED40) published in November 1986 (see Chapter 12).
In order to conform with SSAP9, companies must include a note in their accounts to the effect that:’ Stocks are valued at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Cost comprises materials, labour and production overheads and net realisable value is based on selling prices, less distribution costs.’‘
The relevant clauses of SSAP9 state that the determination of profit for an accounting year requires the matching of costs with related revenues.
The cost of unsold or unconsumed stocks will have been incurred in the expectation of future revenue, and when this will not arise until a later year it is appropriate to carry forward this cost to be matched with the revenue when it arises.
If there is no reasonable expectation of sufficient future revenue to cover the cost incurred (e.g. as a result of deterioration or obsolescence) the irrecoverable cost should be charged to revenue in the year under review.
Thus stocks need to be stated at cost or, if lower, at net realisable value.
In order to match costs and revenue, cost of stock should comprise that expenditure which has been incurred in the normal course of business in bringing the product to its present location and condition.
Such costs would include all related production overheads even though these may accrue on a time basis.
It is necessary to identify the nature of typical building materials held in stock by a contractor or developer.
These would normally comprise such materials as cement, sand, aggregate, bricks, blocks, concrete and steel lintels, timber, sheet materials (plasterboard, plywood, etc.), windows, doors, joinery, kitchen fittings, roofing and floor tiles, sanitary ware, plumber's fittings, structural steel work, glass, paint, drainage goods, etc.
NATURE AND ORIGIN OF STOCK
It will be immediately obvious that:(a) The majority of materials outlined above are bulky and therefore expensive to double-handle.
(b) Each material has a different rate of deterioration
(c) The most efficient delivery arrangement will be direct from the builders' merchant or manufacturer to an individual site, rather than to the builder's store.
(d) Materials used via a builder's store with subsequent double-handling may well result in additional costs of at least 25%.
When considering the on-cost on stocks the builder must take into account the employment costs of storekeepers, stock lost owing to obsolescence and deterioration, insurance, interest on capital invested, and overhead costs associated with administration and floor space.
The amount at which materials are charged out to sites on stores issue notes must therefore reflect the whole of this on-cost if the stores are to be operated on a profitable basis.
Storage costs often exceed the value of goods stored during the normal turnover period.
In recent years, however, inflation in material cost may have overridden this factor.
Many builders do not consider it financially viable to maintain a stock of materials at a yard.
However, where a company is involved in small works or renovation of existing buildings, it may be essential.
Some builders, in order to assist with the viability of maintaining a yard stock and operating a store, actively encourage direct sales to the general public.
Stock may be acquired either as a stock order from a merchant or manufacturer or from surplus materials returned from site on the completion of a project.
SSAP9 states that it is frequently not practicable to relate expenditure to specific units of stocks.
The ascertainment of the nearest approximation of cost gives rise to two problems:(a) The selection of an appropriate method for relating costs to stocks (such as job costing, batch costing, process costing, standard costing).
VALUATION AT COST
(b) The selection of an appropriate method for calculating the related cost, where a number of identical items have been purchased or made at different times (such as unit costs, average cost or FIFO —first in first out: see below).
In selecting these methods, management must exercise judgement to ensure that the methods chosen provide the fairest practicable approximation to actual costs.
Furthermore, where standard costs are used, they need to be reviewed frequently to ensure that they bear a reasonable relationship to actual costs obtaining during the period.
Methods such as base stock and LIFO (last in first out) do not usually bear such a relationship.
The method of arriving at cost by applying the latest purchase price to the total number of units in stock is unacceptable in principle because it is not necessarily the same as actual cost and in times of rising prices, will result in the taking of a profit which has not been realised.
One method of arriving at cost in the absence of a satisfactory costing system is the use of selling price less an estimated profit margin.
This is acceptable only if it can be demonstrated that the method gives a reasonable approximation of the actual cost.
Costing is discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
Most builders use a simple cost system for job costing (specific order costing) and the stores department may well just be treated as another job or cost centre with monthly costing which is balanced and closed on an annual basis.
Many builders are unlikely to develop sophisticated costing techniques for their stores department, which will usually only represent a small fraction of the total materials purchases for the business as a whole.
The most common methods of valuation in construction companies are: FIFO (first in first out) —the calculation of the cost of stocks on the basis that the quantities in hand represent the latest purchases or production.
Replacement cost —the cost at which an identical asset could be purchased or manufactured.
SSAP9 states that net realisable value is the amount at which it is expected  that items of stock can be disposed of without creating either profit or loss in the year of sale, i.e. the estimated proceeds of sale less all further costs to completion and less all costs to be incurred in marketing, selling and distributing directly related to the items in question.
VALUATION AT NET REALISABLE VALUE
The comparison of cost and net realisable value needs to be made in respect of each item of stock separately.
Where this is impracticable, groups or categories of stock items which are similar will need to be taken together.
To compare the total realisable value of stocks with the total cost could result in an unacceptable setting off of foreseeable losses against unrealised profits.
The initial calculation of provisions to reduce stocks from cost to net realisable value may often be made by the use of formulae based on predetermined criteria.
The formulae normally take account of the age, movements during the past, expected future movements and estimated scrap values of the stock as appropriate.
In reality, owing to the fact that the majority of stock retained by a builder may well be surplus materials returned from completed contracts, valuation on the basis of net realisable value will be the most frequent method adopted.
Practically all building materials are affected by one or a combination of the following: extremes of temperature dampness method of stacking or storing accidental or wilful damage avoidable or unavoidable wastage Sometimes deterioration may be difficult to detect and, perhaps even more important, actual realisable value may be negligible and in some cases negative, in that costs will be incurred in carting away.
PHYSICAL DETERIORATION OF STOCK
Obsolescence may result from: change of fashion (sanitary ware, windows etc.) change of size (metrication) introduction of new and cheaper substitutes (plastic)
OBSOLESCENCE OF STOCK
When stocks are held which are unlikely to be sold within the turnover period normal to a company, the impending delay in realisation increases the risk that deterioration or obsolescence will occur before the stocks are sold.
Such stocks should therefore be written down when assessing net realisable value.
EXCESS OF STOCK
VALUATION OF LAND STOCK
Land stock may represent a significant factor in the balance sheet of many building companies.
Often land owned by the company for many years is shown at cost and few people, other than the directors and possibly the company's bank manager, are aware of the true value of the land stock.
If the land was revalued and stated in the balance sheet at its current market price this would of course result in the company making a book profit.
A tax liability would therefore arise but the cash may not be available to meet this obligation.
Where, however, the company is making a loss, it may be possible to mitigate this loss by revaluing the company's land bank, without incurring any tax liability.
When a company's land bank is shown at cost and its true value is not reflected in share prices it may, of course, be ripe for a takeover bid.
In order to conform with SSAP9, most companies include a note in their annual accounts to the effect that:’ The individual parcels of freehold land held for development are valued at the lower of cost or estimated net realisable value.
Cost comprises the purchase consideration including professional fees and net realisable value is based on the anticipated net selling prices.
Independent professional valuations for land held for development have not (or have) been obtained.’
ACCOUNTING POLICY
Alternatively an even briefer statement is sometimes included, such as:’ Stocks and land, including development costs and construction thereon, are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.’
House building companies tend to use their land banks in different ways.
LAND BANKS
Some companies endeavour to maximise profits from the land element of potential development.
This can be achieved by holding sites for long periods and delaying the start of actual work on site for periods of up to, say, five to ten years.
(Planning approvals must of course be renewed every five years.)
Other companies derive their profit primarily from the construction process with a shorter land bank cycle of, say, up to three years.
It must be appreciated that inflation in land and house prices tends to distort the profit earned on land and the development process.
It is important to develop budgetary control techniques and costing records within the company to clearly identify where profit is being made on development.
All too often the profit earned on an individual house or indeed a development as a whole is less than would have been made if the site had merely been left undeveloped and sold at the end of the development period.
There are two methods commonly used in the valuation of land — direct comparison of capital values, and the residual method.
ACCURACY OF VALUATION
The value of land is estimated by comparison with the value of similar land in the locality, provided there is sufficient evidence from recent sales for the valuer to use as a base.
Direct comparison of capital values
A calculation is made of the estimated gross return from a development project less; construction costs, including siteworks, roads and sewers architect's fees planning and building regulation fees legal and estate agent's fees overheads and interest on capital invested profit required The balance will equal the residual valuation of the land.
When this residual method is employed it is obvious that any error made in any part of the estimate will be directly reflected in the residual valuation.
Residual method
In practice professional valuers tend to prefer the comparative method and builders the residual method, but for valuations for annual financial or management accounts it would perhaps be prudent to take an average of the result obtained using both methods.
Whichever method is used, certain factors have to be taken into account by the valuer in reaching a decision as to a realistic estimate of site value, such as: Economic factors State of national economy Availability of finance for developer and purchaser Interest rates Supply and demand in locality (need for accurate market research) Demographic changes Local employment conditions Proximity and availability of schools, shops, etc.
Legal factors Restrictive covenants Existing easements Easements required Approval of scheme by third party Vacant possession (squatters) Sight lines Ransom strips Private and public sewers Infrastructure and services Existing roads and access Proximity and capacity of existing public sewers Availability of gas, water and electricity supplies Engineering problems Made-up ground, mining, bearing capacity of soil Springs, streams/rivers, flooding, water table Existing foundations and basements Previous use of land (i.e. lead works, chemicals, asbestos, etc.)
Invert depths of sewers, pumping station Septic tanks and cesspools, approval for discharge of effluent Planning and environmental problems Classification of land, agricultural land, land with hope value, land scheduled for development (usually in development or local plan) Outline planning approval, detailed planning approval  Built environment, redevelopment or change of use Existing planning approval may not be viable Planning conditions, open space, density, play areas, height and design of buildings Character of area and immediate environment
Continual rises in land values cannot necessarily be viewed as an automatic process.
In fact it is possible, particularly on inner-city sites, for land to have a negative value.
Whichever method of valuation is used, any of the problems outlined above may have a serious and dramatic effect on the valuation of a potential building site.
CONCLUSION
When the comparative method of land valuation is used problems may sometimes arise where unrealistic transactions are used as a guide or base value, particularly at the point when land values are about to fall, as happened in 1973.
When land is developed it is important in the management accounts to clearly identify the source of profit —from land appreciation, construction, or marketing.
9 Costing
INTRODUCTION
The construction industry is noted for its high rate of liquidations.
Perhaps one of the most significant contributory factors is the failure of builders to maintain adequate written records of business transactions.
Often the smaller the company the greater the propensity for this particular weakness to develop.
For efficient management of a company, records should be maintained in at least three categories: Financial accounts Cost accounts Management accounts Each of these divisions of the accounts records are of course interrelated and will now be examined in detail.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS
All companies are obliged to produce a balance sheet and profit and loss account on an annual basis.
These must be prepared in accordance with the provisions laid down in the various Companies Acts, particularly 1948, 1981 and 1985.
Although the accounts are drawn up for the benefit of the proprietors or shareholders of a business, the primary objective of such accounts could be said to establish the amount of tax due to the Inland Revenue.
The annual financial accounts of companies presented to shareholders must be filed with the Registrar of Companies.
As public documents they can be scrutinised by anyone prepared to pay the search fee.
In the Companies Act 1981 an option was given for certain smaller  companies (provided they are not public companies) to produce modified or shortened accounts for filing with the Registrar of Companies.
In order to be classified as small a company or group of companies must meet at least two out of the following three criteria:(a) annual turnover not exceeding £1400000.
SMALLER COMPANIES
(b) balance sheet total not exceeding £700000.
(c) average number of employees not exceeding 50.
If a company meets these requirements in any year and is therefore entitled to the accounting exemptions for that year it will also be entitled to the same exemptions for the following year, regardless of whether or not it meets the criteria.
A company qualifying to be classed as small is entitled to the following accounting exemptions:(a) It need not file a profit and loss account.
(b) It need not file a director's report.
(c) It may file a modified balance sheet.
(d) Certain information normally required to be given in the notes of the accounts may be omitted.
In addition the notes to the accounts need not include the directors' emoluments.
Modified accounts are not intended to give a fair and true view of the company and it is therefore not necessary for such accounts to comply with the disclosure provisions of SSAP.
This opportunity to file or publish modified accounts does not limit the requirement to prepare full accounts for the shareholders.
The objective of a company taking advantage of these provisions, therefore, is to conceal as much of its activities as possible from the outside world and therefore maintain a degree of confidentiality.
A smaller building company may be asked to provide more detailed financial information than is contained in the modified company accounts when applying to join a list of approved contractors or applying for a tenancy of, say, a builder's yard or offices.
It should perhaps be mentioned that there are also accounting exemptions for medium-sized companies (annual turnover not exceeding £5750000) but these are modest and are barely worth the effort and expense of preparing separate accounts for the shareholders and filing with the Registrar of Companies.
One of the problems facing the very small builder is lack of time and accounting expertise.
There can be a tendency for such firms to collect  details of all cash or cheques received from clients on the one hand, and all cash or cheques paid out for labour, materials, plant or services on the other, and pass the entire batch to the accountant at half-yearly or yearly intervals.
In such circumstances the only indication of the company's well-being (and possibly a poor one at that) will be the state of the bank balance, until the accountant has produced the accounts for the year.
Usually such very small building enterprises will be engaged on work of short duration and will therefore be less prone to encounter the problems associated with the valuation of work in progress discussed in Chapter 12.
As a result the accounts produced will tend to reflect a fairly accurate view of the profitability of the business.
For the larger builder with an accounts department, or at least the assistance of a bookkeeper, all financial transactions will be recorded on a regular basis and in a systematic manner.
The objective will be to identify the financial effect of each transaction on both the company and its creditors or debtors.
To this end a double-entry system of bookkeeping, where each debit has a corresponding credit entry, will be used, which provides an arithmetic check of the books.
PREPARATION OF COMPANY ACCOUNTS
Each year an annual report and accounts will be drawn up which contains three main elements:(a) The profit and loss account.
This account is credited with all the income earned by the company and debited with all the expenditure incurred.
The balance of the profit and loss account represents the net profit or loss for the accounting period.
In effect it shows the flow of money through the company for the trading period.
(b) The balance sheet.
The balance sheet does not relate to a period but sets out the book values of the assets, liabilities and capital as at a particular point in time.
The balance sheet is not intended to show the current monetary worth of the company at the date upon which it is prepared.
For example, fixed assets are normally valued at cost, less provision for depreciation, and current assets at cost or net realisable value, whichever is the lower.
The values at which many of the assets appear in the balance sheet, therefore, may be far removed from current market value.
(c) Sources and applications of funds account.
This account shows how the company raises finance during the year and what the finance was  used for.
It shows the movements in the company's liabilities and assets during the trading period.
There are three factors which influence the content and presentation of company accounts: the law, the accounting profession and certain other bodies.
STRUCTURE AND CONTENT OF THE ACCOUNTS
The Companies Acts of 1948 to 1985 make certain requirements regarding the content and presentation of company accounts.
The 1981 Act in particular lays down how the information is to be presented and provides two formats for the balance sheet and a choice of four formats for the profit and loss account.
The Act also requires disclosure in connection with the balance sheet of movements in share capital, debentures, fixed assets, reserves, provisions for contingent liabilities, and capital commitments.
On the profit and loss account, disclosure is required of turnover and pre-tax profits by type of business and significant geographical areas, interest payments, taxation, staff payments, depreciation, auditor's remuneration, income from listed investments and payments for the hire of plant and machinery.
Smaller companies are exempt from some of these disclosures, as already mentioned above.
The accounts also have to be prepared in line with the accepted practice within the accounting profession, as laid down in a series of Statements of Standard Accounting Practice (SSAPs) issued by the Accounting Standards Committee.
A detailed assessment of the majority of the SSAPs is outside the scope of this book, except for SSAP2 which is discussed below and SSAP9 which is discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
The various SSAPs, with the exception possibly of SSAP16 which requires companies to produce current cost accounts, may be regarded as binding upon both the company's accountants and its auditors.
If there is a serious departure from these laid down guidelines the auditor may refuse to accept that the accounts are a’ true and fair view’of the financial affairs of the company and accordingly qualify the accounts to that effect.
Other bodies impose rules regarding the presentation and content of accounts on member companies.
The Stock Exchange, for example, requires that its members prepare their accounts in accordance with the SSAPs and that there is a geographical analysis of turnover and operational profit for activities outside the UK.
In addition the place of  operation of subsidiaries must be given and the particulars of associated companies together with the directors' interests in the companies' shares.
SSAP2 laid down fundamental accounting concepts which were largely incorporated as a legal requirement for the first time in the Companies Act 1981.
The Act specifies four fundamental accounting principles which must be applied: Going concern basis.
The company shall be presumed to be carrying on its business as a going concern.
ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES
Consistency.
Accounting policies must be applied consistently from one financial year to the next.
This is partly to ensure that any increase in profitability can be identified as the result of improved efficiency rather than a change in the method of compiling the accounts.
Where accounting methods are changed this should be disclosed.
Prudence.
All items must be determined on a prudent basis and should err on the side of caution and in particular:(a) Revenue and profits must not be anticipated, but should be recognised by inclusion in the profit and loss account only when realised in the form of cash or of other assets, the ultimate realisation of which can be assessed with reasonable certainty.
(b) All liabilities and losses which have arisen or are likely to arise in respect of the financial year to which the accounts relate or a previous financial year must be taken into account, including those which only become apparent between the balance sheet date and the date on which the balance sheet is signed.
Accruals.
All income and charges relating to the financial year covered by the accounts must be taken into account without regard to the date of receipt or payment.
This is commonly referred to as the’ accruals’concept.
In other words, revenue should be shown for the period in which it is earned and not when it is paid.
This will ensure that revenue and cost have been more correctly matched.
Consequently revenue is recognised as having been earned when sales are made and not when the debt is settled, and the balance sheet will therefore including details of pre-payments both made and received by the company.
The Companies Act 1981 also provided that in determining the aggregate amount of any item in a company's balance sheet or profit and loss account, the amount of each individual asset or liability included in that  amount shall be determined separately.
For example, in calculating the amount at which stocks are to be stated, the test’ lower of cost and net realisable value’should be applied to each individual material, rather than to the total stock-holding.
When the directors consider that it is essential for some reason to depart from these fundamental accounting principles a note must be included in the accounts stating the nature of the departure, the reason for it, and its effect.
COST ACCOUNTS
The financial accounts for a building company would not give any indication of the profit or loss on any individual project but only the financial position of the company as a whole.
The majority of builders therefore prepare a second set of accounts known as the cost accounts.
Cost accounts are only prepared at the discretion of the directors of the company and are not a legal requirement.
Many smaller builders are unable to allocate the financial resources or staff to provide cost accounts and, with the consequential lack of accurate costing information, run greater risks of insolvency.
The primary objectives in producing cost accounts are to provide:(a) The detailed information to determine the profit or loss on individual projects or an aspect of the company's business transactions.
(b) An accurate assessment of project results to provide a backup and feedback to the estimating department for more precise tendering for future work.
(c) A check against target costs or standard costs and a long-stop for the budgetary control of individual projects.
(d) The basis for calculating cash flow on individual projects.
The cost accounts are concerned with the composition of cost and the source of profit.
Although the financial accounts provide a basis for calculation of profit there is no concern with how or where the profit (or loss) arises.
On the other hand the cost accounts are not concerned with debtors, creditors, assets, liabilities or personal accounts.
The financial accounting system was historically well established before the concept of cost accounts was introduced.
A distinct division therefore developed between the two methods of accounting.
As will be seen later in this chapter, the type of analysis used for the financial accounts is unsuitable for the cost accounts.
This means that the original data must be separately reprocessed for the cost accounts.
INDEPENDENT COST AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS
A control (or total) account of all costs arising for a defined period (day, week or month) can be reconciled with the postings to the individual cost records for each project to ensure that the figures are balanced.
With this system, however, there is no direct link with the financial accounts unless there are corresponding control accounts within those accounts.
When this is not the case there will almost certainly, however, be periodic attempts to reconcile the two sets of accounts, by comparing the profit shown in the financial accounts with that revealed in the cost accounts.
Because the two sets of accounts are administered independently it is relatively easy for clerical errors to arise and for items to be omitted from the costs, particularly internal transfers such as stores, transport and plant charges.
Many smaller companies, through lack of expertise, staff or financial resources, will be obliged to adopt this system of independent cost and financial accounts.
Obviously where frequent attempts are made at reconciliation the cost accounts may be reasonably accurate.
Accuracy is of course particularly important when a builder is engaged in small works and uses the cost records to prepare the final account and sales invoice for the client.
In order to ensure that the cost accounts are a proven and reliable record it is essential that the cost and financial accounts are integrated.
To this end the normal procedure is to reconcile the two sets of accounts at the close of the accounting period (close down).
The accounting period adopted by most companies in the construction industry is either the last working day of the calendar month or the last day of the calendar month.
This coincides with the normal trading and credit arrangements of builders' merchants and suppliers.
The cost accounts will therefore be closed down on the same date.
INTEGRATED COST AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS
By the use of control accounts in both the financial and cost accounts it will be possible to ensure that both sets of accounts are balanced and integrated.
A control account is merely an extra account inserted at the back of a ledger or kept separately to make the ledger self-balancing.
Items are posted to the individual ledger accounts in the usual way but  when the postings are complete the total is posted to the control account.
At the end of the accounting period the balance of the control account will be equal to the sum of the balances in the ledger account, thus proving the ledger.
As all documentation processed through the financial accounts will therefore also be processed and costed to the cost accounts, the monthly reconciliation of the two will bring to light any clerical errors or omissions from the cost accounts.
Unfortunately this only proves that the total costed each month to the various cost centres is correct, but does not overcome the problem of invoices or other documentation inadvertently being costed to the wrong project.
Cost is defined in SSAP9 as being:’ that expenditure which has been incurred in the normal course of business in bringing the product or service to its present location and condition.
This expenditure should include, in addition to cost of purchase, such costs of conversion as are appropriate to that location and condition.
ANALYSIS OF COST
Cost of purchase comprises purchase price including import duties, transport and handling costs and any other directly attributable costs, less trade discounts, rebates and subsidies.
Cost of conversion comprises:(a) Costs which are specifically attributable to units of production, i.e. direct labour, direct expenses and sub-contracted work.
(b) Production overheads.
(c) Other overheads, if any, attributable in the particular circumstances of the business, to bringing the product or service to its present location and condition.’
The costing for any individual contract or development project could be analysed as follows: Profit or loss In the building industry the normal practice is to cost net excluding the majority of overheads unless they are site-related.
Most cost systems therefore concentrate on the prime cost.
The costing of indirect costs or overheads is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
It is normal practice in the building industry to cost all items gross.
Any retention and cash discount, therefore, would be ignored in the cost accounts but dealt with separately in the financial accounts.
Trade discount, however, would usually be deducted from the cost unless it was received as a rebate from the supplier when the company as a whole reached a certain level of purchases.
SIMPLE HISTORICAL COST SYSTEM
The simplest form of cost system merely amounts to an analysis or separate cost record for each individual contract or development project.
No distinction will be made between the various elements of cost such as labour, plant and materials.
The cost will simply be kept for each project as a running total entered by hand in a cost ledger.
Indirect cost will be similarly costed to an analysed overhead account.
The production of a single cost figure per contract or even a very limited split of, say, labour, materials and expenses, is not particularly helpful to the surveying or management staff, although of course better than nothing.
It is therefore normal practice to provide a more detailed cost breakdown under key cost headings arising on contracts or development.
Typical cost headings for contracts might be: Directly employed labour Labour-only sub-contractors Materials Own stores Nominated suppliers Labour and material sub-contractors Nominated sub-contractors Hired plant Own plant Own transport Special expenses In the case of development projects administered and constructed by the builder a similar breakdown could be used.
The cost headings for nominated sub-contractors and nominated suppliers, however, would be deleted as development projects would not normally be administered by an independent architect and therefore nominations would not arise.
Additional cost headings would, however, need to be included for: Land Legal fees Estate agent's fees These basic breakdowns of cost do enable the surveyor or management to identify the total cost allocated to certain cost centres each month and with the aid of this basic information it is possible to produce a cost value reconciliation statement (see Chapter II).
With such a limited cost breakdown, however, there is insufficient information to relate costs to work sections, other identifiable parts of an individual project or bill of quantity items.
More detailed cost breakdowns are discussed later in this chapter.
Monthly close down of costs will usually occur at the end of each calendar month to coincide with the similar close down of the financial accounts.
After the close down date most companies will allow a period of up to, say, 14 days for processing the various items of paperwork through both sets of accounts.
This will include any late documentation from inside or outside the company.
Depending on the efficiency of the staff of the  accounts department the cost accounts for the previous month should be available to management within a maximum period of a further seven days, making a total maximum delay of 21 days.
Where accounts have been computerised it may well be possible to accelerate this programme, as discussed later in this chapter.
CLOSE DOWN OF COSTS
In order to appreciate the reasons why cost records may be inaccurate at any given point in time and therefore will need adjustment before any cost value reconciliation can take place, it will be useful to examine the thinking behind a typical cost system.
Obviously an individual company may deal with each cost centre on a different basis from the one discussed, thus varying the propensity for inaccuracies to occur.
DIRECT OR PRIME COST
Methods of remuneration of directly employed labour were discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
Whichever method is adopted the wages clerk will be involved in checking time sheets and/or bonus calculations in order to calculate the wages due to operatives.
Directly employed labour
The time sheet filled in by the operative will need to provide certain basic information: The contract or project number, for easy identification of cost centres.
Hours spent on each site during the day or part of a day if working on more than one site.
This is particularly important for operatives working in small works departments of large companies or for small builders where frequent moves from one site to another occur.
Where sophisticated cost systems have been introduced a division of the time sheet into hours spent on each operation or work section will be essential.
An indication of the time spent on work which is not directly productive, such as working in the yard or stores, driving or travelling.
Management may need to provide encouragement and at worst assistance to operatives in the completion of time sheets.
There will of course be a delay between the completion of time sheets by the operatives, or bonus calculations by the bonus surveyor, and the actual payment of wages including any expenses and allowances.
In the construction industry this delay for processing does not normally exceed two or three days, with a maximum of seven days (one week's wages in  hand).
Deductions from wages paid to operatives such as PAYE, national insurance, superannuation or court orders for maintenance will only be processed through the financial accounts.
The on-costs on labour such as employers' national insurance contributions, CITB levy, holidays with pay scheme and other more indirect on-costs such as allowances for severance pay and legislation affecting employment, sick pay, allowance for employer's liability and third party insurance, will be processed through both the cost and financial accounts.
As far as is possible it is preferable to charge the actual cost incurred rather than a percentage assessment to the cost accounts.
This should ensure that any discrepancy between the cost and financial accounts each week that is charged to a variance account is very small, less than, say, £10 for the whole of a financial year.
On individual time sheets there may be hours of non-chargeable time, for example unproductive time spent waiting in the yard or time spent by apprentices in training or at college.
Such costs will either be absorbed on a pro rata basis into the cost of existing projects or charged to the overhead accounts.
The cost of the payroll will usually be charged to cost accounts each week.
At the end of the calendar month when the time sheet may apply to two accounting periods, the accountant will either:(a) Allocate the total cost of the payroll to the calendar month in which the wages were paid.
(b) Allocate the total cost of the payroll to the calendar month in which the last day of the time sheet falls.
(c) Divide the cost of the payroll between the current month and the next month's costs, pro rata to the exact number of days worked in the respective months.
The majority of companies will opt for alternative (a) or (b) for ease of administration.
This will result in directly employed labour being slightly undervalued from time to time.
Monthly salaries will obviously be costed on a calendar month basis and with the exception of site-based staff the majority of salaries will probably be costed to overheads.
Many companies use a certification system for the payment of labour only sub-contractors (see Chapter 6) which makes the costing process  relatively simple.
The builder's surveyor will either check the information supplied by the sub-contractor or measure the work carried out during the payment period, usually weekly, but occasionally for longer periods of up to a month.
Labour-only sub-contractors
The monetary valuation of the measurements will form the basis of the payment each week.
The certificate should indicate the name of the contract, contract number, name of sub-contractor, nature of work, the gross payment to date, previous payments and current payment for the period, together with details of deductions for such items as retention, insurance and CITB levy.
The deductions will be controlled in the financial accounts and the gross payment for each period will be posted to the cost accounts.
For simplicity the amount to be costed is best highlighted in dark type or shown in a separate box on the form.
The accountant is faced with the same problems regarding the correct allocation of cost to the current or following month for payment certificates near or straddling the month end, as was discussed under directly employed labour.
Payment certificates will usually need to be prepared in quadruple: Top copy to sub-contractor Second copy to financial accounts Third copy to cost accounts Fourth copy to surveyor's file The builder's surveyor obviously occupies a key role in this process.
Any inaccuracy in weekly measurements and subsequent payments to subcontractors will be translated directly into both the financial and cost accounts.
It may be weeks, months or even years before slaphappy surveying methods are identified by management.
It must be emphasised, therefore, that it is essential that management monitor and frequently check the competence of their surveying staff, the methods of measurement used, and that sub-contractor's accounts are accurate and up to date.
It is imperative that management allocate sufficient staff resources to achieve this objective.
The bulk of the documentation passing through the accounts and surveying departments will relate to materials purchases.
The various stages of the purchasing process include enquiry, quotation, placement of order, delivery with delivery note, invoice received, invoice checked and  approved, and statement reconciled and account paid, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Materials
Although strictly speaking the company is responsible for the cost of materials immediately the order is placed, the normal procedure is for costing to be delayed until the invoice has been checked and approved for payment.
The author was once involved in the takeover of a small company where costing was undertaken manually in a large ledger.
A cost entry was made when materials were ordered, and updated at delivery, when the invoice was received, checked and then paid; notes were made of any problems at each stage.
(A costing system for materials invoices is outlined later in this chapter.)
Costing for own stores is a very similar process to that for materials invoices except that the priced stores issue note (see Chapter 5) will take the place of the materials invoice.
Because the documentation is produced internally and no cash transfer is involved there may be a tendency for the pricing of stores issue notes to be deferred, with the consequential possibility of late or under-costing.
Own stores
The stores department would of course be subject to complete financial control with all wages for storemen, overheads, transport and materials purchases being debited to the control account, and stores issue notes being credited.
The resultant profit or loss on stores will form part of the financial accounts.
The costing process for nominated suppliers also involves the client's quantity surveyor.
At each interim valuation the builder will pass the original nominated invoices received during the month to the quantity surveyor for inclusion in the interim certificate and payment.
A duplicate copy of the invoice will be retained by the builder's surveyor for record purposes.
Nominated suppliers
JCT 80 provides that’ Full discharge by the Contractor in respect of payments for materials or goods supplied by the Nominated Supplier shall be effected within 30 days of the end of the month during which delivery is made less only a discount for cash of 5% if so paid.’
A problem may obviously arise for the builder where the nominated supplier makes deliveries late in the month and the relevant invoices are not available at the date of the valuation.
Equally, the valuation may take place just prior to the end of the month and deliveries be made after the valuation but before the end of the month.
In the first case the client's quantity surveyor may possibly include an estimate of the cost in the valuation but in the second case the amount will be omitted from the valuation completely.
The builder, however, is committed to pay in accordance with the principles laid down in/CT 80, which may well cause cash flow problems.
The invoices may be processed through the cost accounts in the same way as that described below for materials invoices.
More commonly, however, the builder's surveyor will certify payments on a similar basis to that described for labour-only sub-contractors.
If payments are to be certified the builder's surveyor may delay the issue of the documentation until the interim certificate for the main contract is received from the architect.
In such circumstances the copy certificates for processing through the cost and financial accounts may not reach the accounts department until after the date of the monthly close down and may therefore be costed to the following month.
Payment should of course be made on time.
The amount certified by the client's quantity surveyor may not necessarily be identical to that certified by the builder's surveyor due to such factors as replacement of any damaged supplies, claims or contra-charges.
Discrepancies must be accounted for during the cost value reconciliation procedure (see Chapter 11).
The procedure for payment of labour and material sub-contractors will usually follow that described for labour-only sub-contractors and interim payments will be supported by a certificate issued by the builder's surveyor.
The sub-contractor will normally make a request for interim payment and raise a tax invoice for VAT purposes on completion of the work.
Labour and material sub-contractors
In order to avoid disputes and unnecessary duplication of effort, where work requires remeasurement this will take place at a joint meeting of the builder's surveyor and the sub-contractor.
Measurement and subsequent payment for work executed may take place at weekly, monthly, or at random intervals and therefore may not  be related to the date of the main contract valuation or the builder's costing periods.
It would be usual practice to ensure that the payment is costed to the month in which the work is carried out.
However, where the payment relates to work executed in two costing periods the accountant may choose the last period, the period when the majority of the work was undertaken, or split the payment between two cost periods.
In practice the simplest solution will normally be followed in that the cost will be allocated to the same period as the payment in the financial accounts.
The important point to consider is that the builder's surveyor must be fully aware of company policy when adjusting the cost for cost value reconciliation purposes.
The invoices will of course be retained on the surveyor's file and the internal certificate will form the documentation for both the financial and the cost accounts.
The certificate, besides containing the basic information outlined previously for labour-only payments, may also give an indication of the amount of the sub-contract and target cost.
Under JCT 80, sub-contract NSC/4 or 4a, the payment procedure for nominated sub-contractors is essentially controlled by the client's quantity surveyor and the date of issue of the valuation certificate.
The payment request or invoices from the nominated sub-contractor will be received and checked by the builder and passed to the client's quantity surveyor at the time of the interim valuation.
The client's quantity surveyor, and if necessary the relevant consultant, will also check the invoices or payment requests and include the agreed amount for each nominated sub-contractor in the interim certificate.
The amount certified for any individual subcontractor may of course be less than that claimed.
The builder must pay the nominated sub-contractor the amount certified within I 7 days of the date of issue of the interim certificate.
The builder's surveyor will be unable to certify payments to the various nominated subcontractors until after the interim certificate has been received from the architect.
Nominated sub-contractors
It is probable, therefore, that the internal payment certificate will not be raised in time for inclusion in the current month's costing as they will be received by the accountant after the close down date for the month.
The builder's surveyor will therefore need to make the necessary adjustments for cost value reconciliation purposes.
The payment will be costed gross and any retention or cash discount will be accounted for in the financial accounts.
When contra-charges or  claims have arisen between the builder and the nominated sub-contractor for such items as damage, breakages or delays then obviously the amount certified by the builder will vary from that certified in the interim certificate.
In order to distinguish between the internal payment certificates for labour-only sub-contractors, labour and material sub-contractors, nominated suppliers and nominated sub-contractors, it may be useful to use different coloured documentation for easier identification.
Hired plant, special expenses, legal and estate agent's fees
Invoices for hired plant, etc., will be processed through the cost and financial accounts in the same manner as for materials invoices detailed below.
Hired plant invoices may create a slight problem where the hire period extends across two accounting periods.
The accountant will need to make the policy decision as to which accounting period the invoices should be costed in, or whether the cost should be split.
Cost documentation for the company's own plant and transport will be produced internally by the plant and/or transport department.
There may be a tendency either to overlook plant charges or to delay the issue of the costing documentation.
Own plant and transport
The company, as a policy, will need to establish whether small tools and minor items of plant are charged to the project at cost and credited on their return to the plant department, or whether all items of plant, including small tools, are to be charged on a similar basis to that used by plant and tool hire companies.
It may be prudent to offer contract management a discount of, say, 10% off normal plant hire charges for the company's own plant to encourage its maximum use.
The plant department will probably have a number of direct employees, including drivers, fitters and administrative staff, and it is therefore essential that proper accounts, with correct proportions of overheads, are maintained to establish the department's profitability.
The cost system now outlined could apply not only to materials invoices but also to invoices for hired plant, special expenses, overheads, legal and estate agent's fees, and in part to certified payments and the company payroll.
COSTING SYSTEM
Separate orders should be used for each project.
If materials for different contracts are included on the same order this may well lead to the supplier repeating the presentation on the invoice, thus necessitating a split before costing.
Orders
The supplier should be requested:(a) To supply two copies of invoices.
(b) To provide a separate invoice (in duplicate) for each purchase order.
(c) To include the project number and the name of the site on the invoice.
May apply to more than one contract, but’ call off’orders should be for specific projects.
Blanket orders
If the supplier does not provide a duplicate invoice a photostat copy must be made.
One invoice should be stamped’ original’and the other’copy’.
The copy invoice should be retained by the accounts department and the original sent to the buying department or other department or individual responsible for checking the invoice (see Chapter 5).
Once the invoice has been checked and approved and returned to the accounts department the original invoice will be processed through the financial accounts and the copy invoice through the cost accounts.
If invoices remain unchecked after the 14th of the month they will be excluded from the monthly close down of the cost accounts, treated as late invoices and costed to the following month.
Invoices received
Approved invoices can simply be placed on a file,’ unpaid invoices for the month of…’and filed alphabetically and in date order under the name of the individual supplier.
The relevant invoices for each supplier can, at the appropriate time, be reconciled with the statement and the supplier's account paid.
Where invoices recorded on the statement have not been received or have been mislaid, copies will be required from the supplier.
Equally, incorrect invoices may need to be adjusted by means of a credit note issued by the supplier or a debit note raised by the builder.
Procedure within the financial accounts
Many larger companies adopt the procedure of raising a debit note for  any errors on invoices.
The combination of the debit note and invoice can then be processed through the cost accounts.
The accountant will of course await the receipt of the relevant credit note and adjustment of VAT from the supplier before finally agreeing the statement.
The copy invoices are initially sorted under project numbers and other cost centres such as the various overhead accounts, stores or plant department.
The invoices for each project are then sub-sorted into cost categories such as materials, hired plant and special expenses.
Procedure within the cost accounts
At the end of each accounting period (calendar month) the invoices are then add-listed to provide a separate total for the sub-division of each project.
The add-list can then be stapled to each batch of invoices for the accounting period as a permanent record and filed on a lever arch file for each contract.
Other cost documentation such as wages, certified payments, etc., can be similarly filed and add-listed.
The total of the copy invoices and other cost documentation processed for each accounting period will be compared and reconciled with the total of the original invoices and other documentation processed via the financial accounts.
The total cost allocated to the various headings under each contract will be entered in a cost ledger as a permanent record each month.
The cost system outlined has certain definite advantages:(a) It is simple to operate and easy to understand.
(b) Surveyors and management can have easy and direct access to analysed monthly costs recorded in a cost ledger as a single line entry for each contract every month.
Any queries can be resolved by direct access to the original information on the project cost file, filed under cost headings in monthly batches.
(c) Any errors in costing, particularly invoices charged to the wrong project, are easy to identify and correct.
(d) All the cost information for a project is retained in one or a very small number of files.
The problem with such a system is that a more detailed breakdown of costs into trades, elements or work sections would be difficult to achieve on a manual basis.
Management will therefore be dependent on surveying records, cost targets and the management accounts.
There will be an obvious benefit to management if costs could be more directly related to work sections, elements, trades or individual bill of quantity items.
With the rapid spread in the development and use of computer technology more complex costing systems are relatively simple to introduce, even in smaller building companies.
MORE COMPLEX COSTING SYSTEMS
The checking of invoices will usually have to be undertaken manually.
Once this has been completed each invoice or other costing document will need to be coded before being processed by the computer operator.
The code on each costing document will need to include the contract number and the work section, element, trade or bill of quantity reference.
In addition it will almost certainly be necessary to give each document a unique reference number for ease of future identification and retrieval.
Coding
It is helpful if all orders are coded and, if possible, separate orders are used for different elements, work sections, etc.
This will ensure that when the invoices are received they will be relatively easy to code and will not need splitting between different cost centres.
Cost breakdown
The decision as to how detailed a breakdown of costs is required is crucial and should only be taken at a high level in the management structure.
The more detailed the cost breakdown and analysis, the more complex will become the coding and analytical decision-taking.
It must be borne in mind that the majority of coding decisions will be taken by junior members of staff.
A well-thought-out cost breakdown and related coding system will enable costs to be reprocessed through the computer and presented to management in a variety of ways.
For example, using the manual cost breakdown already discussed it would be possible to expand such a system to provide the following:(a) A printout of costs in a simplified form, identical to that outlined for a manual system —directly employed labour, labour-only subcontractors, etc.
(b) A breakdown of each cost heading in (a) above into trades, i.e., materials into concrete work, brickwork, etc., possibly using SMM classifications.
(c) A breakdown of the cost of each trade but with labour, materials and plant combined.
This would compare directly with the breakdown of a traditional bill of quantities.
(d) A breakdown into elements —foundations, external walls, roofs, internal walls, etc., and subdivided again as in (b) or (c) above.
(e) A breakdown into work sections (groups of bill of quantity items) which would comprise an easily identifiable site operation.
(f) An analysed breakdown into individual sub-contract functions where sub-contractors are undertaking the bulk of the work.
In each case it may be possible to print out target costs against each subsection and therefore quantify any profit or loss.
The advantages in such a system are obvious.
Provided coding can be accurately and quickly undertaken cost records can be continuously and rapidly updated.
In order to achieve integration with financial accounts, invoices and other documentation should be processed in batches, possibly one day's output.
This will enable the accounting staff to reconcile the totals of each batch on a daily basis.
Where the cost breakdown is sophisticated, problems may arise both on site and in the office.
With many materials, for example cement, sand, aggregate, and bricks, the correct cost centre may be difficult to monitor.
Such materials may be used in foundations, superstructure, roads, and drainage; if an elemental breakdown is employed, in a dozen different elements.
It is therefore essential, if costs are to be meaningful, that site and surveying staff accurately monitor the flow of materials to each cost centre.
This will obviously absorb management resources.
Once invoices and other costing documentation have been correctly coded and costed via the computer system, management is faced with a choice of how to file the’ dead’paperwork:(a) Filing could be on the basis of the unique number on each costing document.
This would of course mean that the costing documentation processed for each day, week or month (depending on the size of the company) would not be split between individual contracts, development or overhead items, but filed in order of processing.
In the event of an enquiry to identify the actual components of cost under an analysed heading, it may be essential to refer to the original documentation.
The unique number, which must of course appear on  the cost printout, will enable management to identify each individual docket but it may well be a laborious process to extract the costing details for one subsection of a project from the filing for the whole company.
This does not compare with the ease of reference to actual original documentation in the manual system outlined earlier in this chapter.
Retrieval and filing
(b) Filing could be either completely or partly broken down using the cost code on each document.
Initially this could be on the basis of individual projects or overhead accounts and subsequently in as much detail as management consider necessary.
The problem with undertaking filing on this basis is that accounting or management staff are in effect duplicating the process undertaken by the computer.
The problem with analysed costing in the building industry is that with the complexity and nature of the construction process, errors may well be frequent.
The propensity for errors to occur must be balanced against the necessity for both management and surveying staff to have a reasonable degree of trust in the analysed cost figures produced.
The identification and correction of coding errors may be virtually impossible unless either a cost centre is obviously incorrect or a fairly detailed manual backup, such as is outlined in (b) above, is utilised.
Nevertheless, the advantages from a correctly administered costing system cannot be overemphasised.
It is possible that, in future computer costing systems, a micro-film record of each document could be retained within the computer system and extracted on demand when required.
Even in small companies computers are an essential tool, particularly in the preparation of estimates and in pricing bills of quantities, where extensive calculations are involved.
They can also be utilised in programming work including network analysis and critical path.
Once computers have been introduced to a company and are found to be indispensable in these areas, it is a small step to progress to analysed costing.
MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTS
Management accounts may perhaps be viewed as the natural development from the financial accounts and cost accounts, and in fact draw on both.
Generally the management accounts provide the necessary information to plan and control the business.
The company is not required by law or accountants and auditors to  provide management accounts and they are only prepared at the discretion of the company.
The management accountant will use the financial accounts and to a greater extent the cost accounts to prepare the necessary financial information for management decisions.
It is therefore absolutely essential that the management accountant is aware of the implications of the weaknesses, strengths and accuracy of the cost accounts.
For many builders the instigation to prepare management accounts arises not from within their own organisation but from the insistence by external bodies that more detailed information concerning the company's financial position should be made available.
This may stem from banks when negotiating overdrafts, from insurance companies when arranging for bonds, or from potential clients who wish to establish the financial integrity of the company before commencement of the tendering process.
Perhaps the banks will be the most insistent on the provision of certain defined management accounting information on a regular basis.
Setting budgets and the associated budgetary control is one essential ingredient not only in ensuring that managers are aware of the financial implications of their decisions, but also in the measurement of actual performance against a predetermined target.
It also enables management to anticipate both beneficial and adverse trends before the event or take evasive action when the evidence of an emerging problem has only just presented itself.
For most builders management accounting will be limited to the production of a few fundamental sets of additional information, although the national contractors will have developed many finely tuned and sophisticated management accounting techniques.
The medium-sized builder will need to provide certain basic information for the bank if any appreciable funding is necessary, including: Cash flow forecast or cash budget.
Schedule of stocks of land and property, showing basic financial information including the planning position, cost, current market value, and anticipated start date on site.
In the financial accounts, of course, land will usually be stated at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Profit forecast on contracting and development operations, prepared using the cost value reconciliation process as a base.
In addition, most companies will produce an overhead budget and allocate responsibility for its monitoring and control.
It is also important  for building companies to attempt to assess the correct allocation of overheads in the management accounts against each project to ascertain the true profit.
This is necessary because many overhead costs are not included in work in progress but are written off against current profits each year (see Chapter 11).
It could also be argued that the preparation and monitoring of cost targets for trades, work sections or individual sub-contractors should be treated as part of the management accounts.
In effect, each builder has a choice in the level of sophistication and extent of the information that is considered necessary to plan and control his business.
Financial accounts must be produced, cost accounts are almost essential for survival, and management accounts are a key ingredient to safe expansion.