

The Soviet multinational state
Gorbachev inherited a Soviet state which was, in a celebrated Stalinist formulation, ‘national in form but socialist in content’.
The USSR's fifteen union republics, united on a supposedly voluntary basis, formed an ‘integral, federal, multinational state’, according to the 1977 Constitution.
They enjoyed an extensive range of formal powers, including the right to enter into diplomatic relations with other states (Art.
80) and to determine all matters of purely local significance (Art.
76).
Under the previous constitution, from 1944 onwards, the union republics had even enjoyed the right to maintain their own armed forces.
Emphasising the point that this was a ‘voluntary association of equal Soviet Socialist Republics’, each of the union republics enjoyed the right to secede from the USSR (Art.
72) and, towards that end, each of them occupied a territory on the periphery of the USSR within which a particular nationality was in principle predominant — Estonians in Estonia, Ukrainians in the Ukraine, and Russians in the Russian Republic, which was by far the largest.
Each union republic had its own parliament (or Supreme Soviet) and its own government (or Council of Ministers).
Four of them (the Russian Republic, Uzbekistan, Georgia and Azerbaijan) included autonomous republics within their borders, and there were still smaller administrative units, autonomous regions and autonomous areas, to cater for less numerous national groups.
This elaborate state structure, providing in principle for the greatest possible degree of local self-government, was none the less based upon the principle of democratic centralism which meant that, in the last resort, central decisions could be imposed upon levels of government below them.
The whole country functioned upon the basis of a unitary and centrally-determined plan and budget, which greatly limited the scope for lower levels of government to choose their own priorities.
The functions of government were nominally divided between the centre and the republics, but all-union ministries, based exclusively in  Moscow, produced 57 per cent of industrial output, union-republican ministries based partly in Moscow produced a further 37 per cent, and only 6 per cent of industry was wholly regulated at the republican level.
The Communist Party, moreover, was a unitary organisation based upon the same principle of democratic centralism, and there was no constitutional court which, as in a true federation, could have resolved any dispute about the respective powers of the republics and of the USSR as a whole.
Workers, in any case, were supposed to have no interests that conflicted with those of working people in any other part of the USSR, and Soviet socialism was held to have ‘solved’ the national question by establishing a system of rule which substituted a harmonious and dynamic union based on a community of interests for the centralism and oppression of the Tsarist past.
The complicated administrative makeup of the USSR reflected the various and changing ethnic composition of the people that inhabited it.
According to the 1989 census, Russians accounted for just over half (50.8 per cent) of the total population; the balance was accounted for by a hundred or more different national groups, ranging from a few hundred Negidals in the Far East to the major Slavic and Muslim groups which occupied the west and south of the country as well as Russia proper.
The ethnic variety of the USSR was in fact still greater than these numbers implied.
On other, more inclusive counts there were not a hundred or so nationalities in the USSR (the 1989 census recorded 128) but as many as 400, or even 800.
The cultural differences among these various nationalities, moreover, were often very considerable, extending to history, language, religion and social customs of all kinds.
The largest group of Soviet nationalities were the Slavs — Russians, Ukrainians and Belorussians — who shared a common linguistic and religious inheritance and together constituted about two-thirds of the total population.
The traditionally Muslim peoples of Central Asia accounted for a further 15 per cent; and the balance was made up for the most part of the larger national groups in Transcaucasia and the Baltic.
Russians, the ‘elder brother’ of the Slavic as well as of the other Soviet peoples, were not just the most numerous but also the dominant national grouping in the USSR as a whole.
Russians are a Christian people — the millennium of the Orthodox church was celebrated in 1988 — speaking an East Slavic language, and they have represented the core of the Russian or Soviet state since early medieval times.
The overwhelming majority of Russians — some 83 per cent in the 1989 census — lived in the Russian Republic, where they accounted for the  same proportion of the local population.
About eleven million lived in the Ukraine, and there were millions more in other republics (in Kazakhstan they almost outnumbered the Kazakhs).
Although scarcely under challenge from other national groups, Russians made up a steadily diminishing proportion of the total population over the postwar period and the Russian Republic included many of the Soviet Union's poorest farmland and most dismal cities, creating at least the impression that it was subsidising developments in more prosperous non-Russian areas.
For reasons such as these there had been a steadily rising tide of national self-consciousness since the 1960s, expressed particularly in a movement to protect ancient monuments and churches and also in a group of writers and filmmakers who had tried to rediscover the honesty, simplicity and even patterns of speech of traditional village life.
The major Soviet nationalities, 1989
The writer Valentin Rasputin, reflecting some of these concerns, went so far as to complain at the Congress of People's Deputies in 1989  of ‘Russophobia’ on the part of other nationalities.
Rather than continue to carry this burden, he suggested that the Russian Republic might itself consider seceding from the union.
Then, perhaps, people could say that they were Russian without embarrassment, and concern themselves with the ecological and other needs of their own republic.
Another speaker at the Congress, the communist deputy V. I. Belov, argued that the Russian Republic was in fact in a position of some disadvantage compared with the other republics, since it alone lacked the full range of party, state and scientific institutions.
The result was that the all-union bodies which carried out these functions were seen as Russian bodies, and Russians took the blame for their shortcomings; while Russia itself, one of the areas whose numbers had been increasing most rapidly before the revolution, was threatened with depopulation.
Concerns of this kind, as Pamyat' demonstrated, could sometimes take a xenophobic or anti-semitic form, but they also helped to provide the impetus behind a growing environmentalist movement centred around issues such as the pollution of Lake Baikal in Siberia and the defence of villages that had been declared ‘perspectiveless’ by central planners.
There was similarly a strong movement, in the late 1980s, to restore the historic names of ancient streets and cities (the most spectacular change of this kind was in 1991 when Leningrad reverted to its original name of St Petersburg ).
The Ukrainians, the second most numerous Soviet nationality, were more than 44 million strong in the late 1980s, with a distinctive language (also East Slavic) and a culture of their own.
Predominantly Russian Orthodox by religion although with a substantial Roman Catholic (Uniate) minority, Kievan Rus had been the origin of the Russian state in the ninth century and enjoyed an extended period of independence, but then came under Lithuanian, Polish and (from the seventeenth century) Russian control.
Despite a programme of Russification (including a ban on the use of Ukrainian in schools and publications), a strongly nationalist movement emerged in the late nineteenth century which led to pressure for greater autonomy and a brief period of independence immediately after the October revolution.
It then became one of the constituent republics of the USSR in 1922.
The Ukraine suffered particularly heavy losses during the 1930s there was a devastating and, it is now accepted, largely man-made famine during the early part of the decade, and the republican leadership was badly affected by charges of ‘nationalism’(in practice, for pointing out the likely outcomes of central policies).
There were further heavy losses during World War II, in which a substantial  volunteer detachment fought on the German side.
The Ukraine included about a third of the Soviet Union's most important industries — coal, iron and steel — and some of its richest agricultural land, and it was traditionally the home of some of its strongest political dynasties (the ‘Dnepropetrovsk mafia’, which included Leonid Brezhnev, was perhaps the best-known example).
There had however been some resistance to what was seen as Russification since at least the 1960s, and in the 1980s the development of nuclear power was a new and very potent source of public disenchantment.
The Belorussians (about 10 million in the late 1980s) also spoke a distinctive East Slavic language and were predominantly Russian Orthodox by religion.
Formerly a part of Kievan Rus, Belorussia also came under Lithuanian and Polish control until it passed to the Russian Empire under the partitions of the late eighteenth century.
A generally swampy land without significant natural resources, Belorussia suffered greatly during the wars between Russia and Poland, and then again during the Napoleonic invasion and World Wars I and II.
After a brief period of independence, Soviet rule was established in 1919 and the larger part of historic Belorussia joined the USSR in 1922.
Western Belorussia, under Polish rule between the wars, was incorporated in 1939.
Together with the Ukraine and the USSR itself, Belorussia became a founder member of the United Nations in 1945 and was a member of the International Labour Organisation and UNESCO.
Moldavia, also a part of the Kievan state, was however a Latin rather than a Slavic community and had originally constituted part of the Roman province of Dacia.
After some centuries of independent statehood it became a part of the Ottoman Empire and then came under Russian influence from the early nineteenth century.
Bessarabia, a part of historic Moldavia between the Prut and Dniester rivers, came under Romanian rather than Soviet control from 1918 up to 1940 and again from 1941 to 1944, when it was incorporated into the USSR together with other Moldavian territories as a constituent republic.
Of the major non-Slavic groups, the Baltic nations had a particularly distinctive inheritance, having come under strong German, Polish and Swedish influence from early medieval times.
The nationalities concerned are generally Lutheran (Estonians and Latvians) or Roman Catholic (Lithuanians) by religion, not Orthodox, and they have been under Soviet rule for a much shorter period of time than most other nationalities, since 1940 rather than the immediate post-revolutionary period (when communist-led governments were briefly established in  all three republics).
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania had been conquered from Sweden in the eighteenth century and incorporated as ‘Baltic provinces’ into the Russian Empire in the early nineteenth century, although a German landowning and commercial class retained substantial influence.
The three republics had an extended experience of representative government, which was not the case in other parts of what became the USSR, and feudalism was abolished in the early nineteenth century, decades before its abolition in Russia proper.
There was also a thriving commercial capitalism, particularly around the ports of Riga and Reval (present-day Tallinn).
The way of life in these republics in the 1980s remained demonstrably much more ‘Western’ than that in the other Soviet republics, and they were among those most exposed to outside cultural influences (Estonia, for instance, had ready access to Finnish television and ‘Dallas’and ‘Dynasty’had a devoted following).
Level of literary and education have traditionally been high in the Baltic republics (Estonia, for instance, was 96.2 per cent literate in the 1897 census compared with an average for European Russia as a whole of 28.4 per cent ), and there are higher than average levels of media consumption, urbanisation and other indicators of ‘modernity’.
Estonia, again, published more than a third as many again books as the USSR average in the late 1980s, and museum and theatre visits were between two and three times the national average.
These republics had many of the Soviet Union's most modern industries and its most successful farms, and living standards were the highest in the USSR.
Estonia, the most prosperous of the three, had the highest levels of car ownership of any of the Soviet republics and the greatest quantity of urban housing in the late 1980s.
High living standards had encouraged migration to these republics from other parts of the USSR, and this became one of the issues most central to the development of a powerful and widely supported nationalist movement in the late 1980s, particularly since the Baltic nations were relatively few in number and tended to have low birth and high divorce rates (in Latvia, where golden and silver wedding anniversaries had formerly been celebrated, there were ceremonies in the 1980s for couples that had been together for just a few years ).
The Caucasian peoples — Georgians, Armenians and Azerbaijanis are also very different in their history, religion, language and culture than the Slavic majority, and they have historically been no less conscious of those differences than the Baltic peoples (there were mass riots in the Georgian capital Tbilisi in 1978, for instance, when it  appeared that Georgian was about to be dropped as one of the republic's official languages ).
The Caucasian peoples are renowned for the Mediterranean climate of the areas in which they live, for their fruit and wine, for their feuds and corruption, for their longevity, and for their paternalistic attitude towards women.
The peoples of these republics, however, particularly the Georgians and Armenians, are also celebrated for their high levels of educational and cultural achievement, especially in theatre, film and painting.
Abuladze's ‘Repentance’ was produced in Georgia; the same republic's Rustaveli Theatre under its director Robert Sturua enjoyed an international reputation.
Armenia is the homeland of the composer Aram Khachaturyan, and the country of origin of the painter Arshile Gorky and of writer William Saroyan.
Both Georgians and Armenians have their own independent churches and have been Christian since the fourth century, six centuries before the Russians; their distinctive languages and alphabets also date from the fourth century.
The Azerbaijanis, by contrast, are a Shi'ite Muslim community of Persian culture; the territory that presently constitutes their republic came under Russian control in the early nineteenth century and entered the USSR, together with Georgia and Armenia, in 1922.
The greatest cultural division of all, however, is between the Slavs and other European peoples and the predominantly Muslim nationalities of Central Asia.
The peoples of these republics — Uzbeks, Kazakhs, Kirgiz, Tajiks and Turkmenis — are the descendants of the great Mongol empires of medieval times and they speak languages that are of Turkic (or in the case of the Tajiks, Iranian) origin.
The territories that they inhabit are for the most part inhospitable, with some of the world's highest mountains and large expanses of desert; and levels of literacy have traditionally been low (some of the nationalities concerned had no written language at all at the time of their incorporation into the USSR).
Industry is relatively little developed (although there are important iron and coal deposits in Kazakhstan) and there is a heavy emphasis upon cash crops of various kinds, mostly cotton.
The peoples of these republics are overwhelmingly Muslim (mostly Sunni) by religion, and their traditional customs and values, with which their religion is inextricably bound up, have been altered relatively little by the experience of Russian and Soviet rule, which has in fact lasted for no more than a century or so (most of what is now Soviet Central Asia came under Russian control in the second half of the nineteenth century).
The Central Asians, for instance, are often reluctant to permit the  employment and education of women, at least to an advanced level, and brides with degrees are reported to command a lower ‘price’ when they get married than those whose education is less advanced.
The proportion of female members of political parties and of local soviets in these republics is considerably lower than it is elsewhere in the former USSR (although in 1988, ironically, the first woman regional party first secretary for many years was appointed in Uzbekistan ).
Fewer pigs are kept in these republics (pork being an unclean meat for Muslims, as it is for Jews) and traditional customs such as the postponement of cohabitation (kaitarma ), pilgrimages to the graves of local holy men and even abduction are still practised, in some cases with the covert support of local party officials (most tragic of all were the reports of girls who had burned themselves to death after being dishonoured in this and other ways ).
There is generally little intermarriage between the Central Asians and other non-Muslim nationalities, and a knowledge of Russian is much less common than it is elsewhere in the other post-Soviet republics.
Perhaps most alarmingly of all from a Russian point of view, the population of these republics had been increasing very much more rapidly than the all-union average and on some projections was expected to account for 25–30 per cent of the total Soviet population by the end of the century (the USSR was already the world's fifth largest Muslim state).
Patterns of ethnic interaction
Soviet spokesmen generally argued that, considerable though their ethnic differences might be, they would diminish and ultimately disappear as social and economic standards throughout the USSR improved and became more uniform.
There was certainly a good deal of evidence, up to the 1980s, that developments of this kind were taking place.
The Soviet Union had become a more industrialised society; an increasing proportion of its population lived in cities and were members of the industrial labour force; and educational standards had risen greatly, particularly among the formerly more backward nations.
A knowledge of the Russian language had become more widespread (over 81 per cent of the population were fluent in Russian according to the 1989 census, up from 76 per cent in 1970 ); and the circulation of printed matter had increased considerably and become more evenly distributed between one republic and another.
Membership of the Communist Party had also increased and become more uniform between one nationality and another.
The CPSU Central  Committee, reviewing these developments in the early 1970s, went so far as to claim that a ‘new historical collectivity of people — the Soviet people’ had come into existence in the USSR, based upon the ‘common ownership of the means of production, unity of economic, socio-political and cultural life, Marxist-Leninist ideology, and the interests and communist ideals of the working class’.
The 1961 Party Programme, still valid on Gorbachev's accession, provided that this process should continue until ultimately the ‘complete unity’ of the Soviet people was achieved.
A good deal of empirical evidence suggested that these perspectives might not be wholly unrealistic.
The investigation conducted by Inkeles and Bauer among Soviet émigrés in the 1950s, for instance, found that the nationality of most respondents had less influence upon their political beliefs and values than did other variables such as social class and education.
Nationality as such played little part in most respondents' educational life-chances or expectations; and educational attainment in turn was far more important than nationality as a determinant of occupational position, although Russians did enjoy some advantages in applying for minor bureaucratic positions because of their better knowledge of the language in which most state business was conducted.
There were relatively few differences between the Russians and Ukrainians who were surveyed in terms of their political attitudes, and relatively few Ukrainians cited nationality policy as an aspect of the system they would like to change compared with the very large numbers who, like their Russian counterparts, were in favour of the abolition of the collective farm system and the ending of police terror.
Younger respondents, moreover, tended on the whole to take a more favourable view of Soviet nationality policy and to manifest less hostility towards Russians then did their elders, particularly if they were better educated.
Investigations conducted among more recent groups of émigrés suffer from the fact that such groups have been disproportionately Jewish; there has nevertheless been some support for the view that nationality is not a ‘primordial’ attachment and that its political importance is likely to depend on situational factors such as the degree of competition for employment opportunities.
A variety of investigations conducted within the USSR itself also suggested that Soviet nationalities policy might be achieving at least some of its objectives.
Attitudes towards marriage with a member of a different nationality, for instance, were found to be more favourable among the urban population (an increasing proportion of the total) than among their rural counterparts.
They were also more favourable among the better educated, who were in turn more likely to know Russian and to have a marriage partner and friends from a nationality other than their own.
A particularly detailed investigation into matters of this kind was conducted in the Tatar autonomous republic, whose social and demographic characteristics were reasonably representative of the Soviet population as a whole.
Russians and Tatars, it was found, were distributed in a broadly similar manner in the occupational hierarchy, received approximately the same remuneration, and were active in socio-political life in virtually the same proportions.
Nationality as such was found to have little bearing upon patterns of friendship, reading of newspapers, watching of television, or attendance at theatres or concerts.
There were slight differences between Russians and Tatars (a traditionally Muslim nationality) in terms of religious observance and size of family; but these were largely accounted for by differences in the age structures of the two groups.
Education, moreover, was tending to reduce those differences that still remained; the proportion of children receiving their education through Russian was steadily increasing, and Russian-speaking Tatars were found in turn to be more favourably disposed towards internationality contact in their home and workplace.
Similar trends were found in other Soviet investigations conducted in the 1970s and 1980s.
A large-scale investigation in five different republics in the late 1970s, for instance, found that there were fewer differences in educational attainment among younger age-groups than among their older counterparts.
Occupational patterns were becoming more uniform, and so too were cultural characteristics such as clothing, housing, media consumption and religious observance.
There were still some important differences among the nationalities, but these related primarily to the domestic sphere; Central Asians, for instance, lived in larger family groups, and attached rather more importance to the views of their parents.
Other studies, using census as well as survey data, found that levels of urbanisation were becoming more uniform from republic to republic, and that rural and urban living conditions were becoming more similar; there was an increasing uniformity of occupational structure and a particularly notable increase in the representation of specialists among the previously less well educated national groups.
The percentage of ethnically mixed marriages was also increasing: it rose in every union republic between 1959 and 1989, and for the USSR as a whole from 10.2 to 18 per cent.
A number of nationalities, indeed, had altogether disappeared (or  become fully assimilated) over the period of Soviet rule: the census of 1926 recorded the existence of 194 ethnic groups but the census of 1959 only 109 and that of 1970 just 104 (although there was subsequently a slight increase).
The overall picture, however, was by no means so clearcut as the data so far considered might tend to suggest.
Levels of intermarriage, in the first place, varied considerably from republic to republic and from nationality to nationality; and although the proportion of ethnically mixed families at the national and republican level might have been increasing, it did not necessarily follow that the incidence of intermarriage between each of the major nationalities had been increasing at a similar rate.
The main increase in nationally mixed marriages was in fact among the western or Slavic nationalities of the USSR, and to some extent also between Slavs and Balts; intermarriage between the other major nationalities of the USSR, and in particular between Slavs and Muslims, was much less common and provided much less convincing evidence of the formation of a single ‘Soviet nation’.
It was reported, for instance, that of the nationally mixed marriages in Turkmenia from the 1920s to the 1970s, not a single one had been between a Turkmen girl and a Russian man.
Marriages between Muslim men and non-Muslim women, although not specifically prohibited by Islamic law, were also relatively uncommon.
Mixed marriages of all kinds in fact declined in three of the Muslim republics, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan, during the 1970s; and differences in the incidence of mixed marriages between one republic and another became slightly greater.
A greater knowledge of the Russian language, moreover, by no means necessarily implied a weaker attachment to the native language of the nationality in question.
Russian had indeed become more widely known; it served as the language of administration and internationality communication, as well as a means of education and career advancement.
Most Soviet citizens, however, appeared to have remained loyal to their native language in their domestic and family life, and there was little sign of the disappearance of at least the major Soviet languages, most of which were still spoken by the great majority of the nationalities in question (the 1979 census found that 62 per cent of non-Russians were fluent in that language, but that 93 per cent of the population identified their national language as their native one; the 1989 census found that the reported level of knowledge of Russian had actually fallen among at least two national groups, the Uzbeks and Lithuanians ).
The Central Asian nationalities were the  most resistant to russification in this as in other respects: no more than 3 per cent of any of the five major nationalities concerned claimed Russian as a native language in the 1989 census, a much lower proportion than for the non-Russian population as a whole, and levels of fluency in Russian were also much lower than among minority nationalities elsewhere in the USSR.
Changes in the degree of attachment of the major Muslim nationalities to their native languages have in fact been ‘negligible’ over the whole Soviet period.
The gradual assimilation of minority nationalities, moreover, has operated less to the advantage of the Russian population as such than to the advantage of the larger nationalities in general, Russians included.
Census data, for instance, made clear that an increasing proportion of the more numerous national groups had been choosing to live in their ‘own’ union republic, with the greatest increases in Central Asia, the Baltic and Armenia (Russians, by contrast, had become more dispersed throughout the USSR).
At the same time there was an increase in the proportion of the populations of most union republics that was accounted for by the titular nationality, an increase that was again most marked in Central Asia with its higher birthrates.
There had been a steady increase in the ethnic heterogeneity of most union republics between the wars; since then, and particularly since the 1960s, the trend had been in the opposite direction.
There was also a good deal of evidence, by the late 1980s, that the cultural self-consciousness of the minority nationalities had not been adversely affected by their increasing urbanisation, industrialisation and ability to use the Russian language.
The circulation of native-language newspapers, for instance, was increasing more rapidly than that of Russian-language newspapers in Central Asia; the local languages were being purged of the Russian loan words that had been imported during the 1930s and 1940s; and the indigenous intelligentsia was showing little sign of relinquishing its national self-consciousness.
Nor was there much evidence elsewhere, even before the open disturbances of the late 1980s, that non-Russian nationalities were merging their identity into that of a greater Soviet community.
Indeed the evidence, by the late 1970s and early 1980s, suggested that Soviet nationalities policy, so far from reducing national self-consciousness, might actually be increasing it.
The development of republican publishing industries, for instance, had helped to bring into being a group of local writers and journalists who tended naturally to operate in terms of the idiom with which both they and their readers were most familiar.
The expansion of educational opportunities in the  less industrialised republics, again, led to the emergence of a substantial native intelligentsia who saw little reason for responsible positions in their locality to be filled by outsiders.
Local political elites, although originally intended to represent the interests of the central government within their area, appeared increasingly to resent their limited control over local appointment and investment decisions and were increasingly willing to employ ‘nationalist’ arguments as a means of increasing their leverage upon the central authorities in this connection.
The very existence of a national-territorial framework in the USSR, indeed, far from providing for the peaceful solution of the nationalities question that was originally envisaged, appeared to have led to precisely the opposite result by establishing a form of representation in which sectional interests, denied any other means of expression, could in practice take only the form of ‘nationalism’.
It was certainly clear, as the 1970s drew to a close, that the nationalities question was by no means destined for the historical obsolescence to which official spokesmen wished to consign it, and even Brezhnev, recommending the adoption of the 1977 Constitution, warned that it would be not just unLeninist but actually ‘dangerous’ if the steady convergence of the Soviet nations were artificially accelerated.
The national question under Gorbachev
The first significant expression of nationalist discontent after Gorbachev's accession was in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan, following the nomination of an ethnic Russian, Gennadii Kolbin, to replace the Brezhnevite incumbent Dinmukhamed Kunaev as party first secretary.
Kazakhstan had a very substantial Russian population 37.8 per cent of the total according to the 1989 census, almost as many as the Kazakhs themselves — but it was the home of the great majority of the Soviet Union's Kazakhs and it had become accepted that the republic's party and state leadership should be drawn from the national group after whom the republic was named.
Not less important, Kunaev was at the centre of an elaborate network of patronage and corruption which was clearly threatened by the imposition of an ethnic and political outsider.
The demonstrations that followed Kolbin's appointment may have been covertly encouraged by Kunaev's clients; there was certainly no doubt that, as Literaturnaya gazeta reported in early 1987, the news provoked ‘inexperienced and politically illiterate youths’ to take to the streets, later to be joined by ‘hooligans, drunks and other anti-social types’.
Nationalist slogans, ‘pulled out of the murkiest depths of history’, were chanted, and the crowd, armed with metal posts, sticks and stones, then proceeded to beat up local citizens, overturn cars and set them on fire, and smash the windows of shops and other public buildings.
Government sources subsequently acknowledged that up to 3,000 people had been involved in the demonstrations, and that 200 had been injured; unofficial sources suggested that as many as 280 students had lost their lives, together with twenty-nine policemen and soldiers.
The next national issue to take the form of open public discontent was in the summer of 1987 when a group of about 700 Crimean Tatars staged an unprecedented demonstration in Red Square.
The Tatars had been one of the groups expelled from their traditional homelands in 1944 on grounds of alleged Nazi sympathies (and a certain amount of active collaboration).
Five of the seven ethnic groups that were relocated in this way were rehabilitated and partially repatriated to their native territories in 1956–7.
The Crimean Tatars, however, were officially exonerated of the charge of disloyalty much later, in 1967, and they were given no general right to return to their former homelands, not least because the territories they had left had now been settled by other nationalities.
By the early 1980s only a few thousand of the million or so who lived elsewhere in the USSR had been able to return, despite an active campaign on their behalf by dissidents as well as Tatar activists.
In the event, the Tatars, remarkably and unexpectedly, were allowed to hold their demonstration without police harassment, and following discussions with government representatives a commission headed by then President Gromyko was established to ‘study the merits of their case’.
In June 1988 it reported, recommending the removal of any improper restrictions upon the right of individual Tatars to return to their native land and calling for more attention to be paid to their cultural needs, but also rejecting the Tatars' call for the reestablishment of their autonomous republic.
Substantial numbers of Tatars returned to live in their traditional homelands and, following a referendum in which the idea had received overwhelming support, a Crimean autonomous republic was finally restored by a vote of the Ukrainian parliament in February 1991.
In many ways the most significant of all the Soviet nationality disputes began to acquire open and public form in the summer of 1987 in the Baltic republics on the anniversary of the Nazi-Soviet pact which had led to the incorporation of these republics into the USSR.
Several thousand Estonians were reported to have demonstrated on 23 August, the date of the pact's signature; still larger numbers, between 7,000 and 10,000, were reported to have demonstrated in Latvia (where substantial demonstrations also occurred in June 1987 to commemorate those who had been deported from the republic by the Soviet authorities in 1941).
The secret protocols under which these republics had been incorporated into the USSR were finally published in the Baltic press in August 1988 and in the national press the following year, but the matters under dispute widened into a challenge to the established relationship between the USSR as a whole and its constituent republics.
So far from resolving the issues in dispute, indeed, the public acknowledgement that the protocols had existed began to call in question the legal status of the incorporation of these republics into the USSR, which had followed a Soviet military occupation and a clearly coerced vote by their respective Supreme Soviets.
Baltic discontent was the product of several causes.
One of them was the very real concern that, with low birthrates and high levels of immigration, particularly of unskilled Russians, the Baltic peoples might become minorities in their own republics.
Estonians, for instance, 90 per cent of the population of their republic in 1940, had slipped to 62 per cent by the late 1980s, and to still lower levels in the towns.
Latvians, 77 per cent of the population of their republic before the war, had fallen to 52 per cent in the 1989 census, and to about a third of the population of their capital city, Riga.
There was also concern about the environmental damage that had been suffered as a result of decisions about economic development taken in Moscow rather than in the republics themselves.
Estonia, for instance, had the largest deposits of shale in the Soviet Union, and very considerable deposits of phosphorite and limestone; but their rapid exploitation in the interests of the Soviet economy as a whole had led to serious environmental damage and to water pollution in particular .
Bathing, for instance, had to be forbidden along the fashionable coastline; some ecologists even suggested that Estonian drinking water was so polluted it could be set on fire!
The safety of the Ignalina nuclear power station in Lithuania, based on a similar design to Chernobyl', was raised by the republican party secretary at the 19th Party Conference; the construction of a third reactor, he complained, was proceeding before the details of its design had been approved, and before proper arrangements had been made for its security.
Influenced by developments such as these, substantial public support began to develop for measures which would protect the position of the indigenous nationalities and which would ensure that  economic decisions were taken with a greater degree of consideration for local circumstances.
Baltic representatives, for instance, associated themselves closely at the 19th Party Conference with the call for ‘regional khozraschet' or in practice for republican self-sufficiency.
The newly-appointed Estonian leader Vaino Valjas complained that more than 90 per cent of the republican economy was in the hands of Moscow ministries, and called for the balance to be reversed in the republic's favour.
The Latvian party leader Boris Pugo attacked the ‘boundless diktat of the union ministries’ and called for the establishment of ‘genuine sovereignty’for the union republics based upon the principle of self-financing.
The Lithuanian party leader complained similarly of the ‘administrative diktat' of higher bodies and called for more economic, social and especially ecological powers to be transferred to the republics.
The idea of regional or republican cost-accounting received no more than a cautious welcome in the resolution on national relations that was adopted at the conference; the resolution did however speak of the ‘further development’ of the federation, involving the transfer of greater powers to the local level and to the union republics in particular.
More important, perhaps, was the emergence in the Baltic republics themselves of an open, widely supported and coordinated nationalist movement taking the form of ‘popular fronts’(or in Lithuania, Sajudis).
Ostensibly ‘in favour of perestroika ’ and incorporating many party members within their ranks, the new movements were none the less associated with a policy stance which went very much further than the party conference resolution.
Their founding congresses in October 1988, for instance, called (in the case of Sajudis) for ‘sovereignty’ in all areas of Lithuanian life, the formation of a ‘pluralist society’with no organisation ‘usurping’political power, a partly privatised economy, and the demilitarisation of the republican territory (in effect, withdrawal from the Warsaw Treaty Organisation).
The Latvian Popular Front, similarly, called for the ‘economic sovereignty’ of the republic, and for the ending of immigration and the abolition of special privileges for all high-ranking officials.
In a series of related developments the old flags of the independent Baltic states between the wars were legalised, in Lithuania the pre-war national anthem was restored, and legislation was initiated with a view to establishing Lithuanian and Estonian as official languages in their respective republics.
In Lithuania the Roman Catholic cathedral, used as an art gallery for forty years, was restored to the faithful in October 1988.
Estonia left the Soviet time zone and aligned itself chronologically  with Finland; Christmas became a public holiday; and the republican capital, Tallinn, was given its Estonian name (with two ns rather than one) for all-union purposes.
The publication of draft constitutional amendments in October 1988 led to widespread public protests.
Baltic opinion, in particular, objected that the changes proposed were centralising in character and that the republics' (admittedly nominal) right of secession had been prejudiced.
The Estonian parliament, influenced by these concerns, adopted a constitutional amendment on 16 November providing for the right of veto over all legislation that was intended to apply to the USSR as a whole.
The decision was held to be unconstitutional by the Supreme Soviet Presidium on 20 November and the Baltic republics came in for severe criticism from other delegates at the Supreme Soviet session on 1 December which passed the constitutional amendments into law.
Some changes, however, were made in the draft to satisfy those who had challenged it in this way: union republics were given eleven rather than seven seats each in the Supreme Soviet's Council of Nationalities and ex officio places on the Committee of Constitutional Supervision, and changes of wording were made in order to remove what Gorbachev described as the ‘misunderstanding’ that the rights of republics had been infringed.
Further constitutional changes were promised at a later stage which would place the relationship between the USSR and its constituent republics on a new and more equitable basis.
Relations between the Baltic republics and the central authorities, in the event, became still more strained over the period that followed.
A form of economic decentralisation, already approved by the Baltic legislatures, was given a cautious welcome by the USSR Supreme Soviet in July 1989 and was formally adopted at the winter parliamentary session.
The legislation applied to the three Baltic republics and (under a separate provision) Belorussia in the first instance; some regions of the Russian Republic indicated that they too would seek to place their relations with the central government on this new basis.
Legislation on the position of the local languages in early 1989 aroused more controversy: according the views of some commentators in Izvestiya , the new directives, at least in Estonia, placed non-native speakers at a considerable disadvantage and probably infringed their civil rights.
Lithuania and Latvia, in May and June 1989 respectively, established a form of republican citizenship.
A set of constitutional amendments adopted by the Estonian Supreme Soviet proved most controversial of all.
The amendments (which were later rescinded) restricted the right to vote to those who had lived in the constituency for at least two years, or elsewhere in Estonia for five years or more; deputies themselves had to have lived in Estonia for at least ten years.
The change provoked an extended strike on the part of the largely Russian speaking blue-collar labour force, and the Supreme Soviet Presidium in Moscow declared the legislation unconstitutional on the grounds that it violated the principle of equal electoral rights (some 80,000, it was estimated, would be deprived of the franchise under the new regulations).
The interests of the non-indigenous population were articulated by bodies such as‘Interfront’ in Latvia, set up in January 1989, and its counterparts in the other republics; the concerns of the substantial Russian-speaking minority in these republics were also expressed in letters to the central press, and found some reflection in the speeches of members of the party leadership.
The central party leadership, in fact, went so far as to issue a formal statement on the Baltic situation in late August 1989, warning against the activities of ‘extremist’ and ‘anti-socialist’forces that were pursuing a separatist line with ‘growing persistence and aggressiveness’.
Declarations of this kind, however, no longer had much effect.
The stance that local leaderships had taken had enormous public support, expressed both in the number prepared to take part in public meetings and in opinion polls, and openly nationalist pressures became if anything still stronger.
On 23 August 1989, the 50th anniversary of the Nazi-Soviet pact, an estimated two million Balts formed a human chain across the three republics in the biggest demonstration that had yet been seen.
The popular fronts themselves became still more intransigent in their demands: both the Latvian and the Lithuanian fronts, in late 1989, were openly contemplating the possibility of formal secession from the USSR, not simply a greater measure of autonomy, and the three fronts jointly organised a Baltic Assembly which called for political independence for the republics within a ‘neutral and demilitarised Balto-Scandia’.
Perhaps most disturbing from the point of view of the central authorities, the party organisations in the three republics, particularly in Lithuania, began to press for a greater degree of independence, establishing direct links with outside ruling parties and adopting their own programme and statute, within or if necessary outside the framework of the CPSU as a whole.
Inter-republican relations in the USSR entered an entirely new stage when in February 1990 supporters of Sajudis won a majority of seats in the republican parliament and then, on 11 March, formally declared Lithuania independent on the basis of its prewar constitution.
Gorbachev, addressing the Congress of People's Deputies, described the Lithuanian action as ‘illegitimate and invalid’ and refused to open negotiations with what remained, in his view, an integral part of the USSR.
The central authorities issued an ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of the declaration of independence; when the Lithuanians refused to comply with this an economic blockade was imposed on 18 April.
These pressures notwithstanding, the neighbouring republics of Estonia and Latvia adopted more cautiously-worded declarations of independence on 30 March and 4 May respectively.
The situation eased, at least temporarily, when the Lithuanian declaration of independence was suspended by parliamentary vote on 29 June, allowing the blockade to be lifted and a negotiation process to begin.
Gorbachev, visiting Lithuania in January 1990, had unexpectedly promised that legislation would be introduced allowing republics to become fully independent; but the law on secession, approved on 3 April 1990, specified a two-thirds majority in a referendum on the issue and then a transitional period of up to five years in which territorial, property and other issues would be resolved.
Only the Lithuanians accounted for so large a proportion of the population of their own republic, and the measure was widely seen as blocking rather than facilitating a transition to fully independent status.
The resolution of differences in this or any other way became still more unlikely when in January 1991 military force was used to restore central authority in Latvia and Lithuania on the pretext that the Soviet Constitution was being violated (in particular, that the civil rights of the non-indigenous population were being infringed and that the call-up of recruits into the armed forces was being impeded ).
In Lithuania, 13 died and 112 were injured when troops stormed the television centre in Vilnius; in Latvia, four died in a battle for government buildings in Riga.
The Soviet defence minister, seeking to justify the action, claimed that organised attempts were being made to establish a ‘dictatorship of the bourgeois type’ in the area; the Lithuanian president, Vytautas Landsbergis, saw the conflict as a result of the ‘fifty-one year confrontation between Lithuania and the USSR’, and the Russian president, Boris Yel'tsin, more forthrightly described it as an ‘offensive against democracy’.
At least to some observers the action in the Baltic represented an attempt by hard-line party and military officials, organised in a shadowy ‘Committee of National Salvation’, to seize power and overthrow the nationalist administrations.
Whether they had taken such action with the explicit authorisation of President Gorbachev remained unclear, although it was  widely agreed that he had failed to respond adequately to the loss of life that had occurred.
The actions of the central authorities, in the event, served to rally local opinion still more closely around the nationalist leaderships, and when the issue of full independence was put to the republican populations in the spring of 1991 it received overwhelming endorsement The Lithuanian vote, in February, produced a majority of over 90 per cent on an 84 per cent turnout; in Latvia and Estonia, in March, there were majorities for independence of 74 and 78 per cent on a similar turnout.
The votes had little constitutional force (although Iceland, for instance, moved at once to establish diplomatic relations with Lithuania ).
They nonetheless strengthened the authority of the republican leaderships as they gradually extended their effective control over local affairs.
All three republics, for instance, had already reformulated Article 6 of their own constitutions so as to end the communist political monopoly.
During 1990 and 1991 they steadily withdrew from the work of all-union bodies, including the Congress of People's Deputies and Federation Council, and suspended contributions to the USSR budget.
All three republics established their own customs services and began to issue their own stamps and passports; more significant still, they began to adopt their own budgets and to make preparations for the issuing of local currencies.
Of all the Soviet nationalities, the Baltic nations looked the most likely to establish (or as they saw it, resume) their independent statehood in the 1990s; their opportunity to do so came soon after the attempted coup when (in September 1991) the USSR Council of State formally approved their independent status and they were admitted into the United Nations and other international organisations.
Communal tensions: Nagorno-Karabakh, Georgia and Uzbekistan
The pressures for independence or at least a greater measure of autonomy that emerged in the Baltic republics were the most serious of their kind that the Soviet leadership had to confront in the early Gorbachev years.
In all three republics, with minor local variations, a largely united people with a distinct cultural identity and a previous history of self-rule were seeking to renegotiate the nature of their relationship with the Soviet state and its economic and political system.
The ethnic differences that emerged elsewhere in the USSR in the late 1980s were for the most part more traditional, almost ‘tribal’ in character, in that they sprang from antipathies between ethnic groups  with different religious, linguistic and historical backgrounds and expressed themselves in the form of communal clashes rather than pressures for formal independence.
The first of these disputes to emerge was in the Caucasus, where the most serious civil disturbances in Soviet post-war history took place between Armenians and Azerbaijanis over the disputed territorial enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.
There were comparable difficulties elsewhere, particularly in Georgia and Uzbekistan, and indeed there were few parts of Soviet territory that did not experience some form of nationalist self-consciousness combined with pressure for a greater degree of cultural and economic autonomy.
Nationalist tensions took a particularly violent and intractable form in the case of Nagorno-Karabakh, an autonomous region which had since 1923 formed a part of the Azerbaijan republic.
A mountainous enclave of about 4,400 square kilometres, Nagorno-Karabakh had originally been assigned to Armenia but had then been transferred to the jurisdiction of its traditionally Muslim neighbour.
Its 1979 census population of about 162,000 was 75.9 per cent Armenian and only 22.9 per cent Azerbaijani, and there had been pressure for some years for its transfer back to Armenia and for a greater degree of autonomy for its predominantly Christian people.
The open conflict of early 1988 was precipitated, it appears, by the rejection by the central party authorities of an appeal for Nagorno-Karabakh to be returned to Armenia which had been signed by 75,000 Karabakh Armenians.
Demonstrations began on 11 February in Stepanakert, the regional capital, and led to the adoption of a resolution by the regional soviet on 20 February which called for Nagorno-Karabakh to be transferred back to Armenia.
Further demonstrations took place in the Armenian capital, Yerevan, to support the call for Nagorno-Karabakh's reincorporation into the republic.
Up to a million Armenians, by late February, were reported to be demonstrating daily in the city's Opera Square.
The demonstrations came temporarily to an end after a personal appeal by Gorbachev on 26 February, but a report that two Azerbaijanis had been killed the previous week led to an anti-Armenian riot on 28–29 February in the oil town of Sumgait in which 32 people were killed and 197 were injured, including more than 100 police officers.
The party first secretaries of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh were all replaced in May 1988; the Central Committee meanwhile promised that steps would be taken to improve housing, schools and hospitals in the region, and to extend broadcasts in both Armenian and Azerbaijani.
Despite Gorbachev's assurances to two Armenian emissaries that a ‘just solution’ would be found, the Supreme Soviet Presidium warned on 23 March that ‘self-proclaimed groups’(a reference to the Karabakh Committee, a group of Armenian activists whose activities were made illegal) could not be allowed to call for the redrawing of state and administrative boundaries, and Pravda made clear that the transfer of.
Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia would be a ‘clearly anti-socialist solution’.
On 15 June, after further demonstrations, the Armenian Supreme Soviet voted unanimously for the disputed region to be transferred to their republic; the Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet, meeting two days later, was equally unanimous in holding this vote to be in violation of the Soviet Constitution.
The Supreme Soviet Presidium, at its meeting on 18 July, adopted a formal ruling which rejected any change in the constitutional status of Nagorno-Karabakh, but called for greater attention to be given to the concerns of ethnic Armenians living within the disputed region; a programme of cultural and economic aid was also approved.
The situation temporarily stabilised, but in further unrest in November at least thirty deaths were reported and tens of thousands of refugees were reported to have joined fellow nationals in the other republic (eventually about 130,000 Azeris left Armenia and 200,000 Armenians made the journey in the reverse direction ).
Continued tensions led in January 1989 to the establishment of a ‘special form of administration’, in effect direct rule from Moscow, headed by Arkadii Vol'sky, who had been appointed the previous summer to represent the central government in the contested region.
The situation, according to Pravda , nonetheless remained ‘tense and complicated’.
Demonstrations and disorders continued, some of them involving firearms, explosives and loss of life; the decision of the Congress of People's Deputies to elect an Azerbaijani as well as an Armenian to represent the region in the new Supreme Soviet aroused particular indignation.
Further disorders were precipitated by the decision to abolish the special administration in November 1989 and return Nagorno-Karabakh to Azerbaijani rule; and in January 1990 the dispute extended into inter-communal violence across both republics, precipitated by an Armenian decision to extend the provisions of their republican budget and electoral law to the disputed enclave.
Tens of thousands took to the streets in Baku alone, up to sixty people (mostly Armenians) lost their lives in pogroms, and there were further fatalities when a state of emergency was declared by the USSR Presidium and troops were used to restore  order on 19–20 January.
At least ninety-three people lost their lives in the first days of fighting.
The dispute was still continuing in the early 1990s, despite attempts at international mediation.
For Vol'sky, interviewed in the press, the whole area was in danger of becoming the Soviet Union's ‘home-grown Lebanon’.
Two further ethnic disputes reached the point of violence and bloodshed during 1989 and 1990: a dispute between Meskhetian Turks and the native population in the Ferghana valley in eastern Uzbekistan, and a complex dispute in Georgia involving both a strong separatist movement and communal tensions between Georgians and Abkhazians, a national minority within Georgia itself.
The violence in Uzbekistan, which erupted suddenly in early June 1989, swiftly became the bloodiest in Soviet peacetime history.
The riots appear to have been precipitated by an apparently casual incident when a Meskhetian angrily tipped over a table of strawberries being sold by an Uzbek girl.
This provoked disorders in which one person died and sixty were injured.
A much more serious incident began on 3 and 4 June when gangs of youths appeared on the streets of Ferghana and nearby towns, armed with iron bars and Molotov cocktails, and in search of Meskhetians.
In the nearby village of Tashlak about 200 youths armed with weapons and incendiary devices, ‘many of them in an alcoholic or narcotic stupor’, destroyed over 400 houses and motor vehicles as well as several public buildings.
There were already fifty-six deaths, the great majority of them Meskhetians; some 9,000 Interior Ministry troops had to be despatched to the area, and a curfew was imposed.
The Meskhetians, another of the ‘punished peoples’, had been moved from their traditional homelands near the Turkish-Soviet border in 1944, ostensibly in order to protect them against the possibility of a German advance.
In 1968 their rights were restored, but no prospect was extended of their return to Georgia.
About 60,000 of them remained in Uzbekistan, some 12,000 in the Ferghana valley.
Relations between the Meskhetians and the Uzbek majority had been strained for some time, largely as a result of the poor housing and other conditions in which the Meskhetians had been forced to remain (many still lived in shanty towns, and levels of unemployment were higher than elsewhere in the republic).
There were also accusations of cultural and other forms of discrimination at their expense.
Encouraged by these circumstances, the disorders of early June continued for some days.
The Ferghana party secretary was shot and slightly wounded when he tried to address a crowd; and 5,000 men armed  with automatic rifles and pistols were reported to have stormed party and government buildings in the ancient city of Kokand (if Izvestiya 's report was to be believed, they carried a portrait of Lenin in front of them with a message written on the back of it which called for the slaughter of all Turks and Russians and ended ‘Long live the Islamic republic and Ayatollah Khomeini’).
By the end of the week 11,000 Meskhetians had fled their homes and were living in refugee camps with troops protecting them; even here they were not entirely safe as a motorised column armed with automatic weapons set out for one of the camps and was stopped only by a detachment of helicopter gunships.
By the end of the week at least 100 people had died and 1,000 had been injured;Izvestiya reported that some of the bodies that had been found were so thoroughly mutilated it was impossible to tell if they were men or women.
Gorbachev was at this time on an official visit to West Germany, which was curtailed somewhat in view of domestic developments.
In his absence a deputation headed by Prime Minister Ryzhkov and Viktor Chebrikov visited the area.
Tass meanwhile reported that the rioting had spread to the neighbouring Namangan region, with up to 2,000 people involved in riots in its regional capital.
A gang also razed the village of Gorsky, in the west of the Ferghana region.
Ryzhkov's visit coincided, fortuitously or otherwise, with an uneasy calm, although this was ‘still far from a complete normalisation of the situation’, according to Tass's report.
Gorbachev, interviewed in West Germany, suggested that Islamic fundamentalism might have played a part in the disturbances.
Ryzhkov, speaking in Tashkent, described them as a ‘carefully prepared action’ led by ‘extremists’, and blamed complacent local officials for allowing the situation to develop; some of them, in fact, had actively encouraged the rioters.
Several hundred people were arrested and charged with ‘organising pogroms, murder and violence’, according to Pravda ; troops remained on duty and a curfew was still in effect in Ferghana, and there were reports of further disturbances elsewhere.
Further intercommunal clashes in the town of Osh, at the eastern end of the Ferghana valley, left over 200 dead and ‘thousands’ of refugees in the summer of 1990.
Long-standing tensions also emerged in Soviet Georgia during 1988 and 1989, inspired in part by nationalist pressures for a greater degree of autonomy within (if not total separation from) the USSR, and in part by differences of a social and ethnic character within Georgia itself.
Georgians were not simply distinctive in their cultural and historical background; they were also the most ‘patriotic’ of the major Soviet  nationalities, as measured by the proportion that lived in their own republic, and their share of the republican population had been steadily increasing, unlike the position (for instance) in the Baltic republics.
There had, nonetheless, been open public disturbances in 1956, shortly after the death of Stalin, and in 1978, when the status of the republican language appeared to be under threat.
In the autumn of 1988 the publication of apparently centralising constitutional amendments led, as in the Baltic republics, to open public opposition.
As Pravda subsequently reported, ‘anti-social elements’ had organised ‘noisy meetings and processions’, either with the approval of the local authorities or where necessary without it.
Self-proclaimed ‘leaders’ had put forward ‘extremist slogans’, such as‘Georgia for the Georgians’and ‘Long live the independence of Georgia’.
An unprecedented hunger strike took place in Tbilisi, the republican capital, in an attempt to block the changes; more than a hundred of the demonstrators had to be taken to hospital.
One of the ‘leaders’ even managed to climb on to the roof of government buildings, where he desecrated the state flag.
There were demonstrations and strikes not only in Tbilisi but also in other large towns.
And most worrying of all, in Pravda 's view, local party leaders, used to commanding rather than persuading, had found themselves unable to keep control of the situation.
Further demonstrations in support of independence took place in early 1989 on the anniversary of the republic's incorporation into the USSR (February 1921).
Some 15,000 protesters were involved, according to Western press reports, 200 of whom were detained.
Still more substantial demonstrations were organised in April 1989.
Reports indicated that more than 100,000 demonstrators had gathered in front of Georgian party and government headquarters; many factories were on strike as well as the local television, and troops and armoured personnel carriers were on duty.
The demonstrators held banners demanding both the secession of Georgia from the Soviet Union and the full integration of the Abkhazian republic, which had itself been seeking to secede from Georgia and to resume the union republican status it had enjoyed from 1921 until 1931.
An Abkhaz nationalist grouping, Ayglara (Unity), had been formed, and the Abkhaz party secretary (dismissed in early April) was reported to have favoured the idea of secession.
The leader of another informal nationalist grouping, the Forum for the Peoples of Abkhazia, was elected to the Congress of People's Deputies and to the new-style Supreme Soviet, where he expressed some reservations about the idea of strengthening the fifteen union republics at the expense, almost certainly, of the smaller  national-territorial units that were subordinate to them.
Georgians, however, accounted for by far the largest share of the population of the Abkhaz republic (Abkhazians themselves were a small minority), and they were resolutely opposed to any diminution of their links with their own republic, holding rival demonstrations within Abkhazia and within Georgia to make their position clear.
Matters reached a critical stage when the demonstrators in central Tbilisi were attacked by interior ministry troops on the evening of 9 April 1989.
At least sixteen people were killed, according to official sources, and a curfew had to be introduced.
The demonstration followed a hunger strike and a wave of industrial disturbances, and was led by the National Democratic Party of Georgia, the Party of National Independence and two other nationalist groupings broadly similar in character to the popular fronts established in the Baltic.
Some of the demonstrators, Tass reported, had put forward ‘nationalist, anti-socialist slogans’ and had called for strikes, civil disobedience and the liquidation of Soviet power in Georgia; some ‘extremists’had been armed with sticks, stones and metal objects.
Local sources insisted that all the dead had been unarmed and that they had been attacked with sharpened spades and a noxious gas, which had itself been responsible for the death of two women.
No such brutal suppression of a peaceful demonstration had been seen in the Soviet Union since at least the early 1960s, strengthening rumours that the action, directed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs rather than by Georgian officials, might have been covertly encouraged by Kremlin conservatives intent on discrediting Gorbachev and the policy of perestroika .
The foreign minister and former Georgian party leader, Eduard Shevardnadze, cancelled his plans to attend a Warsaw Pact meeting and flew to Tbilisi to appeal for calm while tanks patrolled the city streets.
Gorbachev added a personal appeal on 13 April.
At a plenum of the Georgian central committee the following day the party first secretary, Dzumber Patiashvili, resigned and was replaced by the former head of the Georgian KGB, Givi Gumbaridze; the Georgian prime minister and head of state also tendered their resignations.
A Georgian parliamentary commission which was established to investigate the incident later concluded that the interior troops had carried out a ‘punitive action — a planned mass massacre, committed with especial cruelty’.
Nor was this the end of the violence.
In July 1989 there were further disturbances in Abkhazia over plans to open a section of Tbilisi University in the Abkhazian capital Sukhumi.
An inter-nationality conflict  developed on 15–16 July which led, according to official reports, to 11 deaths and 127 hospital cases.
Tensions became still greater in late 1990 following the success of the ‘Round Table/Free Georgia’ coalition at the elections and the formation of a nationalist administration headed by the veteran dissident Zviad Gamsakhurdia.
The Georgian parliament, under its new leadership, unanimously adopted a resolution calling for the full restoration of republican sovereignty as it had existed up to 1921.
A republic-wide vote was held on 30 March 1991 in which 90.3 per cent of the population were reported to have taken part, 98.9 per cent of whom expressed support for the restoration of Georgian independence; following this, on 9 April, the Georgian parliament adopted a further resolution proclaiming the republic a fully independent state (the act, for the moment, had little practical significance).
Gamsakhurdia was elected President with 86.5 per cent of the vote in May 1991; he came under increasing pressure thereafter because of an increasingly authoritarian style of government, and in January 1992 was forced to flee the Georgian capital.
The former party leader and foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, became effective head of state in March 1992.
There were strong pressures from still further national minorities for a greater degree of control over their own affairs.
A popular front came into existence in the Ukraine in late 1988, influenced by concerns about the environment (and the further development of nuclear power in particular) as well as by enduring linguistic and other cultural issues.
The Front, known as ‘Rukh’(‘Movement’), held its founding congress in September 1989; the local authorities, meanwhile, began to address one of its central concerns by making Ukrainian the official state language in the republic.
A declaration of sovereignty, adopted in July 1990, asserted the republic's right to its own armed forces and security as well as natural resources.
A Belorussian popular front was formed in June 1989, although its founding congress had to take place in Lithuania because of the hostility of the republican leadership.
Soviet Germans, about two million strong, established a new All-Union Society of Germans in early 1989 and called for the restoration of their autonomous republic, which had been abolished at the outbreak of the war in 1941.
There were demonstrations in Moldavia (renamed Moldova) calling for greater control over local affairs, and in particular for official status for the Moldavian language; there were counter-demonstrations by the republic's non-Moldavian population, more than a third of the total, against what they saw as a form of reverse discrimination (Russian, in the event, was retained as a means  of inter-nationality communication).
Both Tatars and Bashkirs claimed full union republican status, in the autumn of 1990, and complained of the management of up to 97 per cent of their oil-rich economy by outside agencies.
There were further calls from many of the Soviet Union's ‘little peoples’— minority nationalities of relatively modest numbers which generally lacked their own national-territorial areas — about falling populations and the use of their area for unrestricted industrial activity.
The most serious problems were in Siberia, where press reports spoke of the ‘unregulated and uncontrolled destruction of the very conditions of existence of the indigenous population’.
National assertiveness reached the largest and most important of the Soviet Union's republics, the Russian, in May 1990, following the elections to the republican Congress of People's Deputies in which radical candidates had won a substantial proportion of the vote (see above, p. 59).
After several ballots the former Moscow party secretary, Boris Yel'tsin, was elected chairman of the Russian Supreme Soviet or de facto republican president on 29 May.
His programme had combined calls for radical political reform with a strong appeal for Russia's sovereign rights, including ownership of all the republic's natural resources, an independent foreign policy, and the primacy of republican legislation over that of the USSR as a whole.
The Russian Congress of People's Deputies resolved to this effect on 12 June; in a separate development a Russian Communist Party was established on 21 June and Ivan Polozkov, a relatively conservative party leader from Krasnodar, was elected its first secretary.
Other republican institutions, including a trade union organisation, a Komsomol, an Academy of Sciences, a union of journalists and a national symphony orchestra, began to be established during the year; a republican KGB was established in 1991, and a Russian radio and television service.
The republican constitution was changed (as others had been) to exclude the leading role of the Communist Party, and an entirely new constitution began to be drafted which would itself be ‘deideologised’.
The Russian legislators were concerned, in particular, that Russia should resume control over its own economic destinies.
About 70 per cent of Russian industry, according to Yel'tsin, was run by all-union ministries, and central rather than republican institutions owned 87 per cent of capital stock in the republic and accounted for more than 90 per cent of Russian exports.
Russia, it was widely argued, subsidised the other republics to the extent of 70 billion rubles a year.
According to figures made public in 1990, it was one of the few republics to run a positive balance in its trade with other republics.
It was in deficit in its trade with the outside world, calculated in Soviet domestic  prices, but with its oil and other resources expressed in world market prices it was the only republic to have a positive balance in its trade with non-Soviet partners; and it was the most economically self-sufficient of all the republics.
The dispute, however, was also a personal one, between Yel'tsin and his former Politburo colleague, Mikhail Gorbachev.
They agreed on the direction of change, Yel'tsin suggested in October 1990, but not about its tempo; Gorbachev, for his part, professed to see the difference not in personal terms but as one between ‘two different political lines and programmatic aims’.
Yel'tsin's position had been strengthened by his election to the all-union and the Russian parliaments, and by a high opinion poll rating.
His election was generally seen as the ‘event of the year’ and he himself as the ‘man of the year’; his popularity soon moved above that of the President and General Secretary.
According to a poll in early 1991 Yel'tsin was already the most important Russian leader of the twentieth century, ahead of Lenin, Bukharin and (a long way behind but with a similar rating) Gorbachev and Trotsky.
His position was strengthened still further by the decision, in March 1991, to institute a fully presidential system in Russia itself; when elections to the position were held, in June 1991, Yel'tsin was elected by a convincing majority on the first ballot with over 45 million votes, 57.3 per cent of the total.
His popularity, nonetheless, was beginning to fade, he lacked the backing of an organised political party, and there was some criticism in the Russian parliament itself of his performance as leader and of his unduly confrontational approach to relations with the Soviet President, particularly a direct call for the President's resignation in a TV interview in February 1991.
Yel'tsin later agreed to take part in the negotiations that led to a ‘9 + 1’ agreement at Novo-Ogarevo, a government dacha near Moscow, between President Gorbachev and nine of the republican leaders, covering a wide range of measures to deal with the crisis that had developed in every sphere of Soviet life but especially the economy, and he was still prepared, after the unsuccessful coup, to negotiate a new political union.
In the end, however, the Ukrainian decision to vote for full independence left him with little alternative but to withdraw from the USSR and in effect bring about its demise (see pp. 179–85).
Policy choices and policy dilemmas
The national question was not, to begin with, one to which Gorbachev devoted particular attention.
His early speeches did include an address on the fiftieth anniversary of the Karachaevo-Cherkessk  autonomous region, which was administratively subordinate to Stavropol, and in December 1972, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the USSR, an article on the ‘Great union of friendly peoples’ appeared in the regional newspaper.
Some years later, in 1980, Gorbachev represented the central leadership at a ceremony in Vilnius to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the incorporation of Lithuania into the USSR.
His speech, ‘The friendship of the peoples of the USSR — a priceless asset’, was wholly conventional, even by the standards of the time.
Gorbachev's otherwise adventurous address to an ideology conference in December 1984, shortly before his assumption of the general secretaryship, was again wholly routine in its reference to the ‘real equality of all nations and nationalities, their further all-round development and convergence, indissoluble brotherly friendship, deep family identity [and the]formation of a new historical community — the Soviet people’(Brezhnev could hardly have put it better).
Gorbachev's acceptance speech at the March 1985 Central Committee meeting contained just a passing reference to the ‘steadfast strengthening of the friendship of the peoples of our great multinational power’; an address on the 40th anniversary of the Soviet victory in World War II referred similarly to the ‘blossoming of nations and nationalities’ in the USSR which was ‘organically connected with their all-round convergence’.
Gorbachev's later speeches on the national question were scarcely more illuminating.
His report to the 27th Party Congress in February 1986, perhaps the most important of these, referred to Soviet nationalities policy as an ‘outstanding achievement of socialism’ which had ‘done away for ever’with national oppression and inequalities of all kinds.
An indissoluble friendship among the Soviet nations had been established, and a Soviet people, a ‘qualitatively new social and international community’, had come into being, ‘cemented by the same economic interests, ideology and political goals’.
A note of caution, however, began to be sounded in Gorbachev's warning that ‘contradictions’ were unavoidable in any kind of social development, including relations among the nationalities, and he acknowledged that there were still tendencies towards ‘national isolation’and ‘localism’.
His Perestroika , written in the summer of 1987, reflected the same more careful tone.
The nationality question, for Gorbachev, had certainly been resolved ‘in principle’.
The USSR, set against an international background of ethnic strife, was a ‘truly unique example in the history of human civilisation’, as he knew from his own experience in the northern Caucasus.
This did not, however, mean that nationality  matters were free of problems, or that they could be isolated from real life with its diversity and difficulties.
There were still tendencies towards national rivalry and arrogance, and these could only be countered by a steadfast policy of internationalism.
Gorbachev's speech to the Central Committee in January 1987, made shortly after the riots in Kazakhstan, marked a new stage in his awareness of the complexity of national issues.
The events in Alma-Ata, in the General Secretary's view, required a ‘serious analysis and a principled assessment’.
There were ‘negative phenomena and deformations’ in relations between the nationalities, as there were in other spheres of Soviet life; and there had been incidents elsewhere not very different from those in the Kazakh capital.
Gorbachev still identified internationalism as the policy which could deal most effectively with problems of this kind.
But he also mentioned the need to ensure that the various nationalities were properly represented in political and economic life, and he acknowledged that party officials had sometimes handled nationality issues without the degree of sensitivity that they required.
Nor was there a satisfactory body of analysis on matters of this kind: too many of the scholars concerned had preferred to write works that were ‘reminiscent at times of complimentary toasts’ rather than engage in the difficult task of examining the complex nature of nationality relations in real life.
Neglect of nationality issues, the General Secretary told media workers a month later, was even ‘dangerous’.
They could never forget, he told his audience in his 70th anniversary speech later in the year, that they lived in a multinational state.
They must be attentive to all the susceptibilities that people might have in this connection, and ensure that all of them played a part in resolving the tasks that arose in a society of this kind.
The whole nationality question, he promised, would shortly be discussed more fully in the light of the changes that were taking place in other areas of Soviet life; perhaps, he added in early 1988, this could be the subject of one of the forthcoming meetings of the Central Committee.
The next sustained discussion of nationality issues in fact took place at the 19th Party Conference in the summer of 1988.
Gorbachev, in his address, still felt able to claim that the establishment of a union of nations and nationalities enjoying equal rights was ‘one of the greatest accomplishments of socialism’.
At the same time there were ‘omissions and difficulties’ and ‘occasional failures to reconcile the interests of individual nations with those of the USSR as a whole’.
The way forward, in his view, lay in developing economic links of all kinds  among the republics, and deepening the domestic division of labour.
The economic and constitutional rights of the republics, at the same time, should be increased and defined more precisely; but any changes of this kind must take account of the fact that each of the republics was itself a multinational state in which the interests of all national groups must be properly respected.
Any other policy would ‘lead to disaster’.
The resolution on nationality relations adopted at the conference reflected very similar concerns.
A ‘new historical community the Soviet people’ had come into existence, based upon a common destiny and an interdependent economy.
The various nations and nationalities of the USSR, at the same time, had their specific concerns, and the neglect of these during the Stalin and Brezhnev years had led them to take the form of ‘public disaffection, which now and then escalated into conflicts’.
To deal with these problems there should be a further development of the democratic principles of the Soviet federation, extending the rights of the union republics and lower levels of government.
Local languages and cultures should be fostered, as well as Russian; and a national research centre should be established to examine these and other issues in more detail.
Although there was still no sign of the Central Committee meeting on the national question, the autumn of 1988 and early months of 1989 saw some elements of a rather different nationalities policy begin to acquire form.
The party conference, for instance, had called for a series of constitutional changes, particularly in the USSR Supreme Soviet's Council of Nationalities.
The amendments agreed in December 1988 duly provided that while the Council of the Union should concentrate upon economic, diplomatic and other matters affecting the USSR as a whole, the Council of Nationalities should particularly concern itself with the interests of all ethnic groups within the framework of the Soviet multinational state.
In November 1988 a set of ‘Theses’ on the national question was issued by the Central Committee with a view to clarifying the issues that would be discussed at the forthcoming plenum.
In March 1989 a set of directives on economic relations between the USSR and its constituent republics was published, which called for the transfer of up to 36 per cent of industrial production to local control (the existing figure was only 5 per cent), with much higher levels — up to 72 per cent — in Georgia and the Baltic republics.
The somewhat opaque slogan of a ‘strong centre and strong republics’ began to appear in official speeches from early 1989.
And a working group on constitutional reform, established by the Supreme Soviet in late 1988, began — at least in its reported  meetings — to develop the notion of ‘republican precedence’, by which the union republics should have full authority over all matters that had not been specifically transferred to the USSR government.
Finally, and most important of all, the Central Committee published a draft ‘Platform’ on the national question in August 1989 setting out the basis on which it proposed to conduct the long-promised plenum, which was now to be held in September.
The Platform began by acknowledging the damage that had been done to national relations by the repression of the Stalinist years and by later attempts to accelerate convergence on the basis of an allegedly full and final resolution of the national question.
Russians, as well as other nations, had suffered from these policies.
In the future, the Central Committee suggested, there should be radical changes in state structure leading to a ‘renewed federation’ with greater devolved powers for the union republics, including their transfer to a cost-accounting basis within what would continue to be a single domestic market.
The Russian Republic, in particular, should enjoy greater rights, including its own party organisation.
The CPSU as a whole, however, should remain a united, ‘consolidating and directing force of social development’, based on a democratic centralism, and with a single statute and programme.
National languages should be encouraged, but Russian remained the language of inter-ethnic communication and all languages must have equality of status.
There could not, however, be prescriptions that were valid for all cases; national policy was a ‘continuous creation’, and what was necessary above all was a realistic and undogmatic approach, free of national chauvinism but receptive to legitimate expressions of national self-consciousness.
The Central Committee plenum, which met on 19–20 September 1989, approved the Platform with minor changes and more generally sought to define the party's line in an area in which its decisions had been inadequate and for the most part purely reactive.
For Gorbachev, opening the meeting, there could be no retreat from Leninist principles, or from the ‘internationalist inheritance’ of the revolution.
There had been enormous economic advances, which had been possible only on a basis of mutual assistance.
And excessive centralisation had often been the fault of the republics and regions themselves, which had competed for major investments by offering to reduce spending on social requirements.
There must be equality of rights for all citizens regardless of nationality; and there could be no excuse for discrimination against any of them, nor for ‘extremist gatherings’ which had terrorised local people who were not of the majority  affiliation.
To applause, he declared that the full force of the law would be used in these and other situations that required it.
In economic matters, the strengthening of the independence of each of the republics and regions must be accompanied by the further development of the Soviet economy as a whole.
Local languages must become official republican languages, but Russian might become the official language of the USSR as a whole.
The party, he concluded, stood for a ‘powerful federal state’, convinced that this ‘corresponded to the interests of all the people that [made]up the USSR’.
The plenum, in the event, made little influence upon the continuing discussion, and by the early 1990s it was clear that only a reconsideration of the very bases of Soviet statehood would be likely to satisfy the aspirations of the various republics and nationalities.
Not simply would the future USSR be a ‘renewed federation’; it would also, necessarily, be a voluntary association of republics based upon a new union treaty, whose features became increasingly distinct as the Central Committee plenum faded into obscurity.
Gorbachev, speaking after his election as President, called for the conclusion of a ‘new union treaty’ of this kind; and the Federation Council, when it met later in the year, agreed that a union treaty was necessary which would ‘guarantee real economic and political sovereignty for the republics’.
A working group, with representatives of all the republics concerned, was established to prepare a first draft.
Interethnic relations, Gorbachev conceded in his speech to the 28th Party Congress in July 1990, had deteriorated since the congress before it, and especially over the previous few months.
There had been considerable loss of life, and thousands had been forced to leave their homelands.
What was needed in these circumstances was an updated union in the form of a ‘real union of sovereign states’, enshrined in a new union treaty which would replace the treaty of 1922 on which the USSR had originally been founded.
Other members of the leadership, at the Congress, placed some emphasis upon the dangers of what Nikolai Ryzhkov called ‘economic separatism’.
Yevgenii Primakov, at this time a member of the Presidential Council, called the whole idea of regional self-sufficiency ‘economically absurd’.
Republican leaders, however, were equally insistent upon the greatest possible devolution of authority consistent with the maintenance of a single state.
The Kirgiz leader, Masaliev, called for a unitary USSR with a strong centre; most other republican first secretaries, however, called for a renewed federation, and the Armenian leader Movsisyan went for the more radical idea of the  USSR as a union of sovereign states based upon a network of bilateral associations.
After some discussion the Congress agreed to include the objective of a ‘union of sovereign states’ in its Programmatic Declaration.
A stream of legislation over the spring and summer meanwhile established some of the guiding principles of the new association: there were laws on the demarcation of the powers of the USSR and of its constituent republics, on the treatment of Soviet citizens outside their own republic, and on economic relations between the USSR, the union and autonomous republics.
Over the same period, in a ‘revolution of sovereignties’, all the union republics claimed primacy for their own laws over those of the USSR as a whole, and some autonomous republics and regions in turn claimed primacy for their laws over those of the republics within which they were located.
The draft union treaty, after an extended discussion, was finally published in the central press in November 1990.
Gorbachev, over the summer, stressed the importance of concluding a new agreement of this kind, and equally, of maintaining a common state framework.
The Soviet Union as it presently existed, he conceded in a speech in Odessa, had ‘exhausted its potential’.
But this was not a justification for the dissolution of an association of this kind; the different republics and nationalities were bound together by a common history, by ties of marriage and settlement, and by the trade that they conducted with each other.
Any weakening of the USSR, moreover, would weaken the positive influence it was able to exercise in international affairs.
Speaking to the Central Committee in October, he deplored any possible ‘Lebanonisation’ of the Soviet Union, with all the consequences that would follow.
The union treaty was considered at some length by the Central Committee plenum in December 1990; it approved a resolution calling for the ‘renewal and preservation of a unitary Soviet Union’, a renewal that was ‘socialist in character’.
Gorbachev himself warned of the danger of replacing an overcentralised state with ‘something amoeba-like’, and called for ‘strong republics and a strong centre’.
The union treaty was also approved in principle by the Congress of People's Deputies, meeting in December, although the absence of several republican delegations weakened the force of its decisions.
The treaty, after further consideration, was published in March 1991 in a revised draft.
It provided for a ‘union of sovereign republics’, not necessarily of socialist ones; the Congress of People's Deputies, in December, had agreed not to change the name of the state, but there  was still some criticism that the world's first socialist state had somehow disappeared with the promulgation of a union treaty that made no reference to its social character.
The revised draft committed its participants to a ‘sovereign federal democratic state’ based upon a voluntary union of republics with equal rights, each of which would have the right to choose its own forms of property and government.
There was no direct reference to socialism or communism; the republics that committed themselves to the treaty would rather be bound to respect the principles of democracy, human rights as defined by international agreements, and social justice.
The central government would be responsible for security and foreign policy, law enforcement and the all-union budget; the remaining responsibilities of government, including socioeconomic development, energy, transport, social policy and higher education, were to be resolved ‘jointly’(whatever this might mean).
The union treaty was intended to serve as the basis for a new Soviet constitution; it also set out the structure of government of the new union, including a directly elected Supreme Soviet in which all national areas would be represented.
Speaking at the Congress of People's Deputies in December 1990, Gorbachev proposed an all-union referendum to resolve the future of the Soviet state.
Although the Constitution made provision for referenda, there had never previously been any exercise of this kind.
The referendum took place on 17 March 1991, when voters all over the Soviet Union were asked to express a view on the following question: ‘Do you consider it necessary to preserve the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a renewed federation of equal sovereign republics in which the human rights and freedoms of any nationality will be fully guaranteed?’
The question, it was widely remarked, embraced a number of different propositions: some voters might be in favour of the maintenance of a single state but not necessarily a socialist one, and there was little guidance — apart from the draft union treaty — about the nature of a ‘renewed federation’.
The issue was clouded further by the refusal of six republican governments (the three Baltic republics, Moldavia, Georgia and Armenia) to take part, although some voting did take place on their territories, and by the modification or supplementation of the question in four other republics.
Only three republics (Belorussia, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan) eventually voted on the single question that had been proposed by the central authorities.
The results, announced a few days later, made it clear that the proposition had been carried by a very large majority.
The turnout, across the Soviet Union as a whole, was 80 per cent, and of those who voted, 76.4 per cent declared in favour of the question that had been asked of them.
Two million voted in the six republics that had formally declined to participate, among whom the level of support for the continued existence of the USSR was predictably very high.
In the Russian Republic, where a further question was put, 69.9 per cent of those who took part also supported the introduction of a directly elected presidency.
There were relatively few reports of irregularities: a Moscow journalist, in an experiment, found he was allowed to vote ten times in five different constituencies; and in one of the Moscow districts there were 346 more votes cast than ballot papers that had been distributed.
Disappointingly for the authorities, Moscow and Leningrad voted for the ‘renewed federation’ by tiny majorities; in Gorbachev's own district in Moscow 375 voted against the proposition and 376 in favour, the only uncertainty being whether the General Secretary or his spouse had cast the decisive ballot.
Gorbachev, in his response to the results, nonetheless claimed that they had received a mandate for the ‘renewal and strengthening of the union state’ and promised to press ahead with the conclusion of the union treaty and a new constitution.
From USSR to Commonwealth of Independent States
The ‘9 + 1’ agreement of April 1991 had committed all of the republics concerned, as well as the Soviet President, to the conclusion of a new union treaty within three months.
After an extended process of negotiation Gorbachev was able to announce on 24 July that the nine republics had reached agreement on a new treaty of this kind, bringing into being a ‘Union of Soviet Sovereign Republics’ in place of the overcentralised association of the recent past.
As published in the central press, it specified that defence, foreign policy, energy, communications, transport and budgetary matters would be decided ‘jointly’ by the centre and the republics, but that in all other matters republican laws would have precedence over those of the union as a whole.
It was this version of the union treaty that was to have been signed by Russian and other representatives on 20 August, and it was apparently to prevent this weakening of central authority, particularly in military and budgetary matters, that the attempted coup was launched one day beforehand.
In the event, the coup discredited the draft treaty and led to a series of declarations of republican independence which, by the end of the year, had brought about the demise of the USSR as such.
Lithuania had been the first of the Soviet republics to declare independence, in March 1990, and during the coup its two Baltic neighbours followed suit, Estonia on 20 August and Latvia on 21 August.
Within weeks their independence had been recognised by the international community (see p. 162).
The second largest of the Soviet republics, the Ukraine, declared itself an independent democratic republic on 24 August; Moldavia followed on 27 August, and Azerbaijan on 30 August.
The Belorussian president, Nikolai Dementei, who had expressed support for the coup, resigned on 25 August, and the republican parliament voted shortly afterwards in favour of the ‘political and economic independence of Belorussia’.
The Uzbek parliament voted similarly on 31 August.
Kirgizia declared itself an independent, sovereign and democratic state on 1 September; Tajikistan voted for independence on 9 September, and Armenia on 23 September.
Turkmenia voted accordingly on 27 October, after a referendum in which (as in Armenia) the idea of independence received overwhelming popular support.
Kazakhstan voted for independence on 16 December, leaving Russia, by the end of the year, as the only republic that had not adopted a declaration of this kind (Russia did, however, adopt a new state symbol — a version of the imperial double-headed eagle ).
The draft union treaty was clearly superseded by these developments, and as the Kazakh president, Nursultan Nazarbaev, told the USSR Supreme Soviet when it reconvened in early September, only a much looser confederation would satisfy the aspirations of the republics that still wished to establish some kind of association.
In the end, ten republics — including some that had declared independence — agreed a joint statement which indicated that a loose union would be established based on Russia and the Central Asian republics, and that around it there would be a ‘common economic space’ that would include most if not all of the republics that had been part of the USSR.
Gorbachev, for the time being, would remain as President; but he was to rule through a Council of State on which all the ten participating republics were represented, and management of the economy was to be entrusted to an inter-republican committee headed by the Russian prime minister Ivan Silaev.
The old Soviet parliament was to be replaced by a two-chamber Supreme Soviet, and in due course a new Soviet Constitution would be presented for approval leading to presidential and perhaps more general multiparty elections the following year.
These were intended to be interim arrangements only, and further  negotiations took place to try to establish the bases of a more lasting political union.
Eventually, on 14 November, nine of the original fifteen republics reached agreement on a new ‘union of sovereign states’.
The agreement, like those that had preceded it, envisaged a directly elected presidency, and a bicameral legislature made up on a republican and a population basis, respectively; central authority would be limited to those spheres of activity that had been specifically delegated by the members of the union.
A referendum in the Ukraine on 1 December, however, resulted in a majority of over 90 per cent in favour of a fully independent status, and this appears to have convinced Yel'tsin that it would be unprofitable to pursue the goal of political union any further.
On 8 December, at a country house in Belorussia, the leaders of the three Slav republics met and concluded an agreement establishing an entirely new entity, a ‘Commonwealth of Independent States’, with its administrative headquarters in Minsk.
The new Commonwealth was not a state, but it would nonetheless provide for unitary control of nuclear arms, a single currency and a ‘single economic space’.
The USSR, as a subject of international law and a geopolitical reality, was declared no longer in existence, and the three republics individually denounced the 1922 treaty through which it had originally been established.
The new Commonwealth declared itself open to other Soviet republics, as well as to states elsewhere that shared its objectives, and on 21 December in Alma Ata a further agreement was signed by the three original members and eight other republics: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kirgizia, Moldavia, Tajikistan, Turkmenia and Uzbekistan.
The declaration committed those who signed it to recognise the independence and sovereignty of other members, to respect human rights including those of national minorities, and to observe existing boundaries.
Relations among the members of the Commonwealth were to be conducted on a multilateral basis, but it was agreed to endorse the principle of unitary control of strategic nuclear arms and the concept of a ‘single economic space’.
The USSR as such was held to have ‘ended its existence’, but the members of the Commonwealth pledged themselves to discharge the obligations that arose from the 15,000 or so international treaties and agreements to which the USSR had been a party.
In a separate agreement the heads of member states agreed that Russia should take the seat at the United Nations formerly occupied by the USSR, and a framework of interstate and inter-governmental consultation was established.
On 26 December the upper house of the USSR Supreme Soviet, itself  inquorate, voted a formal end to the original treaty of union (which had not, in fact, provided for any procedure of this kind).
The Commonwealth of Independent States, 1993
The new Commonwealth was at least a genuinely voluntary union, and yet it was far from clear that it provided the answer to nationality differences that had for so long eluded the Gorbachev leadership.
There were, for a start, serious difficulties of economic coordination.
The economies of all fifteen Soviet republics had been closely bound together in an all-union division of labour; about 20 per cent of their national income represented trade with other republics, as compared (for instance) with the European Community, only 16 per cent of whose trade was with other members.
In the case of oil, for example, the raw material was in one republic, the petrochemical plants were in another, the scientific research was conducted in a third and the extracting equipment was in a fourth; and who owned the pipelines that passed from one republic to another?
As Gorbachev himself pointed out to the Central Committee, Russian oil and gas provided most of the energy needs of the other republics.
The Russian Republic, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan supplied the other republics with metal, and produced 90 per cent of the grain harvest.
Central Asia dominated the production of cotton, and the Baltic republics played a comparable  role in advanced engineering.
How could such an integrated economic mechanism accommodate a variety of currencies, tax regimes and forms of property?
And yet how could the non-Russians indefinitely accept a division of labour that left them, in some cases, as ‘raw material’ republics, exporting their primary produce and importing more expensive manufactured goods?
There were enormous difficulties, equally, in the sphere of cultural policy and minority rights.
Virtually all of the republics, by the late 1980s, had adopted legislation which provided for the majority language of that republic to enjoy official status.
In the case of Georgia, for instance, the legislation provided for the greater use of Georgian in official business, and for compulsory instruction in Georgian for school pupils of other nationalities.
There was equally to be a greater degree of attention, in schools and elsewhere, to Georgian history, archaeology and culture.
The legislation that was considered in Estonia, to take another example, introduced a compulsory language requirement for a number of occupations, although this was a violation of Soviet labour law, and provided that court business was to be conducted in Estonian, although this conflicted with all-union legislation on court procedures.
In almost every case, in fact, the attempts that were being made to promote the cultural interests of non-Russian nationalities came into conflict with the multinational composition of each of the republics, not just of the USSR as a whole.
More than 75 million Soviet citizens lived outside their ‘own’ republic (Kazakhstan alone contained more than 100 different nationalities), and very often they had little knowledge of the language of the republican majority.
How could a policy be devised that satisfied the aspirations of the local majority, but which provided the same rights for other nationalities?
How could the Soviet system — and after it, the Commonwealth — function if there was no widely understood common language?
And were there, in any case, enough teachers and schoolbooks to turn any policies that might be agreed into a reality?
There were comparable problems in establishing a form of rule that would satisfy the aspirations of republican majorities but at the same time protect the legitimate interests of local minorities.
Gorbachev, shortly before his resignation, sent a message to the representatives who were gathering in Alma Ata urging them to consider a form of Commonwealth citizenship so that all the former citizens of the USSR would feel their rights were protected in whichever republic they were resident.
Some of the republics appear to have been sympathetic to this idea but in the end no common citizenship of this kind  was established, which was hardly reassuring (for instance) to the very large Russian minorities in the Ukraine and Moldavia.
Some of these minorities formed their own state institutions, including the Dnestr republic in Moldavia, which was unrecognised by the Moldavian authorities but enjoyed the firm support of the local Russian population.
It voted overwhelmingly for continued membership of the USSR in the March 1991 referendum, and elected its own president.
The Russian law on citizenship, adopted in November 1991, extended that privilege not only to the population of the Russian Federation but also to those living in other republics who requested it, and the Russian defence minister, Pavel Grachev, made it clear that fellow nationals would be defended ‘wherever they live’; Vice-President Rutskoi called more directly for recognition of the Dnestr republic, and the Foreign Ministry intervened when it appeared that the civil rights of Russian speakers in the newly independent Baltic republics were being infringed.
There was clearly some basis here for irredentist disputes of a kind that had become familiar in interwar Europe.
There were further difficulties within most of the republics stemming from demands for local autonomy or even independence.
In the Russian Federation, for instance, the Tatar Republic adopted a declaration of independence in October 1991 and declared its intention of affiliating independently to the newly established Commonwealth.
A referendum, held in March 1992, confirmed this position by a large majority although it had itself been declared unconstitutional.
By the spring of 1993 at least nine republics or regions within the Russian Federation were insisting that their own laws took precedence over those of the Federation as a whole, and the Chechen republic had gone still further and declared itself a fully independent state.
In Georgia the South Ossetian autonomous republic was abolished by the Georgian authorities, but when the referendum took place in March 1991, 99.8 per cent voted in favour of continued membership of the USSR and the republic later sought independence within the Russian Federation.
In Azerbaijan the Nagorno-Karabakh autonomous region voted to establish itself as an independent republic with the support of 99.9 per cent of those who took part in a referendum on the matter, and applied to join the newly-established Commonwealth of Independent States; Azerbaijan, for its part, voted to abolish the region entirely, renamed its capital city and placed the whole area under the control of a military governor.
Nor was there general agreement on boundaries and territories, whether republics affiliated to the new Commonwealth or not.
As  Gorbachev pointed out in an interview in early 1991, only about 30 per cent of the USSR's boundaries had been legally defined.
Yel'tsin caused a great deal of concern in this connection by authorising a statement that Russia would not necessarily recognise existing boundaries with states that did not become members of the same political union; this, at least implicitly, raised issues such as the status of the Crimea, transferred to the Ukraine by Khrushchev in 1954 as a political gesture.
The Russian parliament, in February 1992, ordered an investigation into the legality of its transfer; the Ukrainians insisted the issue was an ‘artificial’ one.
Belorussia, in these new circumstances, began to raise territorial claims against Lithuania, which extended as far as the Lithuanian capital Vilnius.
The Lithuanians, in turn, called for the withdrawal of Russian military detachments from Kaliningrad, which was formally part of the Russian Federation.
Finns began to express an interest in Karelia, acquired by the USSR following the Winter War; and the Estonians and Latvians began to query the status of their boundaries with Russia.
It was already clear that national and territorial disputes could involve substantial loss of life: about ten thousand Soviet citizens were killed or injured in this connection during the years of perestroika , and at least 600,000 became refugees in their own country.
Nationalities policy was perhaps the biggest single failure of perestroika .
Part of the problem, certainly, was the slow and inadequate response of the central authorities and of Gorbachev personally to a deepening crisis.
Looking back, Gorbachev was prepared to acknowledge ‘mistakes in tactics’; but although he travelled more widely throughout the country than previous Soviet leaders, he was also guilty of some remarkably insensitive mistakes (as when he twice referred to the Soviet Union as ‘Russia’ during a visit to the Ukraine ).
The failure of Soviet nationalities policy, however, was more than a personal failure; it also reflected the failure, over more than seventy years, to devise an official theory that could adequately account for ethnic and national differences, and perhaps a still deeper weakness in a doctrine that insisted working men ‘had no country’.
Relations among the Soviet peoples, it had to be acknowledged, were no longer a ‘zone of universal harmony’; different stages of social development presented different problems, and there could be no ‘complete solution, valid for all time, to one of mankind's most complex problems’.
Seventy years of Leninist nationalities policy, certainly, had not provided one.
The Soviet Union and the wider world
For a country of its size and population, the Soviet Union had often appeared rather isolated from the affairs of other members of the world community.
In part, at least , this reflected the influence of Russian history and of the political tradition that derived from it.
With its broad and open frontiers, Russia is a country that has been invaded and occupied many times by outside powers.
Foreigners, since the earliest times, have been required to live in special residential areas and have been treated with a good deal of suspicion and hostility by ordinary Russians as well as by government officials.
Russian nationalism, an official ideology in the late Tsarist period and still very strong today, helped to create an attitude towards the West which combined an admiration for its prosperity and efficiency with a deep contempt for its petty-mindedness and commercialism: a ‘peculiar amalgam of love and hate’, as Isaiah Berlin has described it, combining intellectual respect and envy with emotional suspicion, hostility and contempt.
These feelings were reinforced by the Orthodox Church, which was a part of the Eastern (Byzantine) communion.
Much more closely associated with the state than was the case in the Christian churches that owed their allegiance to Rome, Russian Orthodoxy helped to promote both a more communitarian form of politics and a feeling that Russians were a ‘special people’ with a particular destiny to fulfil in terms of world civilisation.
The Soviet authorities after 1917 could hardly associate themselves with, for example, Russian Orthodoxy and the tradition it represented.
And yet many of the attitudes towards the outside world that had flourished in the Tsarist period still play a role in Soviet and now post-Soviet foreign policy today.
It was always a Russian (and later a Soviet) ambition, for instance, to acquire warm-water ports to the south, and to develop a network of client states in Eastern Europe to strengthen the country's defences against the other continental powers.
There are no obvious geographical barriers along this frontier  and a series of invasions, from the Poles in the seventeenth century to Napoleon in the early nineteenth, have borne witness to its vulnerability.
The Russian army has always been a large one, much larger than those of other continental states, and military spending has always been a disproportionately heavy burden on public finances.
These feelings of isolation and insecurity, combined with a belief in a ‘special destiny’, were developed further by the Marxist-Leninist ideology with which the Soviet leadership was associated after 1917.
This saw the USSR as an embattled champion of world socialism, a feeling strengthened by the attempts that were made by foreign governments to overthrow Soviet rule immediately after the revolution and again during World War II.
As late as the 1980s foreign trade accounted for a relatively small proportion of Soviet national income, the Soviet currency was not freely convertible, and the movement of people and information across Soviet borders was closely regulated and very limited.
For all these tendencies towards isolation, however, the post-revolutionary period saw the USSR integrate itself ever more closely into the international community.
A network of diplomatic relations with the neighbouring capitalist world came gradually into existence, first of all with the smaller border states such as Finland and Estonia, then, in the 1920s, with Germany, France, Britain and Japan, and finally, in the early 1930s, with the United States, Belgium, Spain and the newly established states of Eastern Europe.
The Russian Empire had diplomatic relations with forty-seven powers in 1914.
Before World War II the Soviet authorities had diplomatic relations with only twenty-six foreign states, but by the end of the war the number had doubled to fifty-two and by the late 1980s the Soviet Union had diplomatic relations with over 140 foreign governments.
The USSR became a regular participant in international conference diplomacy at the Genoa Conference in 1922; initially hostile to the League of Nations, describing it in 1919 as a ‘Holy Alliance of capitalists for the suppression of the workers' revolution’, the USSR became a member in 1934 and was in turn a founding member of the United Nations in 1945 and a prominent member of its Security Council.
The USSR, equally, took part in a widening network of international conventions and associations, from the Universal Postal Union (in 1924) to the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 1955 and to a series of conventions on copyright, hostage-taking, narcotics, patents and arms control in the 1970s and 1980s.
Nor was this simply a matter of formal relations at a state-to-state  level.
Foreign trade, for instance, increased sixteen times by volume between 1950 and 1987, more rapidly than national income as a whole.
Within this total, trade with the developed capitalist countries increased at twice the rate of trade with the other countries of the socialist community.
In 1950 the Soviet Union traded with forty-five foreign countries; by the late 1980s it traded with 145.
An increasing number of factories and other enterprises were being constructed in foreign countries: by 1989 over 3,500 had been built, most of them in the socialist world but nearly 900 in developing countries.
The number of passengers carried on international flights quadrupled between 1960 and 1970, and quadrupled again (to 4.2 million) between 1970 and 1988.
Half a million foreign tourists visited the USSR in 1950, but over two million did so in 1971 and over five million did so in the late 1980s.
More books were translated from other languages into Russian in the 1980s, including record numbers from English, German and French; and there were more foreign students in Soviet universities than ever before.
The level of foreign trade was still low in terms of national income, and the USSR had not become a major trading partner for most of the developed capitalist countries; nor was interpersonal contact particularly large given the population numbers involved.
By the end of the 1980s it was nonetheless possible to say that the USSR was more directly involved in the affairs of the world community than at any previous time in her history, not only at a formal intergovernmental level but also through a variety of personal, commercial, sporting, scientific and other channels.
Soviet interaction with the outside world had also increased in ways that were connected with the USSR's standing as the world's leading communist power.
The October revolution had been carried through on the assumption that Russia, although a relatively backward country and hardly ‘ripe’ for revolution in a Marxist sense, could help to bring about a European and later a worldwide transition to a communist social order.
The major capitalist countries, Lenin argued in his Imperialism (1916), were economically interconnected, and a revolution in any one of them — most obviously in Russia, the ‘weakest link’ would necessarily lead to revolutionary changes in the others.
At the time this did not appear an entirely unrealistic perspective.
Immediately after the war ended, in 1918–19, there were revolutionary uprisings in many parts of the world, and Soviet republics were established in Bavaria and Hungary.
To the early Bolshevik leaders it seemed only a matter of months, if not days, before first Europe and later the rest of the world joined the Soviet and other socialist states.
July 1919, Lenin promised, would be the ‘last difficult July’; the following July would see the ‘victory of the international Soviet republic and that victory will be complete and final’.
Not only the Bolsheviks but their ‘worst enemies’, wrote Zinoviev, were convinced that ‘socialist revolution on a world scale was going to develop at a mad gallop’.
The Communist International, founded at an unrepresentative gathering in March 1919, was intended to supply decisive leadership; the ‘workers of the world’ would do the rest.
The Soviet republics in Bavaria and Hungary, in the event, soon collapsed, uprisings in Germany and Bulgaria in 1923 proved abortive, and in most of Europe right-wing governments came to power which often dealt harshly with local communist parties and trade unions.
Some advances were recorded in the colonial world, but the most promising revolutionary movement, in China, was bloodily suppressed by Chiang Kai-shek in 1927.
A Soviet-dominated regime was established in the Siberian region of Tannu Tuva in 1921 and a People's Republic came into being in Mongolia in 1924 after Chinese occupying forces had been defeated.
In all other respects, however, the USSR was left in a state of ‘capitalist encirclement’ between the wars, and there was little response from Western governments to Soviet proposals to establish a common front against the Fascist powers, above all Nazi Germany.
The Munich Agreement of 1938 was widely interpreted, not just in the USSR, as confirmation that the major capitalist powers intended to offer no serious resistance to Hitler provided he confined his territorial ambitions to the east.
The Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact of 1939, however morally repugnant, did at least provide the USSR with a breathing-space in which military preparations could be accelerated; the pact, however, was broken off in June 1941 when German forces invaded the USSR's western borderlands, and in the four years that followed the USSR lost over 26 million citizens and suffered material damage on an unimaginable scale.
Soviet leaders, at the end of the war, were understandably concerned to secure a settlement which would offer secure guarantees against a further invasion of this kind, and at the Moscow, Yalta and Potsdam conferences in 1944 and 1945 these objectives were largely achieved.
The cost was the post-war division of Europe.
The extension of Soviet control over Eastern Europe in the early post-war period is conventionally described by Soviet diplomatic historians as the ‘establishment of international relations of a new type’, cemented by a network of bilateral alliances of which thirty-five had been concluded by the late 1940s.
Soviet control was extended by a  process of leadership manipulation, including purges and the enforced adoption of Stalinist legal and economic reforms.
In some cases there was little domestic support for communist policies and a new administration had effectively to be installed by the Red Army (this was the case in the GDR, Poland and Romania; Bulgaria, where the communists had enjoyed some support, took the German side during the war and here too a communist government was imposed by the Red Army).
In Czechoslovakia and Hungary, on the other hand, the communist party had enjoyed a substantial degree of popular support and the Red Army, despite some excesses, was seen by many as the agency by which these countries had been liberated from the Nazis.
In both cases coalition governments were established in which communists swiftly assumed a dominant position.
In Yugoslavia, Albania, North Korea and China a rather different pattern developed: in all these countries the communist party came to power through its leadership of a popular struggle against foreign occupation, with little or no help from the USSR in doing so.
These, on the whole, were ‘indigenous’ rather than‘imposed’regimes, and they tended to be the most independent-minded in their relations with the Soviet authorities.
This was also the case in Cuba, where Fidel Castro led his 26 July guerrilla movement to power in 1959 and declared his formal adherence to Marxism-Leninism in 1961.
There were further extensions of Soviet influence during the 1970s and 1980s.
In Vietnam the US-supported regime in the south was defeated in 1975, following an agreement in Paris in 1973 which formally ended outside involvement in the longstanding conflict with the communist-ruled north.
National elections were held in 1976 and the two states were formally merged into the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, linked (from 1978) by a twenty-five-year treaty of friendship and cooperation to the USSR.
A new constitution, adopted in 1980, declared that Vietnam was a state of proletarian dictatorship which was developing according to Marxism-Leninism.
In Laos a people's democratic republic was established in December 1975 following the abdication of King Sayang Vatthana and the formation of a new government led by the Lao People's Revolutionary Party.
Brezhnev, speaking at a reception for a Laotian party and government delegation the following year, welcomed their ‘heroic victory’ and the establishment of a state which was seeking to establish the ‘bases of a socialist society’.
In Cambodia, similarly, the communist Khymer Rouge took power in 1975 at the end of a civil war and proceeded to establish a harshly dictatorial regime known as Democratic Kampuchea.
This was in turn succeeded by a Vietnamese-backed administration in 1979, headed by the Revolutionary Party of Kampuchea, which failed to secure widespread international recognition and more than a decade later had not yet established effective control of the entire national territory.
The countries that were under the control of ruling Marxist-Leninist parties represented, for the USSR, the ‘world socialist system’, a community of nations that shared the same political, social and economic interests.
The USSR and its East European allies constituted the Warsaw Treaty Organisation, founded in 1955 and extended for twenty years in 1985; a somewhat larger group of states, including Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam, were members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or Comecon).
A still broader grouping of states, in the late 1980s, could be described as Marxist or (in Soviet terminology)‘revolutionary-democratic’ and had close associations of various kinds with the USSR and its allies.
In Afghanistan, for instance, a pro-Soviet administration was formed in 1978 under the leadership of the People's Democratic Party; it concluded a friendship treaty with the USSR later in the year.
In Nicaragua a lengthy civil war against the Somoza dictatorship ended with the victory of the Sandinista Liberation Front in 1979.
A series of regimes in Africa, in the 1970s and 1980s, adopted avowedly Marxist governments.
Ethiopia, where the monarchy was overthrown in 1974, inaugurated a People's Democratic Republic in 1987 under the leadership of the Workers' Party of Ethiopia; Mozambique, which became independent in 1975, was headed by a liberation movement of broadly Marxist orientation; and Angola, which became independent in the same year, was governed by the Marxist MPLA-PT (all three countries concluded friendship treaties with the USSR in the 1970s).
Benin was declared a Marxist-Leninist state in 1972; and a similar form of administration was introduced in the People's Republic of the Congo in 1970 under the direction of a single ruling party, the Congolese Party of Labour (which concluded a friendship treaty with the USSR in 1981).
Between thirty and forty regimes, worldwide, could be classified as Marxist in this sense in the late 1980s, although their domestic and foreign policies often diverged considerably from those of the USSR and its East European allies.
Soviet influence over the non-communist world was exercised through a variety of agencies, among them a network of about 100 non-ruling parties which, in the late 1980s, had a total membership of more than 80 million.
Soviet control had originally been exercised  through the Communist International and much less effectively through the Cominform, which was established in 1947 and dissolved in 1956.
Since that date the main organisational form that the movement had assumed was periodic congresses of communist and workers' parties, three of which took place between 1957 and 1969.
One measure of the declining influence of the Soviet party was that at the last of three congresses several ruling parties (the Yugoslav, Albanian, Chinese, Vietnamese and North Korean) did not attend, and only sixty-one of the seventy-five parties present could be persuaded to sign the final communique without reservations although it made no reference to Soviet leadership of the movement and contained no explicit criticism of the Chinese.
Since then there had been a number of regional conferences of communist parties, such as the meeting of Latin American parties in 1975 and of European parties in 1976 and 1980, but many parties refused to attend even these more limited gatherings in case they compromised their organisational independence.
Several parties, particularly the Italian and Spanish, went still further, accepting NATO, a mixed economy and liberal democracy and rejecting the Soviet model and the heritage of Leninism.
By the late 1980s the CPSU itself accepted, as Gorbachev put it to the 27th Party Congress, that no single party could have a ‘monopoly of truth’ and that the movement as a whole would not normally be unanimous on all the issues it confronted.
Gorbachev and ‘new thinking'
Gorbachev's early policy pronouncements gave little indication that one of the central features of his administration would be its emphasis on ‘new thinking’ in international affairs.
His important address to the ideology conference in December 1984, shortly before taking office, stressed the ‘necessity of a fundamental change through accelerated economic development’ and pointed to glasnost' as a means of promoting this process.
The section on foreign policy, however, was couched in much more orthodox terms, accusing capitalism of resorting to ‘wars and terror’ in order to further its objectives and of constantly seeking ‘social revenge’on a global scale.
Having exhausted their historic potential, Gorbachev went on, the major capitalist countries had decided to accelerate the arms race and militarism of all kinds, and were deliberately preparing their populations for nuclear war.
A policy of nothing less than ‘state terrorism’ had been adopted in Central America, the Middle East, Afghanistan and southern Africa.
The military-industrial complex had strengthened its influence on US foreign policy, and so too had the multinational corporations; together they had declared a ‘crusade’ against communism, which was threatening the future of the world community as a whole.
In relations between the two ‘opposing systems’, conflict clearly took precedence over competition.
A somewhat different tone began to emerge relatively quickly, particularly in an address that Gorbachev gave to British members of parliament later the same month.
In the speech Gorbachev expressed a wish for renewed dialogue and cooperation, above all in relation to the threat of a nuclear war in which there could be ‘no winners’.
This, however, was only one example of the kind of issue that required the concerted action of states with different social systems.
Another was the need to resolve regional issues peacefully; others were the fight against famine and disease, protection of the environment and the global supply of energy and natural resources.
The atomic age, Gorbachev suggested, required a ‘new way of political thinking’, above all the recognition that all the peoples of the world lived in a ‘vulnerable, rather fragile but interconnected world’.
Whatever divided them, they had to share the same planet; and this dictated a ‘constructive dialogue, a search for solutions to key international problems, for areas of agreement’.
Gorbachev also made clear the reason why he advocated a position of this kind: it was to be found in the interconnection between foreign and domestic policy.
A country's foreign policy, he noted, could not be separated from its ‘internal life, its economic and social goals and needs’; the Soviet Union, for its part, needed peace so as to be able to achieve its ‘truly breathtaking creative plans’.
In his electoral address of February 1985 Gorbachev returned to the European theme, regretting the loss of impetus that had occurred since the signature of the Helsinki Final Act ten years earlier and expressing the hope that West Europeans would not allow ‘our common home’ to be converted into a testing-ground for American doctrines of ‘limited’nuclear war.
Gorbachev's speech on his election as party leader laid proper emphasis on domestic priorities, but also called for better relations with the ‘great socialist community’, particularly China, and for the continuation of ‘peaceful, mutually advantageous cooperation’ with the capitalist world, leading if possible to an agreement that would provide for the complete elimination of nuclear arms and with them the threat of nuclear war.
His address to the Central Committee in April 1985, his first full statement as party leader, called for ‘stable, proper and, if you like, civilised inter-state relations based on a genuine respect for international law’.
The unity of the socialist states and their military-strategic parity with the NATO countries must at all costs be preserved, as the only secure guarantee against the ‘aggressive appetites of imperialism’.
The Soviet armed forces, in particular, would be provided with everything that was necessary for them to perform their task.
There was, however, no ‘fatal inevitability of confrontation’ between the USSR and its major capitalist adversaries.
On the contrary, none of the nations wanted war, and ‘ever new progressive and democratic forces’ had appeared in the capitalist countries which were strengthening the common struggle for peace.
In his speech to French parliamentarians the following October Gorbachev laid particular emphasis upon the ever-growing ‘interdependence between countries and continents’ in ecological as well as military and economic terms.
He also emphasised the need to develop cultural contacts of all kinds, and to avoid extending ideological differences to the conduct of interstate relations.
His address a few days later to the Central Committee in Moscow balanced these remarks with more familiar declarations about the ‘further strengthening of the positions of existing socialism’ and growing opposition to the ‘reactionary, aggressive forces of imperialism’.
Gorbachev's address to the 27th Party Congress in February 1986 was relatively short of surprises in terms of foreign policy; there was nothing, at any rate, to compare with the unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing that had been announced just a few weeks earlier.
It did, however, make clear the extent to which the Soviet approach to international affairs had changed as compared with the relatively simple priorities of the Brezhnev era.
Gorbachev pointed out that the contemporary world was ‘complicated, diverse, dynamic, permeated with contending tendencies, and full of contradictions’.
The gradual development of societies from capitalism to socialism, admittedly, was not an accident, but a necessary, law-governed and irreversible process.
The socialist world was a ‘powerful international entity’ advancing along a path which ‘reveal[ed] in every way the intellectual and moral wealth of man and society’.
Capitalism, for its part, was a system plagued by problems and crises, and one that was aggressive and interventionist by its very nature.
It contained its own ‘internal antagonistic contradictions’, based on the exploitation of labour, and also contradictions as between the various capitalist countries, such as those between the less powerful capitalist states and transnational corporations, and between the United States, Western Europe and  Japan.
Relations were worsening, moreover, between the major capitalist nations and the developing countries, which were being robbed of the fruits of their labour and forced to suffer poverty, illiteracy and famine.
Beyond these differences, however, lay a further group of contradictions relating to the pollution of the environment, the air and the oceans, and the depletion of the world's natural resources.
These were problems that no single group of states could resolve by itself; and there were many others.
No single group of states, for instance, could deal with the problem of ‘corruption and vandalisation’ in the cultural sphere (Soviet spokesmen at this time generally cited the ‘Rambo’films and other examples of ‘warnography’).
Nor could capitalist or socialist states deal by themselves with the threat of a nuclear catastrophe, or the difficulties that were facing the developing countries.
Gorbachev invited the major capitalist countries to undertake a ‘sober, constructive assessment’ of problems of this kind, based if nothing else on their common need for self-preservation.
The course of history and of social progress, he told the delegates, required with increasing insistence the ‘establishment of constructive, creative interaction among states and peoples on the scale of the whole planet’.
Notwithstanding their competition and confrontation, both capitalist and socialist countries were coming to appreciate that they lived in an ‘interdependent, in many ways integral world’ in which they must cooperate for their common benefit.
There was novelty in Gorbachev's appeal for cooperation with Social Democrats, and even religious organisations, in this connection; but it was his central proposition — that global problems demanded global solutions and that socialism as such provided no solution to them — that was the most distinctive and important element in the address.
This ‘new thinking’ in Soviet foreign policy was set out more fully over the months that followed.
The ‘Delhi declaration’ of November 1986, for instance, committed the Soviet leader to a ‘non-violent’as well as nuclear-free world.
An extraordinary gathering, ‘the International Forum for a Nuclear-Free World, for the Survival of Humankind’, brought West German Greens, clerics, Academician Sakharov and Western film stars such as Gregory Peck and Claudia Cardinale together in Moscow in February 1987.
Gorbachev's address emphasised that the USSR and its people were ‘part of a world community’ and that their goal was the ‘humanisation of international relations’.
A new defence doctrine began to take shape at the same time: it was intended to be non-offensive in character and to give other states no  reason to fear for their security, notwithstanding the immense size of Soviet armed forces and the perceptions of those forces that were entertained particularly in Europe.
The Soviet leader had already taken several unilateral initiatives towards this end.
The first was the decision, in April 1985, to freeze the deployment of SS-20 missiles in Europe; the second was the moratorium on all underground nuclear testing which began on 6 August 1985, the anniversary of Hiroshima, and was eventually extended until February 1987.
Gorbachev added a more elaborate proposal in January 1986, calling for the elimination of all nuclear weapons by the year 2000; a commitment to this objective was written into the new Party Programme, which was adopted shortly afterwards.
A new military doctrine, ‘reasonable sufficiency’, was adopted by Gorbachev at the 27th Party Congress and subsequently by the Warsaw Treaty Organisation.
Nor were these simply doctrinal changes: there were substantial cuts in Soviet military spending and troop numbers from 1989 onwards, and much more information was made available on the structure and size of the military budget and on troop and weapons deployments, which themselves became more defensive in character.
The Central Committee's Theses, adopted shortly before the 19th Party Conference in 1988, contained the first official criticism of Soviet foreign policy in the Brezhnev and Gromyko years, suggesting that there had been too much ‘dogmatism’ and ‘subjectivism’at this time and that Soviet policy had lagged behind the important changes that were taking place in world affairs.
Too much emphasis had been placed upon the strengthening of security by military rather than political means, and this had placed an undue burden on the domestic economy.
The party's ‘new political thinking’, by contrast, recognised the existence of a complex and contradictory world in which there were threats to the survival of humanity as such but also great opportunities for coexistence and cooperation.
The main elements in this ‘new political thinking’ included the gradual liquidation of nuclear arms by the year 2000, the establishment of a system of comprehensive security, a doctrine of military sufficiency and non-aggression, and improvements in the world economy.
This, the Theses made clear, was the ‘foreign policy credo’ of the Gorbachev administration; already it had begun to become a reality with the establishment of a broad dialogue with foreign governments and ordinary citizens, the recognition of the variety of national forms in the socialist community, and a series of international agreements on nuclear arms and other issues.
Other commentaries went further in their criticism of the Brezhnev-Gromyko  legacy, and the new foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze was one of those who was clearest in his call for a proper mechanism of democratic control so that the mistakes and violations of international law of these years did not recur.
A still more influential statement of the ‘new political thinking’ in Soviet foreign policy came in the Soviet leader's address to the General Assembly of the United Nations in December 1988.
In the speech Gorbachev expressed his personal support for the United Nations, which had ‘increasingly manifested its ability to act as a unique international centre in the service of peace and security’, and repeated his belief that the most important issues that faced the world community were global rather than regional in character.
This had been made clear by the development of nuclear weapons, by new popular movements and ideologies, and by scientific and technical developments.
Improvements in communications had brought the world more closely together; the world economy was increasingly a ‘single organism’.
The French and Russian revolutions had made an enormous contribution in their time to human progress, but they lived today in a different world in which universal human values must have priority.
This meant a common search for a new quality of international interaction, less dependent on military force and free of ideological prejudice.
In more practical terms Gorbachev pointed to the need for a greater measure of agreement on the reduction of all forms of armaments and on the elimination of regional conflicts.
There should be a ‘more intense and open dialogue’ between political leaders and their societies (he had himself taken part in more than 200 meetings with foreign governmental and political representatives).
The United Nations should itself play a greater role, especially in issues such as Third World development, environmental assistance and the peaceful use of outer space.
The UN could also play a greater part in regulating regional conflicts, such as in Afghanistan.
More work needed to be done to clarify and strengthen international law, particularly in relation to human rights.
Most spectacularly of all, the Soviet leader announced a reduction of 500,000 in the size of Soviet armed forces over the following two years, including reductions in the number of divisions in both Europe and Asia and changes in the structure of the forces that remained (including the withdrawal of a large number of tanks) so that their purposes became more clearly peaceful.
Corresponding moves were suggested on an international scale to ‘convert the armaments economy into a disarmament economy’.
Helpful though such measures were likely to be in domestic terms, the simultaneous resignation  of the Soviet Chief of Staff suggested that not all powerful institutional interests had been persuaded of their necessity.
Superpower relations and arms control
The central issue in global terms, for any Soviet leader, was the relationship with the other superpower.
The state of those relations, on Gorbachev's accession, was not an encouraging one.
The wartime alliance had been followed by an occasionally hot ‘cold war’ and then, from the 1950s onwards, by a cautious search for a limited modus vivendi .
The first major step towards what became known as ‘detente’ was probably the Partial Test Ban Treaty, signed by Britain, the USA, the USSR and eventually 103 other nations (but not China or France) in 1963.
There appears to have been some resistance within the Soviet military to Khrushchev's doctrine of ‘minimum deterrence’— the USSR, he had complained in 1963, could not produce ‘nothing but rockets’— and the Cuban missile crisis and later the Vietnam War delayed the signature of further agreements.
But then in 1968 a Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty was signed, in 1971 a treaty was signed prohibiting the testing or use of nuclear weapons on the sea bed, and in 1972 three related treaties were signed in Moscow by Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon.
These were SALT I (Intermediate Agreement on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms), a Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems (the ABM treaty) and a set of Basic Principles for the conduct of US-Soviet relations.
SALT I, the most important of these, placed limits on the further construction of intercontinental nuclear weapon systems by both sides; it was intended to remain in force for five years or until superseded by a more comprehensive agreement, and it was the first real fruit of negotiations that had been proceeding since the late 1960s.
In 1973, during Brezhnev's visit to the United States, an agreement on the prevention of nuclear war was signed together with a set of basic principles relating to the further limitation of strategic nuclear weapons; and in November 1974 Brezhnev and Nixon's successor, Gerald Ford, signed a series of related agreements at Vladivostok.
In June 1979 a further agreement, SALT II (Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms), was signed by American and Soviet representatives in Vienna, based upon the provisional agreements reached in Vladivostok and earlier.
The treaty limited each side to no more than 2,400 intercontinental launching vehicles and heavy bombers until 1981, and to 2,250 thereafter until the treaty expired in  1985.
There were certain additional restrictions upon the types of weapon systems that could be deployed within these limits.
The treaty, however, was not presented to the US Senate for ratification, following Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979.
The worsening crisis in Poland during 1980 and 1981, and what was believed to be a Soviet role in the imposition of martial law in December 1981, made matters worse; so too did Cuban intervention in Angola, and US support for the Contra guerrillas in Nicaragua.
‘Detente’ quickly became a pejorative term, and President Reagan, elected in 1980, referred to the USSR in a celebrated phrase as an ‘evil empire’; the Russians, he declared at his first press conference, would ‘lie and cheat and pursue their ends of world domination’.
Economic, cultural and other relations between the superpowers also deteriorated; the Olympic Games were a notable casualty.
‘Detente’ had also involved a series of parallel negotiations and agreements on territorial, economic and other matters.
An agreement on the first of these had always been an objective of the Soviet leadership, in order to stabilise the situation in Europe and thus secure formal Western acceptance of the post-war settlement in Eastern Europe.
Towards this end they advanced the idea of a European security conference from the mid-1960s onwards.
After some detailed negotiation about the composition and scope of such a gathering, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) finally opened in 1973 in Helsinki, and in August 1975 the thirty-three participating nations signed a Final Act — an agreement rather than a formal treaty — which recognised existing boundaries in Europe, in effect legitimising the division of the continent into Soviet and Western spheres of influence which had existed since the end of the war.
The Soviet and East European participants, however, were obliged in return to give their agreement to the so-called ‘Basket 3’, which concerned the movement of people and ideas between East and West in areas such as tourism, the reunification of families and access to printed and other media  The Final Act also committed its signatories to a series of follow-up meetings, designed to monitor the fulfilment of the agreement; the first of these was held in Belgrade in 1977, and the second in Madrid in 1980.
With the deterioration in East-West relations more generally in the late 1970s, other sets of negotiations made less progress.
MBFR (Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction) talks began at Vienna in 1973 but became deadlocked around questions such as the way in which the forces deployed on both sides should be counted and whether absolute  or relative reductions should be made: the first of these suited the East, which had larger totals, but the second was pressed by Western negotiators.
INF (Intermediate-Range Nuclear Force) talks began at Geneva in November 1981 but broke down two years later.
Geneva was also the location for the START (Strategic Arms Reduction) talks, which began in June 1982 but made no more progress.
Although negotiations on arms reductions were about to resume in Geneva when Gorbachev assumed the general secretaryship, Cruise and Pershing-II weapons had already been deployed in Western Europe following the NATO ‘dual track’ decision of 1979 (this was itself represented as a response to the Soviet decision to replace its ageing SS-4 and -5 missiles in Eastern Europe with more modern SS-20s).
Weapons such as the Pershing-II, launched from Western Europe, could reach Soviet territory in about ten minutes and were seen as strategic rather than intermediate in character by Soviet negotiators.
For the US, on the other hand, strategic weapons were those that were launched from the USSR (or from nuclear submarines) and which in turn gave greater opportunities for defensive action.
The British government's decision to upgrade its Polaris weapons by replacing them with much more powerful Tridents introduced a further tension, since it was unclear whether this or the French deterrent would be included in general East-West agreements.
Chemical weapons, and the whole question of verification, raised additional difficulties.
Perhaps most fundamental of all, however, was the climate of hostility and mistrust that existed between East and West during the ‘new cold war’ of the late 1970s and early 1980s; and it was the dissipation of this climate, above all through a series of face-to-face meetings between the Soviet and American leaders, that contributed most directly to the resumption of progress in arms control and other matters.
The first of these summit meetings took place at Geneva in November 1985; it provided an opportunity for an exchange of views on the progress made at the arms talks and on regional issues.
The importance of the summit was, above all, that it had taken place, and that the two leaders had been pictured together in amicable fireside discussion.
The communiqué that was issued after the meeting noted that the talks had been ‘frank and useful’ and did not disguise the fact that there were still ‘major differences’on a series of key issues; but the two leaders had achieved a better understanding of their respective positions and had agreed on the importance of maintaining a ‘constant dialogue’.
Gorbachev, speaking at the closing ceremony, acknowledged that there were basic disagreements between the two sides, but  thought the meeting had created ‘opportunities for progress’; Reagan thought that ‘useful preliminary results’ had been achieved, and hoped that further progress would be achieved at the meeting that had been arranged for the following year.
The Politburo, reviewing the talks, described them as a ‘major political event’ and thought particularly significant the two leaders' declaration that a nuclear war could not be won and must never be fought; this was at odds with the views of some influential US (and Soviet) strategists.
The joint statement that had been issued by the two leaders at Geneva also addressed some of the issues that had arisen in the arms control negotiations.
The statement called for a 50 per cent reduction, ‘appropriately applied’, in their strategic arsenals, an interim INF agreement and appropriate measures to ‘prevent an arms race in space’.
This was an allusion to the Strategic Defense or ‘Star Wars’ Initiative that the American president had unveiled in March 1983.
Reagan himself claimed that the SDI was defensive in character, since it was designed to dispose of nuclear weapons before they reached their target, and that it was in any event a programme of research in the first instance.
Critics of the programme, who were numerous in the USA as well as in the Soviet Union, maintained that it would violate the ABM treaty and therefore undermine the whole concept of deterrence by allowing a first strike to be delivered from behind a space ‘shield’ which would prevent or at least reduce the risk of retaliation.
There were additional concerns in Europe, given that the SDI programme was designed to ensure immunity for the United States and that it might prejudice the US commitment to European security in the event of nuclear war.
Gorbachev, both at Geneva and in his subsequent address to the Supreme Soviet, argued that SDI was in effect a new type of armament, a ‘space-strike weapon’ which could be used against missiles, satellites or land-based targets.
It would certainly give a new twist to the arms race; indeed some of Reagan's advisers appeared to be recommending SDI precisely because they thought the Soviet economy would collapse under the strain of attempting to emulate it.
At a conference in Stockholm in late September 1986, nonetheless, a last-minute agreement was reached that each side should give the other advance warning of troop movements, and that on-site verification should be permitted on a limited basis for the first time.
It was in these difficult but not unhopeful circumstances that the two leaders met again, at a reputedly haunted house in Reykjavik on 11–12 October 1986.
The Soviet negotiators arrived, as Gorbachev claimed subsequently, with a package of arms reduction proposals that would if accepted have marked a ‘new era in the history of humanity’.
In the discussions Gorbachev proposed a cut of at least 50 per cent in US and Soviet strategic arms, leading to their total elimination by the end of the century.
The whole ‘triad’ of strategic arms was to be involved, including land-based missiles, sea-launched missiles and heavy bombers.
Both US and Soviet intermediate-range missiles in Europe were to be eliminated entirely, without reference to the British and French deterrents (this was a concession as compared with the Soviet position at Geneva); and discussions should start immediately on the elimination of such missiles from Asia, and on shorter-range or tactical missiles.
The ABM treaty was to be respected by both sides for at least a further ten years (it was of indefinite duration but both sides had the right to withdraw after due notice).
Laboratory research on SDI could continue; but it could not, Gorbachev insisted, be tested, let alone deployed, in space.
And it was on this point that the discussions broke down, as Gorbachev was unwilling to allow any element in his package of proposals to be approved without agreement on all the others.
The Politburo, at its meeting on 14 October, blamed the breakdown of negotiations on the Americans, but called for further meetings and discussions on the basis of the proposals that the Soviet side had put forward.
The third summit between the two leaders, which took place in Washington in December 1987, was undoubtedly the most significant.
Indeed it was historic, in that it provided for the first time for the elimination of an entire class of nuclear arms — land-based missiles of intermediate and shorter range.
Although this represented no more than 4–5 per cent of their combined nuclear arsenals, it was nonetheless the first significant agreement of this kind between the two powers since the ABM treaty of 1972, and was held by both sides to presage the conclusion of an agreement the following year which would make cuts of up to 50 per cent in strategic nuclear arms.
The agreement, which was of unlimited duration, made no direct reference to SDI; nor did it involve conventional or chemical weapons, although both sides expressed a wish to reach an agreement on such matters at the earliest opportunity.
Little progress was apparent on ‘regional issues’, particularly Afghanistan and Central America, or on human rights, where the final communiqué recorded that a ‘thorough and candid discussion’ had taken place.
The two sides, however, did instruct their negotiators at Geneva to ‘work out an agreement that would commit the sides to observe the ABM treaty, as signed in 1972’, and to devise  measures which would help to ‘ensure a predictability in the development of the US-Soviet strategic relationship under conditions of strategic stability, to reduce the risk of nuclear war’.
Further measures were agreed to improve Soviet-American bilateral relations; and President Reagan accepted Gorbachev's invitation to visit the USSR the following year.
In his television address to the Soviet people on the results of the summit Gorbachev described the INF treaty as a ‘major event in world politics’ and a ‘victory for the new political thinking’, which represented a ‘first step towards the actual liquidation of the nuclear arsenal’.
Although only a small number of weapons had been eliminated, scientists had calculated that just 5 per cent of the weapons that existed were sufficient to destroy the world.
The agreement, moreover, had shown that it was possible to restrain and even reverse the arms race.
There were still powerful forces in the West, however, that were opposed to ratification of the treaty and anxious to ‘compensate’ for it by the modernisation of existing arsenals and the rapid development of SDI.
Such ‘dangerous tendencies’ could undermine the achievement of the summit in helping to bring about the demilitarisation of international relations.
The Politburo, meeting on 17 December, welcomed the agreement as ‘historic’; and Soviet public opinion, according at least to some rapidly-conducted opinion polls, appeared to take the same view.
A telephone poll in Moscow, for instance, found that 42 per cent of respondents thought the results of the summit were ‘very good’, and that a further 44 per cent thought they were ‘good’; at the same time only 37 per cent thought the treaty would strengthen the security of the USSR, and 8 per cent thought it might be detrimental to Soviet interests.
The fact that more than four times as many Soviet warheads were to be withdrawn as American ones gave rise to particular misgivings.
The fourth and final summit between the two leaders took place in Moscow in May-June 1988; it was the first visit by a US president to the Soviet capital for fourteen years.
During the summit talks were held on arms control, human rights, and regional and bilateral issues, with both sides reportedly obtaining a ‘better understanding of each other 's positions’ on all such matters.
The INF treaty, agreed at Washington the previous December, was formally signed by the two leaders on 1 June, following its ratification a few days earlier by the US Senate and by the USSR Supreme Soviet (the first Soviet rockets were destroyed, to some publicity, in early August).
A joint statement issued by the two leaders described the meeting as an ‘important step in the process of  putting US-Soviet relations on a more productive and sustainable basis’; in particular, a draft treaty on the reduction and limitation of strategic nuclear arms had been discussed and a series of agreements had been made on the contentious question of the verification of nuclear testing.
Nevertheless, ‘serious differences’ remained on important issues.
Gorbachev, at a press conference on 1 June, expressed the view that more could have been achieved, including a joint statement of political principle and some advance in the discussions on conventional arms, and complained of a certain ‘contradictoriness’ in the American position.
But politics, in the end, was the ‘art of the possible’.
The Politburo, at its meeting a few days later, described the summit as a ‘major event in international life’ whose main result had been the ‘deepening of the political dialogue between the Soviet Union and the USA’; and the dialogue did, indeed, continue under Reagan's successor George Bush, first at a storm-tossed ‘get to know you’summit off Malta and then more formally in the course of an official presidential visit to the United States in 1990.
This, the first extended Bush-Gorbachev summit, was hailed as a new beginning in US-Soviet relations, despite acknowledged and continuing differences on a number of key bilateral and international issues.
Formally speaking, the summit resulted in several agreements, including a convention banning the production of chemical weapons and a series of bilateral agreements on trade, energy, education and cultural cooperation.
In particular, the Soviet Union secured ‘most favoured nation’ access to the US market for the first time for fifty years.
A more far-reaching agreement on reductions in strategic nuclear arms, which at the time of the Malta summit had been thought imminent, was deferred for further discussion.
Gorbachev, at the two leaders' concluding press conference, described the summit as an ‘event of enormous importance for our bilateral relations’ and added that one could now speak of a ‘new phase of cooperation’between the two countries.
A third and, as it turned out, final summit between the two leaders took place in Moscow in July 1991.
The most significant single development at the summit was the signing of a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty which committed each side to a reduction of 30 per cent in its stock of weapons.
In separate talks the US President met Presidents Yel'tsin and Nazarbaev, and he also travelled to Kiev to address the Ukrainian parliament; this was a recognition that Soviet foreign policy had become multipolar even before the USSR had been replaced by its constituent republics.
Gorbachev and the communist world
Relations between the communist states had for some time been less amicable than a common dedication to working-class interests might have suggested.
The first split occurred as early as 1948 when Yugoslavia was denounced by the Soviet Union and its allies for supposedly giving too much favour to peasants at the expense of the working class and for exercising party authority in an insufficiently decisive manner.
In fact there appears to be no doubt that Stalin simply resented the independence that the Yugoslav leaders were displaying and believed they could be brought to heel as easily as communist leaders in other parts of Eastern Europe.
If so, he miscalculated badly: the Yugoslavs arrested Soviet supporters within the communist party and weathered the storm with a largely united people behind them.
In 1955 Khrushchev and Bulganin made a visit to Belgrade in an attempt to secure a reconciliation, and the following year a Soviet-Yugoslav communiqué was signed in Moscow which brought the dispute to an end.
The Yugoslavs were allowed to retain their non-aligned status, and kept to their ‘national path to communism’ which differed in important respects from that of the other communist-ruled countries.
A dispute in Hungary at about the same time was not resolved so amicably, at least in part because Hungary occupied a far more important strategic position in terms of Soviet security than did Yugoslavia.
An attempt to establish a ‘liberal communist’ regime under Imre Nagy which appeared likely to take Hungary out of the Warsaw Treaty Organisation was brutally crushed by Soviet tanks in October 1956, and a new leadership under János Kádár was installed which took a long time to establish any measure of domestic support.
The next crisis in inter-communist relations was a result of the attempt by the Dubček leadership in Czechoslovakia to establish an alternative model of socialism, one that accorded more closely with the humanistic and democratic traditions of their country.
There was apparently no Soviet objection in January 1968 when, following economic and other difficulties, Antonín Novotný was replaced as party first secretary by Alexander Dubček, a Slovak who had received part of his education in the USSR.
With the publication of the party's ‘Action Programme’ in April 1968, however, it became clear that relatively far-reaching changes were envisaged, among them the abolition of censorship, restrictions on the power of the secret police, a genuinely independent judiciary and freedom of travel.
After direct  negotiations with the Czech party leadership proved of no avail, the USSR and four other Warsaw Pact allies intervened militarily in August 1968 and reestablished communist orthodoxy.
An authoritative article in Pravda entitled ‘The defence of socialism is the highest international duty’ set out what later became known as the ‘Brezhnev doctrine’: this insisted that the interests of the communist countries as a whole took priority over the wishes of any individual communist country and that no defection from the communist camp could be permitted.
Brezhnev himself, addressing the Polish party congress in November 1968, made it clear that any threat to the socialist order in a given country would be considered ‘not only a problem of the people of the country in question, but a general problem and concern of all the socialist countries’.
Difficulties in Soviet relations with its East European neighbours continued into the 1970s and 1980s, particularly in Romania (which had not taken part in the invasion of Czechoslovakia and refused to allow any Soviet troops to be stationed on its territory) and above all in Poland.
Stalin is reported to have remarked at the end of the war that to establish communist rule in Poland would be like ‘trying to saddle a cow’ and Soviet relations with that country (the largest and most populous in Eastern Europe) have borne out these apprehensions.
Perhaps the most important single explanation was that Polish political values and practices were rather closer to those of Western Europe than to those of the more authoritarian East.
Poland, for instance, unlike Russia, was a participant in and indeed an important contributor to the great movements in early modern European history, such as the Renaissance and the scientific revolution, and the country's legal system, literary forms and religious faith aligned it firmly with the liberal West rather than the more authoritarian East.
An estimated 90 per cent of the population adhered to the Roman Catholic faith, and the Church had a massive presence in Polish society, including its own university, large numbers of priests, newspapers and periodicals, and representatives in the armed forces and the Polish parliament, the Sejm.
The election of Cardinal Wojtyla of Krakow as Pope John Paul II in 1978 and his visits to Poland in 1979 and subsequently emphasised these attachments and strengthened the historic association between the Catholic faith and Polish nationhood.
The Polish leadership, headed by Edward Gierek, had been experiencing increasing economic difficulties during the 1970s as an overambitious expansion programme began to founder and foreign debts began to mount.
Efforts to improve matters by raising prices and  reducing subsidies led to open resistance and had to be rescinded.
The regime became increasingly draconian in its attempts to deal with the problems it was confronting; the society, in turn, began to establish public associations of all kinds, most notably the workers' defence committee (KSS-KOR), which were independent of party and state control.
In July 1980 a dispute at the Lenin shipyards in the Baltic port of Gdansk led to the formation of an inter-strike committee and shortly afterwards to the establishment of Solidarity, the first (and so far the last) genuinely self-governing trade union that has ever existed in a communist-ruled country.
Solidarity, at its peak, embraced more than 9 million of Poland's 13 million workers; it prompted the formation of a country counterpart, Rural Solidarity, and profoundly affected the ruling Polish United Workers' Party, about a third of whose members are estimated to have joined Solidarity at this time.
The regime (headed by Stanislaw Kania after Gierek's resignation in 1980, and then from 1981 by Wojciech Jaruzelski) committed itself to a programme of ‘renewal’(odnowa ), but the economic situation continued to deteriorate, while Solidarity for its part became increasingly powerful, radical and politicised in its objectives.
Developments of this kind were obviously worrying to the Soviet leadership, which began to speak openly of the dangers of ‘internal counter-revolution’.
This had normally been sufficient pretext for direct military intervention, and some action of this kind appears to have been under consideration in December 1980 and again in March 1981.
The Soviet party also expressed its concern in a letter of June 1981 to the Central Committee of the Polish party.
The letter expressed the CPSU's ‘deep anxiety for the fate of socialism in Poland’, regretted that the necessary measures had not been taken against domestic anti-Soviet and anti-socialist forces, and called upon the Polish party to ‘reverse the course of events and channel them in the right direction’.
In the end the situation was not restored (from the Soviet point of view) until December 1981, when Jaruzelski declared a state of martial law, suspending Solidarity and interning some of its most prominent members.
The Polish-Soviet alliance, he promised in a public broadcast, would remain the ‘cornerstone’ of Polish foreign policy; Poland would also remain an ‘indestructible part of the Warsaw Treaty and a reliable member of the socialist community of nations’.
Jaruzelski's action may have pre-empted Soviet military intervention, but it did not, in the long run, resolve the problem of political order, nor indeed the problem of economic reform.
It was not in fact until a newly legalised Solidarity had been successful at the  polls and formed a majority administration in 1989 that the making of public policy began again to command at least a minimum of public acceptability.
The Soviet response, this time round, was to accept the election of a Solidarity prime minister with relatively good grace (Jaruzelski, after all, had become president); more generally, Soviet theorists began to accept that socialist countries could have legitimate differences of interest and that these could be resolved only through discussion, not by the imposition of a Soviet diktat .
Soviet relations with the largest of its neighbours, the People's Republic of China  have also been difficult and at times have broken down altogether.
The Chinese leaders appear to have been dissatisfied with a number of aspects of the Sino-Soviet treaty of 1950, and at the 20th Congress of the CPSU in 1956 they were reportedly unhappy about the manner in which Khrushchev had denounced the actions of Stalin.
The Chinese, as late as 1957, still accepted Soviet leadership of the international communist movement: ‘in the socialist camp there must be a head’, Mao explained to students at Moscow University, ‘and that head is the Soviet Union.
Among the communist and workers’ parties of all countries there must be a head, and that head is the CPSU'.
Soviet support for the Chinese atomic programme, nonetheless, was withdrawn the following year, the USSR was neutral during the Sino-Indian war of 1959, and in 1960 the dispute between the two communist giants came into the open.
Khrushchev, speaking at the Romanian Communist Party Congress in June of that year, attacked the Chinese leadership by name.
All Soviet technicians were withdrawn; trade between the two countries dropped off sharply; and a series of hostile open letters was exchanged, the Chinese accusing the Russians of ‘revisionism’ while the Russians accused the Chinese of ‘dogmatism’and ‘splittism’(or of attempting to break up the world communist movement).
Relations deteriorated still further during the late 1960s.
In 1966 both sides recalled their ambassadors, and in 1969 open military hostilities broke out along the Ussuri river, which marks the Sino-Soviet border in Siberia.
Since then relations have slowly normalised.
Negotiations on matters in dispute were opened in 1969; in 1970 the ambassadors returned to their posts; and trade began to increase substantially.
The two sides, however, were still separated by traditional rivalries extending over several centuries as well as by differing interpretations of Marxism, disputed borders and rivalry in their relations with other countries; indeed it was perhaps surprising that their earlier association had lasted as long as it did.
So far as the Chinese were concerned, in the late 1970s, there were ‘three great obstacles’ to the restoration of closer relations: Soviet troops in Afghanistan, the Soviet military presence along their long common border, and Soviet support for the Vietnamese-sponsored regime in Kampuchea.
The Soviet leadership, for its part, deplored Chinese policy on many international issues but called for the normalisation of relations ‘on the basis of peaceful coexistence’.
By 1981, however, in Brezhnev's view ‘unfortunately’, there was still no sign of an improvement in the relationship.
Gorbachev, in his accession speech, called specifically for closer relations between the USSR and China, and added that this was ‘entirely feasible’ if there was some reciprocity on the Chinese side.
The Chinese deputy premier Li Peng, who was in Moscow for the occasion, publicly agreed that an improvement in relations was desirable; an agreement on educational exchanges and a trade pact followed later in the year.
Gorbachev, addressing the 27th CPSU Congress in 1986, was able to welcome the improvement that had already taken place in relations with ‘socialist China’.
Differences remained; but it was also clear that in many cases the two countries could work together, on an equal and principled basis, without prejudice to the interests of other countries.
In a speech at Vladivostok the following July he expanded these remarks to a broad conception of an Asian security zone.
The Pacific region, Gorbachev observed, had not been militarised to the same extent as Europe.
There was however some danger of developments of this kind given the resources of the powers that were active in the region.
The two biggest wars since 1945, the Korean and Vietnamese, had taken place in Asia; and there was no counterpart to the Helsinki Final Act and the framework of dialogue it had established.
In these circumstances, Gorbachev explained, the Soviet Union would expand its bilateral ties with all the states, socialist and non-socialist, in the region.
He indicated, on a point of particular importance to the Chinese, that the withdrawal of a substantial number of the Soviet troops stationed in Mongolia was under active consideration; and he announced that six Soviet regiments were being withdrawn from Afghanistan.
The Soviet Union and China, Gorbachev observed, had the same priority — to accelerate social and economic development; and he suggested specific forms of cooperation in cross-border trade, railways and space exploration.
Gorbachev welcomed the broader ideas that were in circulation concerning Pacific economic cooperation and the possibility of a Pacific ‘Helsinki’.
More significantly, he supported proposals to establish a Pacific nuclear-free zone and to lower levels of troops and armaments to that of ‘reasonable sufficiency’.
Proposals such as these went a long way to alleviate Chinese concerns and brought closer the possibility of a summit meeting between the two leaderships for which Soviet spokesmen had for some time been calling.
The final obstacles were removed when the Chinese foreign minister visited Moscow in December 1988 and Shevardnadze visited Peking early the following year; both sides agreed on the desirability of ‘Chinese-Soviet relations of a new type’.
Gorbachev, finally, was able to visit Peking in May 1989, the first Soviet leader to do so for thirty years.
The talks, inevitably, were overshadowed by public demonstrations of support for the Soviet leader which in turn contributed to a wave of public resistance to the policies of the Chinese government itself.
There was some substance, none the less, to Gorbachev's claim that relations between the two countries were entering a ‘qualitatively new stage’, and he suggested several ways in which such relations could be carried further, including a new ‘liquid coal’ pipeline, a new ‘silk way’from China to Europe, and various forms of inter-regional cooperation.
The joint communiqué with which the visit concluded welcomed the normalisation of relations between the two countries, and between their two ruling parties.
Both sides welcomed the Vietnamese commitment to withdraw their troops from Kampuchea; the level of armed forces along the Sino-Soviet border would be reduced to a minimum, and any remaining territorial differences would be resolved on the basis of international law.
In the spring of 1991 the reconciliation was sealed when the Chinese party leader Jiang Zemin visited Moscow, the first visit of its kind since the days of Mao Zedong.
Soviet policy and the developing world
Soviet policymakers had generally taken little interest in the colonial or newly independent world during the Stalin years.
Under Khrushchev, however, there was a reassessment, and Soviet policy from this time onwards began to seek links of all kinds with the developing nations both at the political level and through trade, investment, arms sales, the training of students and so forth.
A particularly close interest was taken in states of ‘socialist orientation’ in the developing world, particularly in Africa.
States of ‘socialist orientation’, in the Soviet view, were those that were carrying out major social transformations such as the nationalisation of foreign monopolies, redistribution of land and industrialisation, and which were taking steps to further public education and to reduce poverty and unemployment.
Of particular importance from the Soviet point of view, states of this kind were held to be ‘objectively anti-imperialist’ in that they generally opposed the substantial control over their domestic affairs that had traditionally been exercised by the major capitalist powers.
Some countries of ‘socialist orientation’, such as Afghanistan, became very close allies of the USSR in the Brezhnev years and indeed all but members of the socialist state system.
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979 followed a coup in that country in April 1978 which brought a pro-Soviet Marxist government to power headed by Hafizullah Amin.
The coup was apparently neither instigated nor expected by the Soviet authorities, and it brought a regime to power which was bitterly divided by factional differences.
The new government provoked widespread rebellion by instituting a series of far-reaching reforms in a brutal and disorganised manner.
Before December 1979 there were already 7,000 Soviet military and civilian advisers in Afghanistan, but the government called for further Soviet support to suppress the domestic resistance.
On 24 December the Soviet authorities, fearing a further change of government and perhaps of political orientation, began to airlift troops into Kabul; it was claimed that they were responding to an appeal from the Afghan government to suppress a counter-revolution which was being fomented from outside the country, and that their action was justified by the Soviet-Afghan friendship treaty.
On 27 December Babrak Karmal, who had been a member of the post-coup government but who had subsequently been exiled to the USSR, announced that the former president had been deposed and that he had taken power; the following day it was announced that Hafizullah Amin had been executed for ‘crimes against the noble people of Afghanistan’.
The months and years that followed saw the establishment of a much more substantial Soviet presence in Afghanistan than any that had previously existed, including political and economic links as well as a growing military commitment.
For at least some Western observers Soviet action was not simply a violation of international agreements but an attempt to establish a greater degree of influence in the Persian Gulf, an area of enormous significance for Western oil supplies and one in which the Western position had already been weakened by the overthrow of the Shah of Iran.
Others saw the action in a more defensive light: as Brezhnev explained at the 26th Party Congress in 1981, the situation in Afghanistan posed a ‘direct threat to the security of [the Soviet]southern frontier’, and it was certainly true that an unstable, possibly militant Islamic government in a state  immediately adjoining the USSR's southern borders might have quite serious implications for public order in the traditionally Muslim republics of Central Asia.
Whatever the Soviet objectives might have been, it soon became apparent that it would be very difficult to achieve them.
Babrak Karmal, for a start, proved unable to unite the warring Khalq (Masses) and Parcham (Banner) factions of the People's Democratic Party, the organisation upon which his authority depended.
Karmal was subsequently replaced as party leader and president by Najibullah, but there was little progress in establishing the broadly-based ‘government of national reconciliation’ which was his declared objective.
There was considerable destruction in Afghanistan itself: between a quarter and a fifth of the population became refugees, perhaps a million Afghans died, and a series of civil and military objects including roads, bridges and airfields were destroyed.
Soviet forces were able to employ enormous firepower, including helicopter gunships and SU-25 attack aircraft, but they established firm control only in the major cities and along the major highways, and much of the countryside remained in the hands of the Mujahaddin guerrillas.
The war was an unsatisfactory one for the USSR in several other respects.
It alienated world opinion, particularly in the Third World; it was very expensive (according to figures made public in 1989, the cost was about 5 billion rubles annually ); and it was very costly in terms of human life (according to figures again made public in 1989, nearly 14,000 Soviet servicemen lost their lives in the course of the war, more than 11,000 of them in combat ).
The war became a most unpopular one domestically as the toll of dead and injured steadily mounted.
Despite attempts to glamorise those who died fulfilling their ‘internationalist duty’ in Afghanistan, there were many letters in the Soviet press complaining of the one-sided treatment of the war that had been provided in the Soviet media and of the failure to make proper provision for the wounded on their return to the USSR.
There were even suggestions, in published letters, that senior officials had used their influence to prevent their own sons being sent to the front line.
Pravda reported that most of the ‘thousands’ of letters it had received asked the simple question: ‘When is the war going to end?’
Influenced by considerations such as these, successive leaderships had attempted since almost the beginning of the war to extricate their forces from the conflict.
Soviet forces were not, at least in the first instance, to be withdrawn unconditionally.
Rather, in negotiations that had proceeded under United Nations auspices since 1981, they  were to withdraw upon a number of specific conditions.
As Brezhnev told the 26th Party Congress in 1981, ‘The sovereignty of Afghanistan must be fully protected, as must its non-aligned status’.
This meant in practice that all foreign intervention, by the United States and Pakistan as well as the USSR, must come to an end; secure guarantees must be provided that there would be no further intervention in Afghan affairs; and the People's Democratic Party (which remained strongly Soviet-aligned) was to be accorded a dominant position in any future Afghan government.
Further negotiations led finally to a series of agreements, signed in Geneva in April 1988, providing for the withdrawal of Soviet forces.
The agreements — comparable, in Pravda 's view, to the INF treaty  — included bilateral accords between Afghanistan and Pakistan on non-interference and non-intervention, and on the voluntary return of refugees; a Soviet-US declaration in support of these agreements; and a joint agreement on the settlement of the Afghan situation which provided for the ‘phased withdrawal’ of Soviet troops, half of them between May and August 1988 and the remainder within the following nine months.
Soviet troop withdrawals began on 15 May and were completed on schedule on 15 February 1989; Shevardnadze, addressing the Supreme Soviet the following October, described the original decision to intervene as a violation of ‘general human values’ and of party and state procedures.
Developments in Afghanistan assumed a greater significance for Western governments than they would otherwise have had because of the place they appeared to occupy in an ‘Arc of Crisis’ that extended from the Middle East to South-Eastern Asia.
The formation of an anti-Western government in Iran after the fall of the Shah, the increasingly explicit Marxist-Leninist orientation of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and Soviet involvement in the Horn of Africa, together with the build-up of the Soviet fleet in the Indian Ocean, seemed to offer convincing evidence of a wide-ranging and effective Soviet strategy directed against vital Western interests, not least the supply of oil and the security of major shipping routes.
The intervention of Cuban troops in Angola in 1975 and in the Ogaden war between Ethiopia and Somalia in 1977–78 — in both cases, it was assumed, acting as Soviet proxies — appeared to provide further evidence of a new global interventionism.
It was in these circumstances that Western governments began to consider initiatives such as a rapid deployment force in the Gulf area and other measures designed to protect their essential interests.
Soviet strategy had in fact been much more reactive and rather less successful than this picture tended to suggest.
This was clearly the case in Soviet relations with Egypt, which became the USSR's most important ally in the Middle East after the mid-1950s when Western governments refused to finance the Aswan Dam.
The USSR had been one of the first governments to recognise the state of Israel in 1948, but Soviet support was thereafter thrown behind the Arab cause and behind the Egyptian war effort in particular.
Soviet-Egyptian relations remained close even after the death of Nasser in 1970, and the following year, under his successor Anwar Sadat, the two states concluded a fifteen-year friendship treaty, the first of its kind to be made between the USSR and an Arab government.
Its twelve articles covered military as well as economic collaboration, and the Soviet presence in Egypt in the early 1970s became the largest anywhere outside the communist bloc at this time.
In 1972, however, following a number of disagreements, 20,000 Soviet military advisers were ordered to leave the country.
In 1976 the friendship treaty was abrogated, Soviet debts (some US$11 billion) were repudiated, and the Egyptians moved closer to the USA, which had played a central role in the Camp David and other peace negotiations in the area.
In 1984, under Sadat's successor Mubarak, the two countries again exchanged ambassadors, but there seemed little likelihood that Soviet-Egyptian relations would ever regain their former intimacy.
Rather closer relations were maintained, in the late 1980s, with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen), which signed a friendship treaty with the USSR in 1979 but remained a very minor power in terms of size and influence.
Military cooperation also led to the conclusion of a friendship treaty with North Yemen in 1984.
Iraq, with whom a friendship treaty was concluded in 1972, remained a much more important Soviet ally in the region, but relations were sometimes difficult, particularly following the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war in 1980.
The conflict was an ‘absolutely senseless’ one, according to Brezhnev at this time, and the USSR initially took a broadly neutral position, hoping to retain the alliance with Iraq but at the same time not to alienate the new and anti-Western Khomeini government in Iran.
Latterly the USSR appeared to have reverted to its traditional support for Iraq, while calling for a negotiated settlement at the earliest opportunity.
The August 1988 ceasefire was warmly welcomed.
Close relations were also maintained with Syria (which concluded a friendship treaty with the USSR in 1980), and with India, which signed a friendship treaty as early as 1971 and which remained one of the  closest of the USSR's non-communist allies under Indira Gandhi and her successor Rajiv.
The USSR became India's main external source of weaponry and rendered extensive economic aid; Soviet support was in part a response to the support that Pakistan received from the Chinese, with whom the Indians had an unresolved border dispute.
Gorbachev had made an official visit to India in November 1986, concluding with the signature of a ‘Delhi Declaration’ in which both sides pledged themselves to the peaceful resolution of international disputes.
A further official visit took place in November 1988, in the course of which both sides reaffirmed their commitment to the Declaration and to the elaboration of a long-term programme for economic, trade, cultural, and scientific cooperation to the year 2000.
Relations with the largest non-Arab country in the Middle East, Iran, were rather more complex both before and after the fall of the Shah.
Soviet agreements with the Shah included credits for arms purchases and the construction of an oil pipeline.
Iran, in fact, was the Soviet Union's largest trading partner in the Middle East during this period.
After the overthrow of the Shah in 1979 the USSR ordered the local communist party (Tudeh) to support the Ayatollah Khomeini, and even began to supply the new regime with weapons.
As Brezhnev explained to the 26th CPSU Congress in 1981, developments in Iran were ‘complex and contradictory’ but what had taken place was nonetheless an ‘anti-imperialist revolution’.
Relations were not disturbed even when the Khomeini government arrested Tudeh leaders and dissolved their movement in 1983.
Latterly, however, the Khomeini regime began to describe the USSR as the ‘greater Satan’; cultural exchanges were ended, the size of the Soviet mission was restricted, Soviet journalists were refused entry visas, and in March 1988 there was an attack upon the Soviet embassy in Tehran.
Both Soviet and American leaders, by the late 1980s, had a common interest in a negotiated end to the Iran-Iraq war and in an international agreement guaranteeing freedom of movement in the Persian Gulf, but neither could necessarily manipulate events in the region to its advantage and neither, perhaps, quite understood the nature of a popular movement so far removed from its own cultural assumptions.
This varied picture of successes and reverses suggested that the USSR was not, in the ‘Arc of Crisis’ or anywhere else, pursuing a long-term strategy based on Marxist-Leninist doctrine.
The evidence suggested rather that the USSR was a defensive and sometimes opportunist power, responding to changing circumstances in much the same way that any other government (or its tsarist predecessor) might have  done.
Nor was it a particularly successful strategy, despite some apparently spectacular advances in Africa and Afghanistan.
The Soviet Union, for instance, sometimes backed the wrong horse (such as Nkomo rather than Mugabe in Zimbabwe).
The main instruments of Soviet influence were arms sales and direct subsidies, both expensive to maintain, and neither necessarily secured a permanent commitment (Egypt and Somalia, for instance, abrogated their friendship treaties with the USSR in the 1970s, and the USSR was unable to prevent the replacement of a friendly regime in Grenada by American military action in 1983).
Local allies, it turned out, were often reluctant to accept guidance from the USSR; some of them (Egypt, Iraq, the Sudan and Ethiopia) persecuted and even executed large numbers of their domestic communist party members, and others took different views on international issues (Iraq, for instance, openly supported Somalia in the Ogaden war).
Soviet allies sometimes found themselves opposed to each other(such as the Ba'athist governments of Syria and Iraq, or Ethiopia and Somalia), and others entered into agreements with Soviet adversaries (both Angola and Mozambique, for instance , signed non-aggression agreements with South Africa in 1984, and Soviet clients generally found it difficult to resist the powerful influence of Western governments and corporations, or in the case of Ethiopia, relief agencies).
It was perhaps above all because of this disenchanting experience that the USSR, under Gorbachev's leadership, began to take a more distanced view of the future development of Third World states.
Gorbachev's report to the 27th CPSU Congress in 1986 was the first in modern times to make no reference to the need to assist ‘national liberation’ movements in the developing countries; rather, the Soviet leader appeared to favour a ‘comprehensive system of international security’involving ‘the use for the welfare of the world community, above all of the developing countries, of part of the funds that [would]be released as a result of the reduction in military budgets’.
The Party Programme, adopted at the same congress, promised only that the Soviet Union would ‘do what it could’ to assist socialist-oriented states in the developing world; and authoritative commentaries made it clear that the USSR preferred the peaceful settlement of regional conflicts rather than the ‘export of revolution’.
Its policy during the Gulf War of 1991 strongly favoured a political settlement and a wider set of negotiations, including the Arab-Israeli dispute, but in the end remained consistent with United Nations resolutions notwithstanding the Soviet friendship treaty with the Iraqi government.
The USSR, as  before, remained ready to further its own interests wherever it could, and those interests were not always in agreement with those of Western governments — nor had they been in tsarist times.
There was, however, a greater awareness of the need to develop a framework of rules which could operate in the interests of the world community as a whole — against terrorism or narcotics, for instance— and a greater readiness to establish relations with traditionally conservative states, such as the Arab monarchies, as well as with those that claimed to adhere to Marxism-Leninism.
How far this reorientation extended was likely to depend at least as much upon the responses of Western governments and the behaviour of the other states concerned as it did upon the Soviet authorities themselves.
Gorbachev's foreign policy: a balance sheet
If Gorbachev enjoyed success in any sphere it was perhaps above all foreign policy.
His ‘new thinking’, admittedly, was not necessarily new: the central propositions had been discussed by Soviet specialists for some time, and the term itself appeared to derive from Bertrand Russell's New Thinking for the Nuclear Age , published in 1960.
The ideas of a ‘common European home’, similarly, had first been employed by Brezhnev during a visit to West Germany in 1981.
The term ‘new thinking’ was in any case a ‘general framework for policy rather than a detailed plan of action’.
Original or not, the application of such concepts under the Gorbachev leadership brought considerable rewards from the point of view of Soviet interests.
The conclusion of a major arms agreement with the United States was perhaps the central achievement; but still more important was the restoration of normal relations with the other global superpower after the collapse of detente in the late 1970s.
The Soviet Union, under Gorbachev, broadened its relations more generally with the world community with Latin American states apart from Cuba, with the Vatican, with Israel, and even with South Africa.
Relations with the other communist giant, the People's Republic of China, had improved remarkably at both a state and a party-to-party level.
In some ways most striking of all, the perception of the Soviet Union as a closed, aggressive society had been largely replaced by one of a changing and liberalising system genuinely committed to peace and headed by a dynamic, Kennedyesque leader and his personable wife.
Gorbachev made a considerable personal contribution to this changing image.
He went out of his way to meet foreign visitors from all  walks of life — politicians certainly, but also a delegation from a Nobel prizewinners' congress, a group of doctors connected with the medical movement against nuclear war, the Latin American writer Gabriel Garcia Marquez, a group of writers including Arthur Miller and James Baldwin who were attending the Issyl-Kum forum in 1986, and many others.
He travelled abroad incessantly, making at least two major foreign visits a year: in 1989, for instance, he carried out official visits to Britain, France, Finland and West Germany, visited Cuba, East Germany and China, took part in the first-ever summit between the Soviet Union and Ireland during a stop-over at Shannon airport, and still found time to meet the new US President George Bush in December after a state visit to Italy and a first-ever meeting with the Pope.
Gorbachev was Man of the Year for Time magazine in 1987 and for Der Spiegel in 1988; in 1989 he was ‘statesman of the decade’ for independent television in Britain; in 1990 he was Man of the Year in France and received the Nobel Peace Prize.
He was trusted, according to opinion polls, rather more in Western Europe than his American counterpart, and the regime he headed was seen as more seriously committed to peace and disarmament.
Even in the United States there was a considerable change: in 1984 about 60 per cent of Americans thought of the USSR as an ‘evil empire’, according to the Los Angeles Times , but by late 1987 nearly 70 per cent took a different view.
And Gallup found that more than half of Americans polled were ‘favourably’ disposed towards Gorbachev, the highest rating for any Soviet leader since the Second World War.
On some occasions, such as his visit to West Germany in 1989, the popular response was described as ‘Gorbymania’.
It was nonetheless closer to the truth to describe Gorbachev's foreign policy as a ‘diplomacy of decline’.
The agreements with the United States had been bought at the cost of disproportionate cuts in Soviet weaponry and were clearly dictated by the need to reduce military spending, a much heavier relative burden for the USSR than for the United States.
The propaganda campaign against the deployment of Euromissiles was lost, despite considerable public opposition in the countries concerned; and the war in Afghanistan was brought to an end, because of its cost as well as unpopularity, on terms that offered no guarantee the Najibullah government would survive or that external intervention in its affairs would cease (it finally collapsed in 1992).
More seriously, the Soviet alliance system in Eastern Europe began to disappear as a series of popular revolutions overturned the communist governments in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania and the GDR (which became a part of Germany and thereby of NATO under the terms of a treaty signed by the two Germanies, France, Britain and the United States as well as the Soviet Union in September 1990).
The Warsaw Treaty Organisation and CMEA, reflecting these developments, were formally dissolved in 1991.
Gorbachev, speaking to the Central Committee in December 1989, professed to welcome the ‘positive changes’ that had taken place in Eastern Europe, but it was difficult to disguise the fact that the sphere of influence acquired at great cost during World War II had disappeared, probably for good.
The world communist movement, meanwhile, had virtually collapsed as an organised force, and individual parties had lost ground in nearly all the countries in which they had a legal existence (some had simply disappeared).
Nor did these developments give a misleading impression of Soviet influence on world affairs.
According to a careful investigation of such matters which was published in the West in the late Brezhnev years, Soviet global influence was at its height in the 1950s, when about 14 per cent of the world's nations could be described as Soviet-aligned; by the late 1970s, however, the total had fallen to 12 per cent.
There was certainly ‘no significant Soviet geopolitical momentum in recent years’.
Soviet influence, moreover, was overwhelmingly concentrated among the poorest and least important countries in terms of population and GNP, whose support was often more of a liability than an asset; the world's major military and industrial powers, by contrast, were all allied or aligned with the United States.
In 1958, according to the same calculations, the Soviet Union influenced 31 per cent of the world's population and 9 per cent of the world's GNP (excluding the USSR itself); by 1979 the USSR influenced only 6 per cent of the world's population and only 5 per cent of the world's GNP, again excluding the USSR itself.
‘If these data indicated anything’, the authors concluded, ‘it is the decline of Soviet world influence since the 1950s.’
Perhaps symptomatically, successive Soviet General Secretaries, from Stalin to Brezhnev, had boasted at party congresses that the ‘correlation of forces’ on the world arena was changing steadily to the advantage of socialism and the Soviet Union.
Gorbachev, at the 27th Party Congress in 1986, made no such claim and indeed could not realistically have done so.
In these and other respects, it was difficult to separate the success or failure of Soviet foreign policy from the achievements of perestroika as a whole.
The weakness of the Soviet position internationally reflected the weakness of the Soviet economy, which accounted for a small and  diminishing share of world trade and provided no secure basis for the exercise of global influence.
As Shevardnadze put it in a speech to foreign ministry staff in 1987, they represented a country which for the previous fifteen years had been ‘more and more losing its position as one of the leading industrially developed countries’.
The declining appeal of socialist ideas was openly acknowledged, for instance, by Anatolii Dobrynin, the veteran US ambassador and later Central Committee Secretary, and by the commentator Alexander Bovin, for whom the changes in Eastern Europe were evidence that ‘the great socialist experiment that spanned the entire twentieth century had failed’.
Justifiably or not, the Soviet Union in the later Brezhnev years had provided no advertisement for socialism, and even communist parties in other countries had felt compelled to distance themselves from the Soviet model and the heritage of Leninism.
Gorbachev's response to these developments appeared to be twofold, so far as foreign policy was concerned.
His first objective was to restore the authority of Soviet socialism by economic reform and political democratisation; the second, much more ambitious objective was to reposition Soviet communism in relation to the European tradition from which it had originally emerged, seeking to build up a coalition of working class, religious, ecological, youth and other forces which could unite around the slogan of peace and social justice, if not necessarily Marxism-Leninism.
At the end of the Gorbachev administration the success of both objectives remained problematic.
Gorbachev and the politics of perestroika
If economic reform was the ‘key to all our problems’ at the outset of Gorbachev's administration and political reform increasingly the means by which it was to be accomplished, the ultimate objective remained the achievement of a form of socialism which advanced decisively on those that had preceded it.
Gorbachev described this vision at the April 1985 plenum, hardly in the most memorable of terms, as a ‘qualitatively new state [sostoyanie ]of society’.
Elsewhere he referred to it as ‘developing socialism’, differentiating it from the ‘developed socialism’ that was supposed to have been constructed in the Brezhnev era and still more so from the utopian vision of a society rapidly advancing towards full communism that had been current in the Khrushchev years.
Still later, from 1990 onwards, the emphasis shifted to ‘humane, democratic socialism’.
And yet six years into the new administration, or even after it, the nature of Gorbachevian socialism remained frustratingly elusive.
What kind of society did he envisage, beyond some rather vacuous generalities?
Was the vision a coherent and convincing one?
And how was it to be achieved — was there agreement about it within the leadership and the wider society, and did a political agency exist that could bring it into being?
The issues at stake could hardly have been greater, and they concerned the other members of the world community just as much as they concerned the USSR: for it was not only in the USSR that an answer was being sought to the question as to whether there could be a ‘third way’— a socialism that ensured a decent and equitable living for all its members and yet avoided monopolistic concentrations of power of a kind that had led to political repression in the USSR and other communist-ruled nations.
Gorbachev and ‘Gorbachevism’
Gorbachev's early speeches gave relatively little attention to the longer-term objectives he had in mind for Soviet society.
His acceptance  speech, in March 1985, promised that the strategy worked out by the 26th Party Congress — over which Brezhnev had presided — and at subsequent meetings of the Central Committee would remain unchanged: a policy of the ‘acceleration of the country's socioeconomic development [and]the perfection of all aspects of the life of the society’.
More precisely, the strategy meant the transformation of the material-technical basis of production, the improvement of social relations particularly in economic matters, and the development of ‘man himself’ in both a material and a spiritual sense.
His first full address to the Central Committee in April 1985 again emphasised the importance of the 26th Congress and called for a ‘steady advance’ rather than a clear break with earlier policies; the party's general line, as he explained it, involved the ‘perfection of developed socialist society’, a characterisation that was thoroughly Brezhnevian in tone.
Gorbachev did call for ‘further changes and transformations’ and for the establishment of a ‘qualitatively new state of society, in the broadest sense of the word’.
It was changes in the economy, however, that would be decisive in any development of this kind, and the speech was largely preoccupied with familiar matters such as growth, efficiency and labour productivity.
The most authoritative statement of the party's longer-term purposes was its programme, first adopted in 1903 and then in further editions in 1919 and 1961.
The 1961 Programme, hailed by Khrushchev as a ‘Communist Manifesto of the modern era’, was best known for its assumption that the achievement of a fully communist society had become an ‘immediate practical task for the Soviet people’.
By the end of that decade, it promised, the strongest and richest capitalist country, the USA, would be overtaken in total production; by the end of the 1970s a state of abundance would be created and a communist society ‘in the main' would be constructed, to be ‘fully completed’ over the following period.
These optimistic perspectives were quickly abandoned by Khrushchev's successors, and under Brezhnev it began to be claimed that the USSR had achieved no more than the construction of a ‘developed socialist society’, a new and quite distinct stage of Soviet development whose further evolution into full communism would be a matter for the fairly distant future.
The Party Programme of 1961 was clearly difficult to reconcile with these rather different perspectives, and the 26th Congress in 1981 approved Brezhnev's proposal that a new edition should be prepared.
The essentials of the existing programme, Brezhnev explained, were still valid, but twenty years had elapsed since its adoption and there were many developments it  had failed to record, among them the fact that Soviet society was proceeding to communism through the stage of ‘developed socialism’.
This, Brezhnev pointed out, was a necessary and ‘historically extended’ period in the formation of a fully communist society.
Brezhnev became chairman of the committee that was charged with the preparation of a new draft, and on his death the following year his successor Andropov assumed the same responsibility.
Andropov set out his general approach to such matters in a speech in the spring of 1983 in which he emphasised that the Soviet Union was ‘only at the beginning’ of the long historical stage of developed socialism; there must be no exaggeration of the country's closeness to communism, and no attempt to minimise the difficulties that lay ahead  Discussing the party programme more directly, Andropov told the Central Committee in June 1983 that many of its directives had in fact been realised: links between citizens and deputies, for instance, had become closer, and national discussion of major items of legislation had become a well-established practice.
Some of the assumptions of the programme, however, had not withstood the test of time, and there were elements of ‘detachment from reality, undue anticipation and unnecessary detail’.
These emphases were repeated by Konstantin Chernenko, particularly in his address to the commission that had been set up by the Central Committee to prepare a revised programme.
Chernenko stressed the need to remove the ‘oversimplified impression of the means and dates by which a transition to the higher stage of communism’ would take place, and argued that the new programme should provide a ‘realistic’evaluation of developed socialism, which would be an ‘historically protracted period’.
Gorbachev succeeded Chernenko not only as General Secretary but also, it emerged, as chairman of the commission preparing the new programme.
He set out his thinking in an address to the Central Committee in October 1985.
Gorbachev emphasised the continuity of political principle between the new version of the programme and its predecessors, but also pointed out the need for ‘creative development’ in the light of changing domestic and international circumstances.
His speech reflected his predecessors' determination to avoid ‘excessive detail and groundless fantasy’, and in particular any ‘rushing ahead, introducing communist principles without taking account the level of society's material and intellectual maturity’.
The central aim, he explained, was to attain a ‘qualitatively new state of Soviet society through acceleration of the country's socioeconomic development’.
The economy, as before, would have a ‘decisive role’, but so too would  the widening of socialist democracy, including the active participation of ordinary people in state and public affairs.
The draft programme was published in the central press for public discussion in October 1985; altogether, Gorbachev told the 27th Congress the following February, six million responses had been received from ordinary citizens, raising a whole variety of issues.
A number of these correspondents, Gorbachev reported, had in fact suggested that the new text be considered an entirely new fourth Party Programme, rather than a revision of the third, because the changes it proposed were so far-reaching.
Perhaps the most striking single change in the new programme was the abandonment of the optimistic perspectives of its Khrushchevian predecessor.
The 1961 Programme, for instance, had defined itself as a ‘Programme for the building of communist society’; the revised version of 1986 was no more than a Programme for the ‘planned and all-round perfection of socialism’ and for further advance to communism through the country's ‘accelerated socio-economic development’.
The dates and stages by which communism was to be reached disappeared entirely; the 1986 Programme, on the contrary, noted that the party did ‘not attempt to foresee in detail the features of full communism’ and warned that any attempt to advance too rapidly was ‘doomed to failure and might cause both political and economic damage’.
The collectivist emphases of the 1961 Programme — more and more services such as transport and housing to be provided free of charge, more public catering and shared upbringing of children — found no place in the new text, nor did the promise of a minimum one month paid holiday for all citizens.
The 1986 Programme, similarly, contained no reference to the historic goal of the withering away of the state (it had long been predicted that the only thing that would wither away was the idea that the state should wither away); its main emphasis was upon practical and short-term objectives, and it struck a disciplinarian rather than utopian note in its references to careerism, nepotism and profiteering.
Both the new version of the Programme and a revised set of party rules, which were also approved at the 27th Congress, included a reference to ‘developed socialism’.
During the period since the 1960s, as the Party Programme put it, the USSR had ‘entered the stage of developed socialism’.
Some of those who had commented on the draft of the new programme, Gorbachev revealed, thought the term should have been entirely removed; others, on the contrary, thought it should have been dealt with at greater length.
The reference to developed  socialism had in the end been retained, Gorbachev explained, partly because it figured in the programmes of other ruling parties, but mainly because the term had been misrepresented.
It had, in fact, originally been employed as a reaction against ‘simplistic ideas about the means and periods of time for carrying out the tasks of communist construction’.
Latterly, however, it had become no more than a framework for the recording of successes, with little attention being paid to problems such as the intensification of production or the improvement of food supplies.
It was the earlier, less complacent version of the term that Gorbachev wished to emphasise.
Developed socialism, nonetheless, did not subsequently figure in the General Secretary's speeches or in party documents, and it was replaced later the same year by the term ‘developing socialism’(razvivayushchiisya sotsializm ), implying a still earlier stage in the transition towards the communist society of the future.
A fuller statement of Gorbachev's vision of the Soviet future came in the conclusion of his address to the 19th Party Conference in 1988.
They were looking, he told the delegates, for a socialism that ‘renounced everything that deformed socialism in the 1930s and that led to its stagnation in the 1970s’, a socialism that would inherit the ‘best elements’ of the thinking of its founding fathers together with the constructive achievements of other countries and social systems.
Although it was impossible to describe such a society in a detailed way, some of its main features could and should be indicated.
Such a socialism, Gorbachev explained, would be a system of ‘true and tangible humanism in which man is really the measure of all things’.
There would, for instance, be a dynamic and advanced economy with the highest possible labour productivity based upon a variety of forms of property and worker participation.
It would combine a broad measure of central planning with a great deal of autonomy for individual enterprises, which would be self-financing and interconnected through a market.
The basic needs of all for housing, health care and employment would be satisfied; at the same time the abilities of individuals would be highly rewarded, where this was appropriate, in both moral and material terms.
A society of this kind would have a high level of culture and morality, and it would be managed by a system of genuine people's rule, of ‘profound and consistent democracy’.
This ‘new image of socialism’ was described by Gorbachev as ‘democratic and humane’, and in turn an ‘important stage in the advance to communism’.
Gorbachev expanded upon this vision of a ‘qualitatively new state of  society’ in an address to senior party functionaries in July 1989.
It would, he explained, be a ‘society of free people, a society of and for the working people, built on the principles of humanism, socialist democracy and social justice’.
It would be based on a variety of forms of public ownership which would enable people to be masters of their own lives and to give full play to their energy and abilities.
Economic development would be based on self-regulation, with the centre playing a merely coordinating role.
It would be a society in which the people would have ‘absolute power and the full range of rights’, and it would be based on both the ‘finest traditions of Soviet democracy and the experience of mankind's democratic evolution’.
Nations and ethnic groups, similarly, would have equal rights, at least within the Soviet federation.
This would be a society with a ‘rich inner life and a high level of culture and morality’, and it would be ‘open to the world, to cooperation in the interests of building new international relations based on free choice, equality, security and universal values’.
This, however, was no more than a ‘general outline’ which needed to be developed in detail by the scholarly community; indeed it was ‘vitally necessary’that they do so.
Gorbachev himself contributed to this task in an extended statement, ‘The socialist idea and revolutionary perestroika' , which appeared in Pravda in November 1989.
It drew upon a series of speeches he had made in the late autumn, particularly an address to an all-union student forum.
If at first he had thought it would be sufficient simply to eliminate various shortcomings in Soviet life, Gorbachev explained, he was now in no doubt that nothing less than a radical reconstruction of the whole of society was necessary.
There was no detailed plan to guide this work, nor could there be; but it would certainly avoid the command-administrative methods of the Soviet past and the capitalist methods of the West.
A process of this kind perestroika — would occupy a ‘lengthy stage in the historical development of socialism’, extending into the twenty-first century.
Its ultimate objective would be the establishment of a ‘genuinely democratic and self-governing social organism’ in place of the authoritarian and bureaucratic system that had come into existence in the Stalinist years.
Gorbachev had no doubt that the socialist choice in October 1917 had been the right one; nor could Marx be blamed for subsequent developments he had obviously been unable to foresee.
Socialism, in any case, had to be conceived as a ‘global process’.
The experience of other countries and movements, particularly European social democracy, provided much from which they could learn; and the future lay in a  cooperative rather than confrontational relationship between the USSR and the wider world from which both sides could benefit.
Official perspectives of this kind were summed up in the ‘Programmatic Declaration’ adopted by the 28th Party Congress in July 1990.
Entitled ‘Towards a humane, democratic socialism’, the Declaration insisted, as Gorbachev had done, that the origins of Soviet difficulties were to be found, not in any deficiency of the socialist idea itself, but in the deformations to which it had been subjected in the past.
The Declaration included a set of ‘urgent anti-crisis measures’ to deal with some of these concerns, including the new union treaty and stabilisation of the consumer market.
For the longer term it envisaged the strengthening of civil liberties, a ‘stage-by-stage transition to a market system’, international cooperation and democratisation of the party itself.
Gorbachev, in his own contribution to the discussion, spoke of a ‘civil society of free men and women’ which would replace the ‘Stalinist model’of the past; continuing the work of the 20th Congress of 1956, its purpose was to ‘profoundly democratise and humanise society, to make it free and create living conditions worthy of a human being’.
The Congress agreed to begin work on a new, fourth Party Programme, replacing the document agreed in 1986.
According to an early draft, the new Programme would give the CPSU the task of carrying out ‘historically progressive aims’(not necessarily communism), and socialism itself was defined as a society of ‘economic effectiveness, social justice, political democracy and human solidarity’(but not necessarily of public ownership).
This broad vision of the Soviet and indeed global future was carried forward in the late 1980s and early 1990s by a group of reform-minded academics and commentators, among them Fedor Burlatsky, Boris Kurashvili and Anatolii Butenko.
Burlatsky, a people's deputy as well as scholar and journalist, argued in favour of a decentralised, self-managing socialism which drew upon the experience of the New Economic Policy of the 1920s as well as the socialist tradition in other countries.
Two different conceptions of socialism, Burlatsky suggested, had been applied in the USSR over the post-revolutionary period.
One of these was ‘war communism’, a centralised model based upon commands and coercion and harking back to the militarised society of the civil war years.
The other was the more relaxed model of the New Economic Policy, which was based upon a mixed economy and more democratic norms.
The war communism model had enjoyed considerable popularity, in part because of the USSR's ‘authoritarian-patriarchal culture’, and had later taken the form of Stalinism, with its  belief that the state should play the major part in the transition to socialism.
This concept, ‘state socialism’, was however not properly socialist, and in any case it was inappropriate to modern conditions.
It should be replaced, in Burlatsky's view, by a different concept, ‘public, self-managing socialism’, in which many functions presently performed by the state would be devolved to civil society and its institutions.
What would this ‘qualitatively new model’ of a ‘more effective, democratic and humanistic socialism’look like?
It would, Burlatsky suggested, be based upon a wide variety of property forms, including state property which would be developed to the higher level of public ownership of the whole people.
It would incorporate a variety of forms of enterprise, including individual, family and cooperative as well as state productive units, which would be economically self-sufficient and interrelated through a market.
There would be a sharing of power between the party, the state and social organisations, and each of these would be based upon more democratic norms, including the development of self-management, elections, the rotation of office and attention to public attitudes.
A wide variety of cultural trends would coexist, and a socialist culture and personality would develop.
This form of socialism, based upon the accountability of the state to society rather than vice versa, would take a long time to develop, but it was this form of socialism that supporters of perestroika hoped the Party Conference would develop further  — as indeed it did.
Another, somewhat bolder version of a Soviet ‘tomorrow’ was presented to the readers of Moscow News by Boris Kurashvili, a senior researcher at the Institute of State and Law of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
The future socialist society, he explained, would be one in which state planning would be retained in only a few essential sectors, but which would otherwise rely upon market forces.
It would incorporate a variety of forms of property, including joint enterprises in which employees held up to 49 per cent of the shares.
The party and state apparatus that was responsible for the management of the economy would be reduced to about a tenth of its present size; and democratic practices would be revived within the CPSU, primarily through party-wide discussions and votes on major issues.
‘Real power’ would be restored to the elected soviets, and a ‘mass public and political organisation’with some similarities to a second party would be set up to run them.
In international relations there would be an era of ‘growing cooperation’ between capitalism and socialism, leading towards a synthesis which would combine the best features of both (Lenin's  formulations on such matters, he suggested, were ‘not always satisfactory’).
Writing later on ‘models of socialism’, Kurashvili looked forward to a further stage of ‘democratic socialism’ which would include respect for minority rights, a separation of powers, genuine federalism and a ‘socialist multiparty system’.
A further contributor to the discussion was Anatolii Butenko, a department head at the Institute of the Economics of the World Socialist System at the USSR Academy of Sciences.
In his writings of the early 1980s, which were strongly influenced by the Polish crisis, Butenko argued that Soviet-type societies did not eliminate ‘contradictions’, in particular those between the sectional interests of managers and the working people they directed.
Writing subsequently and at greater length, Butenko set out a vision of the Soviet future that was based upon the concept of ‘socialist popular self-management’ and which involved the abolition of the nomenklatura appointments system and a wide-ranging electoral reform.
Interviewed in Pravda in 1989, Butenko placed the greatest emphasis upon the emancipation of labour as the goal of socialism.
This meant more than the elimination of exploitation, which had already been achieved in the Stalinist period: it meant the elimination of the oppression of man by man, which could be achieved only by the working class itself and not by a bureaucracy on its behalf.
Butenko called in particular for the establishment of a socialist civil society, based upon a wide dispersal of ownership (so long as workers depended upon their employers, even under public ownership, they could never become the agents of their own destiny).
This meant individual and private as well as state and municipal ownership; and in the political sphere it meant ‘genuine popular rule — rule of the people by the people themselves’.
Butenko was one of a group of leading scholars which met regularly from the spring of 1987 under party auspices with a view to formulating an adequate and up-to-date conception of socialism.
The results of their labours appeared in the party press in 1989; they summed up the perspectives of the most strongly reformist section of the social science community.
Lenin's ‘new model of socialism’, they argued, had been put into effect during the 1920s, but then replaced by a Stalinist system which had ‘created an alienation of the individual from ownership, from power and from the results of his work’.
Liberating society from this legacy was no easy matter, because not only officials but wide strata of the population thought this Stalinist model was in fact the very epitome of socialism.
The statement distinguished, as Butenko had done, between exploitation (which had been eliminated  by public ownership) and oppression, which had continued.
More controversially, and following Hayek and other critics of socialist collectivism, the group went on to argue that complete state ownership led to ‘totalitarian forms of government’, and that a wide variety of forms of property, including private ownership, was necessary if the personal liberties of citizens were to be securely protected.
Economic life, more generally, was to be regulated through a ‘socialist market’, but with an improved system of social benefits to protect the disadvantaged from its worst effects.
It would, finally, be a society based upon the rule of law, and upon universal human values such as honesty, decency and a sense of duty.
Scholarly thinking became still more outspoken in the early 1990s.
Indeed little of what had been unchallengeable orthodoxy since the 1920s remained untouched.
The rector of the party's Institute of Social Sciences, for instance, Yuri Krasin, insisted upon the continuing relevance of Marxist conceptions of social justice and equality, but accepted the obsolescence of the earlier idea that commodity-money relations would be unnecessary in a socialist society.
S. S. Alekseev, chairman of the Constitutional Supervision Committee, found most of enduring value in the ideas of the early Marx, particularly his concept of alienation.
Georgii Shakhnazarov, head of the Soviet political science association and a Gorbachev adviser, went still further in a series of articles on the ‘new model of socialism’ in the party theoretical journal Kommunist .
For Shakhnazarov, socialism would continue as long as mankind pursued a better world; but he rejected the idea of ‘stages’ of human history and the primacy of economic factors and saw communism itself as a ‘hypothesis’or even a ‘dream’.
Some were even prepared to argue that socialism was not necessarily incompatible with ‘capitalist private property’.
It was difficult, in any of this, to discover what a future socialist or communist society would be like; if there was consensus about anything it was that it would not be based upon public ownership, would not be dominated by a single ruling party, would not supersede capitalism and might not even offer an alternative to it.
The party's considered response to these and other discussions was a draft Programme, ‘Socialism, Democracy, Progress’, which was approved by a Central Committee plenum in July 1991 and subsequently published for discussion.
Several writers, in the discussion, had urged the CPSU to adopt its own ‘Bad Godesberg’, after the German Social Democratic Programme of 1959 in which the last vestiges  of that party's Marxist heritage had been discarded.
The published Programme did still commit the party to communism as an ‘historic perspective’, but this, as the Leningrad party leader Boris Gidaspov commented, was very much in the spirit of an ‘epitaph on a tombstone’.
The draft Programme was certainly much briefer than its immediate predecessors; it was also very different in character.
It committed the party to a set of basic principles including ‘all-human values’, ‘democracy and freedom in all its forms’, social justice and international integration, and to a series of more immediate policy objectives.
The longer-term aim was the construction of a society based on a mixed economy, political pluralism and ‘genuine people's power’, which in turn could only be formed in association with a ‘new world civilisation’.
The new Programme was intended to provide a ‘plan of concrete action for today and tomorrow’; it was also, in Gorbachev's words, an admission that the communist ideal was unrealisable in the foreseeable future.
Gorbachevism and the party leadership
Coherent or otherwise, the Gorbachevian vision had relatively few convinced supporters within the party leadership during his early years of office.
One of them, certainly, was Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, who had previously been party first secretary in Georgia.
In that capacity he had presided over a campaign against corruption, and more positively over a relaxation of the restrictions upon private trade and local government.
The Georgian party organisation was also distinctive in the attention it devoted to the study of public opinion, in particular through a professional sociological service attached to party headquarters.
Perhaps the clearest expression of Shevardnadze's views was a speech he delivered in April 1986 on the  anniversary of Lenin's birth, some months after he had become professionally responsible for foreign affairs.
In the speech Shevardnadze called for the broadest possible democratisation of political and economic life, including greater autonomy for enterprises and the election of management.
He emphasised the need for benefits of all kinds to be fairly distributed and attacked the dispensing of glasnost' in measured doses; he drew attention to nationality differences and called for the ‘perfection [in other words, reform]of the electoral system’, a point the General Secretary himself first developed in his speech to the Central Committee the following year.
Shevardnadze's  speeches as Foreign Minister (until his unexpected resignation in December 1990) showed a similar concern for openness, consultation and democratic accountability.
Another ‘Gorbachevian’ member of the leadership was Vadim Medvedev, a Secretariat member from 1986 and a full member of the Politburo from September 1988 (he left both posts in 1990).
Medvedev was a former rector of the Central Committee's Academy of Social Sciences, and in September 1988 he became head of the newly-established ideological commission of the Central Committee and thus the leadership's most prominent theoretician.
Medvedev called, in October 1988, for an ‘up-to-date conception of socialism’, one that took into account the diversity of experience of the other socialist countries and indeed the lessons that could be learned from the capitalist world.
Socialism, in his view, was a logical stage in the development of human civilisation; it should take account not only of the scientific and technical achievements of capitalism but also of its forms of political and economic organisation, including small-scale enterprise and international economic integration.
The experience of Western social democracy also deserved attention, particularly for its defence of the social and political gains of the working class.
Within the USSR itself there must be a less exclusive emphasis upon state ownership and greater scope for cooperative, leasehold and other arrangements.
There must also be a place for ‘commodity-money relations’, or in other words the market, which was an ‘irreplaceable means for the flexible economic coordination of production with growing and constantly changing public requirements and an important instrument of public control over the quality of goods and the costs of their production’.
There was still a role for central economic management, in Medvedev's view, but it should be of a wholly strategic kind, leaving operational decisions to the enterprises themselves as ‘socialist commodity producers’.
This must be complemented by a political system of a ‘socialist pluralist’ character, one that would take into account the ‘diversity of interests and aspirations of all social groups and communities of people’.
Internationally, this system would inevitably interact with capitalism within the framework of ‘one and the same human civilisation’.
Speaking in early 1989, Medvedev (an economist by training) spoke still more positively of the market as a ‘flexible instrument for reconciling production and consumption’ which could be adapted to the purposes of a wide variety of social systems.
It encouraged a swift response by producers to changing demand, and provided  incentives for efficient economic management.
Any attempt to evade it for the sake of the ‘purity of the ‘socialist ideal’’, 'he warned, would simply lead to a further expansion of the bureaucratic apparatus and to the dictatorship of the producer.
Speaking to the Central Committee later in the year, Medvedev accepted that the process of change in which they were engaged might be complex and even alarming.
There was no real alternative, however, to the ‘unconditional continuation’ and even ‘deepening’of democratisation and glasnost' .
Perhaps the most intellectually convincing exponent of the Gorbachevian position was Alexander Yakovlev, a Central Committee Secretary from 1986 and full Politburo member from 1987 to 1990.
A doctor of historical sciences and corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences, Yakovlev (an exchange student at Columbia University in the late 1950s) had come to Gorbachev's attention while ambassador to Canada and from 1983 to 1985 had directed the important Institute of the World Economy and International Relations of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
In September 1988 he became, in addition, chairman of the Central Committee commission on international affairs.
Speaking in April 1987, Yakovlev attacked ‘dogmatic thinking’ and located its social origins in that section of the society that had ‘no interest in development, who are personally satisfied with the customary and convenient status quo, who are unable or unwilling to respond to the challenges of the times and to new phenomena in life’.
In cultural affairs, for instance, they resolved the question of what films or plays could be seen with ‘bureaucratic callousness’.
Artistic creativity, in Yakovlev's view, served the needs of society for self-understanding and self-knowledge; without it there could be no moral progress or human development.
There could be no proper limits to glasnost' , in Yakovlev's view.
And no one, he argued in terms that could have come straight from John Stuart Mill, could have a monopoly of the truth, either in asking questions or answering them; it could be determined only through the interplay of argument.
Yakovlev's speeches had three central themes: the necessity of the market, international affairs, and, most distinctively, morality.
Speaking in Vilnius in August 1988, for instance, he devoted particular attention to ‘common human interests’, such as the conservation of global resources, in which both East and West could cooperate.
Speaking in Perm' in December 1988 Yakovlev emphasised that for Lenin, at least after 1921, socialism was a ‘society with commodity production, a market, competition, money [and]democracy’, and  himself urged the establishment of a ‘developed socialist market’.
Speaking to Moscow automobile workers in June 1989, Yakovlev argued that Marx's ‘utopia’ of non-commodity production had simply not justified itself.
Not simply was a market the only effective mechanism for the exchange of commodities and services in a large-scale modern society; it was also the foundation of democracy, as it provided the economic independence that made a dictatorship impossible.
The larger purposes of perestroika , however, were ethical: it must revive moral norms, honesty and decency, without which man was ‘merely a consumer of material values rather than a bearer and creator of spiritual values’.
This, perhaps, was the most fundamental objective of the reformers: to end a system in which the population was seen as a ‘building material from which anything could be moulded’ and to create in its place a ‘highly moral society of free, creatively thinking, active and independent people’.
A very different view of the Soviet future, however, was put forward by other members of the Soviet leadership, among them Yegor Ligachev and (from 1990) Ivan Polozkov and KGB chairman Vladimir Kryuchkov.
For this section of the leadership, the Soviet past was to be seen in a much more positive light, while a much greater emphasis was laid upon discipline and central control in political and economic affairs.
Ligachev, for instance, argued in a speech in June 1987 that the ‘class enemy’ was hoping that perestroika would undermine the influence of Marxist-Leninist ideology in the USSR and had been making use of it to spread ‘irresponsible demagogy, hostile to the interests of the toilers’.
In a further speech in August 1987 he complained that there had been a tendency both in the USSR and outside it to see the socialist construction of the 1930s as no more than a series of mistakes.
On the contrary, Ligachev argued, it had seen the collectivisation of agriculture, the USSR's emergence as the world's second-largest economy and subsequently the defeat of Nazi Germany.
There had been some among their ‘class opponents’, Ligachev went on, who had been praising perestroika , hoping it represented a departure from socialism in favour of a market economy, ideological pluralism and Western-style democracy.
On the contrary, Ligachev insisted, the USSR would never leave the path of Leninism or abandon the achievements of the ‘glorious seventy-year history of Soviet power’.
Speaking in the city of Gorky in August 1988, Ligachev again insisted that the CPSU was unapologetically a ‘ruling’ party.
There was no room for multiparty politics or a political opposition, and there could be no place for strikes or other ‘antisocialist’ phenomena.
Nor  would there be any copying of Western market and property forms, with the unemployment and inequality that inevitably accompanied them.
In foreign affairs, equally, there could be no retreat from ‘class’ positions, and no ‘artificial ‘slow-down’in the social and national-liberation struggle'.
In other speeches Ligachev insisted that the CPSU was ‘above all a party of the working class’; and although an ‘unrestricted dialogue’ was necessary under single-party conditions,glasnost' should be ‘constructive’and must not be used for ‘selfish’or ‘anti-Soviet purposes’.
He attacked any deviation from ‘class positions’ in public life, and called for a more vigorous defence of the founders of socialism.
And while he acknowledged the losses of the ‘cult of personality’ period, he insisted (in an address to the French Communist Party) that ‘not a year’had been lost in the process of socialist construction — in effect a defence of the Brezhnev as well as Stalinist years.
It was, apparently, because of Ligachev's insistence that the Central Committee report to the party congress in 1990 made no reference to private property.
Defeated for the deputy party leadership at the Congress, Ligachev remained an open and vocal exponent of ‘socialist perestroika ’ and continued to insist upon the priority of planning and party dominance.
Viktor Chebrikov, at this time KGB chairman, made a still more pointed speech in September 1987 in which he declared that Western intelligence services were attempting to subvert Soviet youth and to sow the seeds of nationalist discontent, hoping in this way to undermine socialism morally and politically and to inculcate political pluralism (Gorbachev, by contrast, had spoken strongly in favour of‘socialist pluralism’ at a meeting with French public figures the same month ).
Socialist democracy and discipline, Chebrikov went on, were inextricably connected; so too were citizens' rights and their obligations.
It must above all be clear that perestroika was taking place under the auspices of the CPSU and that it would be conducted within the framework of socialism.
Chebrikov was particularly scathing about the ‘informal groups’ that had been attracting public attention, warning that ‘extremist elements’had worked their way into the leaderships of some of them and that they were encouraging them to engage in actions ‘objectively against the interests of our society’.
Chebrikov's successor, Vladimir Kryuchkov, went even further, arguing in December 1990 that ‘destructive elements’ were engaged in an attempt to overthrow Soviet rule and that foreign intelligence services had declared a ‘covert war’against the USSR.
The Russian party leader, Ivan Polozkov, was another Politburo  member publicly associated with conservative positions.
Polozkov's speeches after his election in 1990 took a strongly ‘workerist’ line.
The CPSU, in his view, must represent the interests of ‘working people’ above all, and must ensure that any transition to market relations reflected their interests and not those of ‘neocapitalist elements and the criminal bourgeoisie’.
Polozkov saw the two-party system as an attempt to divide and weaken the working class; he rejected anything that would lead to the emergence of divisions between rich and poor in Soviet society, and insisted upon the dominance of state control and ownership.
Speaking to the Central Committee in January 1991, Polozkov attached the ‘so-called democrats’ who had undermined perestroika and whose real aim was to re-establish the ‘dictatorship of private capital’.
The Leningrad party leader Boris Gidaspov, a member of the Secretariat from 1990 onwards, placed most of his emphasis upon central control and discipline; he was openly dismissive of ideas of ‘people's capitalism’ and ‘nonparty glasnost' ’and in 1991 attacked what he described as the ‘anti-democratic liquidationist movement’that was taking advantage of the weakness and indecision of the party leadership.
Politburo ‘conservatives’ hardly had a coherent programme, and their numbers were subject to continual attrition (Ligachev, who left the leadership after his defeat at the 28th Congress, was a notable casualty).
They did, however, have a political position, articulated most clearly in a remarkable letter ostensibly addressed to the newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya in early 1988 by Nina Andreeva, a Leningrad chemistry lecturer.
The letter, ‘I can't forgo principles’, was reportedly published at the behest of Ligachev and for some time it was believed that Andreeva was the pseudonym of a conservative member of the leadership.
Andreeva began by welcoming the more open atmosphere in which her students were discussing all kinds of issues, but deplored the way in which the Soviet past had become identified with mistakes and shortcomings.
There had been a meeting in a student dormitory, for instance, with a retired colonel, who had been asked about political repression in the armed forces.
He replied, apparently to the students' dissatisfaction, that he had himself encountered nothing of the kind and indeed that many of those who had started off the war with him and seen it through to the end had become major military commanders.
The subject of repression, Andreeva contended, had become ‘excessively magnified in the perception of some young people, pushing an objective comprehension of the past into the background’.
There were many other examples of this kind.
One of her students, for instance, had told her that the class struggle was an obsolete concept, and an eminent academic had put forward the view that relations between capitalist and socialist states were devoid of class content (he had previously maintained the opposite).
Not surprisingly, ‘nihilistic views’ were intensifying among young people; they were becoming politically disorientated, and some had even argued that it was ‘time to call to account the Communists who had supposedly ‘humanised’the country's life after 1917'.
The construction of socialism, as a recent film about the life of Sergei Kirov had shown, was a time of enthusiasm and optimism, not the period of repression and ignorance of which the script had spoken.
Andreeva went on to complain of historical plays, such as those of Mikhail Shatrov, which were arbitrary in their interpretation and close to the views that had been put forward by Lenin's opponents, and she deplored the obsessive interest in Stalin among many writers, obscuring the fact that his was a complex and transitional period in which industrialisation, collectivisation and a cultural revolution had brought the USSR into the ranks of the great powers.
Andreeva shared the anger and indignation of others in respect of the repression of the 1930s and 1940s, in which her own family had suffered.
But common sense could not permit the ‘monochromatic colouring of contradictory events’ that had begun to prevail in some quarters of the press.
Andreeva called for an assessment of all party and state leaders, including Stalin, from a class and political standpoint, not on the basis of abstract moralising by people who were far removed from the period concerned.
There was in fact no shortage of evidence, even by those that were opposed to him, that Stalin had been an outstanding leader (she quoted Winston Churchill to this effect, as well as de Gaulle and others).
In the USSR as well as outside it there were those who had an interest in attacking the record of these years; they included the ‘spiritual heirs’ of Menshevism, of Trotsky and of the kulaks.
Indeed these were far from abstract scholarly debates.
On the contrary, all kinds of groups and associations representing ideas of this kind had come into existence in the USSR: some of them had openly called for ‘power-sharing’ on the basis of a ‘parliamentary regime’, for ‘free trade unions’, ‘autonomous publishing houses’and so forth.
All of this unavoidably suggested that the ‘central question in the debates now under way in the country is the question of recognising or not recognising the leading role of the party and the working class in socialist construction, and hence in restructuring’.
As Gorbachev had himself told the Central Committee in February 1988, in the ideological sphere  above all they must be guided by their Marxist-Leninist principles and not forgo them under any circumstances.
Andreeva's letter was in turn attacked in a lengthy editorial in Pravda on 5 April 1988, three weeks later and after Gorbachev had reportedly been able to secure the agreement of the Politburo to a considered rebuttal.
The editorial, ‘The principles of restructuring: the revolutionary nature of thinking and acting’, 'insisted that there was ‘no alternative to perestroika ’ and that even its postponement would be gravely damaging to Soviet society and to socialism internationally.
Over the previous three years perestroika had become a reality; the Soviet people themselves had changed, and were facing facts that had earlier been obscured from them.
This, admittedly, was not an easy process; some were inclined to doubt their own strength, and others had failed to understand the seriousness of the task that lay before them.
There was also a form of opposition to perestroika that stemmed from outdated patterns of thinking and the self-interest of those who had become used to living at the expense of others.
Andreeva's letter had echoed such sentiments: indeed it had gone further and was completely incompatible with the principles of restructuring.
There were evidently quite a few people who, like Andreeva, had failed to appreciate the seriousness of the task that faced them in April 1985 and the uselessness of applying the command-administrative methods of the past.
The time had come,Pravda argued, for a return to the essence of socialism, and for a break with the distorted form it had acquired during the 1930s and 1940s.
Only this would ‘free the best constructive forces for the struggle for socialism, for our values and our ideals’.
A critical examination of the Soviet past, as in Andreeva's letter, was a necessary part of perestroika in that it helped to provide a better, clearer picture of the way forward.
Historical truth was sometimes bitter.
It was known, for instance, that ‘many thousands’ of party and non-party members had been subjected to mass repression during the Stalin period; this was the truth of the matter, and there was no escaping it.
Then there was the role of Stalin.
Rather than quoting Churchill (or more precisely, it appeared, the British Trotskyist Isaac Deutscher)Pravda reminded its readers of Lenin's assessment of Stalin, and of the verdict of the party congresses of 1956 and 1961.
These made clear both Stalin's undoubted contribution to the struggle to achieve and then defend socialism, but also his ‘flagrant political mistakes’ for which a ‘great price’had been paid.
It was true that the press gave far more attention to shortcomings than had been the case in the recent past, but those shortcomings were a feature of life itself and would not  disappear if the newspapers simply ignored them.
Pravda noted the heavy responsibilities that party papers had to accept in these difficult times, and charged that the Andreeva letter was in effect an attempt, ‘little by little’, to reverse decisions the party had already taken.
Sovetskaya Rossiya , ten days later, acknowledged that publication of the letter had been inopportune; this could not disguise the fact that there were profound differences in approach at leading levels of the party, which had been reflected in both sides of the exchange.