

6 Providing a Comprehensive Service
Having examined the characteristics of mental disorder and the various structural and organizational problems which must be overcome, we are now in a position to look at some of the proposed solutions.
First, however, it is important to understand how services are perceived by users who, in the main, suffer from the disorganization, lack of coordination and disparate funding of services in different geographical areas of the country.
Listen to the views of two women, both in their early fifties, with adult children, who live in the London Borough of Southwark.
Let us call them Mrs Smith and Mrs Jones.
Mrs Smith is a widow living in a small council flat in Bermondsey.
She works as a primary school teacher's reading helper in a local school.
She has two sons, both married with families, who live at some distance, and an older sister living in Brighton who cares for a disabled husband.
Mrs Smith's 82-year old mother lives with her and has severe senile dementia.
She is totally dependent on her daughter for help with bathing, washing, dressing and feeding.
She is still agile but is unable to control her bladder and has anaemia and a recurring chest problem.
Her memory is extremely poor and she cannot sustain a normal conversation.
She frequently gets up at night, thinking it is daytime, and wanders round the flat.
Several times she has wandered out into the street while Mrs Smith was asleep, although now the front door is kept double-locked at night to prevent this from happening.
Mrs Smith comes home from school four times during the day to make sure her mother is all right and she is also usually up three or four times in the night to attend to her mother.
She has a break one night  a month when her sister comes from Brighton to stay overnight; on these occasions Mrs Smith sleeps soundly on the sofa in the living room.
Mrs Smith described the problems as follows:
I get a lot of help and I'm very grateful but somehow it doesn't seem to add up to a great deal.
I feel exhausted all the time from the sheer hard physical work and never getting a proper break.
Not having a good night's sleep is the main thing and not knowing how long it'll go on for.
Every week she gets worse and yet it could go on for years.
I feel I'm cracking up, always on the verge of tears, but I can't let her down.
She was such a marvellous mother, slogged all her life for us and she just dreaded going into one of those homes.
I'll keep on as long as I can.
I've got a list of phone numbers, it seems like fifty, of different people who have been invoked — the doctor, the home help, district nurse, chiropodist, social worker, hospital doctor, Age Concern, the Red Cross, the old people's home where she went for a break and dozens more, I hardly know who they are.
I'm always short of money, she needs such a lot of extra things, you wouldn't believe the money I've spent on bedding, laundry, special chairs, clothing.
We both need a break but I can't afford a holiday and you wouldn't believe the hassle of organizing for her to go into a home for a fortnight.
This year they said she was too ‘far gone’ and she'd have to go into hospital if I wanted a holiday; getting a definite date for that was impossible so I couldn't book anything.
The home help does a bit of cleaning but frankly that's the least of my worries.
The district nurse comes to give her the monthly vitamin injections for her anaemia — takes about ten seconds and she's gone.
The community psychiatric nurse comes occasionally — I never know when — and she sympathizes; nice girl but she doesn't actually do anything useful.
And as for social workers — it's never the same one twice.
They say there's too many children with problems round here to worry much about the old well, they'd damn well have to worry if I wasn't here doing all the work wouldn't they?
Now let us listen to Mrs Jones.
She is exactly the same age as Mrs Smith and came to Britain from Jamaica in 1957 as a 20-year old with her father (a skilled motor mechanic who came to work on the London buses), her mother and her three brothers.
Her parents have done well; her father became one of the first Afro-Caribbean councillors in inner London.
Mrs Jones married a welder from Antigua and had four children.
They bought a tumbledown Victorian terraced house near the Elephant and Castle, cheap because  it had an old man as a sitting tenant on the top floor.
Their one major problem started when their 19-year-old son was diagnosed as having schizophrenia.
That was five years ago.
He's unrecognizable as the boy we once knew.
He spends most of the day in his room writing letters — crazy, mad letters no one understands.
He lets waste bits of paper pile up in his room — he won't let me touch them.
He doesn't talk to us about his problems — he scarcely talks at all.
But he's so rude, he seems to think his troubles are all our fault.
He thinks we're in league with the police to get rid of him and now my husband won't have anything to do with him, he leaves it all to me.
He's got a fear of water don't know why — and just won't bath or wash.
He smells dreadful.
His room's a dustbin with lists of objects pinned all over the walls — no, I don't know what it means.
Every now and again he gets so worked up he hits me or his sister.
When he's really crazy and violent or says he'll kill himself, he goes into hospital — for about a month, usually.
That happens once a year or so.
But that's no relief.
Some of the nurses are black but the doctors are white.
They don't really understand us.
I reckon they use more of the heavy drugs on blacks than whites.
Getting him to hospital is something I dread you wouldn't believe the struggle to get people to understand how bad it is — it's usually building up for weeks but until he's practically killed himself or someone else, no one wants to know.
And when he comes out of hospital, it's like they've forgotten he exists — just a couple of visits from a nurse.
They want him to have injections every month — I don't know if they help or not — but he says they slow him up and make his legs ache and he can't think straight.
He may be right — he seems like a zombie when he's on them, but then about a month after he stops having the regular injections he gets happier for a while, then gradually all the funny ideas begin again.
Sometimes he just wanders off for days on end — we get frantic, not knowing where he is.
He's got no money, and his Giro seems wrong every week.
No one helps him with it.
He says he wants to work but how is he ever going to find work when normal fit boys can't get work round here?
There's nowhere for him to go for a bit of company — he won't go to the day hospital because he thinks they'll make him take drugs.
It's heartbreaking to see him wasting his life away.
I wish there was someone I could talk to about the problems — someone who'd keep an eye on him and watch for him getting bad and get the doctor to do something, sooner; someone who'd help him with money, a job, get him out of the room for a bit, give us a break too.
Both Mrs Smith and Mrs Jones complain of feeling unsupported and isolated, and stagger from crisis to crisis without knowing who to turn to.
Their dependent relatives have very different kinds of problem and they themselves need different kinds of help.
Mrs Smith needs someone to help her with the practical side of caring, to arrange respite breaks, coordinate the nursing input and ensure that the hospital and local authority services work together with her.
Mrs Jones needs a closer and better relationship with the psychiatric services; she needs to get them to listen to her needs and she also needs someone to provide practical help with money problems for her son, someone who can discuss work opportunities, recognize his need for friendship and help him think about his future.
The practical problems Mrs Smith and Mrs Jones are both experiencing are a result of operational difficulties in the way the services are organized and delivered in the community.
Lack of money to make choices
Most sufferers and their families simply have insufficient money under their own control to make choices about how they wish to be helped.
Money empowers people to choose for themselves what kind of accommodation they need, how much assistance with household chores they require, and how much help they need from neighbours or private agencies.
Money doesn't solve everything but it gives a sense of control over some of the options.
Certain welfare benefits such as attendance allowances and invalid care allowances make a small contribution to the care of some individuals but the sums are very small, particularly when compared with the costs of providing residential or hospital care.
Inadequate personal income and lack of assistance in this area are a major problem for many mentally disordered people and their relatives.
Local variability of commitment and funds
There are extraordinary disparities between one area of the country and another in the commitment of funds to mental health services from local authorities and health authorities.
For example, in 1986, inner-city north-east Newcastle-upon-Tyne spent 7.43 per head of population per annum on mental health services, while Redbridge, a prosperous outer London suburb, spent just 0.49 per head per annum .
NHS spending varies as widely.
In 1986 Mersey Region Health Authority spent proportionately over double what Oxfordshire Region spent.
To make matters worse, there is no evidence that lack of spending by social services is compensated for by increased NHS spending, or vice versa; indeed, the financial allocation seems just as likely to be low from both authorities, as it has been, for example , in the London Borough of Lambeth, or very good in both authorities, as traditionally has been the case in Newcastle.
Nor has the growth of private sector nursing homes and specialist hotels been evenly spread across the country; indeed, these tend to be concentrated in those areas where cheap large houses were available for conversion, or in traditional holiday areas.
Prosperous rural and coastal areas are often over-provided with this sort of accommodation, while inner-city areas, where far more people with serious mental disorder live, are desperately short of such places.
Confused responsibilities
Once a person leaves hospital, no one is ‘in charge’ of that person out there.
Whereas a patient living inside a hospital has one named doctor — the consultant — in charge of his or her treatment and one named person — the ward sister — responsible for the nursing care he or she receives, outside the walls of the hospital no one person is responsible for assessing the individual's needs for a range of services and for then making sure that the required services are delivered.
A younger person, for example, may need help with housing, assistance in finding a way through the complex welfare benefit system, help with using the local rehabilitation facilities at a day centre or day hospital, help in planning a return to work, and so on .
What is needed is one named individual who is responsible for assessing that person's total needs, deciding who should do what, coordinating the efforts of the various health professionals and for ensuring that, from the ‘consumer's’ point of view, the various  services are integrated and one hand knows what the other hand is doing.
Importantly, the appointment of one named individual also ensures that there is someone to turn to when help is required.
Insufficient staff with the right training
When a hospital patient is unable to perform the activities of daily life for him- or herself, staff are on hand to help; such staff are called ‘nurses’, though in reality ward staff do little that requires a skilled qualified nursing background.
What the staff provide is understanding and tolerance of difficult behaviour; they also assist with the practical caring tasks of washing, dressing and feeding, and they encourage, supervise and train patients to carry out these tasks for themselves.
They ensure, for example, that meals are eaten at the right time, that appointments are kept, that a daily routine is adhered to and that patients do not neglect themselves or put themselves in danger.
In the community, however, people called ‘nurses’ are not available to do these practical things.
They are people who visit, oversee, inspect, give medication and observe, but they are involved with patients only intermittently and are not present twenty-four hours in a day.
None the less, in very many cases ‘hands-on’ care is still required and there has been a distinct failure to understand the needs of discharged patients for continuing support of this kind.
A yawning gap exists in the supposed overlap of services between the home help and the nurse, which needs to be filled by a small army of ‘hands-on’ carers.
However, the creation of such a workforce of carers requires a heavy investment in training and recruitment as well as substantial on-going budgets.
Yet such carers do not need to be highly skilled, though they require careful selection, close supervision and extensive in-service continuing training.
While many local authorities are now organizing care of this sort for disabled elderly people living at home, the similar needs of people with chronic mental disorder have by no means been as widely recognized.
The sideline role of general practitioners
Family doctors treat and care for over 95 per cent of all mental disorder.
They refer on to specialists only a tiny proportion of people with mental disorder, usually those with severely upsetting or difficult problems such as new psychotic illnesses, very severe depression or disabling anxiety disorders.
Generally, however, family doctors receive very little training in the management of severe chronic mental disorder in spite of the fact that they may be frequently called on to give advice and may often have to decide when to recommend a period of hospital treatment.
GPs also complain, quite rightly, that hospital staff making, for example, discharge plans for a group of patients to a new home or hostel sometimes neglect to discuss the plans with the primary care team — normally the local general practice together with its team of doctors, nurses and other specialists — yet expect the GPs to pick up the pieces when something goes wrong.
The reason for this may well be that the hospital consultant is reluctant to let go medical responsibility for former patients and thrust them on to a local GP, but he is not normally easily available when off duty or working in a clinic many miles away.
Thus responsibility for the discharged patient often ends up with the GP, whether this outcome is planned or not, and few GPs have been prepared by vocational training for a more involved role in community care services.
GPs and their primary care team of nurses and other staff must be involved more fully in the central task of planning and delivering services.
The problems of community care are not just financial
Government money, channelled via local government and the NHS, or through income support benefits into the pockets of sufferers and their families, is essential for effective community care services, but it is not enough on its own.
More and more money from public taxation has been put in to such services one way or another, yet the services still do not work in a foolproof way, for a number of practical reasons.
Future services must be structured and organized so as to avoid the pitfalls: an organizational structure  is required to facilitate the smooth cooperation of all the individual parts of a service and ensure that there are no wasteful overlaps and no gaps.
Much analysis of what is wrong with current systems has been undertaken.
In the last few years many policy analysts, professional organizations, charitable bodies and government-funded bodies have made recommendations on how the NHS and local authority structures should be changed in order to develop community care more effectively.
One of the organizations concerned is the King's Fund, founded by the beneficence of King Edward VII to assist hospitals in London, though its role today is to develop policy on improving the organization and management of health services throughout Britain.
In 1987 it published a report on its observations of specific community care projects which were felt by local people to be successful.
Four key elements common to all the successful services were identified.
1.
Clear values and principles about what the services were trying to achieve .
All the individual professionals, managers and planners, together with the local people the service was designed to serve, shared a common vision as to what they were aiming for, often based around the concept of providing a more ‘normal’ home life for patients who had previously lived in an institution.
As we have already seen, it is more difficult to agree a common vision for the development of mental health services than for other services because of the differing philosophies with which people approach individuals' rights to refuse treatment and to take personal risks.
Often dramatically opposed views are held by consultant psychiatrists, for example, on one side and the local MIND group on the other, on what comprises a good mental health service.
When this happens, however, opposing parties are usually willing to work towards a common view if they are brought together for joint discussions by a neutral.
‘arbitrator’ or facilitator, for example, a senior respected manager or an elected member of the local public or voluntary services.
With goodwill, even people with apparently ‘extreme’ views may find, sometimes to their surprise, that there is much common ground.
2.
The views of the recipients of the services were considered .
Mental health services are traditionally planned without any reference whatever to the views of those on the receiving end.
‘Consumers’ or ‘users’have traditionally been regarded as having no realistic, lucid, practical views to offer, and many professionals feel that the very nature of mental illness precludes users of services from making a sensible contribution.
While this may be true, in part, for acutely disturbed patients, for those who are unable to express themselves clearly or for those with advanced senile dementia, it is not true of most people who depend daily on mental health services.
Even when people are very severely disturbed they can express legitimate choices about whether they wish to be alone or in company, occupied or relaxing, about the food they like, about whether they would prefer silence or a music-filled room, and so forth.
Most users, once recovered from an acute phase of illness, can make a contribution far beyond such simple choices, and can be involved in planning the shape of services, provided their opinions are sought and listened to.
Such consultation, though a problematic and difficult area, is vital for proper service planning and is considered in greater detail in Chapter 8.
Relatives are also ‘consumers’ and they too must be involved in service planning; they know the problems at first hand in a way which professionals can never do.
The King's Fund found that good projects involved families in the planning of services and built them in to the system in such a way that they felt their important role was appreciated.
Relatives and sufferers should feel that they are in control or, at least, have a powerful voice in what happens to the individual.
Relatives, of course, do not always agree with the individual about what is best for him or her and they may not agree with professionals trying to help the person either.
There will inevitably be disagreements and sometimes these may prove insoluble.
But while this may be true for matters concerning individual patients, as family relationships often develop severe tensions and problems, it is rarely true of the relatives of groups of patients who, when involved in planning and running services, show collective good sense and experience in addressing practical problems.
The role of relatives is also discussed in Chapter 8.
3.
The skills of doctors, nurses, social workers and other professionals were valued .
In some areas of Britain local voluntary organizations, or perhaps one of the arms of the public sector services, have become so disheartened by the lack of commitment and enthusiasm on the part of local psychiatrists and psychiatric nurses for developing a new style of service away from their traditional hospital base that they have decided to go ahead and develop a new service without any support from the consultants and hospital staff.
On the whole, such services tend not to serve severely mentally disordered people but to concentrate instead on less seriously dependent people.
Generally, links with other services are poor and the contribution that doctors and nurses can make to specific treatment is entirely lost.
Typically, exasperated health service managers in some areas have developed ‘community-based teams’ of nurses, psychologists and therapists working with people living at home, while the local consultant has remained firmly ensconced in his hospital office, near his admission ward and at some distance from the team.
This separation creates inevitable tensions between the team and the consultant, which are inimical to good multidisciplinary work.
Consultants are often fearful that these new styles of service will lead to the quality of care of acutely ill patients on the wards suffering; they believe that the focus of community work is away from those who are most in need or are concerned that if they work in the community they will lose the professional day-to-day support of consultant colleagues.
All these issues can, however, be satisfactorily resolved with tact and consultation, and overall, it is usually better to be patient and to move slowly, gradually involving reluctant or sceptical professionals and attempting to meet their anxieties, than to go it alone.
Professionals have training and experience which are valuable in planning services; ignoring them almost always leads to an inferior service.
4.
Recipients of good schemes had access to local community facilities available to the local population at large .
Local facilities such as libraries, swimming pools, tennis courts, further education classes, bingo, cinemas, pubs, working men's clubs, parks, concerts and  church services are, in theory, for the use of everyone, and if people with mental disorder live day in and day out inside the confines of a suburban house and never use such local facilities or participate in the life of the community, they might just as well remain behind the walls of an institution.
Ordinary people spend their leisure time using such facilities as well as shopping, meeting friends in local cafes or pubs, visiting friends at home, and so on.
People with mental disorder may well have difficulty in doing some of these things but often they would like to try, particularly if they are accompanied in the early exploratory stages, and are helped to achieve confidence in using facilities for their own enjoyment.
Local authority education and leisure department can often be usefully involved in planning and developing services and in the education and training of staff.
They are usually also very willing to create special opportunities for individuals to become accustomed to new experiences such as going swimming, to help them become familiar with an unknown and perhaps daunting routine before ‘plunging in’ with the general public.
In addition to the above elements, the King's Fund also identified several other factors which determined whether or not a community care scheme would be successful.
They were:
1.
The presence of an entrepreneur .
Successful schemes always had someone who could be identified as the driving force, someone who pushed and who steered the project through to a satisfactory launch.
This leader, the champion of change, was frequently a consultant responsible for the area service, or a general manager within the NHS or social services, or the director of a voluntary organization, but it could be anyone with sufficient enthusiasm, knowledge, commitment and determination to persuade others to collaborate and to get people who control resources to part with their cash.
However, to ensure that projects do not collapse when the ‘entrepreneur's’ work is finished, the service system has to be established in such a way that it can continue if necessary without that person's contribution.
2.
A focus on action .
Community care plans are often bedevilled by too many people from too many organizations spending too much time in  endless meetings where no decisions get taken and where ideas and enthusiasm become diluted and, eventually, dissipated into thin air.
The way in which community care projects get off the ground quickly is to have a small project team of three or four people with the task of steering it through from start to finish, working under the guidance of a strong chairman.
This small group needs the authority to make decisions on behalf of organizations who hold the purse-strings and therefore must be made up of individuals who are trusted and respected within their own organizations.
Such small project teams rarely spend much time meeting or writing reports they just get on and do it.
3.
Intersectoral integration .
This grand term merely means that successful community care schemes are usually a joint initiative of two or more service sectors, that is, a local authority and a voluntary organization, a local authority and the NHS, the NHS and a housing association, and so on .
There is, for example, a sheltered home in the south of England for ten adult patients recently discharged from a psychiatric hospital, where the large house is privately owned by the manager/proprietor and the staff are employed by a local voluntary organization but trained and supported by the health service.
The consultant psychiatrist and a team of community nurses from the health service are actively involved in supporting and visiting the scheme, and the home is registered and inspected by the local authority who also provide a social worker to provide links with other local services.
Every resident has one member of staff who acts as a personal ‘key worker’, responsible for making sure that the care plans drawn up by the professional staff and the individual residents are implemented.
4.
Local neighbourhood focus .
Each geographical area served by different teams of people from different organizations needs to be small enough for all the individuals to get to know each other, so that good personal working relationships are fostered and liaison between services is optimized.
Services organized across large District Health Authorities covering 200–300,000 people cannot possibly provide a local, friendly, easily accessible service.
Sufferers and families need to be able to walk to the main services in their  neighbourhood or to catch a bus into a local centre no more than a mile or two away.
Services should be provided near enough so that people do not to have to venture further than their local shops or post office.
Thus the office base for a local service should cater for a local population of 10–20,000 people, although in inner-city areas the number can be larger because of the greater density of population.
In some rural areas the population served may need to be even smaller if villages are far apart.
In practice, the majority of services can be provided locally, but there are none the less certain disadvantages in carving a district up into ‘patches’ or ‘localities’.
Rigid demarcation lines can leave users with no choice at all about who they wish to be treated by, and getting along with and trusting the professionals who are responsible for providing help is a crucial factor in whether a service user will stay in touch with the services and persevere with treatment.
So a small neighbourhood system often works best if service users know that they can, if they wish, choose to be treated in a neighbouring locality by another consultant.
In addition, more specialist services such as those for mentally abnormal offenders, where there are usually only one or two expert practitioners in a large district, often have to be organized on a larger scale than is ideal for patients, simply because there is no other practical way of making the service available to everyone who needs it.
5.
Multidisciplinary collaboration .
Good community care services work best where skilled professionals work comfortably hand-in-hand with unskilled staff, families, neighbours and voluntary organizations.
Service teams should comprise people from different professional backgrounds, although it is still not uncommon to come across teams called ‘community mental health teams’ which consist entirely of nurses from the health service or of social workers from the local authority.
Multiprofessional teams bring a range of educational backgrounds, training and expertise to bear on the management of individual cases, which ensures that care is not dominated by one single professional approach.
The same principles apply in planning and delivering a new service.
A range of disciplines and organizations ensures that all  relevant points of view are considered, although this does not mean that every Tom, Dick and Harry has to sit on the planning committee; rather, their insights and experience are gained through their active participation in informal discussions at the planning stage, and through consultation at all stages in the development process.
The organization of community care
The structure and organization of public services do not, at present, foster service developments which match the King's Fund recommendations, and the need for an overhaul in the way services are organized has been recognized for some years.
In late December 1986 the Audit Commission for local authorities in England and Wales published an influential report which severely criticized the existing public sector framework for community care services.
The Audit Commission conducts ‘value for money’ studies across the whole of the statutory public sector responsible for community care, and its report, Making A Reality of Community Care, was revolutionary in its recommendations and hotly debated by professional staff in the NHS and local authorities.
The Commission's brief was not only to address the problems of mentally disordered people but also to make recommendations on community care for elderly people and everyone with long-term physical or mental disabilities.
It decided that only fundamental, structural changes to the organization and management of services would bring about the environment necessary for locally integrated community care to flourish.
It proposed three such major structural changes.
First, it recommended that local authorities should be made responsible for all long-term care of mentally handicapped and physically handicapped people, except for the rare few in need of permanent 24-hour medical supervision, who would remain the responsibility of the NHS.
The second recommendation was that a single budget should be established for the care of elderly people in the community, with contributions from the NHS and from local authorities.
The amount paid would be determined according to a centrally agreed formula, and the budget would be controlled by a manager who  would purchase services from whichever public or private agency gave the best value for money.
The manager of the budget would be supervised by a joint board of representatives from local statutory services and from health and social services.
Third, the Audit Commission recommended that for mentally ill people the NHS should continue as the main authority responsible for care, but the possibility should remain for developing a central budget similar to that proposed for elderly people; alternatively, the NHS should have the ability to purchase local authority services on a contractual basis.
These proposals for major structural changes had considerable appeal.
The notion of a lead agency with overall responsibility for developing services or for buying in the necessary services from local statutory, private or voluntary agencies would make clear where responsibility should lie.
It thus gave a framework for developing a system of accountability and for monitoring and reviewing the service provided to individual clients.
These proposals for ‘top-down’ changes, which effectively sought to redraw the service boundaries, would probably achieve little, however, unless the real operational problems of delivering the service to individual clients were also tackled.
Fortunately, the practical operational problems were addressed in the next important report to be published.
The Griffiths Report
As a direct result of Audit Commission criticisms and other recently published reports, the government announced that Sir Roy Griffiths had been invited ‘to undertake a review of the way in which public funds are used to support community care and to advise on the options for action which would improve the use of these funds as a contribution to more effective community care’.
The announcement was-carefully worded to stress the financial aspects of the study but it none the less generated a good deal of hopeful excitement as well as sceptical anxiety.
Sir Roy was a popular choice; he was managing director of Sainsbury's, the retail grocery chain, and was shown to be a  pragmatic and sensible man accustomed to issues relating to the provision of complex services.
His previous government report, in 1983, on the restructuring of senior management in the NHS, had brought about very significant improvements to the administration of hospitals and community services and, since 1983, he had been immersed part-time in health care issues in his role as Deputy Chairman of the National Health Service Board.
When he embarked on his enquiry he was clearly favoured by the government, but his report of his findings,Community Care: Agenda for Action , published in early 1988, created government consternation.
While it was widely acclaimed by public sector authorities, voluntary organizations and professionals — though inevitably with some interagency squabbling and professional quibbling-its proposed ‘agenda for action’ was perceived as even more far-reaching and revolutionary than the Audit Commission report, although in fact many of Griffiths' recommendations were themselves derived from the Audit Commission's findings, translated into practical proposals.
It is important to understand Griffiths' proposals because some of them formed the basis of new government legislation in 1990, although other fundamental recommendations were, unfortunately, rejected — something which may well cause difficulties in the future, as we shall see later.
The Griffiths Report recommended the following:
1.
There should be government action to promulgate a definition of community care values and a set of objectives to guide developments.
A new Minister of State should be appointed in the Department of Health with responsibility for ensuring that national policy objectives are consistent with resources available to public authorities charged with meeting those objectives.
Griffiths regarded central government leadership in establishing policy objectives as crucial.
His proposals would have prevented the political indifference and the civil service's lack of interest, noted earlier, which have blighted the development of mental health services.
2.
Local authority social services should be responsible for identifying all people with community care needs in their area, for  assessing such needs, for arranging for individuals to receive social, domestic and personal care, and for ensuring that other authorities such as housing and health services are alerted to their needs.
3.
The individual and his or her particular situation and needs should be assessed by a care manager, a local authority member of staff who would develop and manage an individual package of services assembled from the various local options.
This care manager would be the person ‘in charge’ in the community, working closely with the client's family so as, for example, to arrange appropriate day care, liaise with the housing department on an application for a flat, keep in contact with the community psychiatric nurse about the client's mental state and need for medication, and so on .
4.
In order to channel most effectively the social security funds then available to individuals to enter residential care, the benefit would no longer be paid direct to the individual.
Instead, local authorities would be the ‘gatekeeper’ and would be able to choose to use such funds to provide care in the client's own home, if that was a more satisfactory arrangement than residential care for the individual concerned.
5.
Griffiths strongly recommended that funds for community care should be separately identified in the public expenditure planning process and allocated to local authorities in a ‘ring-fenced’ budget so that community care monies would not ‘leak’out into education, housing or leisure services on the decision of locally elected members.
6.
Local authorities should become the planners, organizers and purchasers of care services, but not direct providers.
Griffiths believed that a greater diversity of service options would develop if the independent sector, voluntary organizations and private companies were encouraged to compete for contracts for domiciliary and residential care services: indeed, there is evidence from initiatives in services for people with mental handicap that having a multiplicity of different service providers stimulates creative innovations in services in a way which monolithic public sector services seem slow to do.
Griffiths' plans thus once again brought local  government firmly to centre stage as the proper place for initiatives for the local population.
7.
Health authorities were encourage to restrict their services to health care only; that is, to the diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation undertaken by doctors and other professionals employed in the NHS.
The NHS was advised not to provide housing and social care but to hand over responsibilities for these community care developments to local authorities.
8.
GPs were to have an important role in alerting social services to the social care needs of their patients.
Griffiths also recommended that GPs should satisfy themselves that social services had considered the needs of individuals, a clear attempt by Griffiths to involve GPs more in the provision of services.
9.
Finally, Griffiths was concerned to ensure that the quality of services was regularly inspected and suggested that local authority registration and inspection units should be strengthened and supported by a national inspectorate.
Griffiths' solutions were radical but, potentially, highly effective.
His emphasis on government leadership, the creation of an identified and ‘ring-fenced’ budget, the clear attribution of responsibility to local authorities and the appointment of nominated ‘care managers’are fundamental to the delivery of a coordinated service.
The principles were sound but none the less there was great fear amongst mental health service professionals about the Report's practical implementation.
The clear advantages of Griffiths were as follows.
First, responsibilities for care for the chronically handicapped in a community were to be given to those elected by the local population; thus the electorate would, in theory, have greater control over the way local services are provided.
Second, the NHS would focus more on acute hospital care; thus chronically sick patients, who lack media appeal and who have never been able to compete successfully for resources within the NHS, would have a substantial part of their budgets protected within the proposed community care grant.
Third, effective operational planning of services for individuals  would be fostered by the appointment of care managers who would have more flexibility to be innovative and would also work within a clear system of accountability to senior managers.
There were other advantages, too, in that the proposed arrangements would give a clear focus for informal carers and relatives; such carers would no longer have to find their way through a maze of local services.
There was also the possibility of a more flexible use of facilities in the statutory, voluntary and private sectors, and, finally, the powerful influence of doctors over the lives of the chronically disabled would inevitably wane, a process of ‘de-medicalization’ which is largely to be welcomed as medical and nursing skills are only a small part of the required professional skills.
The new arrangements might, therefore, provide a better balance of skills and better opportunities for employing unskilled local people.
Many psychiatrists, unsurprisingly, did not like Sir Roy's proposals.
They were concerned about their own roles but they also felt there was no historical evidence of local authority commitment to mental health services and they therefore feared losing hard-won resources to these authorities.
A further drawback was that at that time most local authorities had neither the trained staff nor the organizational structure to manage a community care programme effectively.
Recruitment of trained staff was a continuing problem for local authorities and training of non-professional grades of staff was almost non-existent.
Another difficulty for local authorities was that they had not developed a culture of objective evaluation; few used good research methods to evaluate the costs and benefits of innovative schemes.
As dependent individuals are not vociferous consumers, ordinary market forces cannot operate in the same way as might be possible for the acute sector.
The most worrying feature of the proposals, however, was whether local authorities had either the ability or the will to implement the recommendations for mental health services.
Although most local authorities take as their priority the provision of services to their electorate, an appreciable minority have elected members whose priorities are concerned largely with the advancement of an  ideology, a situation to which the streets of some London boroughs, for example, provide mute witness.
Some councils refused under any circumstances whatever to purchase private services and would rather deny a disadvantaged person access to care than buy it privately.
Others had so mismanaged their own social work departments that they no longer had sufficient staff to fulfil their minimum statutory responsibilities to children at risk of abuse or to operate the Mental Health Act.
The prospect of handing over total responsibility for the care of the most vulnerable people in society to such local authorities was felt by some to be profoundly disquieting.
There were also councils of an altogether different political complexion who knew full well that most of their electorate would not make an issue if they skimped the care of minority, socially disadvantaged groups.
It was therefore felt that any new arrangements should ensure that no council could ignore its responsibilities, although no effective legal mechanism existed for central government to impose Griffiths' ‘ring-fence’ budget on local authorities.
In spite of these anxieties, the Griffiths Report contains the most impressive proposals on the effective delivery of community care services.
Its proposals are workable and provide a framework for services which can be applied at all levels from the government at the top right down to the professional worker in direct contact with the recipient of services.
Caring for People , 1990: the government's plan
The Griffiths Report was published in early 1988 but the government then fell silent.
The proposal to delegate responsibilities to local authorities was anathema to the Thatcher government in particular as it profoundly mistrusted local government and had progressively weakened its influence.
The only advantage of the proposals from the government's point of view was that they offered the possibility of appearing to reduce central government expenditure, a cause dear to the Tory heart.
Some sceptics also felt that community care was in such a mess that it would be quite convenient for the government to transfer future blame for failure on to local councils.
The government's prolonged sixteen-month silence over the Griffiths Report naturally led to much speculation, rumour and gossip.
Policy discussions at ministerial level appeared to focus mainly on the hoary old issues of which agency should take lead responsibility,’ but finally, in 1989, the government took a decision which was considered unthinkable only a year earlier, that is, that local authority social services departments should be given lead responsibility for community care and for all services including mental health, but with some additional controls added in the latter case, the single most controversial of Griffiths' proposals.
Under the new arrangements the role of the local authority will be to assess needs in their locality, set local priorities and service objectives, and arrange the required care by designing, organizing and purchasing it.
In order for this to be effectively implemented, social security benefits and existing community care monies are to be channelled through local authority social services and these funds will also be available to support individuals at home.
If the new arrangements are adequately funded and properly implemented, they will comprise the first major government initiative to foster care at home rather than in institutions.
The new arrangements also address the government's concern over the escalating social security bill for residential care, in 1989 running at 1 billion per year.
There were, however, enormous and seriously worrying gaps in the government's Caring for People White Paper, its response to Griffiths.
Griffiths, for example, wanted decisive central government action to ensure that clear objectives and priorities were set, but no such central direction was contained in Caring for People and no mechanisms were devised by which the government could ensure that local planning and implementation were consistent with national priorities; indeed, no such priorities were set.
Also, without the appointment of a minister with specific responsibilities, there seems little likelihood of the essential interdepartmental links developing between the Ministries of Health, Social Security, Housing, Employment and Education.
The government also failed to take up the recommendation to ‘ring-fence’ community care budget allocations, except in the case  of mental health services where they did agree to a specific grant which would only be spent on community care service plans developed jointly by the health and social services.
Other monies will not be separately identified from the general rate support grant from the Department of the Environment, a decision which will make it very difficult to identify exactly what is being spent on services by individual authorities.
In spite of these problems, the proposals do have the potential for righting the current gross geographical imbalance of services, though only if the resources made available to and by local authorities genuinely match the local costs of domiciliary and residential care.
The allocation of resources to authorities must be linked not only to social need in terms of the levels of disability locally and the age and social class patterns of handicap and mental disorder, but also to the local costs of delivering that care.
Geographical accident must not be allowed to disadvantage individuals in their ability to gain access to good local care.
It seems, too, that certain specific proposals in Caring for People relating to the care of mentally disordered people are something of an afterthought; certainly they read that way.
It is generally felt that in the past local authorities have dragged their feet in taking on their responsibilities to care for mentally disordered people, and the Minister of Health, Roger Freeman, outlined further plans for this group to Parliament the day after Secretary of State Kenneth Clarke's speech on community care; these were, clearly, some last-minute additions to the government's package of proposals.
The responsibility for the assessment and organization of care would, it was proposed, be with local authorities, as for other care groups, but health authorities would have an influence over social care spending plans.
Furthermore, health authorities could no longer discharge patients without an individual care plan being approved and agreed with the local authority.
This last-minute addition went some way to satisfying the psychiatric lobby who had pressed for continuing health authority control.
Overall, the most welcome part of the White Paper was the clear commitment to continue with the policy of closure of the large institutions, though in a more controlled fashion.
Even though reactionary voices were raised in opposition to this, both in Parliament and by some campaigners,(particularly the National Schizophrenia Fellowship, who wished to reverse the policy on the basis of the misguided notion that this would remove the problem of homeless, drifting, mentally disordered people), the disasters of the past thirty years of unplanned discharge cannot be reversed by bolting the stable door now.
In the main, however, most people welcomed the proposals, among the most heartening of which was one to allow developers to invest private capital in hospital closure programmes in order to enable the right kinds of alternative accommodation to be developed.
The White Paper,Caring for People , was a partial response to Griffiths and it can be fleshed out into a workable comprehensive policy; it became law in June 1990 with the passing of the NHS and Community Care Act.
In fact, the proposals for community care received very little media attention throughout the bill's passage through the Houses of Parliament because other parts of the bill, those which proposed a new organizational structure for the general hospital and community services, represented the most fundamental change to the NHS since its inception in 1948 and therefore deflected attention away from the community care proposals.
Health authorities, doctors, nurses, professional organizations, trade unions, administrators and managers were seriously at odds over whether the proposed reforms to the hospital service were beneficial or disastrous, and the all-consuming nature of the massive organizational ‘shake-up’ preoccupied the NHS and the media almost to the exclusion of anything else.
Community care proposals were perceived by many NHS staff as essentially to do with social care, something which could best be left to the local authorities.
In between the publication of the White Paper and the passing of the new Act, the government decided that in view of the work required on the hospital services, it could not expect its community care proposals to be ready by the proposed launch date of April 1991, so in early 1990 it announced a two-year delay in implementation until 1993.
Once again, community care was to take a back seat while the hospital services received the main attention.
There are a few District Health Authorities who are already    grasping the nettle and beginning to work closely with their local authority colleagues to ensure the implementation of the community care proposals, but close joint working is very patchy across the country.
Enthusiasm largely fizzled out when the delay in implementation was announced, and the ad hoc, laissez-faire government approach of letting authorities decide for themselves how fast and how enthusiastically to move on the proposals is exacerbated by a lack of ministerial drive and an absence of central government leadership in the mental health field.
Care management
Care management practice, which has been mentioned earlier, is so fundamental to good community care and such a key part of Griffiths' and the government's proposals that a further word about it is necessary here.
Care management, or case management as it is sometimes called, is a concept which developed in the United States in the mid-1970s and is growing rapidly in popularity in Britain.
In this system one individual worker, employed by an agency responsible for community care services, is appointed to assess the needs of an individual client, plan a comprehensive set of services for the individual, coordinate the various services and follow up the individual's progress over time.
The services themselves may be provided by a number of different agencies, for example, a voluntary respite ‘sitting in’ service, a local authority day centre, a privately employed cleaner, meals on wheels, a community nurse, and so forth , but it is the care manager's task to pull all these together into a scheme which best suits the individual, his family and other close supporters.
There are many advantages to having a care manager, ‘someone in charge out there’, and this has long been recognized as essential, although in the past this recognition has not been focused on as closely as under the current care management system.
Such a system has the following advantages:
1.
Services are built round an individual's needs in a flexible way, rather than people being forced to comply with existing service  patterns, whether or not they find them convenient or useful.
2.
Care managers can use financial resources efficiently, especially when they are planning services for a group of people with widely differing needs and have a flexible budget to use at their discretion.
3.
The individual service user and his family have one named contact, one phone number to call for information, help and support.
4.
There is one person responsible for ensuring that the individual does not ‘slip through the net’ or drift away from the service, a factor which is particularly important in mental health services.
5.
Care managers can become advocates and supporters for their clients.
Care managers can come from a wide range of professional backgrounds though social work professionals are probably best trained for the role.
Others, however, such as senior nurses, therapists or even people without specific health care qualifications can be trained to do the job.
What is critical is that care managers should be able to command authority with the various service agencies and with others such as consultant psychiatrists, probation officers, senior housing managers and so on, as one of their key tasks is to cajole, encourage and, at times, bully services out of government and private agencies.
Care management is at an early stage of development in Britain but, if the experience in the United States is anything to go on, we can be optimistic that the system will promote for the recipient a better coordination of services and a better quality of community care.
Developing a seamless service
The new community care plans do not, however, directly link together the NHS and local authorities in order to improve coordination of services.
Figure 4 above shows how few direct links exist between the two authorities.
The plans exhort those responsible to  bridge the gulf but do not themselves bridge it.
Griffiths had in fact suggested that rather than try to create new bridging structures by organizational change, it would be better for both statutory authorities to have clearly defined responsibilities and roles which did not overlap.
He suggested, as I describe earlier, that the NHS should confine itself to health care, and local authorities should be responsible for social care.
Thus most long-term care for people who require a lot of daily support would be the responsibility of the local authority rather than, as formerly, of the NHS.
The idea, under the new plan, is that, over a number of years, the local authority will contract with a wide range of voluntary and private agencies to provide a spectrum of different services which it pays for.
It will purchase the total range of care needed by local people with mental disorder and, meanwhile, the NHS will restrict itself to providing a psychiatric service for these individuals in whichever setting is most appropriate.
These proposals are, however, made much more complex by the existence of old long-stay wards in hospitals whose main function, quite clearly, is social care, yet which for many years are going to be run by the Health Service.
Griffiths realized that this situation could not be changed overnight, so under the new regulations the NHS will still be allowed to carry on providing long-term care if it wishes.
A further problem is that no one is quite sure exactly what defines health care and social care, since an individual's progress in responding to treatment is often measured by an improvement in the performance of social care tasks and everyday activities.
This being so, specific rehabilitation programmes for people with mental disorder frequently use a therapeutic approach which practises and rehearses ordinary activities so as to help people regain confidence in managing the business of life.
It is therefore perfectly possible for social care to be provided in an ordinary household with rehabilitation and personal development as its main purpose; in other words, the therapy itself is of a social care nature.
Under such circumstances, it is not at all clear which statutory agency should take the leading role in developing such therapeutic houses and homes, something perhaps which explains why the government has now  proposed a specific grant for mental health services in the community which can only be spent by the joint agreement of local health and social services.
The specific grant, introduced in April 1991, should encourage authorities to plan together so that a broad spectrum of services is developed and there are no gaps for individual patients to fall down.
One commonly heard complaint from relatives is that ‘I was told she was too disturbed for the council day centre as they couldn't stop her from wandering out’, yet ‘The doctor at the day hospital said they only took short-term cases, people who could get better and move on.’
Too ‘bad’ for the council and too ‘good’for the NHS is a recurrent problem, and, therefore, a range of services is needed to care for all possible problems, however unusual, complex, worrying or burdensome an individual's difficulties may appear.
In some parts of Britain health services and local authorities are beginning to work together to develop an overall plan for services in their area.
Fortunately, the NHS reforms and the community care changes share some unifying principles which should encourage the two statutory authorities to work together more closely.
1.
The role of the responsible local statutory authority is to develop an overall strategy for the shape of services for the local population in a defined geographical area.
The authority must develop a plan for the design and development of a service, set priorities and determine the most appropriate set of services for its residents, within the constraints of its resources.
The authority will be purchasers and enablers of care, but not necessarily a provider of care.
2.
The management of services will be via contracts.
Authorities will develop specifications for services and then reach contractual agreements with provider agencies such as voluntary or private organizations.
Public authorities have, however, minimal expertise in this area, though they have ‘cut their teeth’ by developing ‘specifications for contracts’for-non-care services such as cleaning and catering.
Developing an effective contractual style of management is a challenge which has, in the main, still to be faced across the public sector.
3.
A ‘mixed economy of care’, with care being provided on similar terms by public and independent sectors, is not particularly new to local authorities, although the contracting of care from multiple organizations has not been a key policy in the past, more an ad hoc response to specific local problems.
Getting the right balance of ‘in house’ provision and ‘contracted out’services will vary from one locality to another and will reflect local authorities' employment policies as well as the availability of effective local voluntary organizations.
It will also reflect the propensity or other wise of the private sector to invest in the provision of care services.
Clearly, both statutory authorities will need to develop new attitudes and approaches to the ‘other world’ of the independent sector.
4.
Local authorities will need good information on the costs, quality and volume of services needed and provided.
While the NHS has been developing its computerized data-bases and information systems for general hospitals with astonishing rapidity, community care services lag far behind.
Both authorities will need to invest substantially in information systems over the next decade if they are to maximize the amount of care they can squeeze out of their constrained budgets.
5.
Last, but possibly most important, both public sector services are moving towards more ‘explicit’ accountability for the use of their resources.
While the NHS has become increasingly concerned with ensuring that there is a hierarchy of individuals with responsibility for achieving certain objectives, and an increasing commitment by individual doctors, nurses and therapists to agreed aims, local authority staff have also come under increasing pressure from elected council members and, behind them, the voting electorate, to demonstrate that their service departments have effective management structures and are truly accountable.
These common features should therefore enable health and local authorities to develop a common philosophy about the style of delivery of mental health services.
They also highlight the relative inexperience of both authorities in certain key areas, although benefits of cooperation between authorities, such as in the  development and sharing of computer information systems for work in the community, are obvious.
When professionals who work in mental health services talk of an ‘integrated, comprehensive, seamless service’ they mean a service where acute hospital beds, hostels, group homes, community teams and services for people in their own homes, are all managed as one service with one team of people who have total responsibility.
In practice this is rarely achieved by health services and local authorities and almost never includes private and voluntary sectors.
Nevertheless, most professionals aspire to a flexible, easily accessible service where ‘users’ can move rapidly between home, day care and hospital when the need arises.
One of the major anxieties about the new NHS and Community Care Act is the further fragmentation of services, with health services even more isolated and hospital-bound, yet still consuming massive resources.
One radical but simple solution to this problem is joint buying consortia.
Buying consortia
Under this system the two statutory authorities would create a new organization where NHS resources for mental health services and the local authority social services resources for domiciliary, residential and day care services would be pooled.
This new organization, or consortium, could have powers delegated to it to design and buy services across an area coterminous with the local authority boundary.
Indeed, the local authority must be the key agency around which services are designed if we are to make the best use not only of social services but also of housing, education and leisure facilities.
Apart from the clear advantages of having a joint strategic plan for mental health services, a joint buying consortium would have much enhanced buying power and could lead, too, to considerable economies in developing information systems and a pooling of skills in service development and the maintenance of standards of care.
Figure 4 shows diagrammatically how the new community care proposals by the government are currently planned.
Figure 5 shows how a Joint Purchasing Consortium would work.
There are, of course, drawbacks to this proposal.
Indeed, the    issues and structures are so massively complex that this is inevitable.
It may, for example, be politically ‘undeliverable’ in many areas at present-both authorities would lose some sovereignty over their current funds and may find this unacceptable.
There would inevitably also be a fear among some NHS professionals that their hard-won services would be dissipated into a ‘support only’ service and that accurate diagnosis and treatment would be sacrificed in favour of providing a better living environment.
There will be an equally potent fear that new, less appropriate priorities may take precedence in planning, and social services council members may fear they will be left with nothing very much to do if they delegate their decision-making to an independent body.
There is considerable suspicion and mistrust between many health services and local authorities, but a real commitment to the needs of society's most vulnerable members could drive both sides to a fresh start.
There are signs from some parts of the country that some authorities are already exploring, albeit gingerly, the possibilities of ‘joint purchasing’ and that this represents a good way forward.
The new organizational and structural changes proposed in the Act are complex, but go a considerable way to addressing the problems outlined in Chapter 4.
They can also be developed further where there is a local political will to do so.
Any serious problems with the new proposals could yet be addressed by the appointment of a designated minister and by a strong government commitment to raising the profile of mental health service planning within relevant government departments.
From Principles to Practice I
For the first time in many years there is hope that by means of the NHS and Community Care Act of 1990, imperfect and incomplete though it may be, the fundamental organizational and financial changes needed to foster good community care have been made.
But the general public does not have a clear understanding of what community care services are trying to achieve, partly because people with mental disorder are the focus of philosophical and ethical disagreements about their care, disagreements which create confusion in the minds of a public unfamiliar with the issues.
The story of the growth of community care and the closure of the asylums has been dominated by unseemly public disputes between different professional and voluntary organizations, all of them committed to developing mental health services but with very different ideas about the routes to be followed.
Thus one organization will expound in the media about the urgent need to ‘slow down the hospital closures’, while another will follow hot on their heels, saying, ‘Close the hospitals as rapidly as possible.’
Clearly what is lacking is a single, explicit, cohesive vision of the future which inspires collaboration between professionals, voluntary groups and the sufferers themselves, and which could also drive political action.
The Victorian asylum movement was successful largely because of a unanimity of views on the subject by most men of influence.
Perhaps if we look beyond superficial disagreements we may find that today's men and women of influence share fundamental beliefs and that these beliefs can inspire a common approach to community care.
This chapter outlines what society should seek to achieve for people with mental disorder.
Principles of community care
The purpose of community care services should be to help individuals achieve and sustain a fulfilling and rewarding life when this has become difficult as a result of mental disability.
The philosophy that underpins this statement of purpose is the belief that every individual human being in our society has rights of citizenship and the potentiality to participate as a citizen, irrespective of gender, ethnic origin, cultural background or physical or mental ability.
Thus every recipient of community care has rights and entitlements, and also responsibilities, and the aim of community care services should be to enhance the ability of an individual to live independently in as ‘normal’ a way as possible.
There is, of course, much argument about what is ‘normal’, but in general it should mean that every adult person lives in a home of his or her own or with chosen friends or family members, that he or she has daily purposeful occupation, whether in paid employment or not, and that the person has social contacts and interpersonal relationships which are emotionally satisfying.
The goal of social independence, of helping people to ‘look after themselves’, is a very important one, but many individuals with long-term mental disorder may also need specific medical and psychological treatment to lessen the burden of symptoms; from time to time they may also need extra supervision, care and shelter.
Community care support, therefore, may well be a starting-point in a process designed to provide an individual with, ultimately, true independence and a generally fuller life.
But although it is easy to write fine-sounding words about the vision which should inspire community care services, it is much more difficult to put them into practice.
It would also be a lot easier to implement a new service from scratch, without the legacy of old hospitals and the current hotchpotch of uncoordinated services.
However, we have inherited such a legacy and we need, too, to work with existing services.
We have, therefore, two quite separate tasks.
The first is to design and construct local services for the majority of mentally disordered people who live in their own homes and who may use mental health services for only a few weeks every few years.
The second is to resettle individuals with long-term mental disorder, who have been left behind in the old hospitals, back into their home localities, and support them with a network of services.
In order to translate an overall vision into practice, some general principles must be followed for both these groups:
Consultation and participation
Recipients of services, whether they are referred to as users, clients or patients, are entitled to be consulted about their treatment and care and to participate as fully as possible in decisions about their lives.
The law provides that no medical treatment or other care should be given without the valid consent of the individual, except in the case of those detained in hospital under the Mental Health Act of 1983 and in certain other exceptional circumstances.
Self-determination and autonomy
Services should aim to promote individuals' capacity for self-determination and autonomy and to enhance their ability to make realistic choices for themselves.
In order for this to be achieved, users need information on future possibilities and options.
A normal environment
Services should be provided wherever possible in ordinary houses and homes rather than in institutions.
A home of one's own is a fundamental requirement but should be provided in the way best suited to an individual's needs.
Minimum segregation
Individuals should be restricted and segregated from the general community as little as possible.
As far as their disabilities allow they should have the opportunity to participate in normal community activities.
Promoting a policy of minimal segregation does not, however, preclude the provision of protection from abuse and harm.
Protection and asylum
All human beings have the right to be protected from physical and mental harm, abuse and exploitation.
Services should be able to provide temporary or permanent ‘asylum’ in the sense of a haven or retreat when someone requires shelter and protection from the pressures of the external world.
Small scale
It is generally better to provide services on a small rather than a large scale.
For example, the numbers of people living together, or the numbers of people attending a day centre or place of work, should be as small as is consistent with the successful functioning of the facility.
Local
Services which are organized locally are usually more accessible and friendly than remote, distant ones.
Environmental solutions are better than special services
Wherever possible it is better to provide a person with the living conditions and equipment to do things for him- or herself, rather than providing special services.
For example, it may be better to provide a schizophrenia sufferer with personal transportation to enable him or her to reach a day centre rather than laying on transportation.
Alleviation of distress
Services should have as a primary goal the alleviation of distress, by providing a programme of treatment, care and support based on the unique needs of an individual.
Distress does not just arise from the symptoms of mental disorder but also from the consequences of the disorder as they affect the social and occupational life of the individual.
Services should also aim to enhance the individual's own ability to cope with distress.
The concept of normalization
The principles outlined above all use the notion of ‘normality’ or ‘ordinariness’and it is worth considering further what this means for people with mental disorder.
The American word ‘normalization’ is now used increasingly in official planning documents to describe the concept, as far as possible, of providing services in ways which maintain mentally disordered people in, or return them to, ‘as normal a life as possible’.
The problem is that just like the ‘moral treatments’ of the nineteenth century, normalization has come to mean different things to different people, and professionals who have espoused the concept of ‘normalization’often proselytize their views with a religious fervour which, though often motivating to fellow staff, can be alienating to those who are unfamiliar with the concept.
Wolf Wolfensberger, an American professor of education and rehabilitation working with mentally handicapped people, was a particularly powerful influence on the ‘normalization’ movement, especially in the 1970s and early 1980s.
His basic idea is that ‘normalizing’ services are those in which the ultimate goal of the service is the creation, support and defence of valued social roles for people who are at risk of social devaluation.
This definition received, and still receives, much support, although, in the context of helping those with mental disorder, it has been agreed that Wolfensberger's concept fails to take account of the realities of many mental disorders.
For example, I visited a ‘community rehabilitation house’, a converted Victorian house in the suburbs of a northern city, where ten adults lived and the concept of normalization was applied.
All ten residents had been long-term patients in a large psychiatric hospital, were severely disabled and had been discharged only after a lengthy period of active rehabilitation.
All had their own bed-sitting rooms and used shared, though generously provided, bathroom facilities, as well as communal dining and sitting rooms.
Physically their new environment was a major improvement on where they had previously lived, a dormitory-style long-stay ward.
The house was staffed round the clock since many of the  residents needed practical help with everyday tasks and several still displayed ‘odd’ or difficult behaviour.
Even so, some residents had started to venture out to local pubs and shops and were slowly becoming part of the community.
One resident was, however, noticeably unshaven and smelly and there was evidence, too, of urinary incontinence.
He would never have been allowed to remain looking like that in the regimented environment of a long-stay ward, but the staff of the house were striving to apply their understanding of the principles of normalization.
One explained, ‘It's his choice to be that way.
He has the right not to change or wash, a right not to conform to social conventions.’
Another member of staff wasn't so sure: ‘He won't wash because he believes the water is poisoned and poison gets through his skin.
Medication doesn't seem to make any difference.
But I think we should at least make him look and smell normal no one else will sit near him or talk to him because he's like that.’
The two members of staff were still debating the issue of whether he should be bathed and shaved, whether he liked it or not, when I left.
In this instance, a well-meaning effort to give an individual the right to choose how he led his life — arguably a choice which any ‘normal’ person enjoys — had led to that individual becoming increasingly isolated and rejected.
The worthy objective of ‘normalization’ should therefore lead to the implementation of care practices and procedural policies which are appropriate for those with mental disorders and it should not be applied in a rigid and obsessive fashion.
Professionals and family members have to be very clear about an individual's own internal experiences and personal needs; clearly it is no good pretending, for the sake of normalization, that delusions, hallucinations and abnormal moods do not exist and that aberrant and unsocial behaviour is not a real and sometimes pervasive aspect of mental disorder.
Above all, care plans must recognize the influence that such symptoms may have on the ability of a sufferer to live a ‘normal’ life.
Criteria for community services
The principles set out above focus on the treatment and rights of the individual but there are also principles which apply to systems of care.
A workable set of such principles was described by the National Institute of Mental Health in the United States in 1980 and these are equally applicable in Britain today.
A service system comprises a network of professionals and/or volunteers who accept responsibility for providing assistance to vulnerable people to meet their individual needs and develop their potential without their being unnecessarily isolated or excluded from the community.
The ten criteria for an effective system are:
There must be mechanism for identifying persons in need and for reaching out to those willing to participate; it may also at times be necessary to reach out to those who do not wish to participate but are at risk of harm to themselves or others.
The system must offer service-users assistance in applying for and obtaining financial entitlements in the form of income support and disability allowances
It must offer 24-hour crisis assistance so that individuals are not left untreated or unsupported during an acute episode of illness, no matter what time of the day or night a crisis arises
It must provide opportunities for social rehabilitation 
Services must be provided indefinitely and be available for an individual's lifetime if necessary
Services must provide adequate medical and psychiatric treatment on a continuing basis
Services must provide back-up support for family friends and members of the local community in order to minimize the burden of care which falls on other people's shoulders
The system must engage voluntary groups, community organizations and other members of the local community to maximize involvement in normal community activities
The system must operate so as to protect patients' rights and ensure their civil liberties are not denied them
Finally, the system must provide for the coordination, integration and binding together of services so that they function as one
‘seamless service’, providing all the elements which one individual requires (this is the function of case management described in Chapter 6)
Having established service criteria, it is necessary to assess every individual who needs services along two dimensions: first, in terms of the ordinary needs of every citizen, and second, in terms of the special needs generated by mental disorder.
Ordinary needs include adequate income, shelter, food and clothing, plus protection from physical harm, a means of daily occupation and the opportunity for emotional, spiritual and social fulfilment.
The special needs of a mentally disordered person are for specific medical and psychological treatments and procedures.
These special needs are dictated by the characteristics of the mental disorder and by its severity, duration and treatability.
Special needs may include, for example, the need for medication, hospital inpatient care or outpatient review, regular monitoring of blood levels of specific drugs such as lithium, investigation of physical health problems, supervision of medication by community psychiatric nurses, perhaps a special diet, and so on .
Once the ‘ordinary’ needs of daily life have been successfully provided, mentally disordered people living in the community need regular skilled review of their mental state to ensure that medical, nursing and psychological expertise is used to best effect to minimize the impact of the disorder.
In general, the fewer mental symptoms people experience and the less preoccupied they are with an internal abnormal world, the more able they are to live successfully in the community.
The remainder of the chapter considers ordinary needs in greater depth and services for special needs are discussed in Chapter 8.
Adequate personal income
Adequate personal financial resources are an essential component of community care and an essential prerequisite, too, of dignity and self-worth, but, surprisingly, the financial needs of people with  mental disorder are often ignored or, at the other end of the scale, such people are at times even treated rather like children — they are provided with pocket money for ‘treats’ but all other financial decisions are taken out of their hands.
In fact without sufficient regular income, individuals can make few choices about their lives.
In Britain today, financial support for long-term unemployed people is provided through a complex system of social security benefits, while other special arrangements exist for people with long-term disabilities.
The system is, however, extremely difficult to negotiate and even the most competent citizen would find the task of tracking down his or her welfare benefit entitlements a daunting one.
(Readers who doubt this should look at the bewildering array of welfare benefit leaflets in their local post office.)
The old hospitals used to employ special patients' monies officers whose sole job was to ensure that patients' income and capital assets were administered for their benefit both while in hospital and on discharge.
Very few general hospital units, however, have recognized how important this service was to individual patients and now it usually falls to a beleaguered social worker to take on the complex task of sorting out welfare benefits; social workers are not, however, experts in this field and it is a time-consuming task that few of them relish.
Indeed, a study in Hackney in 1990 of the work of mental health professionals working in a community team supporting people at home found that no less than a quarter of their working time was spent on working out welfare entitlements.
One said, ‘Being articulate and diplomatic and having saintlike patience and dogged persistence have become key attributes needed to prise out money that should be available as right.’
Any comprehensive community care system must ensure that all service users have ready access to skilled help from someone who is trained to assess their entitlements, to negotiate on their behalf with the Department of Social Security and other agencies, to assist with budgeting, offer financial advice and, where the individual desires it, hold benefit books and cheque books and arrange for regular bills to be paid and financial commitments to be planned.
Welfare rights and patients' monies' officers are, indeed, needed  in every service and not just in community care, but at present there is doubt as to who should pay for them.
The NHS used to fund such officers when patients lived in long-stay hospitals, but as people moved into the community their role was forgotten.
As new services develop, health and social services should agree between them how they are going to allocate the responsibility for ensuring that every mentally disordered person has sufficient income to live on without the fear of poverty.
Our welfare state provides every citizen with the entitlement to such income, but mentally disordered people find it particularly difficult, without assistance, to benefit from such entitlement.
Physical and environmental needs: housing and personal care
Shelter, food, clothing and protection from physical harm are the basic essentials of life, and personal care to maintain cleanliness and health, and domestic care to maintain a clean and safe living environment, are minimal necessities.
At its most basic, ‘shelter’ is a place of protection from the weather and a safe place to sleep, but people also need a home of their own, an environment which provides security, familiarity and a haven from the external world.
People with mental disorder are no different from anyone else in wanting to live in good, decent housing, and local authority housing departments and housing associations are often willing to discriminate in favour of mentally disordered individuals in making properties available for rent, provided they can be assured that tenants will receive the right support and help from skilled professionals when they need it.
Many local authorities have ‘special housing needs’ panels which consider individuals who have specific needs as a result of mental or physical disabilities.
Tenants allocated homes in this way do of course pay rent and local taxes just like everyone else, although the sad reality at present is that many councils have such long waiting lists of homeless people and families living in substandard accommodation that people with mental disorders face great competition for housing.
Indeed, there is a desperate shortage of accommodation to rent, especially in  urban areas, and the housing stock that exists in these areas is often poorly maintained and badly managed.
Perhaps the greatest challenge for mental health services in the 1990s is securing adequate housing for former patients in the community.
Some of the criticisms which are voiced by service planners and professionals when thinking about ordinary housing for long-term patients is that it is ‘too expensive’, or that ‘They can't cope on their own,’ or that ‘They'll be affected by the same stresses and strains that put them in hospital in the first place.’
But community services for mentally handicapped people have demonstrated that it is possible to provide for quite severely disturbed, multiply-handicapped people in specially adapted ordinary flats and houses, as long as there are sufficient well-trained staff to provide good-quality care round the clock, and provided the staff themselves are well supported by senior professionals with the right experience.
Mental health services have unfortunately been generally reluctant to follow this good example and are still developing too many large group homes and hostels which create too many segregated communities of mentally disturbed people.
If community care is to function properly, suitable housing must be affordable on the low income support funds available for unemployed disabled people.
Inevitably, therefore, the individual must usually rent accommodation rather than own a property.
But perhaps more thought could be given to assisting such people to buy homes of their own.
In Britain the majority of people aspire to owning their own home and those who do acquire a certain position in society.
Indeed, they are keen to advertise the fact by stamping their personalities on their home, something which is evidenced by looking at homes in Britain which have passed from public to private ownership.
If we take seriously the idea of valuing individuals as citizens, then instead of using bridging capital from the sale of hospital sites to purchase large houses and hostels outright, a means could perhaps be found of lending capital to individuals as an initial down-payment on a property or a share in a property.
Such an initiative might also attract investment capital from building societies and other lenders and thus assist Regional Health Authorities with their cash-flows.
It is important not to be inflexible when looking at housing options, although sometimes it seems that dogma is of overriding importance to staff and, indeed, more important than finding solutions which suit individuals.
While the basic aim of a service should be to provide people with ordinary homes of their own, there are many former long-term hospital patients who would not wish to live alone after many years of living in close proximity to other patients; such people may feel more comfortable living in a three- or four-person flat or house, or perhaps in a sheltered group of flatlets where communal dining rooms and recreational facilities echo the arrangements in ordinary sheltered accommodation for elderly people.
Unfortunately there is very little hard research evidence as to the sort of residential provision which best suits people with differing levels or types of disability, and fashions change as new ideas evolve.
Nevertheless, certain specific elements of good practice remain:
Residents should have the same security of tenure as normal tenants, even if they spend weeks or months in hospital every now and again.
Residents should have their own rooms and access to bathroom and WC facilities, preferably of their own, or shared with no more than one or two others; tenants sharing a house are not like a family of adults and children in an ordinary house where intimacy allows much more comfortable sharing of facilities
Residents' rooms should be private, lockable and large enough to provide a comfortable sitting space, with room for entertaining guests and facilities for preparing hot drinks and snacks
There should be sufficient staff both day and night to ensure that all residents have access at all times to physical and emotional support .
How this requirement is implemented will obviously vary enormously with the level of disability of individual residents and it is normally more economical in staffing terms for there to be a fairly even level of disabilities among the residents of one unit.
However, it is difficult to say if this is desirable from the residents' point of view, or whether they would prefer to live in a mixed group of people with differing levels of disability; when  asked, most patients express a preference for being with others who do not have behavioural problems.
Such a preference is scarcely surprising but may be difficult to accommodate in specially designated homes and hostels.
A home is a place for sleeping, retreating to in the evenings, storing one's personal possessions and for relaxing in private.
It is not a place where one spends all day, every day, cut off from other people, and self-contained large units which provide all residents' daytime activities on site face the danger of becoming merely ‘wards’ in the community, new types of ‘closed’institution.
There must, therefore, be active commerce between the home and the outside world of shops, pubs, libraries, parks and neighbours.
Finally, both staff and residents must be able to summon skilled medical and nursing help very quickly both day and night.
This is particularly important in the case of people with serious behavioural problems or continuing florid symptoms of psychiatric disorder.
However, the difficulties involved in providing a safe and reassuring environment for staff working with this group of people are one reason why so many professional staff still clamour to retain the old asylums; in such asylums staff know they can summon help at a few minutes' notice from a neighbouring ward and from resident medical staff.
In order to provide the same sort of instant help and emotional support to staff as well as residents, it may be necessary to site a house supporting potentially disturbed people near to a hospital site with acute psychiatric admission wards, for although technology can link many homes to one central point, it cannot provide the reassurance of instant personal help in times of emergency.
Core and cluster
The concept of linking an administrative central service ‘core’ with a dispersed cluster of homes of people receiving long-term services was developed in the 1970S, and still retains its appeal.
Under such a concept the ‘core’ is the central base for professional staff who are engaged in the rehabilitation and personal development of individuals living in the homes; it may also serve as a training base for  staff, a research base for the evaluation and monitoring of the service and a place where the residential care staff meet to exchange ideas.
It is often based at a Community Mental Health Centre (CMHC), although if it is, it is important that the supervisory and rehabilitation staff operate separately from the staff who provide the routine day-to-day mental health service, otherwise the needs of those in crisis may quickly push the needs of long-term sufferers into the background.
The ‘cluster’, under such an arrangement, is a dispersed group of residential facilities and ordinary dwellings scattered round the locality in which individuals receiving the service live.
‘Core and cluster’ is thus not a visible ‘village’but, rather, an invisible administrative structure comprising a wide range of facilities of differing sizes and levels of staffing to suit a spectrum of disabilities.
Half-way houses
People sometimes find that their housing requirements change and seek after a period to move on to different kinds of residence, particularly into flats of their own.
When this happens, the decision to move should be theirs alone and there should be no pressure to shuffle people round from house to house as their level of social achievement improves or deteriorates.
The idea of ‘half-way’ houses, where discharged patients lived for a year or eighteen months and then moved to ordinary independent living, became fashionable in the 1960s.
But it soon became apparent to the pioneering voluntary organizations that established them, such as the Richmond Fellowship, that patients who had been mentally unwell for years did not miraculously become capable of independent living in a short space of time; they often needed permanent help and support and coped particularly poorly with changes in their environment and lifestyle.
Family placement schemes and boarding out
The aim of these schemes is to place individuals, usually on a permanent basis, as lodgers with a landlady or family, where they can live as family, participating in home activities as much as possible.
The idea behind such schemes is derived from children's  fostering schemes and although they suit a small minority of less disabled former patients, the hosts normally need a great deal of regular help and support from professionals for the scheme to succeed and there must also be close monitoring and supervision of the quality of care provided.
Nevertheless, these schemes play a small role and they are particularly useful for people who need a short break away from their own families and for carers in need of respite; they can also help someone moving towards a more independent life from a closely sheltered environment.
Occupation/participation: day care services and work
We all need to give form to our lives by pursuing a common goal with others for a purpose which has social value; in other words, we all need worthwhile occupation or, more prosaically, work.
Work is usually thought of as paid employment outside the home, but purposeful work inside the home, providing domestic, physical and emotional comforts for others, can be equally rewarding.
Daily purposeful occupation gives form to our lives, and if mentally disordered people are unable to participate in ordinary work inside or outside the home, consideration needs to be given as to how the absence of normal occupation can be compensated for.
Day care
The number of day hospitals run by health services and day centres provided by local authorities and voluntary organizations has grown slowly but steadily over the last forty years, although there remains a great deal of confusion about the purposes of day care, and professionals from different services have differing expectations and aims.
NHS professionals normally perceive day hospitals as a possible alternative to hospital admission for people who are acutely ill and cannot be treated as outpatients or at home, as a place for recently discharged short-term in-patients to attend for a period while settling back into normal life, and as a place to treat, monitor and give social support to long-term patients who would otherwise live isolated lives.
Day hospitals usually have generous staffing levels of doctors, nurses and therapists, an ambitious therapeutic  programme, at least on paper, and an ethos geared to continuing rehabilitation.
Many are sited in hospital grounds near the inpatient unit.
Day centres , in contrast, are described in Department of Health guidance notes as providing for ‘clients’ needs for shelter, occupation and social activity', although they also provide a break for caring relatives and a break for the individual away from home.
Day centres are usually less well staffed, and therefore cheaper, than day hospitals, are run by staff with a wide variety of non-medical qualifications (for example, in social work, education, occupational therapy and industrial therapy), and usually depend heavily on unqualified helpers.
In spite of the differences in the declared aims of the two sorts of day care, and in their staffing, studies have found very little difference between them in terms of what the people who use them actually do.
In most day units, whatever they are called, attenders normally spend a good deal of time chatting to other attenders or sitting about watching the world go by, doing nothing very much.
Craft activities — weaving, pottery, printing, painting, woodwork, metalwork and so forth— may be offered for attenders but are only modestly popular, and increasingly units are focusing on developing the skills required for ordinary life, such as shopping and cooking, and on some forms of regular task-oriented activity which mimic the skills required for work, such as operating a computer keyboard.
If doctors are employed in a unit the amount of time they spend with a patient may be as little as fifteen minutes twice a week for a short-term attender and an astonishingly low four or five minutes per week for a long-term attender.
In fact, the majority of attenders at day hospitals and day care centres are long-term service users.
From the user's point of view, day care offers somewhere to go during the day, a new environment, a free or cheap meal, somewhere to meet other people, recreational activities and someone to talk to when things aren't going well.
However, what they get from the service often falls far short of what they need.
A study carried out in the mid-1980s in a South London day hospital and in local day centres examined the ordinary, everyday needs and specific treatment requirements of attenders.
The  researchers found that one-quarter really needed sheltered work of some kind rather than the informal craft and recreational activities which were on offer and that a further proportion would have benefited more from a social club of a less structured kind.
Other studies have found that while managers and staff prize highly the ‘therapeutic’ discussion groups which flourish in many day care units, there is less evidence that users rate them as valuable and no evidence that people with long-term mental disorder gain benefit.
Current day care services have other problems, too.
For example, attenders are usually expected to get there under their own steam; ordinary ambulance services have been reluctant to ferry day patients, and local ambulance service personnel are not trained to understand why an able-bodied young man lacks sufficient motivation as a result of schizophrenia to make his own way half a mile down the road to the day hospital.
However, negotiating the public transport system may simply be too difficult for someone with mental disorder and ‘dedicated transport’ using specially trained personnel, though expensive, is often the only feasible solution.
Day care is clearly in need of a radical rethink and a wider choice of services is required than is now available.
Perhaps what is needed is smaller, more easily accessible places that can be reached on foot and where closer attention is paid to the social needs of users and to identifying individuals' choices about their requirements for leisure, work and education.
More use could also be made of educational techniques to improve interpersonal social skills and increase levels of educational attainment, particularly as many long-term attenders are handicapped not just by their mental disorder but also by poor schooling and impaired learning ability.
There is concern, however, that providing separate, specially labelled services which only mentally disordered people can use is not only extremely expensive but also encourages a discriminating attitude towards already stigmatized people.
The creative use of existing clubs and leisure facilities could go much of the way to addressing this concern.
Work and employment
For many day care attenders, the service provides an alternative to going out to work.
But it does not feel to them like real work and there is no financial reward and rarely any specific long-term achievable objectives which can be shared with others.
The challenge of providing real work for long-term mentally disordered people has not been tackled successfully in Britain.
Between 70 and 80 per cent of psychiatric admissions are unemployed and almost all patients now being discharged from long-stay wards have no work.
The domination of mental health services by the NHS, which is traditionally concerned with specific medical treatment rather than other aspects of care, has meant that expertise in this field is very thinly spread across the country.
The importance of work and employment to those with mental disorder has, however, been recognized since Victorian times.
John Connolly in his book The Construction and Government of Lunatic Asylums (1847) wrote:
Among the means of relieving patients from the monotony of an asylum and of preserving bodily health and at the same time of improving the conditions of the mind and prompting recovery, employment of some kind or other ranks highest.
The Lunacy Commissioners wholeheartedly agreed and severely castigated Boards of Guardians who did not provide daily occupation and incentive rewards for the majority of patients.
They noted that asylums had a tendency to provide employment on farms and in workshops for the most competent and socially organized patients and there were some remarkably successful asylum farming ventures; for example, in the early twentieth century Cane Hill Hospital became famous for its herd of pedigree pigs.
Such ventures, however, left out those who were most disturbed or withdrawn and hence who found it most difficult to work; these were left to idle their time away on the wards, and it was always a struggle to find sufficient financial investment in equipment and raw materials to establish and maintain occupational ventures.
In times of full employment, employers are more willing to take on disabled people of all kinds and there is a direct economic  incentive to ensure that those who can work do.
During the Second World War, for example, a number of government initiatives stimulated thinking about the resettlement of disabled people into open employment by channelling them through a period of ‘industrial rehabilitation’.
In the 1940s and 1950s Britain was still predominantly a manufacturing society, and preferred schemes tended to foster manual workshop skills.
Pioneering NHS industrial units in large hospitals thus took on subcontracted work from local factories.
By the 1960s enthusiasm for such industrial-type resettlement units was waning, and the rising unemployment of the late 1960S and 1970s made it increasingly difficult for people with chronic mental disorder to find work on the open job market.
At the same time, the more able-bodied and work-fit patients had already been discharged from hospital, leaving behind a more seriously disabled group, who were unlikely ever to resume open employment, plus new short-term patients who needed assistance to return to their former work rather than the development of new skills.
Moreover, Britain was increasingly shifting from a manufacturing economy to a service-based economy where quite different and, often, more sophisticated social skills are demanded of employees.
People with long-term mental disorder have many problems in holding down a job.
These often relate not so much to poor manual skills or dexterity, although they may be slower than usual in completing tasks, as to problems in maintaining drive and interest, in adhering to a regular timetable and in forming the relationships with fellow workers which are necessary to effective completion of work tasks.
It is often difficult to predict which patients will be able to develop effective work skills, and some quite seriously disturbed people with persistently odd behaviour can work effectively while others with few overt symptoms of mental disorder may have great difficulties.
The transition back to work is easier, however, if individuals have worked previously and have skills to fall back on.
Many schizophrenia sufferers, however, find that they can no longer achieve previous levels of attainment after the onset of the disorder and need to adapt to less challenging work.
It is now recognized that many seriously disabled patients cannot  be resettled into open employment but their need for real work can be met, none the less, by providing a special working environment where good job performance and long-term achievements are rewarded.
It is difficult, however, to accept the concept of work which is non-profit-making or which may even cost the providing employer a substantial amount of on-going revenue funds, and until now there has been a great reluctance to fund such initiatives.
The NHS has invested little in work schemes, although a few innovative services have established enterprises in such areas as gardening and horticulture, catering services and computer programming or word processing activities.
Following the transfer of responsibility for social rehabilitation of discharged patients in 1993 from the NHS to local authorities, greater emphasis may be given to developing work schemes.
Sheltered work ventures provided specifically for identifiable groups of people with special needs always run the risk of segregating people with mental disorder from the rest of the community; whenever possible, therefore, it is desirable to link such initiatives with ‘for-profit’ enterprises away from large old hospital grounds, however tempting it may be to use cheap old buildings and land on hospital sites.
Local large employers could also be encouraged to establish departments providing work experience for people with long-term disabilities, provided they received financial incentives in the form of capital grants and revenue support: employers should not be expected to provide charitable funds or investment, although they can provide an atmosphere of tolerance, access for sheltered workers to the benefits which other employees enjoy (such as sports and canteen facilities), and a willingness to consider these supported workers for more general employment if they make good progress.
Specially recruited supervisory staff could be paid for by the local authority or by some other scheme initiator.
Voluntary organizations, notably local branches of MIND, and others specially created for the purpose, such as the Peter Bedford Trust, have developed a variety of sheltered work schemes.
Some are service agencies providing painting and decorating, gardening and catering services to the local community; others have developed workshops which concentrate on one business activity — baking, furniture renovation and picture-framing are examples.
For people who have a realistic chance of developing their social skills sufficiently to re-enter open employment, other creative approaches have been used to place them in work.
In the 1980s the government-funded Manpower Services Commission (MSC) sponsored a scheme whereby the employer paid a percentage of the salary and costs of a partially disabled person's employment in proportion to the individual's assessed percentage contribution to the job in terms of how it would be performed by an average non-disabled person; MSC paid the balance.
Sheltered Placement Schemes of this kind have, however, been more successful with physically disabled and mentally handicapped people than with mentally disordered people as it is easier to assess the proportionate efficiency of people with physical disabilities and mental handicap.
It is much more difficult to predict the performance of someone with mental disorder, and the process of assessment of an individual in a real situation requires time and skilled judgment.
New ideas do, however, appear from time to time.
Once such has recently been copied from a well-known initiative in New York whereby the rehabilitation organization guarantees to the employer that an identified job will be done satisfactorily.
The employer pays only one salary but two or even three workers will be identified who can perform the task, either working part-time or acting in concert on a full-time basis.
If the workers fail to perform, the supervisor will guarantee to do the job himself or assist the workers to do it.
Usually these ‘cooperative’ placements are temporary; successful placements lead, it is hoped, to full-time employment and the identified job is then made available for another placement.
Work schemes of this type are, none the less, especially difficult to fund, and neither the NHS nor social services have regarded them as their responsibility, a situation which must change if we want to provide a more fulfilling life for people with mental disorder.
Some of the money that is currently channelled into day centres and day hospitals would probably be better spent in creating work schemes.
There remain, at the same time, two unsolved problems which have proved detrimental to the establishment of work schemes.
The  first is the ‘poverty trap’, well recognized in open employment, whereby those who acquire poorly paid employment lose part or all of their social security ‘income support’ benefits.
Clearly, there need to be realistic incentives to reward effort and performance; payment in kind, by supplying goods and other services, is no substitute for cash.
What is particularly required is for the government to review the rules on benefits paid to people who receive income under therapeutic work schemes.
The second problem for such work schemes is the lack of trained staff with the necessary technical, commercial and entrepreneurial skills to set up and run a business for people with mental disorder.
A new order of recruits is required, and a new set of skilled trainers should be established to develop careers in this rewarding area of work.
Emotional, spiritual and social needs: friendship, leisure and personal growth
Human beings have a need to feel valued, to possess self-esteem, to experience affection and warmth for others and to be liked and loved in return.
The pursuit of happiness through developing rewarding emotional ties with other people is something most of us spend a good deal of our lives attempting.
People with mental disorder have very special emotional needs and those with schizophrenia may find it virtually impossible to form close, mutually rewarding relationships; indeed, they often feel more comfortable with an accepting, tolerant but ‘arm's length’ relationship where emotional demands are few.
But almost everyone needs friends and someone to confide in who is non-judgmental, sympathetic and understanding.
Service planners have rarely acknowledged the need for emotional support, yet services need to be organized to foster the well-being of existing relationships and to help people develop new ones.
Human beings also seek-meaning in their lives, a deeper spiritual understanding of their purpose which gives us our moral framework.
While for many people religious faith provides a spiritual backdrop to their lives, for others simply feeling a part of the continuity of human society provides the same spiritual dimension.
Unfortunately, just as the emotional needs of mentally disordered people are often ignored, so too are their spiritual needs.
Professionals and voluntary workers need to be aware of these needs, although equally they should be aware of the vulnerability of people with mental disorders and should resist any temptation to proselytize or advocate a particular religion or sect, no matter how strong their own spiritual beliefs.
Man is a gregarious animal.
It is not enough to have relationships with only one or two other people who are very close.
Most people have a circle of friends, acquaintances, neighbours and colleagues who provide a network, of contacts of varying closeness.
For people who work outside the home, work provides the main opportunity to form this loose social network but for others the same support is provided by an extended family network of children, grandchildren, brothers and sisters and neighbours.
Just as the provision of work is not generally regarded by health and social service staff as their responsibility, so too it is easy to ignore those social aspects of life which mentally robust people organize so effectively for themselves.
People who live alone, especially when they suffer from a serious disability, are particularly at risk of becoming isolated and friendless, and people with long-term mental disorder are often desperately lonely and socially isolated.
While many are unable to tolerate a close, demanding, intimate relationship they nevertheless crave friendships and want to engage in normal social activities such as eating out and chatting over a drink in a club or pub.
Mental disorder saps self-confidence and lack of practice at social gatherings leads to self-conscious awkwardness and a tense self-awareness which creates a barrier to relaxed conversation and the formation of friendships.
Services which promote occasions when long-term patients can develop leisure activities outside ‘working hours’ and with people outside the mental health system are also quite rare.
While many day centres and day hospitals provide a ‘social club’ environment, the environment is highly segregated and normally provides little opportunity for mixing with other people outside the mental health system or at evenings or weekends.
A welcome exception are the social clubs for former psychiatric patients run by voluntary organizations.
They  usually function one evening a week in a local church hall or community centre and can undoubtedly play a most valuable role.
They are also much appreciated by members but tend to run the risk of segregating members from the activities of the normal community.
Befriending services are also now provided by some local voluntary organizations.
A volunteer normally offers to spend two or three hours per week as a companion to a former patient and may go out with the person or help him with specific tasks.
There is, of course, a difference between companionship and true mutual friendship and these schemes can be rather hit-and-miss in matching the ‘befriender’ and the target.
Also, while unpaid volunteers have much to offer, and their work deserves to be commended, long-term commitment is sometimes improved if the befriender is paid for the hours of ‘companionship’ work as well as being reimbursed for travelling and related expenses.
Statutory services have, however, done little so far to encourage the development of such services, even though they can bring very significant emotional benefits to individuals, particularly those living alone or who are estranged from their families.
It should also be recognized that it is no easy task to spend several hours in the company of someone whose behaviour may be odd and conversation repetitive or bizarre.
Therefore, the ‘befrienders’ or ‘companions’need regular support and supervision to avoid becoming overstressed.
In the old large hospitals it was sometimes difficult to detect the strong mutual, informal relationships which developed amongst patients and provided a good deal of support, and, unfortunately, often little account was taken of these relationships when patients were moved from the hospitals into the community.
When the first group homes of four or six former patients were established, it was quickly realized that old friendships and mutual dependencies could be a powerful influence on the successful functioning of the group.
Community-based-services should also be sensitive to emotional needs and can do much to foster the development of ‘self-help’ groups of service users.
8 From Principles to Practice II
An accessible service
In the old days of the large mental hospitals, all specialist treatment was either provided at the hospital or not at all.
As outpatient clinics developed in local general hospitals, GPs started to refer patients to consultants in exactly the same way as they did for other medical specialties.
While this suited some people with mild conditions, it became clear that those who attended as outpatients frequently had quite different characteristics from those who were admitted to the mental hospitals as in-patients.
On the whole, outpatient clinics catered for a less severely ill group of patients and did not reach people with severe mental disorder.
The clinics operated for short office hours on only one or two days a week and were not staffed to cope with disturbed and upset people who required help in a crisis.
They were also staffed largely by doctors and had little input from other professional members of the team.
Outpatient clinics still operate widely and are convenient and comfortable for the doctor, provide a practical opportunity for training medical students and junior doctors and suit a minority of patients very well.
Consequently, they have continued to dominate the style of psychiatric practice in many districts.
However, in the past twenty years a variety of new approaches has evolved, beyond clinics on the one hand and mental hospitals on the other, to provide a more easily accessible ‘user-friendly’, informal ‘open-door’ facility.
These can help patients with more serious crises and also meet the needs of the withdrawn, isolated or suspicious person who will not readily attend an outpatient clinic.
Community Mental Health Centres (CMHCs)
CMHCs developed in the United States and first appeared in Britain some twenty years ago.
In 1990 there were about 150 centres across the country.
A CMHC provides a physical base for the service team, often in a converted house or community-based clinic within easy walking distance of most of the local population, and usually has facilities for interviewing, counselling, family meetings and staff meetings.
Such centres often welcome anyone who cares to ‘drop in’ to talk about a problem at any time of day or night but, in common with outpatient clinics, sufferers of severe mental disorder rarely turn up to CMHCs on their own initiative.
Consequently some CMHC teams tend to focus on more articulate, well-organized, socially competent people in a transient state of distress and have less time for the more seriously disturbed and those with long-term disorders who are less readily engaged in treatment.
An effective CMHC is one which can provide a rapid professional response anywhere in the local community, either in the patient's own home, at work, in the street, at the police station or in court.
Local GPs and social workers need to know that guaranteed specialist assistance is at hand both day and night and, as distress and despair do not conveniently confine themselves to the hours of nine to five, this means having experienced consultant psychiatrists and psychiatric nurses on call for community work at all times.
Teams working from CMHCs can provide a realistic alternative for most outpatient clinic work, although precisely where such services should be sited depends on the local geography, the social profile of the local population and the involvement of local GPs.
While it may be possible to provide for most eventualities from a number of well-sited CMHCs within a district, a full community mental health service should offer a choice of convenient ways to get specialist help in addition to CMHCs, for example through the local GP health centre or surgery, at a local outpatient clinic or at home.
Nowadays, many psychiatrists and psychiatric nurses visit GPs' surgeries regularly to discuss how the GP and his team can best help their own group of patients with mental disorder.
Support for long-term sufferers
It is extremely difficult for workers in Community Mental Health Centres to focus their efforts effectively for a dispersed community of people with long-term problems if their work is constantly being interrupted by crises and emergency work.
The demands of people at risk of suicide or of harming others must always take precedence over the quietly distressed but passive long-term sufferer, and it is often better, therefore, to relieve mental health workers dedicated to the particular needs of people with long-term problems from having to cope with the emergency short-term demands of new patients.
The ‘rehabilitation’ or ‘long-term support’team, as well as caring for a group of people with long-term problems, should also be responsible for maintaining a register of all people who should be receiving help in order to assist with monitoring their progress, ensuring that they receive the right care and treatment and that they do not get lost to the service.
A computerized system is essential for accurate monitoring and follow-up.
Such surveillance should not, of course, be thrust on unwilling recipients without good cause, but it is good practice to keep in touch and know how people are getting on.
Such specialist rehabilitation work is, however, demanding and stressful, and it is generally much easier to recruit professionals to work in what is perceived as the glamorous ‘acute’ sector of the mental health service than in the long-term support services.
But experience has shown that it is possible to create elite, high-calibre long-term support teams if they are given the right leadership and training, an attractive physical environment to work from, good pay and conditions of service and, crucially, a set of realistic objectives about what they are trying to achieve.
The phrase ‘rehabilitation’ denotes no more than the practice of helping individuals to function as well as they can in all areas of their daily life or, more simply, to be happier and more fulfilled people.
In the early days, psychiatric rehabilitation services used to be based on the ‘ladder’ model where the idea was to assist all individuals inexorably upwards towards a progressively more independent life.
Indeed, staff often felt themselves to have failed if patients could not attain an independent  life-style.
Gradually this approach is giving way to one of setting more realistic goals for each individual, allowing him or her to develop, or not, at his or her own speed.
Staff need, however, to strike a delicate balance between giving optimistic support and encouragement on the one hand and accepting on the other that some individuals do not wish to, or cannot, change as a result of disability and may need to be helped, therefore, to cope with permanent social impairments and distressing symptoms.
In-patient beds and 24-hour asylum
The majority of people with acute mental disorder can be treated at home if sufficient staff are available to supervise medication and give adequate support.
There are areas in Britain where very fe, v patients are admitted, because of the wide availability of family and professional support — for example, a predominantly Asian suburb of Birmingham, and a prosperous south-west London suburb.
But most families in Britain are familiar with using hospitals and demand in-patient care for their relatives when a crisis arises.
There are also times when there may be no option but to admit someone to hospital for treatment when there is a serious risk that the person will harm him or herself or is becoming physically ill through inadequate nourishment and self-care.
There are also occasions when someone may create such disturbance and disruption at home or in a public place that others are seriously overburdened by the symptoms and admission is necessary.
Under such circumstances, in-patient beds providing 24-hour asylum may be essential.
Most such acute psychiatric wards are now sited in district general hospitals; and even though it is not essential for in-patient facilities of this type to be in the same place as other medical specialties, it is often helpful for elderly people, in particular, to be treated where specialist medical advice on physical illness and disability is readily available.
The numbers of acute beds that a service needs has long been a contentious issue.
If there are too few to meet emergency treatment needs, there will be intolerable pressure on families and community services because people will be admitted only as a desperate last resort, treated rapidly and perhaps discharged too early.
On the  other hand, there should not too many beds as psychiatric wards are a very expensive part of the total cost of the service, and resources spent on acute beds will not be available for developing other parts of the service.
Moreover, if there are too many beds people will inevitably stay too long, which increases the difficulties of resettling them back into normal life.
Also, as in-patient beds are much more plentiful than supported housing and hostels, they are often used as substitute accommodation because people have nowhere to live after hospital treatment has ended.
Between a third and a half of all short-term in-patient beds are occupied by people with nowhere suitable to go, and it is not uncommon for patients to stay in an acute hospital bed for one or two years when they should have been discharged for continued treatment in a more appropriate domestic environment within three months of their admission.
Indeed, conventional hospital wards are rarely designed with people with mental disorder in mind and, even when they are purpose-built, they do not provide a suitable environment for at least three groups of people listed below.
People who need intensive care in a secure environment
Mental health services must be able to cope with individuals whose mental disorder is so severe that the person creates serious disturbance or threat to others.
‘Raving madness’ is rare, but severe episodes of manic disorder, acute schizophrenia and other delusional states are sometimes accompanied by hours or days of fluctuating distress, excitement, agitation or violent outbursts which require very close nursing supervision round the clock and very careful monitoring of medication.
Many general hospital units find seriously disturbed people impossible to manage in an open ward; other patients are frightened and the whole ward may be disrupted.
Moreover, the individuals themselves who are suffering these severe episodes need security and containment as well as space to move about, to feel unfettered and to retain some privacy.
They are, most often, more frightened than anyone else about what is happening to them.
Staff with special training in dealing with distraught and potentially violent, disturbed people are needed in all acute inpatients services, as are specially designed areas comprising clusters of single rooms, each with its own sitting and dining areas and  bathroom facilities.
The smaller the unit, the shorter should be the stay inside it — there are very few patients who need to be contained within a locked unit of this kind for more than a few days.
There are, however, some patients who, though not in an acutely disturbed state, will need extra security for a period because they have been a risk to the public at some time in the recent past or are considered to require special containment while assessment continues in conditions of moderate security.
Mentally disordered offenders who have been admitted to ordinary hospitals from the courts, or from prison, or from the Special Hospitals such as Broadmoor may require such a period of care in conditions of medium security.
The special needs of these individuals are covered separately in the next chapter.
People who need ‘slow stream’ treatment
The amazing improvements in symptoms which can be brought about by medication have created an expectation that most people treated in hospitals will be recovered from their acute episode of disorder and ready for discharge within a few weeks.
But over the last twenty years a ‘new long-stay’ population has been accumulating on acute psychiatric wards.
A third of this group, most of whom have schizophrenia, continue to experience symptoms which have responded poorly to treatment and remain quite disturbed for several months or years.
Many of these patients need close daily supervision because of a tendency to self-neglect and poor compliance with medication; they are often closely dependent on staff for day-to-day emotional support.
The remainder of such ‘long-stayers’ are either those who simply have nowhere suitable to live where they can be adequately supervised or those who suffer from multiple physical and mental disabilities as a result of an accident or brain disease.
Generally, such new ‘long-stay’ patients do not need a hospital ward; a closely supervised staffed house where medical and other treatments are readily available would be more suitable, but at present few appropriate facilities exist.
People who need asylum in a crisis
There are a surprising number of admissions to psychiatric beds of people who stay only two or three days.
Hospitals provide emergency ‘asylum’ care for vulnerable people who find themselves in a personal emotional crisis and need  to escape from a distressing family situation.
They want a haven for a few days to talk to some neutral listener while they conquer an impending sense of ‘going round the bend’.
It has frequently been suggested that asylum of this kind could as easily be provided in a sheltered house or flat in the community as in a hospital ward.
This interesting idea, which is being tried out in one or two districts at present, should be subject to research evaluation of the costs and benefits as no reliable data exist at present .
Staffing a service
It is easy to produce a list of all the professionals in health and social services who can play a part in a specialist ‘mental health team’.
Psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, occupational therapists and psychiatric nurses all have a valuable role, and different educational backgrounds and training experiences bring a variety of perspectives to bear on mental health problems.
Most professionals prefer now to work in a ‘multidisciplinary’ team where one or more of each profession is represented and where regular meetings of the team are held to discuss individuals' progress.
Usually one member of the team is designated as ‘key worker’ and has a special responsibility to coordinate the efforts of the whole team for one person, and a social worker from the local authority is usually attached to the team.
Mental health teams are essential to the provision of a good service but on their own, without the back-up of others, health professionals may achieve little.
These ‘others’ comprise housing workers, people skilled in developing and supervising work and other forms of daily occupation, welfare benefits negotiators, domestic care staff to provide help in the home and with personal care, teachers, counsellors and sympathetic listeners, people willing to act as befrienders and companions and, finally, responsive general practice services.
Overall, however, the single most critical role in the provision of a mental health service to an individual is, or should be, the case manager or care manager, as was discussed more fully in Chapter 6.
This person should be the one who regularly assesses the individual's overall needs and is responsible for coordinating the efforts  of health professionals responsible for treatment, social work and assistance with housing and other such problems.
The case manager or care manager should be responsible for organizing a total care plan for each individual, spanning both ‘ordinary’ needs and ‘special’needs, and for integrating the input of the NHS, local authority and voluntary organizations.
Unfortunately, there are drawbacks to any service staffed by professionals who work only within the confines of their traditional remit.
Health professionals and social workers all have closely demarcated responsibilities which are impressed on them during training and they often bring to mental health services traditional attitudes and approaches which can act as a brake on the development of new ways of doing things.
A little loosening of the reins of the professions and of their ‘demarcation lines’ would be no bad thing, and some fresh ideas on managing mental health problems might emerge, too, from widening the social and educational backgrounds from which mental health workers are recruited.
Many nurses, for example, give injections, supervise medication, discuss problems and act as counsellors, but they do not usually negotiate welfare benefits, arrange outings, arrange for the gas board to read the meter, go shopping with a client, and so on .
There are too many highly qualified, expensive professionals employed in mental health services who work within traditional professional roles, and too few general support workers or ‘generic’ mental health workers willing to turn their hands to a variety of practical and emotional support work.
The concept of the generic worker is still in its infancy, but some voluntary organizations and statutory services now favour this sort of employee and this may be a more satisfactory way to staff community services in future than by increasing the numbers of specialist professional posts.
Naturally, such members of staff will need training, in-service educational programmes, close supervision and ready access to professional help, and many senior support workers will have specialist professional backgrounds.
It is, however, also important to recognize the potential of other bright people who can be trained while in post, and the problems and inefficiencies which can arise from ‘sectarian professionalism’.
The relatives' role
In considering mentally disordered people's needs, we have focused so far on the individual rather than on the family.
But the effect that people with mental disorder and their relatives have on each other 's lives is a critical factor in community care.
Now that large numbers of people who would previously have been in asylums live in the community, there are many thousands of relatives or close friends bearing the brunt of providing daily care in their own homes, for example, the parents of someone with schizophrenia, or the spouse, daughter or daughter-in-law of a dementia sufferer.
Relatives often carry enormous personal burdens, for example, the grief of losing a child's expected bright future, or the tragic decline into senility of a loved companion.
At the same time as coping with their own emotional burdens, they may need to give practical, financial and emotional support to someone with mental disorder and puzzle out how best to manage the bizarre manifestations of that disorder.
Traditional services have in the past largely ignored the role and needs of relatives, but there is now increasing recognition of the vital part they play.
Unfortunately, the government has not yet backed up this realization with sufficient hard cash, and the benefits available for supporting relatives are paltry compared to the costs incurred by the state if someone is in long-term institutional care.
In theory, the Community Care Act of 1990 allows local authorities to provide financial assistance to relatives but it remains to be seen whether any will do so when the new system starts in 1993.
In the earliest phase of a mental disorder, relatives feel puzzled and bewildered by what is happening, and it can take many months or even years before deteriorating social function gives way to overt symptoms which can be clearly interpreted as mental illness.
From the relatives' point of view, it is usually an enormous relief to be able to label increasingly apparent peculiarities and emotional problems as ‘illness’ because illness is no one 's fault and families are, therefore, absolved from the guilt incurred by self-blame.
In the 1960s the writings of Laing and his followers were interpreted by some to mean that pressures inside the family drove victims into madness.
Oppressive parents, over-close siblings and a  stifling family atmosphere were regarded, for example, as causative factors in schizophrenia, and relatives — rightly — deeply resented a theory which never had any foundation in hard research evidence.
The ideas of the Laingians in part struck a chord because someone with mental disorder causes enormous disruption and upset in a family — so it is no wonder that relatives appear deeply concerned and closely involved, a factor which professionals often forget.
‘Over-involved’ is a derogatory label still used by professionals to describe anxious, supportive relatives, yet it takes extraordinary judgment and sensitivity to manage a close relative's abnormal beliefs and behaviour in a way which neither colludes with pathological beliefs nor alienates the sufferer.
And an additional problem for relatives is that while it may be a relief to designate mental disorder as ‘illness’, this may be deeply resented by the individual concerned.
In normal families, family members frequently do not like each other very much.
Children often long to escape the parental home and a parent may be severely critical of one particular son or daughter.
Mutual liking and respect prior to the onset of a mental disorder in one family member undoubtedly helps relationships afterwards, but families in this situation often stay together through loyalty and force of circumstances and sometimes they need practical help to develop their lives and put things in perspective.
A further dilemma may arise when the individual whom professionals are trying to help has a very different interpretation of his or her circumstances, aspirations and prospects from those of relatives, or where the individual is suspicious and distrustful and does not want even close family to know what has happened to him or her.
Ultimately the individual receiving the service is the one whose wishes must be respected but, where that person depends on a relative for day-to-day care, it is only reasonable that the relative should be as fully involved as possible in decisions and become a full participating partner in the professional team, contributing to treatment and care plans.
It must be recognized that while relatives almost certainly do not cause mental disorder, the emotional atmosphere of the household  certainly influences the course of the disorder.
People with schizophrenia who are discharged from hospital to live with relatives who are over-critical, disapproving or who express a high level of anxiety and tension, are more likely to suffer early relapse than those returning to a neutral or tolerant atmosphere, and spending less time in daily contact with other members of the family, possibly by attending a day centre or going to work, seems to help some sufferers to cope with an emotionally charged home environment.
Most relatives, however, develop an amazing degree of flexibility and over the years accommodate to eccentricity, peculiar behaviour, apathy and social withdrawal, though sometimes at a high cost to their own lives.
‘Informal carers’ is the term used in official documents to describe close supporting relatives though it is not a good term ‘informal’implies that the task is done by choice in a rather casual fashion, which is rarely the case, and ‘carer’implies an embracing emotional commitment which may be wholly inaccurate.
Most ‘carers’ simply happen to be those nearest relatives who find themselves in an unwanted, unsought and very stressful situation.
One relative, a 45-year-old divorced teacher caring at home for her 21-year-old unmarried son who had developed schizophrenia in his second year at university, wrote the following list of relatives' needs for the local mental health service.
She is now the secretary of a local MIND group in a rural area in the south of England.
1.
At the beginning I was very frightened.
I had never met anyone with mental problems.
The first thing you need is a sympathetic GP who will just listen and explain exactly what this illness is.
GPs need to be better informed and realize how it affects the rest of the family.
It would have helped to have had something to read in the quiet of my own home, so I could know what to expect in the future.
2.
The consultant needs to see the relatives as well as the patient and take time to explain what the treatment is for, what its effects are and about the side-effects.
How can I explain to my son why he should persevere with regular injections when I don't know myself?
3.
Someone should have told me about the local MIND and the  National Schizophrenia Fellowship and what they could offer.
The Citizens Advice Bureau gave me help with getting his benefits right but most people don't even know where to find the CAB.
We need some solid practical advice on benefits and services.
4.
Relatives want to be accepted as part of the caring team.
We're doing the real work 90 per cent of the time.
Often I feel the consultant listens more to what the nurse says than to me, but she only comes once a month; I'm here all the time.
5.
It is very helpful to attend a relatives' group.
I've learnt so much from other families in the same situation and it's helped me to accept the realities.
This was particularly helpful in between his two breakdowns because relatives get even less attention when things seem to be sailing along all right on the surface.
And we all enjoy ‘having a go’ at the rotten services we have to put up with.
6.
One of the good things about the group is that they get lectures and talks from experts who know about recent research, progress in developments round the country, mental health law, what to do in a crisis.
We want to improve our knowledge about the problems our relatives have.
7.
It is vital that relatives are able to see the consultant, nurse or social worker on their own if we wish to.
Although the issue of confidentiality is important, patients should be encouraged to agree to this.
There are some things you just cannot say when the person is present.
Relatives also need to know who to contact and how when an emergency arises.
8.
Relatives often want to separate from the person for the sake of their own sanity.
They need to know that it is possible to find alternative accommodation for the individual or themselves.
Services shouldn't assume that because relatives cope silently they want to go on doing so for ever.
9.
Relatives need a regular break.
While I'm out at work during the week I get a break from my son's peculiarities.
But in the long school holidays the tension between us rises to fever-pitch.
He goes to a day centre three days a week but it would help if he could have a  two- or three-week holiday somewhere every now and again.
Then I could take a break too.
10.
Relatives want someone to take them seriously as individuals, not just treat them as ‘appendages to a case’.
Relatives are valuable and ought to be treated that way.
Community care can't work without us.
11.
All services should address relatives' needs seriously by giving information, ensuring they feel involved and above all by ensuring that they are given the support they need to carry on caring.
The contribution of voluntary agencies
Britain is fortunate in the diversity and breadth of the activities of ‘not-for-profit’ organizations.
In the mental health field the voluntary sector is, on the whole, well organized and effective but it suffers from lower levels of charitable donations compared with more immediately appealing charities such as those for children, cancer research or research into heart disease.
The fear and stigma of mental disorder deter a public which is ignorant of the pressing need and unclear as to what their gifts might be used for.
In spite of this, MIND (the National Association for Mental Health) is one of the most effective campaigning and advocacy organizations in Britain and was largely instrumental in achieving the refinements in the law which enhance patients' rights and are embodied in the Mental Health Act of 1983.
MIND has continued to play a strong public role in defending the civil liberties and rights to treatment and care of all mentally disordered people, and it has been particularly successful in supporting individuals who have been maltreated and neglected by the mental health service system.
MIND's militant antipsychiatry stand in the 1960s and 1970s created a rift with professionals which has gradually healed, although there is still a healthy tension which is probably in service users' interests.
Like many voluntary organizations, MIND is composed of multiple autonomous local branches established by volunteers, often the relatives of patients or professionals.
They run day centres, drop-in centres, social clubs, sheltered work programmes and  befriending and counselling services.
MIND is now a large ‘direct-care’ organization, that is, it receives money in grants from NHS and local authorities to provide some of the elements of the total service described in Chapters 7 and 8, and it employs a large number of staff to support and enhance the work of the volunteers.
The National Schizophrenia Fellowship focuses on one group of mentally disordered people, those with schizophrenia, and, in particular, their families, although local groups of NSF often operate in similar ways to local MIND groups.
The NSF has the same broad objectives as MIND — it acts as an advocate for individuals, campaigns for better local services, organizes support groups for patients and their families and publishes some very helpful literature.
A third rapidly growing national and international organization is the Alzheimer's Disease Society, established in Britain in 1979 for dementia sufferers and their families.
Largely a relatives' organization, it campaigns for better services, runs relative support groups and is beginning to consider providing more direct care services.
And, in addition, there are dozens of other autonomous voluntary groups, many operating only in one locality, launched by the enthusiasm of a single initiator, as well as certain quite large national organizations focusing on one type of disorder, such as Alcoholics Anonymous.
All voluntary organizations in the community care field face an uncertain though challenging future as a result of the government's encouragement to them in the 1990 Act to take a more active, participative role in providing services directly to clients in the community, with finance provided by the local authority or health authority.
The dilemma for the voluntary sector is whether to expand their services and move to a more ‘centre-stage’ role in running and planning services or to remain as small, local, campaigning organizations.
Many feel they run the risk of losing their ability to act as external advocates, campaigning for the needs of their local population.
If they accept a contractual obligation to provide care, they may find that voluntary sector care increasingly substitutes for services which otherwise would have been provided by statutory agencies; they will thus become mainstream rather than supplying supplemental, additional services.
They also perceive a danger that their skills in recruiting volunteers will be seen as a cheap way of providing care.
If, however, the voluntary organizations do choose to expand, they will need skilled professional help in becoming major employers, handling substantial finances and complex planning and management tasks.
Sudden, over-ambitious expansion is certain to lead to disappointments all round.
A further major problem is that voluntary organizations have hitherto been able to choose the particular client group within the field on which they wish to focus.
In mental health areas this has largely been the more articulate and less seriously disturbed group of sufferers.
Voluntary organizations will need to demonstrate their willingness to work with people with severe long-term problems if they are going to contribute seriously to the real work of a service, and they will need professional support and training to do this more arduous work.
On balance it is well worthwhile for the voluntary organizations to seize this opportunity to play a fuller role.
It provides them with the chance to be ‘centre stage’ and thus profoundly influence the delivery of care to mentally disordered people, and voluntary organizations have the additional advantage that they need only expand at their own pace, developing those areas which they know have the greatest need.
They thus need only provide care to quality standards which they set for themselves when first agreeing a contract and they can avoid being drawn into the ‘high volume/doubtful quality’ trap.
Overall, a healthy plurality of different initiatives is likely to arise if a strong voluntary sector grasps the opportunity with which it is currently presented and if it is actively supported by the statutory authorities.
Most day care, work projects, respite care, befriending, counselling, advocacy and welfare benefits work, as well as some direct personal care services provided at home, could be done by ‘not-for-profit’ organizations, and focusing as they do on one client group's problems and having strong links with families, they are unlikely to lose their strong advocacy role.
Unfortunately, staff in the NHS rarely know much about how the voluntary sector operates or understand its potential.
On the  other hand, voluntary organizations are often small and too daunted by local bureaucracy to negotiate effectively with health and social services.
A greater degree of interaction between the statutory and voluntary agencies could foster mutual education and understanding, and initiatives need to be undertaken by both sides.
Services provided by the private sector
Since the mid-1970s a growing number of privately owned small psychiatric hospitals has been established.
They care for short-term patients who can afford to pay or who are privately insured.
They serve a largely middle-class clientele and, for a small minority, provide a satisfactory option to NHS hospital care.
However, since chronic mental disorder generally brings with it long-term unemployment or low income, the private sector psychiatric hospitals make an insignificant contribution to longer-term services.
The private sector has, however, carved out a small specialist ‘niche’ in the provision of secure hospital accommodation for people with severe behaviour disorders, those who are considered beyond the care of a local psychiatric hospital.
Health authorities and local authorities are sometimes willing to pay high prices to buy care for those one or two individuals who are felt to be unmanageable in their own services.
In 1990 the fees charged by such hospitals were approximately 50–55,000 per person per year, and while one or two of these establishments provide excellent standards of care, others offer a poor-quality custodial environment very different from the care projected in the glossy brochures used to market their services.
For the same or less costs, health authorities could combine their resources to purchase better care from within the NHS.
In addition to these hospital services for those with severe behaviour disorders, there is a huge, private ‘cottage industry’ of proprietors running nursing homes and residential care homes for elderly people with dementia.
In 1990 half the residential care facilities provided for elderly people were owned privately and in most localities there are also increasing numbers of privately owned hostels, group homes and nursing homes, of widely variable quality, serving the needs of young clients.
In some parts of the country a  substantial part of residential services for adults with long-term mental illness, elderly or otherwise, is provided by private landlords who may employ one or two staff to assist with the care of a few residents.
The future of these private establishments largely depends on whether, after April 1993, the local authority will agree to continue funding such residents; a decision which will be influenced, hopefully, by whether the quality of care provided in these establishments is acceptable to local authorities, and whether standards can be maintained and improved by local authority monitoring procedures.
In some prosperous areas of the country, too, specialist services providing domestic and personal care services direct to elderly people in their own homes have developed in response to local demand.
There is clearly an opportunity for private entrepreneurial initiatives to provide a whole range of services for younger mentally disordered people, such as home care, day care and work projects.
These would compete directly with voluntary agencies and health and social services' own provision and the quality and effectiveness of such services will depend on the contracting skills of purchasing agencies and on close quality-monitoring programmes.
British people are, generally, deeply suspicious of ‘with profit’ companies who operate in the health and social care area and it remains to be seen whether free enterprise can win the hearts and minds of authority members and staff and make a profit at the same time.
Quality standards in mental health care
Most businesses rely on two complementary forces to ensure that they maintain and raise their standards.
First, they take notice of what the customers want and incorporate their requirements into their products or services and, second, they have a quality monitoring programme within the organization to ensure that agreed standards are being met.
In businesses such as McDonalds where service provision is undertaken by relatively junior staff remote from the centre, very particular attention is paid to quality control procedures as it is realized that lapses of quality or service may have a devastating effect on public confidence and attitudes.
Manufacturing businesses, on the other hand, where product quality is controlled in a central production unit, are much less vulnerable, though all successful businesses are meticulous about product quality.
Traditionally, health and social services have muddled along without paying much attention at all to what the recipients of services think, and only now, in the 1990s, are services beginning to consider developing quality assurance and quality-monitoring programmes.
People with mental disorder cannot act like consumers in the ordinary sense of the word because of the nature of their problems — they cannot, for example, forsake the NHS for another service as they might McDonalds for Burger King — but we can, nevertheless, devise ways of listening to what they have to say and ensuring their voices are heard.
Advocacy — ensuring service users have a say
While writing this book I have tried to avoid, where possible, medical language that refers to people with mental disorder exclusively as ‘patients’, a race for whom doctors and other professionals make all the decisions, whether the ‘patient’ likes it or not.
Some ‘users’ of the service are indeed patients in the conventional sense; they have entrusted their mental problems to a psychiatrist in the same way as one might entrust one's stomach problems to a gastroenterologist, but it is increasingly recognized that the model of conventional professional medicine is a poor framework for the provision of mental health services.
It is thus important to use language which reflects a real change of attitude to people who for so long have been unwilling recipients of services designed largely for society's comfort and not theirs.
Some people prefer to be called ‘clients’, a term which suggests a rather more active participative role in a dialogue where the professional service provider negotiates an agreed course of action with the recipient of his services.
The reality is that while the professional/client model is attractive, people who come into contact with mental health services often do not feel they exert the kind of influence that, for example, a person might have when he is instructing his solicitor.
Nor are mentally disordered people ‘consumers’ in the sense of the term used by retail and other service industries.
They can rarely exercise real choice about what is provided for them, or decide to ‘shop elsewhere’, except by refusing to attend a clinic or hospital or by avoiding contact with local services completely.
Moreover, people in personal crisis are not very effective at making their needs felt in socially acceptable ways; they do not organize themselves into consumer pressure groups to demand a better deal, not at least until they are recovered from their own crisis.
There are also a good many ‘users’ of the service who are treated involuntarily, where a family member, friend or professional has determined that he or she shall receive treatment and care whether it is wanted or not, because it is judged to be in the best interests of the individual's health or safety.
And while a good many people subjected to compulsory hospital admission and treatment are grateful, in retrospect, for this enforced care, many continue deeply to resent the intrusion and to deny that it was either necessary or helpful.
At times they are right to feel anger and resentment; at others such feelings are unjustified, though no less strongly felt.
For all these reasons, there are bound to be tensions in the relationship between mental health service providers and those on the receiving end.
If we are genuinely to make the services more acceptable and enhance users' individual experiences we must take seriously the users' views about their own personal treatment and care.
We must also involve all recipients of services in the planning and management of such services.
When professionals are trained in a philosophy of service which recognizes individuals' rights and entitlements, individuals participate in their own care and treatment.
Regrettably, history suggests that people who are mentally vulnerable are consulted infrequently and in some cases are neglected, exploited and mistreated through either thoughtlessness or cruelty.
A measure of protection is provided for patients detained in hospital under the Mental Health Act, but the vast majority of service users, both inside and outside hospitals, have no one fighting their corner or making sure their voice is heard.
Advocacy schemes have been developed to help people with  mental disorder assert their rights and make their own choices.
‘Citizen advocacy’ is a voluntary movement where coordinating staff train selected volunteers to represent the interests of specific individuals, and ‘legal advocacy’is a specialized legal service directed at ensuring individuals exercise or defend their legal rights.
But unfortunately, professionals are often deeply mistrustful of advocacy organizations and tend to see advocates as intruders creating a barrier to communication between the professional and the service-user.
To an extent some such tension is inherent to the advocacy role: ‘advocates’ volunteer to get to know individuals using the service, set out the options for them and negotiate on their behalf with service providers.
It is perhaps inevitable that professionals view advocates with a touch of apprehension and mistrust.
It is, however, encouraging that statutory authorities are beginning to see how helpful advocacy schemes can be in alerting them to easily ignored issues and in raising awareness of users' rights, particularly those focused on legal and civil liberties and welfare benefit entitlements.
Some innovative health authorities have given financial assistance for the establishment of advocacy schemes, though such money must be provided as a ‘donation’ or ‘gift’rather than as revenue with strings attached.
For advocacy groups to work properly they must feel that they are truly independent of the influence of professionals employed by the authority, since any group will from time to time find itself challenging the advice of a consultant psychiatrist or service manager employed by the authority.
At present even those authorities who support the concept of advocacy tend to wait to be approached by a local voluntary group before initiating a project.
They should perhaps look to take a more active role in initiating advocacy projects by funding development work with local users and with agencies such as the Citizens' Advice Bureau which have developed expertise in this area.
Advocacy schemes focus on the rights, entitlements and choices of individuals, but they do not generally much influence the wider issues of the way services are planned, shaped and managed.
Most planners and managers, though they pay lip-service to the idea that users should have some influence on the way services develop, do  not in fact involve users very much in the planning process, and there is no service in Britain to which I can point at present were users get anywhere near having a significant influence.
One survey reported that a staggering 50% of District Health Authorities, when asked about plans to involve users in planning services, actually felt it was ‘irrelevant’ to involve users and had no plans to do so.
Managers whose consciences tell them that service users ought to have a voice often choose just one articulate, recovered, temporary recipient of the service as a token single voice of the mental health planning committee, where this lone individual often feels at a serious disadvantage, confused by professional jargon and out of his or her depth in the complex and confusing world of statutory agency planning.
Consequently, it is often impossible for lone appointees to represent the views of users effectively and authorities must become more seriously committed to listening to service user's opinions and providing opportunities for them to exercise real influence.
The initiatives which authorities should aim to develop include:
Service-users Councils in hospitals, day centres, workshops, residential units and outpatients clinics, which are consulted on policies, plans and changes in the service
‘Self-management’ of facilities by people who use these facilities either by having several user representatives on the management group or, where possible, by a user-only management group, supported if necessary by a professional administrator
Encouragement, funding and practical support for advocacy groups and user-only forums so that they become active in monitoring local mental health services; formal channels of communication should be established from the users' group to health and local authorities
Community Health Councils, the health watchdog bodies now formally established in every area, and local voluntary organizations can play a key role in pressing for users' views to be heard.
Maintaining high-quality standards of care: quality assurance programmes
The horrors of eighteenth-century madhouses engender disbelieving revulsion in the twentieth century, yet throughout the last thirty years scandal after scandal has been reported in the press with depressing regularity and without the concern that might have been expected in an apparently liberal and caring society.
Mentally disordered people are still subject to grossly inhuman, degrading or cruel practices, and serious problems have surfaced in large NHS mental hospitals, local authority-run residential homes, small, privately owned hostels and homes and units run by large profit-making corporations.
No sector is immune from the problem although, fortunately, the reported scandals do appear to be relatively rare worst cases and are not the tip of some horrendous iceberg.
Nevertheless, developing and maintaining standards of high quality practice in mental health services, especially those providing ‘round the clock’ care in hospitals and residential homes, is an uphill struggle and people who depend on others to provide the basic necessities of life for most of their lives are necessarily vulnerable as they are not in a position to complain effectively, ‘vote with their feet’or refuse to be consumers of a bad service.
Dr Douglas Bennett, a psychiatrist renowned for his commitment to rehabilitation services, remarked that ‘dust will settle’ in facilities for continuing care unless there is constant vigilance to maintain standards, and I have seen residential homes, established on the surest clinical foundations with excellent staff, deteriorate within a couple of years to become merely average.
It is possible to identify the characteristics of organizations and institutions where scandals arise.
There are, usually: poor professional leadership; remote, ineffectual or invisible senior management; hazy systems of accountability; a high proportion of untrained and unsupervised staff; a poorly maintained physical environment; and, above all, a consequent low staff morale.
As the situation within the institution worsens, staff develop their own ethos, practices and policies to make life easier and more bearable for themselves in an unpleasant and disheartening situation.
Staff involved  in scandals are nearly always the victims, too, of a system that has failed to recognize the needs of both users and providers.
When services were concentrated in large hospitals, it was possible for good managers to keep a watchful eye open for the danger signals, and although the physical and emotional environment may not have been of high quality, most residents would be properly fed and clothed and protected from abuse.
Now that services are altogether more fragmented, it is very much more difficult for managers to keep a close eye on what is happening.
It is therefore vital for services to have a formal system in place for monitoring the standards of care being provided.
Moreover, this needs to be supplemented by the further safeguard of an external, independent monitoring system.
‘Quality assurance ’ is the term used for a programme of activities instigated by service managers to ensure that certain standards are met.
Any quality assurance programme should encompass the concepts of effectiveness in achieving the benefits desired and efficiency in reaching and giving priority to the people for whom the service is intended; it is also important to ensure that money is spent effectively and not expended on other less important areas of need.
Managers responsible for assessing the quality of services need to compile a list of specific objectives for a service, such as those outlined in Chapter 7, and then establish a measurable set of criteria to assess whether the total service meets its objectives.
It is, in fact, remarkably simple for managers to do this, though it is rarely done.
Too often senior managers get carried away measuring features of the service system, for example, the numbers of doctors and nurses per head of population, rather than asking such questions as: ‘Is the community team's service available twenty-four hours per day?’
‘How long do people wait for a new outpatient appointment?’
‘How many patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia have been discharged in the last year to a hostel or shelter rather than to a home of their own?’
Mental health services and indeed all ‘human care’ services could learn a lot from the more successful service businesses on how to maintain quality of services in multiple remote locations.
As we have seen, the franchised hamburger and fast food restaurants and  hotel chains stand or fall on their ability to supply a reliable, predictable, high-quality product or service in a situation which is remote from the centre and where the actual provider is quite low down the corporate hierarchy.
The most successful companies achieve success by:
Defining very specific standards for the minutiae of every procedure and for the physical environment; rules are written in great detail and reminders are posted everywhere
Ensuring that rules and standards are rigidly applied by intensive staff training on a continuing education and refresher course basis and by a ‘fall-back’ disciplinary or, even, dismissal procedure
Imbuing staff with specific cultural attitudes which they must constantly rehearse; part of this consists of ensuring that staff are proud to be part of a highly elite team
Having an absolute veto on local managers creating their own rules; local entrepreneurial activity is outlawed unless specifically agreed by senior management
Clearly devolving responsibility for delivering the service locally by pushing such responsibility as far down the hierarchy to the point of delivery as is reasonably possible, and by ensuring that the local manager is placed in a hierarchy of managers, all with closely defined job descriptions from top to bottom of the organization
Encouraging local managers to use their entrepreneurial and leadership qualities by contributing to the corporate planning and decision-making structure; in other words, they can influence the future of services if they can convince colleagues and seniors that such change is justified across the organization, but they cannot do whatever they want without authority
Ensuring that services stay up to set standards by employing a team of inspectors to monitor the service in detail
Seeking the opinions of customers and adapting their services according to changing customer demands
Monitoring rivals closely to copy good ideas and ensure that they are keeping their service in the forefront of developments 
Rewarding successful managers according to clearly agreed quality and performance criteria
All these features are as relevant to running a high-quality home for mentally disordered people as they are to selling hamburgers, and many services are now devising rules for ‘human’ care which can be monitored in exactly the same way, covering aspects of the physical environment, care practices and procedures and ‘customer satisfaction’with the service.
It is important to realize, of course, that while the system protecting care standards may be rigid and incapable of local, independent relaxation, the creative diversity of care activities and freedoms of choice for the individual can be endlessly varied.
Thus the quality of the environment which is required to provide autonomy of action and personal freedoms has to be rigidly defined in the care system, but within this system the care provider has considerable freedom and responsibility.
The two apparently opposing concepts of tight systems on the one hand, and considerable managerial authority and responsibility on the other are by no means incompatible.
There are four key areas that any quality assurance programme should cover in its detailed schedules:
Human and physical resources and the physical environment
External links and the relationship of the unit to the community
Management procedures and policies and how residents spend their working, leisure and social lives
Specific treatment and rehabilitation practices and how individual needs are met
A key feature of any quality assurance programme should be a system whereby managers regularly review different aspects of the service and provide feedback to staff about their performance and the performance of the unit so that new objectives can be set for the next assessment period.
Feedback is crucial, otherwise staff feel uninvolved and unable to participate in improving service standards.
Arm's-length monitoring
Service managers in public sector services usually both hold the purse-strings and are responsible for quality standards, and the tensions implicit in having this dual responsibility should be recognized.
Where such a dual management function exists, an external group of people should be appointed to evaluate the performance of the service against agreed criteria.
Public authorities refer to this kind of ‘almost independent’ quality-monitoring system as ‘arm's-length’monitoring, and local authorities are now required by statute to establish ‘arms-length’monitoring of their own residential care homes.
Establishing nationwide standards of care
Nationally, at present, there are several quality-monitoring inspectorates with well-defined but overlapping remits.
First, the Social Services Inspectorate is concerned with quality standards in services provided or contracted by local authority social services departments.
Second, the Health Advisory Service visits hospitals and health services to advise on improving the current quality of service and to examine and advise on development plans for mental health.
Third, the Mental Health Act Commission has a specific and quite narrow remit to protect the rights of detained patients, to ensure that the provisions of the Mental Health Act of 1983 for consent to treatment are followed, and to investigate individual complaints.
In addition to these three, there are a number of professional bodies concerned with maintaining standards of professional training, such as the English National Board for nursing, and the Royal College of Psychiatrists for doctors.
There are probably too many official visiting bodies concerned with external monitoring of standards of service.
Inevitably they sometimes give conflicting advice and although, in some areas, the inevitable overlaps provide ‘belt-and-braces’ security, in others problems may be overlooked altogether.
As services move to multiple locations in the community, the need for a unified approach to establishing and monitoring standards on a national scale becomes even more pressing.
The government should seriously consider creating one national  quality-monitoring commission for mental health services with a remit to cover all aspects of hospital and community care.
Such a body would be able to set nationally agreed standards and ensure that local quality-assurance programmes are working effectively.
9 Some Special Topics
Most of this book has been about mainstream mental health care of adult people.
The problems of children and adolescents have not been discussed here because this group requires a network of specialist medical, social and educational services which are very different from those required for adults.
Elderly people have not been singled out for special consideration either, but for quite a different reason: their needs are broadly the same as those of younger adults, and specialist mental health services for elderly people are now developing all over the country as a direct response to the enormous growth in the numbers of people with dementia.
Such services should be based on the same broad principles as those outlined for other adults.
There are, however, some special problem areas that mental health services have in the past tackled very poorly.
Indeed, the enthusiasm and effectiveness with which statutory authorities have addressed these areas is often a good ‘litmus test’ of the overall quality and commitment of local services.
In this chapter we consider the special problems of mentally disordered offenders, problem drinkers, drug misusers and homeless people with mental disorder.
Finally, the difficulties of devising appropriate services in a multiracial society are also considered.
Mentally disordered offenders
The majority of mentally disordered people never get into trouble with the law.
They are inclined to be retiring, anxious and solitary and are far more likely to be victims of crime than perpetrators.
The  minority who do find themselves embroiled in the criminal justice system are usually involved in petty crime such as shoplifting, casual theft, prostitution and minor public order offences rather than violent crime, and may become frequent offenders — magistrates complain that they see a procession of recidivist minor offenders in whom unemployment, poverty, poor intellect, long-standing emotional and social difficulties and a wide range of mental health problems are compounded.
While most magistrates are keen to prevent people from serving custodial sentences for minor offences, inevitably some such offenders do end up in prison and the probation service, which has a responsibility to assist and supervise many of these individuals after their discharge from prison, is usually unable to do its job properly because of a lack of appropriate accommodation, and an inability to provide close personal supervision.
The community could cope with this group of minor offenders better through the provision of special hostels and supervisory care staff but, at present, few initiatives are planned in this area.
There is, however, a minority of people coming to the notice of the police or courts in whom mental disorder has played a direct causal role in the offence.
The offences committed by such people are at times of a rather bizarre nature and may be trivial or serious.
Three typical examples will give a flavour of the nature and range of such problems.
1.
A woman in her eighties was plagued by hallucinations of loud machinery noises coming from her neighbours' houses, noises which she believed were deliberately made to disrupt her sleep.
After many weeks of trying to persuade puzzled neighbours to ‘stop the machines’, one night, in desperation, she hurled empty milk bottles through the windows of the terraced houses on either side.
Fortunately the police did not prosecute and she was very successfully treated with medication.
She was also fitted with a hearing-aid and conciliation with the neighbours was engineered by a community psychiatric nurse.
The ‘machinery’ noises faded to an irritating occasional ‘shushing’noise in one ear.
2.
A 40-year-old man with a long history of schizophrenia was arrested in a public car park while attempting to break into a car to  steal a blanket off the back seat.
When stopped by the car park attendant, the disturbed man shoved the attendant aside, causing him to fall and break his wrist.
Frightened by the collecting crowd, the man lashed out at several others until he was finally arrested by the police.
It transpired that he had been sleeping rough for weeks and that his last known address was a Salvation Army hostel 100 miles away.
He was remanded in custody and remained in prison for six weeks, unwilling to be treated for his distressing voices and persecutory beliefs and unable to give a clear account of himself as a result of his jumbled thinking and speech.
Psychiatric reports were eventually obtained and recommended that he should be detained in hospital for treatment, not in prison.
He was transferred after waiting a further month for a bed to become vacant.
Within six weeks he was improved mentally and fit for discharge but remained a further three months on the ward while a suitable home and day centre were found for him.
This unfortunate man exemplifies many of the problems of mentally disordered offenders.
He was held in a wretchedly depressing and isolating prison environment for many weeks while the legal process ground slowly on.
He waited an excessive length of time for a psychiatrist to examine him and make a report.
And he waited far too long in prison for a place to be made available in hospital.
His distress could have been alleviated with treatment far earlier if he had been diverted into the hospital system straight from the police station, or direct from the court, rather than via prison.
Finally, he remained in hospital months longer than he needed to.
3.
The third example is a young man who falls into the rare category of those who pose a serious threat to public safety, a threat which in some instances exists for only weeks or months, although occasionally a person may remain potentially dangerous for some years.
This tall, well-built 19-year-old came from a large, chaotic household in a north-west dockland town.
He was a poor performer at school, often in trouble for truanting, and by the time he was 16 he had had several appearances in the juvenile court for stealing and ‘joy-riding’.
On three occasions he was referred by the court for a psychiatric report on account of his oddness, lack of sociability, occasional outbursts of violence and a suspicion that he was taking illegal drugs.
As he grew older he became preoccupied with becoming physically fit, collected body building magazines and spent many hours practising on an assortment of home ‘fitness’ machinery.
He never found work, made no male friends and had only a passing acquaintance with people in a local pub, including the 20-year-old barmaid.
He began to tell his family she was his girlfriend although in reality she had rejected his overtures.
However, he persisted, following her home in the evenings and continuing to press his suit with increasing, insistent agitation.
One evening, after threatening her with a knife, he raped and then stabbed her.
She was severely injured but made a full recovery.
Throughout his remand and trial he denied that he had injured her and appeared to be in a fantasy world, convinced of his own merits and powers.
He was without remorse, seemingly unable to understand the gravity of the offence.
However, he was found fit to plead, found guilty and detained under an order of the Mental Health Act in one of the Special Hospitals which provide care and treatment in conditions of close security.
As the years went by this young man matured and developed.
He trained as an electrician while in hospital and formed several friendships with other patients.
Five years later he was judged by the hospital staff and by the Home Secretary, who has to agree to the fitness of certain patients held for indeterminate periods, to be discharged on trial leave.
It was, unfortunately, a further year before a suitable hostel place could be found where he could undergo further rehabilitation before finally being released into the external world again.
Offenders who are mentally disordered suffer the stigma of being labelled as both ‘mad’ and ‘bad’, although for centuries it has been recognized that some people have diminished responsibility for their actions as a result of mental abnormality and that punishment and retribution, usually demanded by society of someone who has committed a crime, should be dispensed with in favour of providing humane care and treatment.
Madness, in fact, carries far greater stigma than simple criminality; society fears people who are  unpredictable or incomprehensible far more than those who are simply dishonest career villains.
It is understandable that society should demand to be protected from the risk of recurrence of a violent or sexual offence, but at present society's response to even modest degrees of risk tends to be overly repressive and restrictive.
Services have thus frequently emphasized the need for custody, punishment and control rather than for rehabilitation and reintegration.
The time has come for a radical re-examination of the provision of services for this particularly disadvantaged group of people.
The greatest challenge is public education in order to reduce fear and to promote a better understanding of the aims of services.
The degree to which such fear exists can be judged by the ease with which the gutter press froths up public agitation over stories concerning discharged former offenders.
People need to understand that it is possible to promote the welfare of mentally abnormal offenders while at the same time protecting the public at large.
Coordinating the efforts of the NHS, local authority services and the criminal justice system is, however, formidably difficult.
The system should enable offenders with mental disorder to move quickly out of the courts and prison system to the most appropriate place for treatment, but in reality the system moves grudgingly slowly and in some parts is at a virtual standstill, leaving disturbed people in restrictive, unsuitable environments which are almost guaranteed to worsen their condition.
Over recent decades, too, as psychiatric units have promoted a more ‘open’ and liberal attitude, NHS hospitals have become increasingly reluctant to accept patients who need a degree of security.
Many psychiatric units now have no lockable wards at all and while this may be admirable for most in-patients, it has inevitably led to the rejection of mentally disordered offenders who require a modest degree of security and who could benefit from assessment and treatment in an ordinary hospital.
Such individuals may wait many weeks on remand in a prison hospital wing, sometimes even in a cell in a local police station, before they are assessed by the local service.
Many will be rejected outright by the NHS hospital staff and remain in the prison system, inadequately treated.
One significant advance in the last ten years is that there are now specialist forensic psychiatry services in most Health Service Regions, and most Regions have constructed special Regional Secure Units (RSUs) where mentally disturbed offenders can be assessed.
But there is a desperate shortage of places and the expertise and facilities of these units is best concentrated on the more difficult or seriously dangerous offender.
Most offenders do not require this degree of security and could be managed in ordinary NHS hospital units, provided there was a simple lock on the external ward door, the right internal architectural design and a team of nurses and therapists trained to manage menacing or aggressive behaviour with confidence.
Mental disturbance requiring such security is often short-lived and within a week or two the person may be well enough to enjoy the normal freedoms accorded other patients.
The few ‘intensive care’ or ‘medium-secure’units in ordinary NHS hospitals which accept mentally disordered offenders are nearly all sited in badly designed old wards in large hospitals.
The high capital costs of building a good ‘medium-secure’ unit on a general hospital site with other admission beds has been a deterrent to developing more suitable facilities.
A further potent factor working against improving care for these patients is their rejection by local mental health professionals who regrettably often share the public's negative and fearful attitudes.
With the right training and commitment by senior managers and doctors, the care of this particularly disadvantaged group could be significantly improved.
A number of recently developed innovative schemes encourage early diversion of mentally disturbed people out of the courts and into the care of the mental health services before they reach prison.
For example, there are ‘court liaison’ services where a specialist forensic psychiatrist is available on call for magistrates and crown courts so that ‘on-the-spot’rapid assessment can be made and recommendations delivered for the court's instant consideration.
Some courts have a specialist probation officer who promptly channels those suspected of having mental health problems into the local service.
More such schemes would be welcome.
The courts  would also be able to keep many more people out of custody if there were more bail hostels, where defendants could reside in a sheltered environment while receiving assessment from local services, and more sheltered hostels for sentenced offenders who require supervision by probation officers but not the restrictions of a prison.
Mental disorder in prisons
In recent years prisons have accumulated increasing numbers of mentally disordered people who at one time would probably been cared for in the old asylums.
A Home Office study in 1990 found that 20 per cent of sentenced prisoners have serious mental disorders and that among women the figure rose to 35 per cent.
It is estimated that there are 7,000 inmates in Britain's prisons requiring specific help for mental disorder, and while it is possible for prisoners to receive psychiatric treatment from visiting consultants while in prison, facilities on the whole are poor and the environment is far from conducive to improving a person's mental state.
Recently great concern has been expressed about the high suicide rates of young offenders and adult prisoners held on remand in prison or after sentencing.
Of the forty eight-people in prisons who killed themselves in 1989, 40 per cent had a history of previous mental disorder.
Such suicides are nearly always preventable and many of those in despair should have been moved to hospital for treatment or received active medical help while in prison.
Whether or not people who feel suicidal require specialist mental health services — and many do not — the criminal justice system should be able to provide protection, care and support for those in its charge.
Bullying, boredom, fear, hopelessness about the future and lengthy hours of isolation lie behind many prison suicides, factors which are all amenable to management changes in the prison service.
Seriously mentally disordered people should not be put in prison.
Ordinary NHS hospitals must recognise their responsibilities for taking over the care of offenders misplaces in prisons, and to encourage this, ‘carrots’ and ‘sticks’, probably of a financial nature, need to be devised by the Home Office and the Department of Health to ensure that local psychiatric services cannot ignore their  responsibilities.
However, there will always be a need for specialist mental health services to be readily available for offenders in prison who do not need to be admitted to hospital.
A government review of the Prison Health Service was undertaken in 1990 and recommendations may emerge which will eventually improve the care which is provided in prisons.
The Special Hospitals
Broadmoor, Rampton and Ashworth Hospitals provide care for 1,700 mentally abnormal people who are judged to require high conditions of security.
A relatively small number of people, about 180 to 200, are admitted or discharged each year, compared with the 200,000 or so people admitted to ordinary Health Service psychiatric units.
In 1990 staff in the Special Hospitals estimated that approximately half their patients no longer required maximum security and remained in their charge simply because there was nowhere suitable for them to go.
The three ‘exit routes’ from the Special Hospitals, at least for those who do not die there, should be via the Regional Secure Units, local psychiatric hospitals or directly into hostels or flats, usually under some form of supervision.
The RSUs provide some former Special Hospital patients with further assessment and rehabilitation to enable eventual resettlement in the community, but at present there are insufficient places to take the large numbers who could benefit.
Some patients in the Special Hospitals could be moved directly to ordinary NHS units if local services were prepared to bear even minimal risks.
Often they are not.
But many Special Hospital patients could move straight into independent living in hostels or flats of their own with the right professional support from local services.
Accommodation is, however, desperately hard to find.
So for one reason or another, people stay on for years in Special Hospitals, sometimes hundreds of miles from their home area, denied the opportunity to develop a normal life for themselves again.
Moreover, when Special Hospital patients stay too long, places do not become available for others who might benefit from a place and the result is large numbers of seriously mentally ill long-term prisoners held in maximum security jails.
Unblocking the system
It will not be easy to speed up the system by which mentally disordered people are moved through the courts, prisons, NHS hospitals, Special Hospitals and, eventually, back into the normal community.
Local health and social services, for example, are unlikely to develop better care for mentally disordered offenders within their own home districts unless financial incentives encourage them to do so.
At present local NHS services do not have to pay for the care of individuals in Regional Secure Units or Special Hospitals; they can shuffle off their responsibilities by claiming to have no suitable facilities and, in any case, such people receive little public support or sympathy.
Positive financial incentives in the form of specific grants from a specially established Department of Health Fund would certainly help.
Extra financial resources might also be needed in the short term to establish a workable transfer system, though in the longer term a fast transfer system could work out far cheaper than the existing system: a Special Hospital or Regional Secure Unit place costs double that of a place in an ordinary mental health unit and quadruple the cost of a hostel place.
It will be rather more difficult to create incentives to move people out of the prison system into hospitals and instead a fundamental policy change by those who are responsible for planning local mental health services will be required.
This will involve an acceptance of the problem and reality of these offenders and a determination, particularly on the part of the Home Office and Department of Health, to consider how they could create policies and incentives, financial and otherwise, to encourage a shift in the right direction.
Senior civil servants and ministers must themselves take initiatives to put right the current barbarities.
Problem drinkers and drug misusers
Services for people who drink alcohol to excess or who misuse drugs have long suffered from a lack of clarity about what the exact nature of the problem is.
The terms ‘alcoholism’ and ‘drug addiction’are still in common usage but conjure up stereotyped images of ageing drunken derelicts and feckless ‘mainlining’delinquents.
In reality heavy drinking is far more pervasive than is commonly realized and most drugs which are consumed to excess are prescribed by a GP rather than bought illegally.
Problem drinkers
While writing this book I surveyed the alcohol policies of a number of health and social services organizations, talked to experts at the forefront of innovations in the field and read numerous descriptions of services.
I was struck by the fact that no one referred to how enjoyable it is to drink alcohol and that no one mentioned that in our culture it is absolutely normal to consume alcohol to excess on some occasions and that most people will have experienced the effects of over-indulgence at some time.
While there is some evidence that awareness and concern about the adverse social and health effects of alcohol are spreading among young, better-off people, daily consumption of alcohol in the home is now a commonplace occurrence in most families.
Drinking too much therefore is ‘normal’, and is not a disease or mental ‘disorder’, although in rare cases very severe mental illness may be the result of years of alcohol abuse.
Under such circumstances it is more helpful to view services as needing to be ‘problem-oriented’ rather than‘illness-focused’.
Thus every individual needs to be regarded as having a unique set of problems, some of which may have encouraged him or her to drink too much, and some of which may be the outcome of the drinking, rather than being thought of as an ‘alcoholic’ or an ‘addict’.
The problem drinker in our society can be defined as any person who experiences social, psychological or physical problems as a consequence of his or her own repeated drinking, and services should not only be aimed at the individuals themselves but also at family members who suffer as a result of someone else's drinking.
The scale of the problem has been estimated by a variety of different surveys.
Ninety adults in 1,000 drink more than 35 units of alcohol a week (men) or 20 units a week (women).
One unit is a glass of wine, a measure of spirits or half a pint of beer.
In the 1980s in a household survey, thirty adults in 1,000 admitted to problems with drink and five in 1,000 are known to at least one agency as  having problems associated with drinking.
In Britain there are 100,000 convictions annually for driving under the influence of drink and it has been estimated that 20 per cent of all hospital admissions are associated with alcohol in some way.
Diseases of the liver and digestive system, motor vehicle accidents, accidents in the home and mental disorders are all commonly related to alcohol, and drinking also impinges powerfully on the work of social services, where child abuse is often related to parental drinking, and on the work of police and probation services.
The economic burden of alcohol abuse falls not only on the individual and on the public purse, but also on employers: it is estimated that over 600 million is lost annually by employers through absenteeism, lateness, sickness, accidents and reduced efficiency resulting from excessive drinking.
Services for problem drinkers must focus on both the individual and his or her environment.
They should aim to enable individuals to use their personal emotional and intellectual resources to modify their attitudes and behaviour and to learn new social skills so as to achieve a stable way of life with diminished or no use of alcohol.
Effective agencies working in this area also provide a socially supportive environment so that the person can develop a more fulfilling life-style than the one which promoted drinking — often the work, social and family life-styles of the problem drinker revolve around opportunities for drinking, which makes developing a satisfactory role in life without drink extremely difficult.
Alcohol consumption and the number of problem drinkers in a community are largely governed by the cost and availability of alcohol, and while public education about alcohol problems and a vigorous promotion of the dangers of drink are all very laudable, investment in health education schemes aimed at prevention are largely wasted in the face of cheap, readily available alcoholic beverages, attractive marketing and agreeable social environments where alcohol is served.
If the community really wants to tackle the problems of alcohol abuse it merely has to encourage the government to push up the cost of alcohol beyond the point of everyday affordability.
At present the evidence suggests that society would prefer to tolerate the adverse consequences of ready consumption  than curtail the enjoyment of the majority.
However, there are two worthwhile targets for health education; employers and primary care workers such as GPs, nurses, social workers and probation officers.
These groups need to be able to recognize problem drinking and its causes and effects, have a knowledge of the help required, be able to provide counselling and know when to seek more expert help.
Most specialist agencies find that a good deal of the counselling and practical advice they give could as easily be provided by someone with less specialist knowledge.
Employers could also help themselves and many of their staff by banning lunchtime drinking and all consumption of alcohol during working hours.
Services for problem drinkers are very fragmented at present.
Some districts have traditional NHS inpatient units and outpatient clinics, but these fell out of favour when studies of outcome revealed that they were not particularly effective and were not reaching a sufficiently wide range of drinkers who might benefit from the service.
It is now recognized that a ‘multi-agency’ approach in which the NHS, local authority and voluntary agencies cooperate is more successful at reaching potential service-users.
Voluntary agencies have played a very important role in developing local services suited to their own area and providing an access point for information and individual counselling.
They often provide a drop-in centre and sometimes they provide group counselling as well as a link to appropriate specialist health services.
In all instances it is important for services to offer choice — some people need individual counselling or family work; others merely want to talk to someone when they get desperate or need practical advice but are not yet ready to contemplate altering their habits.
Getting started on a rehabilitation regime sometimes requires help with detoxification, a process to remove excess chemicals from the body.
The process can be unpleasant and dangerous if unsupervised, but with medical, nursing and family help most people can ‘detox’ surprisingly easily within a few days at home or, if necessary, in hospital, without untoward symptoms.
Following ‘detox’, most people can be helped as day attenders at a special centre but some benefit from getting right away from their old life by entering a  residential unit for some weeks or months.
This gives a breathing space for people to establish a sense of their capacity to live without drink.
The danger is that once they leave this sheltered environment, resolve may slip away.
There is therefore no point in providing residential care unless this is followed by an intensive discharge rehabilitation programme.
This can be provided by Community Alcohol Teams of specialist social workers, nurses and psychologists who provide support to people at home as well as information, education and guidance to other agencies handling drinkers.
Drug misusers
Public concern about ‘the drug problem’ has broadened with each new wave of publicity about a new drug allegedly sweeping Britain.
In reality the impact of illicit drug misuse on the rest of society is fairly minor compared with the effect of alcohol, and is far less of a public health hazard than that commonest of all drugs, tobacco, a legal substance which kills about 100,000 in Britain every year.
Illicit drug use also has to be set against the context of prescribed drug-taking.
In the late 1980s nearly 40 million prescriptions for psychotropic drugs were issued every year, of which 40 per cent were minor tranquillizers such as Valium.
Twelve per cent of women and 5 per cent of men regularly consume tranquillizers, and there is now a growing awareness of the addictive nature of these drugs; numerous self-help groups have been established to assist people who want to stop taking them.
In large part the misuse of tranquillizers was directly created by doctors and indirectly by the pharmaceutical manufacturers; both were insufficiently aware of the dangers and over-enthusiastic about the real but limited benefits that these drugs can bring to a tiny number of people.
To most people, however, ‘drugs’ do not mean tranquillizers but, rather, cannabis, heroin, cocaine or a variant of one of these.
The illicit drug in commonest use is cannabis and the majority of low or moderate users of this drug rarely experience adverse effects on their health although they may, of course, find themselves at odds with the law.
The commonest drug problem encountered by specialist services is multiple drug use; a person may be using  alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, hard drugs and ‘pills’.
Indeed, he or she will use whatever is available locally at the time.
The principles for the provision of services for drug misusers are exactly the same as those for heavy drinkers, with the proviso that services have to accept that many service users are initially very reluctant attenders and are sent by the courts, police, school or parents.
Often the continuing desire to use drugs is only marginally tempered by the impact of the heavy cost of drugs and regular brushes with the law.
Nor is there a typical ‘addict’, although in some areas there may be a particular local problem — a school where solvent abuse has become a minority craze, for example, or a housing estate where crack (a form of cocaine) is readily available for sale.
Providing a service often requires a thorough local knowledge of the culture and mores of small areas of the community.
Preventing substance misuse is largely a matter of controlling the availability of drugs and this involves controlling the cultivation and processing of drugs, preventing their import through ports and airports, and ensuring tight pharmacy security and controls on prescribing.
All these approaches have had a degree of success, but the drug scene is a dynamic, creative one where just as one drug seems to be under control, a new threat emerges.
Controlling production by massive ‘bribes’ in the form of aid to Third World drug-producing countries in exchange for specific measurable target reductions in production and controls on local drug merchants requires major intergovernmental agreements and even so will not prevent the illicit manufacture close to the point of consumption of man-made ‘designer drugs’.
Local education and information campaigns, though well-meaning, have proved of dubious value in prevention terms, although it is sensible to educate local youth workers, school teachers, probation officers and the primary care team to recognize the problem and be able to tackle it in an informed way.
Drug misusers who particularly want to reduce their usage of drugs can, however, be helped.
The outlook is not entirely bleak and it is reckoned that of those who enrol at a clinic, for whatever reason, about 40 per cent will be drug-free within ten years, although within that time, too, 15 per cent of opiate addicts may  well be dead.
Many people seem simply to grow out of heavy drug use, rather as many young drinkers mature out of heavy drinking.
Services are best organized along multi-agency lines, with a range of detoxification facilities, drop-in clinics and day care and residential units.
Some agencies combine services for drinkers and drug-takers into one ‘substance misuse service’ and this may well be the right approach in a rural area or country town where opiate use is minimal.
An important feature of all good alcohol and drug services is instant accessibility.
People should be able to walk in off the street when the mood takes them.
They should thus be open in the evenings and at weekends as well as during ordinary office hours so that working people can attend without having to take time off work.
They must also offer confidentiality and staff need to be nonjudgmental and ready to offer help, whether or not the individual is ready to ‘kick the habit’.
New-style services of this type are usually less expensive to run than traditional Drug Dependence Clinics and the in-patient beds provided in some areas by the National Health Service; money spent on establishing local voluntary organization action and a professional back-up service will usually reach a far wider group of people.
Community care services in this area offer much better value for money than the traditional NHS approach.
Services for homeless people
The major problem faced by homeless people is that of not having a home.
Most homeless people are not ‘social problems’ in any other respect than that they need a roof over their head.
The stereotyped view of a homeless person used to be of a drunkard who has slipped into the gutter as a result of a lifetime's fecklessness and, more recently, the visible evidence of frankly mentally disordered people on city streets, the phenomenon of ‘Cardboard City’ and the increasing numbers of people sleeping rough has merely added to the belief that most homeless people are destitute wrecks or foolish youths.
In reality, however, the majority of the homeless are families, particularly single-parent families, living in bed and breakfast lodgings or cheap hotels while they wait to be rehoused by the  local council.
The physical conditions in which many of these families live are extremely seedy, with seriously inadequate sanitary and cooking facilities and little privacy or space.
As a result, life in such temporary accommodation can be extremely stressful and can serve to add markedly to the stresses which gave rise to homelessness in the first place.
Homelessness is a social phenomenon, not part of the human condition, and has been created in part by economic policies which have deterred local councils, housing associations and private property owners from maintaining or developing low rental housing.
The sale of council houses and flats, the soaring costs of capital projects in the 1980s, the loss of accommodation provided directly by employers (for example, farmers and hoteliers), the increasing need for single-person or small-number occupancy dwellings for young people and small family units, have all added to the numbers of people without a home of their own.
The blame does not, however, lie at the feet of only one government but is the result of a succession of employment, social security and housing policies over the past twenty years.
Large numbers of people have benefited from the positive aspects of many of these policies but the casualty list has also been appalling.
Only coordination at Cabinet level will make a significant impact on the problem.
The provision of health services for homeless families living in lodgings or hotel accommodation is a task for local GPs, health visitors and other members of the primary care team, and while depression, anxiety and emotional disorders are common, few require the services of the specialist mental health services.
Where they do, these services are best provided in the least stigmatizing way possible, from the local community mental health service.
The majority of people in need of a home do not, then, have severe mental health problems.
However, there is no escaping the fact that fifteen years ago it was rare to see wildly deranged people on the streets of London and other major cities.
Now it is all too commonplace and scarcely commented on.
There is a popular misconception that long-stay patients were dumped straight out of mental hospitals on the streets when they were abandoned.
In fact the sequence of events was much more  complex than that, although, as discussed earlier, many former patients were discharged to inadequate accommodation without aftercare, and progressive reduction of psychiatric beds over the past thirty years has contributed significantly to the problem.
In the 1930s, twenty years or so before the hospital bed reductions began, a period of economic standstill and high unemployment drove many single, unemployed, poorly educated young men from, mainly, depressed areas in the north of England, Scotland and Ireland to more prosperous areas in the south in the vain hope of finding work.
City centre lodging houses and ‘casual wards’ run by local authorities housed many thousands of vagrants at night, but during the Second World War, when work became plentiful, the numbers dropped to a few thousand.
After the war, as numbers began to climb again, the government established Reception Centres where ‘persons without a settled way of life’ were provided with temporary accommodation.
But the problem continued to get worse and a series of surveys in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s established the main characteristics of these single, homeless people.
These men — and overwhelmingly they were men — came from large, poor families, moved from job to job in catering and manual work and were unable to save out of their meagre earnings.
They lived as cheaply as possible, permanently on the brink of destitution, and were often withdrawn, self-isolating personalities with few friends and no contact with their families.
Perhaps 10 per cent misused alcohol and were in persistent trouble for minor breaches of the peace and alcohol-related crimes, a smaller percentage than is commonly thought.
Their health tended to be extremely poor; tuberculosis, chronic bronchitis, malignant disease and infections were common.
A survey in one Edinburgh hostel found a high rate of mental disorders; schizophrenia was diagnosed in 26 per cent, organic brain disease or lifelong mental handicap in a further 15 per cent , serious alcohol abuse in 9 per cent .
Fourteen per cent of the sample had been in a mental hospital at some point.
A further survey of men in the Camberwell Reception Centre one night in 1965 found that a quarter of them had at one time been in mental hospitals and a further quarter were heavily dependent on alcohol.
As the years passed, surveys have shown that the proportions of mentally disordered people in single homeless hostel populations have grown, while the number of hostel places available has diminished.
In the 1980s most surveys found that 30–40 per cent had overt psychiatric disorder.
In November 1988 there were over 3,000 places in twenty ‘direct access’ hostels in London run by the Department of Social Security, the Salvation Army, local authorities and private proprietors.
Around Britain it is estimated that there are now 180,000 single people without a permanent home who live in temporary shelters, hostels or on the streets.
The number of destitute people with serious mental disorder now living more or less permanently in this way is reckoned to be 60–90,000, but no one knows for sure: a large number of people but still a quite small proportion of the total number of people in our society in need of a home.
Hostel dwellers do not move around from place to place as much as many people think.
Over half live for many years in one hostel.
But those who stay only for short periods of weeks or months are much more likely to be suffering from serious mental disorder than long term residents.
A survey in a Southwark Salvation Army hostel in 1987 found that nearly 40 per cent of men who had recently moved in had symptoms which pointed to a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Almost all of these men had been in psychiatric hospitals at some time in their lives, especially the younger ones.
Half had been discharged quite recently from an acute psychiatric admission ward — hostels provide a cheap and available alternative to a permanent home and avoid the mental health teams having to plan a more satisfactory discharge.
The other half had been discharged from the large hospitals years earlier, after many years as in-patients.
Originally most had been placed satisfactorily but they had not been followed up and had drifted away two or three years later as circumstances changed.
From the men's point of view hostels offer a tolerant, undemanding atmosphere where they can live in ‘a world of their own’ without being ‘social-worked’or ‘assessed’or ‘treated’unless they expressly desire it.
But they live in a physically impoverished environment which provides far fewer amenities than the average  long-stay ward — the cost is often less than a third that of a hospital bed.
Many, too, live desperately unhappy lives and want help to achieve a better quality of existence.
And it is possible to help by a low-key, unthreatening, gradual approach, building trust over a number of months.
Many men will accept medication to help distressing symptoms but they also, of course, need help with accommodation, often requiring highly staffed housing which is not readily available.
There needs to be a two-pronged strategy to deal with the problems of the minority of homeless people with mental disorder.
The first is to provide now a mental health service specifically for hostel dwellers or those living on the streets.
That will require significant investment in specialized accommodation, social work input and health care.
Voluntary organizations already play a major role in providing day centres, lunch clubs, advice and pastoral counselling, and probably the most effective way of providing an acceptable mental health service is by attaching professional workers to the places where homeless people already go willingly for help.
The second tactic is to ensure that we stop adding more people to the numbers of tragic people on our streets as a result of years of social and self-neglect.
We must ensure that hospitals have well thought out discharge plans for every individual, whether he or she has been in hospital for five years or just five days, and that follow-up and after-care services are available for a lifetime if necessary.
We know that people do not drift away from their main sources of financial help, social support and continuing treatment, particularly if they have built up a relationship with someone in the service they trust.
Mental health services in a multiracial society
Existing mental health services in Britain have developed within a largely white, Westernized culture with its own characteristic notions of health and disease.
We have expectations of the way people relate to each other and of the roles they play within families.
Traditional attitudes about the value of autonomy and  independence and notions of personal responsibility and duty may, however, be quite different in other cultural groups.
As a result puzzling misunderstandings sometimes arise even between British-born professionals and other Europeans, and cultural differences can create a chasm of incomprehension between Britons and members of some non-European societies.
The barriers are not, however, insurmountable, provided that professionals take time to listen to individuals and their relatives.
Cultural barriers have been cited rather too glibly to explain the serious difficulties which exist in providing acceptable services for ethnic minority populations.
A much more important factor is, to put it bluntly, racism.
Though sometimes overt, racism is usually covert, but is deeply ingrained in professional and institutional practices.
Most often it is totally unconscious and goes unrecognized by staff and service users.
A second factor of importance is the very real differences which exist between the prevalence of certain types of mental disorder, particularly schizophrenia, in different ethnic groups.
Certain immigrant communities have been documented for many years as having higher mental hospital admission rates.
In England and Wales people from Poland, Ireland, Scotland and the West Indies all have higher rates of admission than native English and Welsh, whereas admission rates for Asian immigrants are low.
The multiple causes of migration and the problems which individuals have are so diverse that it is impossible to generalize about the reasons for these differences.
Migration, for example, may be an enforced personal tragedy following persecution or a voluntary choice for a more prosperous life.
Much will depend, therefore, on the person's abilities and aptitudes, knowledge of English, family and cultural background, financial and educational status and ability to come to terms with enormous personal upheavals.
All individuals' circumstances must be considered separately in the light of their former and current lifestyle and beliefs.
Accurate diagnosis and treatment rely on effective communication through discussion of personal experiences, emotions and ideas expressed in an individual's own language.
Good interpreters can aid communication but professionals must be trained to use  interpreters properly or, ideally, should have fluency themselves in an individual's native language.
At present hospitals and community services often use the translation services of a relative who is bilingual, or of a kitchen porter or nurse who may know nothing of mental health problems, or of anyone in the vicinity who happens to speak the language.
Such expedient solutions are, however, often demeaning and worrying for the patient and ineffective and frustrating for the staff, and professional interpreters, though expensive, are essential in localities where a substantial minority speaks a language other than English.
In some parts of London where there are forty or more languages in common use, local authorities should establish a panel of professional interpreters who are available for hire at short notice by all local statutory and voluntary agencies providing personal services to the public.
It must also be recognized that hospital admission can prove a particularly daunting experience for someone whose basic life-style is totally different from the British one.
British food, for example, may be unfamiliar or not uncommonly, unacceptable on religious grounds, but it is very easy to get diet right if catering staff ask individuals or their relatives about their dietary habits.
But most members of ethnic communities in Britain are not migrants, they are British-born and bred.
One group in particular seems greatly disadvantaged by the current system and ill-served by current mental health services — service-planning for the Afro-Caribbean population often creates a great deal of dissent and anxiety amongst both service managers and service-users.
For many years it has been known that black people are more likely than whites to be admitted to hospital for treatment of mental disorder, more likely to be admitted compulsorily following being arrested in a public place by the police and far more likely to be diagnosed as having schizophrenia than white people.
In one London area where 15 per cent of the general population is black, black people make up a third of all psychiatric admissions under the age of 65 years.
Why?
The following reasons have been suggested:
1.
Black people find the existing services difficult to approach, hard to get access to and overwhelmingly dominated by middle-class  white professionals who know little of black culture.
When distressed, black people naturally resist accepting help in frightening institutional settings from people they do not trust.
Consequently they attend for.treatment late, reluctantly, often unwillingly, and are more likely to be treated in locked or secure settings as their fear leads to aggression, violence and a cycle of anxiety and rejection by staff.
2.
Treatments offered to black people are more likely to be physical, such as drugs and ECT, rather than counselling and psychotherapy options.
Professionals respond to reluctant, uncooperative or culturally different patients by unconsciously spending less time with them.
Many Community Mental Health Centres treat a smaller number of black clients than would be expected.
Drug doses also tend to be higher and given for longer periods.
Professionals feel ignorant and at a disadvantage working with patients they feel they do not understand and who, in turn, do not trust them.
3.
The unhealthy relationship between the police and the Afro-Caribbean population has its roots both in white racism towards blacks and the historically high crime rates in black areas.
Minor public order incidents can be treated less sympathetically than for white people and can lead in turn to confrontation and serious disorder warranting emergency admission.
4.
The high rates of diagnosis of schizophrenia among black people were at one time thought to be due to widespread misdiagnosis of bizarre behaviour and transient hallucinatory experiences by white psychiatrists unfamiliar with normal Afro-Caribbean cultural expressions of severe distress.
It is now clear that this is no longer an adequate explanation and that the rates of schizophrenia in British black young people are worryingly high.
We do not know if the cause is genetic, the result of physical or mental antecedents such as infection or early childhood experiences or, as has been suggested by some observers, the outcome of growing up feeling disaffected and disenfranchised in a rejecting society which offers black people few prospects of work, wealth and the good things in  life to which white people aspire.
The reasons have been insufficiently studied because of the reluctance of the ethnic communities themselves to examine the issues dispassionately and because service planners and managers dance nervously round ‘the problem’, hoping that the differences can all be explained away by a statistical artefact such as the ways people are brought to the attention of the services, by claims of racial prejudice in the ways staff handle patients, or by simple misdiagnosis.
But these explanations are insufficient on their own.
The roots of the differences may be cultural, but if so, they are deeply embedded in the current disadvantaged position of non-white populations in Britain.
If the situation is to be changed, then society has to change fundamentally the educational and employment opportunities for black and non-white communities.
Ultimately, the aim should be to provide fully integrated services for people of all races and cultures which are designed to respond appropriately to individual differences.
But as an interim solution it may be advisable to develop specialist services for ethnic groups where the ethnic community asks for them.
Specialist day centres, advice centres, and advisory services staffed largely by professionals and volunteers from the community can successfully bridge the cultural divide and also link individuals into mainstream services when these are required.
Statutory agencies can encourage the establishment of local ethnically focused voluntary organizations by targeting specific grant aid.
Indeed, Asian communities in the London area, parts of the Midlands, and in West Yorkshire are now served by specialist services, a development which has been much helped by the availability of trained Asian health care professionals and a strong community infrastructure.
But specialist services can make only a fairly modest contribution to an overall plan for services in a multiracial society unless mainstream services are also radically overhauled in those areas with substantial ethnic populations.
Service planners should actively consider the specific needs of their local ethnic populations for mental health services, and consult users, their families, local community leaders and organizations about the way services are organized.
Services should also affirm their policies on equal opportunities by ensuring that they monitor the use of their services by specific ethnic groups, test that the information they make available for the public is comprehensible and accessible, canvass users' views of the current services, recruit staff of different ethnic backgrounds, at all levels in the organization (although, in the case of Afro-Caribbeans in particular, this can be difficult due to the lower educational opportunities of this group and, in consequence, a paucity of suitable candidates for posts), and institute a programme of training for staff of all grades and backgrounds to understand their own conscious and unconscious prejudices about race and culture.
Finally, senior members of ethnic communities should take the lead in initiating research in conjunction with academic and professional organizations into the causes and consequences of mental disorder characteristic of their populations.