

III: OUT OF DARKNESS
SIX
Daybreak tended to steal up gently on the valley, reinventing a fresh landscape out of the leftover mists of the night; lake breezes would then strip away the shrouds one by one to uncover the forests and the shores and the mountains behind.
Three Oaks Bay was a small resort town on the lake's eastern side, busy in the season and almost dead outside of it.
The Bay had a square, two pubs, a promenade walk overlooked by three medium-sized Victorian hotels, and a restaurant with a terrace that stood out over the water.
It rated one resident policeman and a mention in the Shell Guide .
People came in the summer to walk and to sail and, if development plans succeeded and the roads could be kept clear, they'd soon be coming in the winter to ski.
Pete had seen a fair number of valley mornings, although not so many had been as early as this.
He shivered a little, and turned up the collar of his suit jacket.
It didn't make much of a difference.
He was standing on the exposed rocks at the highest point of the headland; the ground fell away steeply from here, mostly bare rock and scrub, with just a narrow shelf of land that was almost a beach down at the water's edge.
He could see the upturned hulls of a few boats drawn up onto the shore, mostly of fibreglass but some of varnished timber, all of them de-rigged and tied down against the weather.
Out across the water, the end of the lake had not yet emerged from the mist, and the mountains above it were no more than a delicate shadow of grey against a deep grey sky.
Alina was still in the car.
Still, as far as Pete could tell, asleep.
He'd covered her over with a coat and taken her few possessions inside, and she'd slept on; she'd been the same way for the last couple of hours of the journey, ever since they'd made their final stop at a twenty-four hour garage so that he could fill the Zodiac's tank and buy some tape for a running repair to the headlamp that he'd broken when, lights doused to escape notice, he'd clipped the corner of the garage block on their way out of the parking area.
The repair didn't look much, but it would keep the rain out.
A sound came from behind him.
He didn't turn.
Alina scrambled up alongside, and found herself a rock just a couple of feet lower than his own.
She'd brought his coat from the car, and she wore it around her shoulders against the cold.
They stood in silence for a minute or more.
And then she said, ‘This is where you live?’
He looked at her then.
‘You like it?’
‘It's…’
She searched for the words.
‘I do like it.
I like it a lot.’
‘Actually, the house is a dump, but the boss lets me have it cheap.
It belongs to his sister's family.’
‘I think it's fine,’ Alina said, and Pete watched her for a moment longer, almost as if he was checking her score on a test.
‘Yes,’ he said finally.
‘It's fine.’
And he turned again to the view.
The mist over the northern end of the lake had now begun to clear, uncovering a part of the Liston estate.
A piece of land that had held no particular interest for him at all until the arrival of its new estate manager.
‘This isn't going to work,’ Alina said despondently.
The silver dawn was turning into plain old daylight now, its magic fading and taking her momentary confidence with it.
‘Why shouldn't it?’
‘Because I'll mess up your life.
I poison everyone I touch.
Look what I already did to your car.’
‘Forget the car.’
‘I can't even pay you rent.’
‘I don't want anything from you.
You think that's using me, forget it.
You're a guest.’
Pete stepped down.
‘Come on,’ he said, offering his hand.
‘We'll put your stuff in your room.’
Alina accepted, and he helped her along.
‘I get a room?’ she said.
‘You even get a bed, until you decide exactly what it is you want to do from here.
There's more space than I can use.
I'll clear it with Ted, but nobody's going to mind.’
They descended to the gingerbread house; Rosedale, the cabin in the high woodland, paint flaking, boards weathered silver, the place that Pete called home.
She didn't look like someone who could poison what she touched, whatever she might think.
Nobody could blame her for taking life as seriously as she'd had to, but the way to some kind of peace and personal balance would surely lie in the opportunity to stop running and relax a little.
She could lose herself in a place like this; if not in the valley itself, then in some other part of the region.
Tourists passed through here in their thousands, and the face of a stranger would be nothing to remark upon in the approaching season.
Even her accent wouldn't give her away; all kinds of nationalities came to take up casual work in the restaurants and hotels.
Endless human variety, but on a manageable scale.
It would probably be just what she needed in order to find herself again.
And she certainly needed to unwind, at least a little.
He couldn't help thinking of something that she'd said in all seriousness when they'd left the apartment building behind and a lack of any interest from a passing night patrol on the motorway had told him that no, the police didn't seem to be keeping an active watch for his car; she'd looked at him and she'd said,Promise me, Peter.
Don't ever try to get too close to me.
Don't even think of it.
And I promise that I'll try never to hurt you.
Is that a deal?
And Pete, who hadn't been entirely unaware of some of the paths that such a newly-founded relationship might follow, suddenly found himself shifting  into back-off mode.
Helping her was one thing.
But even to consider getting involved with someone who could talk in such a way…well, that would be to enter dangerous waters indeed.
The room that he'd given her was smaller than his own, but she got a bigger wardrobe.
Not that she had much to put in it…the only other pieces of furniture were the bed and an old dressing-table with a cracked mirror.
Her window looked out of the back of the house, onto what had once been a small garden.
She sat on the bed, next to her bags.
Pete stood in the doorway and watched as she bounced a little and made the mattress creak.
When she looked up at him and smiled, he could see that the dangerous edge of last night's exhaustion had been blunted.
He said, ‘I only wish I could help you more.
But I wouldn't know how.’
’ You are helping me.’
‘That's not what I mean.’
‘I know what you mean,’ she said.
‘Please don't worry.’
‘There's tinned stuff in the kitchen if you wake up and I'm not around.
If I'm not here, I'll probably be down at the boatyard.
When I get the chance, I'll show you the sights.’
‘I'll manage,’ she assured him.
And so he made a gesture as if to say,It's all yours .
And then he withdrew, closing the door after him, and went to his own room to stretch out for a while.
Alina stayed where she was, her eyes closed, almost as if she was listening to the silence.
Pete must have dropped onto his bed without undressing, he made so little sound.
Then she turned to the much-travelled carrier bag on the bed beside her.
From it she took a book, which she carried over to the dressing-table.
It was a cheap scrapbook, coarse paper between cardboard covers, so well-used that some of the  pages were starting to fall out.
She laid it flat and opened it up.
The book was filled with photographs.
A few of them would have been a serious giveaway in any frontier search, but these she'd covered over with postcard views bought from the Europiskaya Hotel.
She began to take out the postcards, revealing the snapshots underneath.
When she reached a particular one, she stopped.
It was a group view, slightly blurred, a dozen friends on a day in the country.
They were in rows like a football team, the people in the front row all kneeling on the ground.
Old times, sad times, a million miles away.
For a while Alina sat looking at her younger, unmarked self.
She was in the back row, lifted higher than anybody by the boys on either side of her.
That was how she'd been, back then.
Open, smiling, everything before her.
Lifted on the arm of a boy named Pavel.
SEVEN
Pavel's was a city dawn, seen from the rear seat of the unmarked car as they circled back in on the motorway network toward their base near the airport.
The night had not been a success.
He knew that he'd been close, but then somehow it had all slipped away from him; when Alina hadn't come out and the three of them had finally gone into the building, it was to find incomprehension from the woman who lived alone and an empty flat where she said she'd gone for help.
Pavel had no names, no numbers.
He could go no further.
And his two escorts had shrugged and sympathised, and called it bad luck.
A couple of years ago, he'd never even have been able to get this far.
The notion of such international co-operation would have been unthinkable even at senior investigator level; but here the arrangements had been made and he'd been on a plane within a matter of hours.
He had no official status and no powers of arrest, but once he'd identified Alina then the two officers along with him would have been able to detain her on immigration charges.
Since she'd entered the country on stolen papers, she could then be deported back to Russia and the knotty question of extradition would never have arisen.
An appeal for political asylum would have been likely to get her nowhere; Alina wasn't political, and never really had been.
By most people's definition, she was a common criminal and nothing more.
For most people, but not in the eyes of Pavel.
To Pavel, and probably to many of the others who'd fallen under her influence, she was the most uncommon criminal ever.
The Finns had found the boy within half an hour.
He'd been hiding in a woodland graveyard, only half-heartedly concealed behind one of the leaning roofed crosses.
He'd known almost nothing.
Nothing of her true nature, not even — and here Pavel had been holding his breath at the back of the Border Control's interrogation room — where she'd been living for the past two years.
The boy's eyes had met his own, and for a moment Pavel had been afraid; but the boy hadn't said anything, and after a moment he'd looked away.
An example of her power: scared as he was, the boy Nikolai had managed to hold out against telling them of her destination until it was too late for them to prevent her from reaching it.
She'd used him and then abandoned him, and yet still he'd continued to protect her.
It was an impulse that Pavel could understand only too well.
And compared to some in her past, the boy had been lucky.
The car rolled into the police yard, a hurricane-fenced compound within sight of the main runway and with a constant background of big jet engines racing up to power.
There were a few marked vans here, but most of the cars were officers' private vehicles.
As Pavel stepped out onto the asphalt, he could see the take off of a Cathay Pacific 747 through the chainlink and across a few hundred feet of grass; it seemed shockingly, dangerously close, and he turned his face away to look toward the main building.
This was in four storeys and in a no-frills, prefabricated style that could have been anything-a tax office, a really dull hotel, a leaking hospital doomed never to come fully into service.
Only the crest over the entrance door gave it away and that didn't entertain the eye much, either.
‘I'll tell you what,’ one of the two men said.
His name was Roger, and he'd made a few stabs at conversation in the course of the night.
Pavel knew that he'd not been the  best company but then, they hadn't been treating this job as anything particularly special.
Some novelty value because he was the first Russian they'd ever had in the car, but that was all.
Roger went on, ‘Why don't we put you in the canteen for a while, and I'll go and look for my boss.
He's the one who's going to have to decide what to do with you now.’
And Pavel said, ‘What's a canteen?’
They grinned as if he'd made a joke, and they walked him inside.
Pavel sat alone at a table in the corner of the police cafeteria.
He bought nothing, because he'd no English money.
Only half of the counter had opened up at this early hour and there were no more than half a dozen people in the place, most of them in uniform.
He idly pushed around the salt and pepper to avoid meeting anyone's eyes, and then he took out a sachet from the sugar bowl and looked at it with curiosity.
The label read Sweet ‘n'Low but the sachet appeared to be empty.
He tore it open and found that it wasn't empty, just that the fine powder inside took up so little space.
He tasted it, and then he put a few of the sachets in his pocket.
A policewoman came to get him.
Her uniform shirt was crisp and her red hair had been tied back and she had a hint of an overbite.
She said, ‘Are you the Russian officer?
I'm sorry, I don't know how to pronounce your name,’ and Pavel said, ‘Please don't worry about it,’and got to his feet to follow her.
They smiled at each other politely in the lift, but nothing passed between them.
Pavel was feeling as loose and unconnected as a bag of spanners, and with about as much energy.
He looked at the floor.
He'd closed his eyes once in the last forty hours, and that had only been a restless doze in the back of the car on the way to the border.
He hadn't been able to sleep on the plane at all.
He'd been wound-up and anxious ever since he'd come home from his shift and discovered her missing, an empty space under the bed where  her bags had been and her photograph album — probably the most precious single item that she owned — gone.
His first reaction had been one of panic.
But Pavel was level-headed, and he knew that he had a certain inner strength; nobody could have kept her and cared for her in secret and for so long without it.
After he'd found the half-burned counterfoil slips from the railway tickets stuffed down the back of the apartment's disused fireplace, his next move had been to return to his Militia post and report that an anonymous source had given him some information on the whereabouts of Alina Petrovna, escapee from the prison hospital and probable murderer of the psychiatrist Belov.
What else could he have done?
It was this, or lose her completely with certainty and forever — a prospect that he couldn't even begin to face.
He loved her too much even to be able to imagine such a thing; Pavel's was the love of Judas, a devotion so great that it encompassed even betrayal.
The chief superintendent had a corner office with a view down onto the place where tenders took on loads of aviation fuel from huge land-based tanks.
The chief superintendent was a man in his forties, with thinning hair and pale blue eyes that didn't seem to blink.
Pavel sat gazing out at the loading area as the man looked through a small number of memos and facsimile messages.
All pipelines and white stones, it had the look of an alien landscape.
The chief superintendent looked from one sheet to another and then back again, as if there were certain connections that he was looking for and was unable to find.
Pavel was calm.
He was here, and the hardest part was over; he was on the soil where Alina walked, he breathed the same air again.
There was no doubt in his mind that he'd find her.
A few hours' sleep, and he'd come up fresh and begin to learn the system around here.
They'd no internal passports in this tiny country, but from what he'd seen of this building they had computers the like of which the Leningrad Militia could only dream about.
He knew 53  her, he knew her ways, he could guess how she'd operate.
With luck, he might even get to her before somebody else died.
‘Look,’ the superintendent said, ‘I only just came on and I can't make head nor tail of this.
I don't understand why they sent you.’
‘I'm the only one who knows what she looks like,’ Pavel said.
‘Couldn't they just have sent us a photograph?’
‘There are none.’
There were none because, after volunteering to bring Alina's file from the records department up to the chief investigator's desk, Pavel had quietly removed them in the corridor.
‘I know her because I'm the one who first arrested her.’
He'd been sent to escort her back after that first long-ago attempt to cross the border; and with that, it had begun.
Belov had studied her and contrived her release…and for him it had ended with his body face-down in the icy waters of the Neva.
‘The best chance would have been to grab her on the way in,’ the man said.
‘But it was too late for that.
All this business last night was an obvious waste of time; it probably wasn't even her and if it was, she could have had five different rides before daylight.
The way I see it now, it's best treated as a problem for Immigration.
You say she's got no friends or contacts here so she can't get work, and she can't get money — sooner or later, she's going to surface.’
Pavel was nodding.
‘So when she does, we'll get in touch.
I understand there's a return flight booked for you this afternoon.’
For Pavel, it was as if his thoughts had skipped a beat.
‘A what?’
‘There'll be a ticket waiting at the check-in desk.
You've to pick it up and then make yourself known to the check-in supervisor.
He'll walk you through the formalities and then he'll sit you somewhere and tell you when it's time to board.’
Pavel stared, saying nothing.
The superintendent said, ‘I think that's all.
Why don't you go and get some breakfast?
You look as if you need it.’
Pavel couldn't get any breakfast, because he still didn't have any English money.
He had ten roubles and some change.
Other than that, he had the clothes he was wearing.
And they were sending him home without her.
A couple of people got into the lift as he was riding down.
They glanced at him curiously.
Both of them got out on the restaurant floor, but Pavel carried on down to the entrance lobby.
There was a Dan-Air flight coming in as he crossed the asphalt lot, dropping like a gull with its undercarriage outstretched.
He was close enough to hear the skid of rubber on tarmac, and then it was past the building and away out of sight.
The grass waved in the morning breeze, the yellow frames of landing lights rising from it at intervals like isolated rigs in a weed-choked sea.
He glanced back.
One of the bigger vans made an effective screen at the end of a line of the unmarked pool cars, meaning that he could look them over without being seen from the main building.
Two of them were locked, including the vehicle in which he'd spent most of the night cruising.
The third was locked as well, but the keys were in the tailpipe.
He sat in the driver's seat to get the feel for a few moments before he started it up.
A hell of a car.
Armrests, and everything.
When he switched on the ignition, he saw that the tank was more than three-quarters full.
After resetting the rearview mirror, he turned and looked through the back window toward the entrance to the compound.
There was a security booth at the gate and-a drop-down barrier, but when he'd arrived the booth had been empty and the barrier had been up.
That situation hadn't changed in the past hour.
His first move would be to find the airport's long-stay car  park and to switch the plates on his vehicle for those on one of the more recent arrivals.
That would give him a week's grace at least, and then he'd do the same thing again in some other place to stay untraceable.
He wasn't familiar with the model but he was sure that the car itself would be pretty unremarkable; police vehicles always were.
He reversed out of the parking space, and braked too hard.
He was used to heavier controls than this, but an hour's practice would make all the difference.
When he'd switched the plates he'd have to give some thought to ways of raising a little cash to live on.
He wouldn't need much he could sleep in the car-but he'd still have to eat and buy fuel.
There was no knowing how long this was going to take.
He drove out through the unattended gateway, and joined the morning traffic on the airport perimeter road.
He switched on the radio.
It was some music he'd never heard before, but he turned it up loud anyway and took a deep breath and settled back into his seat.
She could be anywhere now.
Alone, in company, under another name.
But he'd find her.
He was certain of it.
EIGHT
Down at the one-time pavilion that was now the Venetz sisters' lakeside restaurant, Angelica Venetz had decided that it was time for the big old mallard's appointment in duck heaven.
She'd watched him at his breakfast out by the terrace, and he could barely feed himself.
She'd wondered briefly about trying to pass the job along to Adele, but knew right away that it wouldn't work out; she was supposed to be the unsentimental one, after all, the hard business-head and the scourge of the tradesmen.
The two sisters were both in their fifties, both ex-nurses, neither ever married; they'd taken on the restaurant as a late-life decision when their father had died and left them a shared inheritance.
They'd hesitated for almost a year before they'd made the move, finally spurred along by the fact that they'd grown sick of talking about it.
The first two years had been the hardest — there was hardly a piece of equipment in the kitchen that didn't have a hospital properly stamp on it somewhere — but things had grown steadily better since.
You'll be doing him a favour, she'd thought, and so as he wandered past the kitchen on a mid-afternoon stroll she crept up behind him and grabbed him by the neck.
His name was Donald.
He squawked and he struggled, but she was stronger.
The road accident that had left him lame had also worn him down.
He fought and he flapped and made little gurgling noises, but Angelica hung on.
And realised that she wasn't quite sure what she was supposed to do next.
She was hurting Donald, but he wasn't actually dying …there was some knack to this, and she didn't have it.
So much for mercy killing.
Her grip began to slacken and he kicked a little harder, perhaps sensing a reprieve, and he managed to turn his head around so that he could look at her.
Why? his small beady eyes seemed to be saying,What did I do ?
‘You're holding it wrong,’ a younger woman's voice said.
Angelica looked up, feeling faintly ridiculous.
She hadn't planned for a witness, but it seemed that she had one; the woman was over on the iron steps, watching her across the restaurant deck.
Donald flapped and fought and struggled, damaged but not done for, and Angelica — not unaware of the absurdity of trying to maintain some kind of formality under such circumstances, said, ‘Can I help you?’
‘Perhaps I can help you,’ the young woman said, and she stepped forward onto the terrace planking.
‘You're holding it wrong.’
‘Have you done this kind of thing before?’
The woman gave a brief smile to show that it was no big deal.
‘I was raised on a farm,’ she said, and she took the duck from Angelica and efficiently flipped it upside down and twisted its neck.
The bird's flapping became as frantic as a wind-up toy's for a few seconds, but this quickly petered out and its body became limp.
She held it out to Angelica, and said, ‘For the kitchen?’
‘For the dustbin,’ Angelica corrected.
The lake birds appeared to be healthy enough, but they were always scrounging food from the tourists and picking over the debris that washed up on the lake shore.
A menu featuring Canard aux Parasites wouldn't be much of a crowd-puller for the coming season.
The woman handed her what was left of Donald, and Angelica said, ‘People feed them and they wander into the road…it's not surprising they get hurt.
I know it has to be done, but it seems I'm no good at it.
Would you care for a coffee?’
‘I brought no money with me,’ the woman said.
‘Restaurant's closed anyway.
This is on the house.’
The woman shrugged, smiled, inclined her head — a gesture of polite acceptance in the continental manner, none of the foot-shuffling embarrassment of the local stock at all.
Angelica loved the valley people — some of them, anyway but at times she could find them…well,basic more or less summarised the idea.
Had it not been for seasonal visitors, the list of locally popular dishes would have been depressingly brief; burned steaks, fried fish, and barbecued chicken.
Preferred background music; anything classical that could be recognised from TV.
Major fashion influence; the Kays catalogue.
This woman was clearly different.
Compared to some, she was almost a china doll.
She seemed dressed for colder weather, in several layers of woollens and a heavy shawl; dull colours, nothing gaudy, and her hair was pulled back and had been pinned in a clasp She followed as Angelica led the way toward the kitchen, careful not to hold the dead duck too close.
The main part of the building faced the lake, and the half-glassed partition of the western wall could be rolled back in decent weather to allow a dozen or more tables to be set in the open air, right out over the water.
As they were stepping inside, the visitor said, ‘This is a lovely place.’
Angelica, trying to place her accent but not managing it, said, ‘You should see it when the season gets going, it's madness.
Let me take a guess.
You're not on holiday.’
‘No.
I live here.’
‘Since when?
I'd better warn you, they've a bush telegraph around here that works faster than the speed of light.’
‘I haven't been here for very long.
I only just arrived.’
‘That would explain it,’ Angelica said, pushing open the  service door that led through into the kitchen.
‘So, what do you think of the valley?’
The visitor smiled.
‘I plan to stay,’ she said.
They were hit by the scents of baking and spices, the results of the afternoon's work put in by Adele Venetz.
Adele, the younger of the two sisters although some privately reckoned that she looked a little drawn-in and slightly older than Angelica, was wiping down the flour from the big kitchen table as they came through the door.
She fixed a baleful eye on Angelica, and said, ‘If ever they bring back hanging, I wouldn't advise you to apply for the job.’
‘You were watching?’
‘I was listening.
Couldn't help it, the racket you were making.
Thank God you got some expert help or we'd have been hearing duck screams in our nightmares forever.’
‘Just get a move on,’ Angelica said, ‘so we can use the table.
And say hello to one of our neighbours.’
She pulled out the kitchen trash hopper, a laundry-basket kind of affair on squeaky castors, and set Donald on his journey to duck heaven by dropping him into the grey plastic liner.
‘I'm Angelica, this is my sister Adele.
All this is our place.’
‘Ours, and the bank's,’ Adele put in.
‘My name's Alina Peterson,’ the young woman said.
Angelica switched on the Cona machine and Adele brought an extra chair.
They sat around one end of the work table, which now seemed vast and empty, and Alina Peterson explained how she'd walked down to the village to look around and, where it seemed appropriate, to introduce herself.
Angelica said that such a gesture would certainly catch the local people off-guard; a new policeman had been appointed to the area about two years before, and everybody still referred to him as ‘that newcomer’.
‘You don't think it's such a good idea?’
Alina said.
60 
‘Well,’ Angelica said, ‘I wouldn't want to discourage you.
But I wouldn't say it was necessary, either.’
The oven timer buzzed, and Adele moved over to attend to it; Alina dug around inside her layers and brought out what looked like a colour postcard.
‘Well, what do you think of this?’ she said, and slid it across for Angelica to see.
‘Is that a good idea, or is that not how they do things, either?’
Angelica took the card and looked at it.
The picture side featured some green-and-white palace, all columns and arched windows and with a couple of tourist buses parked off to the side.
She turned it over, and read the situation wanted ad that Alina had drafted on the back.
‘I didn't make it up,’ Alina said.
‘I copied it out, mostly.
I know they show cards like this in one of the stores, I saw it on the way over here.’
Angelica briefly held the card up so that her sister could see it.
She didn't have to say anything more.
Adele looked back over her shoulder, read it through, and then gave a brief shrug as if to say no objection .
Angelica laid the card down, and looked at their visitor.
She said, ‘Where are you living right now?’
‘On the headland to the north, the place I think they call the Step.
I've a temporary room in a house there.’
‘Anywhere near Pete McCarthy's place?’
‘Not too far from him,’ Alina said.
‘I'm not trying to pry, I'm only wondering how far you'd have to travel,’ Angelica explained.
‘You see, we usually take on a couple of girls locally for when the season picks up.
I don't think we've anything fixed yet.
Have you ever done restaurant work?’
‘You mean like a cook, or like a waitress?’
‘Waiting on, mostly, although you can get all sorts thrown at you.
Of course, it's not the kind of thing that everyone would want to get involved in…’
‘Try me for a week,’ Alina said.
‘Two weeks, I'll take no money.
You'll see how fast I can learn.’
61 
‘You want to be careful what you say,’ Angelica warned her.
‘You don't know how much we can throw.’
Alina stayed for about twenty minutes longer.
They talked mostly about Three Oaks Bay, its people, its peculiarities.
Angelica reckoned that she was a reasonable judge of people — one could hardly be a nurse for twenty years without picking up one hell of a lot of insight — and it hadn't taken her long to decide that Alina Peterson was either dead straight or very plausible.
Given that she'd nothing in particular to gain, the chances seemed to favour the first of these options.
She was bright and she was presentable, which meant that she already scored on two counts over the help that they'd hired last year.
Her clothes were neat enough but her shoes were a giveaway, so old and worn under their polish that they almost telegraphed her need; there was a story to be told here, Angelica thought, and Angelica was a sucker for an interesting story.
But Alina hardly talked about herself at all, not at this first meeting.
They talked about hours to be worked, they quickly fixed a rate.
She said that she was waiting for some of her belongings to be sent on, but she'd supply all her tax and National Insurance details as soon as they came.
She said that she could start whenever they needed her; tomorrow, if they wanted.
When they'd covered more or less everything and it was time for her to go, Angelica walked with her to the main door.
The empty restaurant lay in linen-and-silver silence behind them as she undid the bolts and opened up to the daylight.
Alina said, ‘What time should I be here?’
‘Say eleven.
It doesn't much matter what you wear during the day, but we'll find you something for the evenings.’
‘You mean a uniform?’
‘No, just something plain.’
As they moved out onto the entrance steps, they saw a breakdown wagon thundering by and raising up dust in the square.
Without warning, it suddenly let out a blast of the 62  first line of Dixie on a five-tone airhorn, so loud and so unexpected that it made Alina take a startled step back.
‘Ten to one that's young Wayne Hammond,’ Angelica said.
‘You'll probably get to meet him.
He's a regular.’
Alina looked out to where the wagon was already disappearing from sight; and she nodded, barely perceptibly.
‘I'll get to know them all,’ she said.
NINE
Even though he was still only sixteen, Wayne had been driving the yard's vehicles around the quiet back roads in the off-season for the past two years.
There was nothing unique in this; it wasn't uncommon in the lanes to find oneself stuck behind a slow-moving tractor with a twelve-year-old in the cab, using public highways to get from one piece of a farm to another.
Ross Aldridge, the ‘newcomer’ policeman, must have been pretty well-briefed by his predecessor, because he restricted himself to friendly off-the-record warnings when the practice occasionally became too obvious.
He couldn't really complain too much; not after the time that he'd run his patrol car into a ditch only three weeks into his new appointment, and the Middlemass girl (14) had turned up with a chain and towed him out.
Wayne was driving now as they left the last of the houses behind, following the lake shore for a while until the wooded hillside of the Step rose up and screened it from their sight.
Liston Hall was about a mile and a half further on, reached by its own private drive.
The gates to this were kept permanently locked but there was a less conspicuous entrance, hardly more than a mud road, amongst the trees a hundred yards along.
They pulled in onto a white gravel forecourt.
The place wasn't huge by country house standards — two storeys, twenty-something rooms — but its main entrance was a covered carriage porch with stone pillars and broad steps leading up to the doors.
The house wasn't run-down, either, but there were touches here and there betraying the fact 64  that it hadn't been lived in for a couple of years; the windows that weren't shuttered weren't clean, and there were weeds pushing up through the gravel.
‘Wayne,’ Pete said as he opened the wagon's door to get out.
‘You're already driving without a licence.
Don't you think that the Dixie horn's pushing it a bit?’
‘I know,’ Wayne said sadly.
‘The devil makes me do it.’
Pete walked over to the steps.
Seen from close-to, the columns were peeling; they were also heavily stained with pigeon crap.
It was hard to think of a place like this as somebody's home.
It looked more like a public building or a sanatorium.
This was mostly a matter of scale; Pete's feeling was that you couldn't own such a place, you could only be owned by it.
You could die or go bankrupt and the house would stay basically unchanged, still mouldering slowly and running up a ransom of a heating bill…unless you were so fabulously rich that you could afford not to give a shit, in which case all arguments foundered.
The latter category could hardly include Dizzy Liston; otherwise, why would he consent to selling off his toys to cover his expenses?
Pete found the bellpush, and pressed.
Nothing seemed to happen, so he pressed again.
Still no response.
He glanced over at Wayne, and Wayne pointed helpfully to the Dixie horn.
‘Do you want me to…?’ he said, leaving the offer hanging.
‘No,’ Pete said quickly.
‘No, thanks.
Wait here, I'll check around the back.’
There was a brick path down the side of the house, and he followed it.
There had to be somebody around, although from the state of the path he wouldn't have laid any bets on it being a gardener.
The path brought him out into the rest of the grounds.
This was obviously the side of the house that was meant to be considered as the frontage, with its six-foot windows 65  and its first-floor parapet and views over formal gardens.
It was, however, as lifeless as the forecourt area.
Well, at least the place had atmosphere.
It had something of the look of a decaying Italian palazzo , stone urns and all.
‘Anybody home?’
Pete called out, and then two things happened very close together.
Firstly, a couple of birds were scared up out of a nearby bush by his call; and secondly, there was a detonation so loud that he almost felt it as a physical shockwave.
The birds squawked and flapped, and the very top of the bush seemed to be flicked by an invisible hand which knocked a few shreds of leaf out into the air.
Pete didn't know whether to duck or run, and the choice was fairly academic anyway, as for the moment his body seemed to be about as responsive as a sack of rocks.
A woman with a shotgun stepped out onto the path some way ahead.
Diane Jackson, the woman he'd come to see.
‘Sorry about the bang,’ she called, much as someone might apologise for slamming a car door too loudly, and she started to walk towards him.
‘It's the bloody pigeons.
They've been driving me mad ever since I moved in, but as soon as I come out with a gun they all disappear.
See up there?’
She pointed.
‘Pigeon shit,’ she went on, without waiting for Pete to reply.
‘The roof's covered in it.
I was going to blast a couple and then string them up to scare the others.
Do you think that would work?’
‘It would with me,’ Pete said.
He was pretty sure that she hadn't recognised him.
Well, what could he expect…?
He'd been no more than another face around the yard on the two or three occasions that she'd been by, no reason that he should have made any lasting impression on her at all.
She'd been polite, and he'd been too quick to imagine that it might signify something more.
No big deal, it had happened in his life before; but suddenly he was intensely,intensely relieved that Wayne  had stayed in the van and couldn't see this.
And better he should get the hard lesson now, than later.
She breezed on by, presumably expecting him to follow; she was heading for a side-entrance to the house that was reached through an overgrown kitchen garden.
At the second attempt, he got himself moving.
His ears were still ringing from the gunshot.
On the evidence of her marksmanship so far, the safest place to shelter would probably be squarely before the target.
‘I tried the bell at the front,’ Pete said as they went in through a whitewashed scullery.
This led into a Victorian style kitchen with a tiled floor and copper skillets hanging in the middle of the room.
‘It doesn't work,’ Diane Jackson said.
‘Like most of the estate staff who were supposed to have been keeping the place straight.
I seem to be doing nothing but making lists of things that need fixing.’
She kicked something in the gloom, and stopped briefly to pick it up.
It was a Speak & spell .
‘Jed's,’ she explained.
‘He's going to be a litterbug when he grows up.’
There was more evidence of Jed's presence on the pin-up noticeboard alongside the kitchen door.
It was covered in paintings and crayon drawings, obviously by a child of preschool age.
The largest and most colourful of them showed a woman with a shotgun, blasting away at Red Indians.
Stopping to look was a mistake.
By the time that he'd stepped out of the kitchen and into the main hall, he'd lost her.
The hallway was of a fair size, high-ceilinged and with an oak stairway that led up to a gallery-style balcony.
The floor was of black and white marble tile, some of them cracked and none of them even.
The few pieces of furniture looked old, solid, and unprepossessing, the kind of stuff that Pete would have expected to see at the bargain end of a market-town auction.
The light, as soft and grey as evening 67  snow, came from an ornate wrought-iron skylight at the ceiling's centre.
Her voice led him to her.
‘I'm not a great shot,’ she was saying, ‘but I'm getting better.
There's an old clay range up in the woods, and I've been practising on that.
I'll turn myself into a countrywoman yet.’
She'd gone on into a book-lined room which appeared to be in use as an office, and she was placing the shotgun along with two others in a locking steel cabinet.
From the doorway, Pete watched her turn the key on it with a certain relief.
‘Now,’ she said, turning to him.
‘Shall we go upstairs and get this out of the way?’
‘Upstairs?’
Pete said.
Diane Jackson was already on her way past him, and heading for the wide stairway.
‘I am desperate ,’ she admitted.
‘It's getting so I can't even think, let alone sleep.
I've told Dizzy that I want the whole works, and I don't care what it costs him.’
‘What exactly were you expecting me to do?’
Pete said uncertainly.
She stopped on the third step, and looked back at Pete.
She looked good in the soft light, he was thinking, but then she had the kind of face that you didn't need to flatter.
She looked good in country clothes as well; in fact she looked pretty damned good all round, and right now it was the world's greatest pisser that he was no more than a rough-at-the-edges motor mechanic whose chances with her had to rate at somewhere close to zero.
There was a growing puzzlement in her expression.
She said, as if she was seeing the possibility of doubt for the very first time, ‘You arc the man from the pest control?’
‘No,’ he said, ‘I'm the man from the auto-marine.
I'm here to do an inventory on your cruiser.’
If she'd stung him before then he got his revenge now, and in spades.
Her mouth fell open, and she clapped a hand over it.
She went pale, and then coloured up red.
And when she could speak again, she said, ‘I thought you'd come about the pigeons!
Oh, God, what must you be thinking?’
He was tempted to tell her.
But he didn't.
Wayne's antennae went onto visible alert when he saw the two of them emerging from the Hall.
The ice not so much broken as dynamited and blown out of the water, they were both giggling like kids out of school.
Pete went over to the wagon, and as he was taking out the inventory clipboard he explained that they'd be going down to the boat house in Diane's pickup truck.
‘Big treat, Wayne,’ he added.
‘You get to ride in the back.’
‘Wow,’ Wayne said, obviously wishing that he could stay in the front and eavesdrop.
Her Toyota was a big red Hi-Lux with four-wheel drive, much easier for her to manage than the estate's lumbering ex-army Land Rover.
As they bumped down the narrow track from the house to the lake shore, Pete asked her exactly what her job entailed.
‘Basically it covers just the house and the immediate grounds,’ she said.
‘All the woodland's leased to the forestry people.
I want to get sorted and ticking by the time that Dizzy and his pals arrive.
Sometimes I feel as if I haven't even started.’
‘What's he like to work for?’
She looked at him, and half-smiled.
‘You want the truth, or the reputation?’
‘I already know the reputation.’
‘You, and everyone else around here.’
She returned her attention to the track, just as a couple of low branches took a swipe at the cab roof.
‘He's fine.
A bit self-centred, but nothing like most people seem to think.
It was my ex who got me fixed up with the job; Dizzy owed him, and he owed me maintenance for Jed, and I wanted to get away from town and get involved in something where I could start to 69  respect myself again…everything kind of fitted into place.
Balancing the books has been the toughest part.
The Estate income's pretty regular, but it can't handle big bills that all come in at once.
So if the furnace needs an overhaul and Dizzy wants to throw a party for the locals to improve his image, then Dizzy's Princess might just have to go.’
‘The party idea's for real, then?’
‘So he tells me.’
Most people in Three Oaks Bay were awaiting Dizzy Liston's return with mixed feelings; mainly apprehension, mixed with trepidation.
Rumours of a social evening at the Hall with the entire village being invited hadn't exactly dispelled all worry, since it was his summer parties that had made him so unpopular around the area in the first place.
Free booze for the locals was all very well, but what would happen when the famous charmer got too well-oiled and started to proposition all the schoolgirls?
But when Pete mentioned this — in rather more diplomatic terms — Diane said, ‘That's the point, he can't.
He can't drink for six whole months, that's why he has to get himself away from town and temptation and live out in the country.
Otherwise he's been told that he won't even be able to sell his liver for cat food.
It's perfect.’
And with that thought in mind, they reached the boat house.
TEN
The boat house resembled a small chapel built into the sloping land that led down to the water's edge, except that it was windowless and the bell in the tower no longer rang.
No lights came on when they tried the switch just inside the heavy oak door, but a minute's search with a flashlight found the main fusebox further in along the wall.
Throwing the contact-breaker caused the overhead lights to flare briefly, and a well-aimed thump on the side of the box made them come back up.
This time, they stayed on.
‘High tech,’ said Pete.
‘Another job for the list,’ Diane said gloomily.
They were standing on rough wooden boards.
These extended like a hayloft about one-third of the way into the building.
Beyond the rail, reached by a stairway so steep that it was almost a ladder, was the main lower level.
‘There it is,’ Diane said as they moved to the rail.
‘Just don't ask me anything technical about it, that's all.’
The lighting was from downward-angled spotlights on the roof grid that gave the place an odd, studio-like atmosphere.
Pete and Wayne looked down, and saw a sleeping princess.
It was actually a Princess 414, more than forty feet of white GRP hull with blue flashes and waterline markings.
It had been run nose-first into the boat house where it lay like a huge, sleek beast in an undersized pen, the deep V of the forward end tucked under the gallery on which the three of them were standing.
Pete held out the clipboard.
‘Do your stuff, Wayne,’ he said.
After a moment's blankness Wayne took the board, and the hint that came with it.
He slid down the stairway in one easy jump and hopped from the quay to the cruiser's deck, and within a minute he'd located the power switches and was down below, checking through the fittings.
Pete and Diane stayed at the rail.
Diane said, ‘What will happen after this?’
‘Well, we'll get a list of everything on board plus the age of the boat, condition, everything like that.
Then Ted can work out a market price and phone it through to you in a day or so.
If you like what you hear, we'll put it in the yard and advertise it and take a commission on the sale.
If you don't, there are other good yards you can try.
But Ted's okay.
He's dead straight.’
‘I know, t’ she said, ‘I've met him.
In fact, that's where I first saw you.’
‘You remember?
I was pretty sure you didn't.’
‘Mind on other things.
You'll have to forgive me.’
‘I'll think about it,’ he said.
Diane glanced at the cruiser, and lowered her voice in case Wayne should be able to hear.
‘Is that Ted Hammond's boy?’ she said.
‘His name's Wayne.
There's another one, an older boy called Shaun.
I never met him, he works abroad somewhere.
I don't think they ever got along.
Wayne's as good as you'll get, though.’
‘Didn't Ted's wife die young?’
‘You heard about that?’
‘Talk about gossip around here…you couldn't get the news faster with a satellite dish.
I heard stuff about you, too.’
‘Really?’
Pete said, suddenly getting extremely interested.
‘Like what?’
‘I'm not telling you,’ Diane said.
And then Wayne climbed out onto the cruiser's deck, and they let the subject drop, and Wayne was left standing there glancing from one to the other, damned sure that something  was going on here, and equally damned if he could tell what it was.
Pete gave another look over the Princess, and wondered what Ted would have thought of the berthing arrangements had he been here to see them.
It had been such a tight squeeze to get the Princess into the boat house at all, that someone had come up with the bright idea of removing the edge boards from the quay platforms on either side.
This had given a couple of extra feet of clearance, but it had also left the steel ends of the support joists exposed.
They'd been muffled with rags and pieces of tyre, but it was still a lash-up.
The Princess deserved better; a high-performance seagoing cruiser, it would be wasted on such a sedate stretch of inland water as the lake beyond the boat house doors.
But what could anyone expect?
Dizzy Liston had won the cruiser on a bet, or so the story went.
It was hardly going to be any great wrench to part with something that had been picked up so casually.
‘All okay?’
Pete called, and Wayne signalled that it was.
So Pete and Diane left the rail and stepped out of the boat house into the mild spring air to wait for him.
‘What are they saying about me?’ he said, but she stayed tight-lipped and shook her head.
Probably nothing, he was thinking, she's only winding me up, and the thought that she was gave him a pleasurable kick.
Wayne handed the clipboard to Pete, and then locked the boat house doors behind him.
Pete said, ‘Any problems?’
‘No, massah,’ Wayne said, and then he turned to Diane.
‘Will you want us to hang onto the keys?’
‘You may as well.
No one else ever comes here, and you'll need them before I will.’
‘Okay,’ Wayne said, and he stuck the bunch into his Jeans pocket.
The beeper alarm on Diane's watch sounded as they were driving back, the signal that it was time for her to go and  collect the litterbug Jed from his minder.
This meant a quick goodbye at the Hall, and an instant disappearance from Diane.
Pete stood with the clipboard under his arm and his hands in his pockets, watching the dust behind her Toyota as she sped off down the service road.
There was no longer any sign of her when, with Wayne once more behind the wheel, the breakdown wagon re-emerged into the outside world in Diane's wake.
Pete had arranged himself in the passenger seat so that he could get his feet up on the dashboard.
Wayne said nothing for a while, and Pete allowed his attention to wander down the inventory list; his eyebrows raised at the mention of a waterbed, a hi-fi system and a video hookup in the after stateroom.
None of these was Marine Projects standard, and he couldn't help wondering what kind of water sports the original owner might have gone in for.
Just before they got to the village, Wayne cracked his silence.
Pete had known that it was coming — the only question had been, when?
‘She actually fancies you,’ Wayne said, almost unable to believe it.
‘Of course she does,’ Pete said.
‘I'm a wonderful specimen of a man.’
Wayne glanced at him, less than one hundred per cent certain that he wasn't being sent up.
He said, ‘She's all right, as well .’
No response to this from Pete.
‘A bit old, though,’ Wayne ventured again, and Pete slowly turned to give him a stony look.
‘Just drive,’ he said.
ELEVEN
It was dusk when Pete finally made it back up the track to the old wooden cottage.
He switched on the Zodiac's headlights, for the shadows.
The damaged one was still working, although it was a little way out of alignment.
The rest of the afternoon had been more or less normal for the time of year except that Ted had been following Pete around for most of it, trying to pump him for details of what had happened between him and Diane Jackson.
He'd been exactly the same once before when he'd found out that Pete had seen Last Tango in Paris (‘Yeah, but what did they actually do ?’) and now, as then, Pete had taken care to fine-tune Ted's frustration to the point of obsession.
Finally, as Pete had been opening out the canvas deck cover on a relaunched Fairline Fury while Ted paced the dock alongside, he'd looked up at his employer and said, ‘You really want to know?’
‘I really want to know.’
So then Pete had told him, truthfully, word-for-word and without any embellishment; about the shotgun, and the pigeons, and the misunderstanding on the stairs.
And when he'd finished, Ted had stared at him for a moment in open disbelief.
‘Oh, piss off,’ he'd said finally, which was exactly the reaction that Pete had been expecting.
Now it was getting late.
He pulled in onto the rough ground before the house, switched off the engine, and got out.
Sometimes he remembered to lock the car behind him, sometimes he  THE BOAT HOUSE didn't, and sometimes he remembered but couldn't be bothered.
In all the time that he'd been living out on the Step Pete had seen only one stranger go by, and that was a hiker who'd stopped to ask the way because he'd been lost.
The Zodiac was no big attraction to a thief, anyway.
Most of the time he'd nothing more serious to worry about than squirrel shit on the seats if ever he left the windows open.
When he stepped up onto his porch, he saw that the front door was ajar.
The windows to either side had been thrown wide as well, and the ends of the tattered old curtains had blown out to hang over the sills.
It looked as if somebody had been giving the place a pretty thorough airing, and it wasn't too hard to guess who.
He went inside and the kitchen scents hit him then, laying down a trail that drew him across the creaking boards and down the hall.
He paused for long enough to throw his jacket onto one of the hallway hooks, and called out, ‘It's me.’
‘Through here,’ Alina called from the back of the house.
He went through.
The first thing that he noticed was that the lights were out and that she'd set up candles from his emergency supply in one of the kitchen cupboards.
They were on the dusty painted dresser, on the shelves, and on a tin tray before a freckled old mirror that had been hanging in the bathroom.
The big pine table in the middle of the floor had been set for dinner, and on it stood a bottle of cheap wine from the village store.
Pete picked it up, looked at the label, and then set it down again; and as he was doing this, Alina appeared in the doorway.
Her eyes shone in the warm tallow light.
Pete felt a stirring of apprehension then, rising like a deepwater fish to the sunlight; and although he tried not to let it show, Alina seemed to perceive it.
‘Wait,’ she said, moving into the room.
‘Wait, I know what you're thinking.’
‘I'm not thinking anything.’
She stood before him, looking up into his eyes.
‘Yes, you are,’ she said.
‘Look, I'm not about to invade your life.
But I like this place, Peter, I like this valley.
Today I got a job.
‘What kind of a job?’
‘A waitress job.’
She gestured at the table.
‘So, don't get the wrong idea about all this…tonight I get to practise on you, so tomorrow I don't look so stupid.’
‘A waitress job?’
Pete said.
Was this girl a fast operator, or what?
She saw his expression, and grinned.
‘I know,’ she said, ‘I'm shameless.
You wouldn't believe what I had to do to get an introduction to the sisters.
But now I'll meet more people, I'll begin to feel at home.
And then as soon as I can find somewhere else, I'll move out and leave you alone.
I'm nobody's charity case, and I won't be a burden to you.
You've been good to me, Peter, I wouldn't want to see you hurt by having me around.’
‘Really, it's all right,’ Pete protested.
But there was a sadness in Alina's eyes now, unlike anything that he'd seen there before; a sadness not for what had been, but for what could never be.
‘No,’ she said.
‘It isn't all right.’
And then she turned away, and went over to check on the stove.
She was, almost without exception, the worst cook that Pete had ever come across.
Worse even than Ted Hammond, who'd once closed the yard for three days with the after-effects of a home-made chili.
This meal was a haphazard trawl of the village store's shelves, an unappealing source of supply at the best of times; Pete realised with a sinking feeling that he'd no choice other than to put his head down and plough on through like a pig at the trough.
Alina seemed to think that everything was fine.
The alphabet pasta, that floated in a sauce of overthickened packet soup.
The frozen peas, that she'd fried.
The…
Oh, God, he didn't even want to think about it.
Fortunately, the conversation was better.
There seemed to be a sense of ease in their company that hadn't existed the night before, and she opened up a little on her background.
She'd been a schoolteacher once, she told him.
She'd lived in Leningrad for ten years but she'd had no work for the last two of them.
Her father was dead but her mother was still alive, and had managed to hang onto the old apartment where she now used the extra space to accommodate short-stay workers who needed a bed in the city.
As soon as she could, Alina planned to write to her.
He asked her about the place so much like the valley, the place where she'd been born.
She said, ‘They moved everyone.
Nobody lives there now.’
It was weird.
They could speak the same language, but there was almost nothing else in their past that they'd shared.
She'd read Shakespeare, Pete hadn't; not unless you counted Julius Caesar at school, which he'd managed to get through with a lot of patience and a set of Coles' Notes.
Alina, on the other hand, had never even heard of James Herbert.
One thing that he noticed; every now and again she'd glance at the uncurtained window, as if she was checking the progress of the oncoming darkness.
Perhaps she was edgy about something, Pete wondered; but if she was, she kept it well-concealed.
Finally, the conversation came back around to the subject of Alina's new job.
She told him that as soon as she had some money she wanted to buy some decent clothes, the kind that she could wear to her work in the evenings.
Pete, thinking of the Venetz sisters' reputation for efficiency and attention to detail, asked her if she'd hit any problems over having no social security records or documentation; she currently had the status of an illegal immigrant, after all, and had even dumped her hot French passport as she'd walked out of the 78  air terminal.
Alina said, no, no problems…and then amended this to well, not yet.
Pete suggested that in a few days' time he could take her out to the nearest big town on the coast, and there she could look for clothes in the department stores and check out the library for the addresses of any useful organisations or people to contact.
The sooner she made a move to get some kind of official recognition, the better.
She said that this sounded fine.
But he wondered if he'd convinced her.
‘That is what you want?’ he said.
‘Of course.’
Pete was now beginning to wonder if she was feeling ill; it was almost as if , for the latter part of the evening, she'd only been keeping up a show of enjoying herself and now the strain of the charade was getting through to her.
Or maybe it was the food.
That wouldn't have surprised him at all.
He asked her if she was all right and she said, ‘I'm fine,’ but it was with a weak smile and her eyes barely focusing on him.
‘I think I'm just tired.’
And then she glanced at the window; the darkness outside was complete.
‘You go on,’ Pete said.
‘I'll clear away.’
But Alina got to her feet, causing the candles immediately around her to dip as if in sudden fear.
Some of them had burned low, and didn't recover.
‘No,’ she said.
‘I think I'll take a walk.’
‘But it's late.’
‘I know.
But I like to walk at night.
It helps me to think.
Don't worry, I lived in the country before, I know what I'm doing.’
‘At least take a torch.’
‘There's a moon.
That's all I'll need.
Don't wait for me.’
The moon was hardly more than a pale sliver, and surely not enough to see by.
Pete stood on the porch and tried to make Alina out as she climbed the path toward the highest part of the headland.
From there she'd be able to go down  to the lakeside if she chose, or else pick up one of the shore paths that would take her further into the valley.
It bothered him to let her go like this, but she'd insisted; for a while he couldn't see her at all, until she reached the skyline and stopped for a moment.
The silence of the valley was like the stillness that sometimes follows a hard rain.
Somewhere far off a dog barked, one small sound in a vast and empty theatre.
Alina kicked off her shoes and then went on, descending from sight.
TWELVE
Sometimes it was hard for Gazzer to believe how stupid some people could be.
Take this one, for example; walking along the canal towpath at this late hour of the night, as if it was the park on a pleasant Sunday afternoon and life held no dangers for him at all .
The canal route was dark and it was deep and it was a secret vein that ran through the heart of the city, and only the scum dropped down here after hours and expected to survive.
Up at street level, on the other side of a high wall, the town centre traffic moved and the neon club lights flickered and police vans stood on street corners waiting for trouble to start.
But even the police didn't come down here.
Only tramps and serious drunks, and occasionally Toms seeking out shadows in which to do business when the client didn't have a car, and people like Gazzer who didn't give a shit.
Gazzer was twenty-two years old and had been compared in looks to a pit bull, entirely to the dog's advantage.
He wore a T-shirt regardless of the season of the year and kept his hair cropped short enough to reveal the half-dozen tiny scars on his head where the stubble wouldn't grow.
Gazzer had been seriously disappointed in love on this night.
His mates had all scored and he inexplicably hadn't, in spite of the money he'd blown on all those lime-green cocktails for the bleached slag in the dress with all the red spangles.
It was clear that she'd been taking him for a ride, in that there was no ride in it for him at the end of the process.
When the evening had ended  she'd disappeared into the pub toilet and from there she'd disappeared, full stop.
Gazzer was not only pissed off, he was seriously out of pocket.
He didn't mind spending the money if it brought a result, but something like this put the whole world out of balance.
Never one to wallow in self-pity, he'd started by mugging a couple of Indian kids in bright shirts behind the bus station and then he'd followed a Yuppie type from his bank's Cashcard machine to the stairway of a multi-storey car park, where they'd had some dealings involving a Rolex and all the wad in the Yuppie's wallet.
After that he'd come down and hopped through a hole in the fence where the canal ran alongside some waste ground, and now he was staying off the streets as he made his way across town and toward home ground.
The Indian kids wouldn't matter, but the Yuppie type might get half an hour in the back of a police car checking the pavements and the pub car parks for some sign of his attacker.
Now this.
A bonus.
An innocent who'd somehow wandered down into the rat run, just asking to get bitten.
Gazzer only had to stand in the middle of the towpath and wait as the man approached him.
There was nowhere else for the man to go other than back, or into the canal itself.
There were yellow sodium lights down here, but most of them had been broken by kids throwing stones.
Odd survivors burned like overhead beacons; there was one under the bridge just ahead, and another one about a hundred yards beyond.
They showed the narrow dirt towpath, the black water, the broken windows of empty warehouses…
And the silhouette of the stranger, still walking toward him.
Gazzer flexed his fingers.
They cracked like static.
The stranger stopped.
‘I'd like to pass, please,’ he said, and Gazzer's heart soared.
A foreigner.
He need have no trace of conscience at all.
‘Only when I get your money and your watch, fuckface,’ he said.
‘I need money myself,’ the stranger said pleasantly.
‘May I see your knife?’
‘I don't need a knife,’ Gazzer said, and he took a step forward to close the gap between them.
Something went wrong.
Gazzer aimed his headbutt, and the stranger moved; he tilted his own head and Gazzer's brains exploded.
That was what it felt like, anyway.
Gazzer's legs went and he sat down heavily in the dirt, his nose smashed and his eyes full of tears.
The stranger stood over him.
He was rubbing the top of his skull just at the hairline, but seemed otherwise unaffected.
Gazzer started to rise.
But the stranger reached down and took hold of his nose.
‘I wouldn't,’ he said, as he twisted the broken cartilage and Gazzer's brains went nuclear.
His arms flapped in panic, and he screamed.
The scream echoed in the depths of the brick canyon.
‘The bone can work its way in, you see,’ the stranger explained as he knelt and checked Gazzer's pockets with his free hand.
Gazzer felt the roll of notes being removed from his jeans, but only as some distant background sensation.
He reached for the stranger, but the stranger gave his nose another warning tug.
He screamed again.
‘I've been down here half the night, waiting for someone like you,’ the stranger said.
‘You can keep your watch, I already have one of my own.
But I really do need the money.’
Gazzer blinked away the tears, and looked into the stranger's face.
He was fair, he was young, he was nothing special; but with rare insight, Gazzer saw beyond all of that.
He knew that this was no accidental encounter.
He knew that he'd fallen for bait like a fool.
And he knew with  certainty that the stranger would be capable of doing anything that he threatened.
Anything.
The man released his nose, and straightened.
‘Thank you,’ he said pleasantly.
Gazzer coughed, and spat blood in a terrifying wad.
But the stranger had already turned and walked off into the night, back along the towpath in the direction from which he'd come.
THIRTEEN
Angelica Venetz stands at the rail of the restaurant's terrace.
She's watching Walter Hardy — seventy years old, and still the Bay's most reliable handyman — as he moves out with waders and a boathook to take a look under the terrace's decking.
Walter is small, thickset, and white-whiskered; he does everything with patient slowness and, once started, he's impossible to stop.
‘Is there a problem?’ a voice from behind Angelica says, and she turns in surprise.
She hasn't heard Alina walking across the terrace, and hasn't even been expecting her for another half-hour.
Alina stands there, her hands in her overcoat pockets, hair tied back and ready for business.
She's been with them now for just over a month, and Angelica has never known a worker like her.
‘You can bet there's a problem,’ she says.
‘Something's stuck under the terrace, and it's drawing the flies.’
‘What is it?’
‘That's what we're going to find out.’
Walter, down below them and with the waters getting perilously close to the tops of his waders, says, ‘Something's rotten under here.
You been burying the people you've poisoned?’
‘Go on, Walter,’ Angelica says.
‘You know perfectly well we put them in the curry.’
‘Buryin' 'em at sea,’ Walter persists, and he lifts the boathook and starts to stir around in the darkness beyond the terrace's supporting pillars.
The boathook is usually kept on the wall behind the bar.
It's a relic from the building's yacht pavilion days, and was originally used for hauling drunks out of the water.
Now it catches on something, and Walter's round face tightens with the effort of pulling it free.
’ Something there,’he says, and he plunges the hook in again, this time with the intention of getting a secure hold so that he can heave out whatever it is into sight.
If he can't, Angelica's thinking, it's probably going to mean the expense of having a part of the terrace decking taken up and relaid.
Alina leans on the rail beside Angelica, both of them looking down at Walter as he makes another thrust into the darkness beneath them.
Angelica's thinking that a bag of garbage has probably been carried along on the night swell and has become caught up amongst the pillars and the metal cross-tics; there will always be somebody who'll think that a couple of heavy stones and a drop out over the deepest part of the lake are an adequate way of disposing of all their empty cans and peelings and plate-scrapings.
Now the gulls are starting to circle, taking a big interest.
Definitely a bag of garbage, Angelica is thinking.
Walter's managed to get the hold that he needs, but now he's tugging and nothing's happening.
He calmly changes his grip, and tries again.
‘Come on, Walter,’ Angelica says.
‘Put me back in business.’
She wouldn't have believed that he could move so fast as, with a rushing like that of fluid from a punctured sac, the rotten body comes slithering out in a wave of its own juices.
The boathook is planted deep in its belly, a grotesque fifth limb that rears up into the air as it turns over.
Not a bag of garbage, then.
Not unless you're really prepared to stretch the definition.
Finding it difficult to believe how controlled she's being, Angelica says, ‘Alina, the police constable's car is just across the square.
Can you go and get him for me?’
But there's no reply.
Alina is no longer on the terrace.
FOURTEEN
The dead dog under the restaurant deck was to be a talking-point for a couple of days, and then interest would shift elsewhere.
Walter Hardy used the boathook to push it into the shallows, and then went off to borrow a small motor cruiser so that he'd be able to tow the carcase out to one of the marshy islands further down the lake.
Here it could be wedged among the reeds, and would eventually be picked clean.
For now the dog lay there, skinless like a rabbit and bloated with decay, awaiting his return.
Angelica tried to avoid looking at it, but like the village children who gathered on the bank she found herself almost fascinated.
Apart from some of its bones showing, it could have been some alien kind of embryo.
‘It was probably hit on the road and then somebody threw it into the lake,’ Ross Aldridge, the young constable, told her.
He was fair and quite softly-spoken and actually a little shy-looking, and he'd made a point of taking off his uniform cap when he talked to her.
‘Or else it just died of old age and the owners dumped it.
I'll mark it down as a stray.’
‘So,’ Angelica said, ‘nobody's lost a dog around here?’
‘If they have, they didn't report it.
Without a collar, that's as far as we can go.’
Needless to say, the boathook didn't go back to its place on the restaurant's wall.
The planking was washed down with Jeyes fluid, and the deck was reopened to take advantage of the increasingly fine weather.
And towards the end of that week, Pete walked over from the yard to see for himself how Alina was doing.
Alina was serving morning coffee on the terrace.
She was wearing what appeared to be a borrowed jacket in place of her own heavy overcoat and shawl, something light enough to allow her to carry on even though the sun might go behind a cloud every now and again.
Down at the far end of the valley, there was still snow on the upper slopes of the mountains; they looked as if they'd been sugar-dusted, with stone walls showing like fine, black veins above the treeline.
Against this backdrop, the small Russian girl stood out on her open-air stage and put all of her concentration into learning the role of a waitress.
Right now, she was clearing an empty table.
From where she was standing, she wouldn't see him.
She was backlit by the late morning sun, the diamond greys and blues of the lake and mountains behind her.
She was beautiful, serene, a vision by a Dutch master — and, by the terms of their agreement, completely out of his reach.
The thought disturbed him.
He'd nothing to say to her; he didn't even plan to tell her that he'd been to see her.
So why, exactly, he now found himself wondering, had he come out to look at her like this?
Nothing came.
He had no ready answer.
And so, feeling faintly and inexplicably troubled, he turned to head back to the yard.
FIFTEEN
‘So where does she go every night?’
Wayne said as the two of them sat in the empty hull of a partly-restored cruiser on the Saturday morning, but Pete could only shrug.
Wayne knew about Alina.
Pete's guess was that everybody in the valley knew something about her by now, and nearly all of them would know that she was staying in his house.
Nobody apart from Wayne had mentioned it to him, though, which probably meant that while their mouths were shut their minds would be running in overdrive.
Well, they'd had a few weeks of mystery, of secrets kept and of wrong conclusions avoided.
His hope had been that she might have moved on before the word got around, no chance for gossip and so no awkwardness, but his sense of firm control in that area seemed to have slipped away from him.
It wasn't that he minded her presence; and he didn't mind her company, on those occasions when he actually spent time with her.
He simply wished that he didn't have to contend with the unspoken supposition that the two of them were hiding up there on the Step and banging away like a couple of baboons, which he saw in the eyes of more than one person who wished him good morning when he went into town to pick up his mail.
The truth of it was that he was even less certain of her now than he'd been at the beginning; how she thought, the way she might react as the world around her changed.
It seemed to be something beyond language, beyond culture; it was a more profound sense of the alien, of their lives as  separate rivers with uncrossable ground in between.
He could hardly begin to imagine what it must be like for her — everything severed, no turning back, the entire texture of her life abandoned for the deep terror of the new.
Little wonder that her scrapbook of photographs appeared to be her dearest possession, or that she prowled the landscape at night like an unquiet spirit.
Two evenings back Pete had found his front door open to the darkness, and the porch light on; rain had been falling outside in a continuous silver curtain and in the sheltered area at the top of the steps, Alina's shoes had lain discarded.
If there had been a moon that night, the clouds had been keeping it hidden.
‘I don't know for sure where she goes,’ he admitted to Wayne.
‘I don't even know when she sleeps.’
‘And she's going to the big party on Saturday’
‘So she says.
You bringing Sandy?’
‘If it works out.’
Wayne made his ‘desolate-andmisunderstood’ face.
‘Her mother's having another Wayne-hating week.’
And then he glanced at Pete.
‘Nothing compared to your problems, though, is it?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, two women on a string, and at your age.’
‘I haven't got anybody on a string.
Alina's just a guest in the house, she's not a personal masseuse.’
And Diane Jackson?
Well, Pete decided to say nothing on that subject.
Back at the village post office he'd sorted out the usual junk mail which never made it past the door of the shop and found that he was left with one real, honest-to-God letter.
He'd opened the envelope and a piece of white card had slid out.
It was a formal invitation for the big party at the Hall; not a specially-printed card, but the kind sold over the stationery counter with spaces for the date and the names to be handwritten in.
This one was a joint invitation; alongside Pete's name was that of Alina Peterson, the Russian girl's newly-adopted identity.
The handwriting, he could only assume, was that of Diane Jackson.
Damn , he'd thought.
Diane always tried to keep her weekends for spending with Jed, but because of the rain they had to spend the early part of the day in their own below-stairs lounge, watching the Saturday morning cartoons on television.
She'd hoped to be able to take him out, perhaps for a longish walk through the forest where they could hope for a glimpse of a deer, but at its heaviest the downpour would have called for wetsuits rather than waterproofs.
And he seemed happy enough.
Jed was coming up to five years old, very bright but also very quiet…so quiet that she worried sometimes, wondering if there were things wrong that he wasn't telling her.
He was small for his age, dark, large-eyed — in fact he seemed to be all Diane and almost nothing of his father.
About twice a day, she'd ask herself whether this move had been right for him.
Jed had watched his parents' marriage break up and had never said a word; he was hardly likely to start making his feelings known now.
So she watched him closely, and she tried to read the signs, and when he seemed to be wanting something special she did her best to see that he got it.
Jed's idea of doing something special was to be allowed to help her out on the estate, almost as if he was afraid that he'd find himself abandoned if he didn't make himself useful.
Diane told herself that this was just a kind of paranoia on her part, an over-apprehension that came from reading too many doctor articles in women's magazines, but it didn't make her any less uneasy.
But what could she expect?
She'd taken him from the town and the friends that he knew and she'd brought him to this great, dusty mausoleum of a place where he didn't even like to run around because the echo of his footsteps sounded too much like someone faceless who was following  too close.
He spent two-thirds of his day at a school ten miles away, and the rest of the afternoon looking through the older children's comics at Mrs Neary's until Diane picked him up at five.
Aimless and with no company, what kind of a life was that?
Too much like her own, she was beginning to suspect.
By negotiation when the rain had stopped, the proposed deer-spotting walk became a combined walk and trap shoot.
Jed liked to pull the lever which fired the clays into the air while Diane would blast away and try to improve her shooting.
It took him both hands and all his weight, but at least it was exercise.
They loaded the launcher and a box of black clays into the back of the Toyota, and drove up an old gated track to the little-used range.
The range was a clearing in the forest with some open sky beyond, along with a couple of huts and an open frame for the would-be marksman to stand.
They brought out the launcher and fastened it to its base, and Diane spread out some plastic sheet for Jed and weighted it with the box of clays.
She'd wrapped him up so well against the weather that he could hardly be seen in the middle of all his clothing.
Around them was the silence of the dense conifer wood, a moment of stillness held forever in time while the rest of the world moved on outside.
Jed did everything by the book, sounding the warning horn before every pull and staying well clear of Diane and the gun.
The launched clays zipped across the window of sky, and Diane followed each with a two-foot lead before squeezing the trigger.
And then, if everything ran true to form, the undamaged clays would sail down to a landing somewhere out of sight.
Diane scored five hits out of twenty, which was the limit that she'd set herself because of the cost of the cartridges.
Afterwards they went scouting for clays that could be re-used; some cracked on landing, but others had come down whole.
Diane carried the box, and Jed filled it.
The  trees around them stood tall and straight, like a phantom army.
The ground sloped, strewn with fine moss and bark so soft and spongy that their footprints took minutes to disappear.
The earth had been churned up black where forestry vehicles had passed through during the week, and there were cut and trimmed logs waiting for collection alongside the track.
‘It's raining again,’ Jed said, looking up at the sky.
‘Must be coming our way,’ Diane said.
‘We'd better hurry.’
The rain put an end to their chances of a walk — not that they'd have been likely to spot a deer anyway, after the noise made by the horn and the gun.
They drove back to the Hall, and Diane grilled a beefburger for Jed and put it on a bun.
He insisted on tackling it with a knife and fork.
Diane sat on the opposite side of the refectory table, watching him, chin in hand, as someone with nothing better to do might watch somebody mending a clock.
‘You might as well pick it up,’ Diane said at last.
‘You're getting it everywhere.’
‘No,’ Jed said, with some determination as he attacked the bun from the other side.
‘It's allowed, picking a beefburger up.’
‘No.’
There was silence for a while as Jed ploughed on.
And then Diane said, ‘So how's the school?’
‘All right.’
‘Only all right?’
‘The games are all strange.
Everybody keeps touching everybody.’
He made a yuck-face, and then carried on.
Diane gave a slight, wry smile, and looked at the rain on the window.
It was still raining steadily when she'd put him to bed, after a last half-hour of television and a couple of chapters of Stig of the Dump .
She stood at the beaded glass and looked out into the gathering darkness.
And, without really meaning to, she found herself wondering what Pete McCarthy might be doing.
Probably having big fun with that Russian waitress.
Damn , she thought.
SIXTEEN
He was in the bathroom that night when he heard her go.
He was waiting for a couple of soluble aspirin to break up in a glass of water as he stood before the opened mirror-cabinet.
He looked up sharply at the sound of the door — Again? he thought disbelievingly, and he winced as the movement aggravated the mild headache that he'd brought home with him.
He listened for a while, and the silence of the house told him yes, again.
Still carrying the glass, he went out into the hallway.
This time she'd closed the door behind her.
He opened it, and looked out.
She'd gone.
Tonight there was a moon, starlight even, and he knew that after a few minutes away from the house it would be possible for her to see with surprising clarity; but moon or no moon, it seemed to make little difference to her and she'd been spending hours abroad at even the deepest, darkest point in the cycle.
This was the part that troubled him, that he found difficult to understand.
He could remember how, after moving out here and having been a city-dweller all of his life, he'd come to realise that he'd never known what true darkness was; even away from houses and street lighting there had always been a faint, reflected amber cast to the sky, but here there was nothing.
He could remember the first time that he'd stepped outside into country darkness and closed the door behind him; it was as if he'd been struck blind with the click of the latch, and he'd begun to panic at his inability even to tell which way was up.
Alina said she'd been raised in the country.
Maybe that was it, you grew up with a knack that you otherwise couldn't acquire, like the owls and the bats and the creatures of the lake.
She had it, he didn't.
Could it be that what he was feeling was a kind of envy, in the sense that he'd brought her here, to a place that he felt he'd made his own, and in a matter of weeks she'd already grown closer to it than he could ever hope to be?
No, he tried to tell himself, that wasn't it; nothing so mean, nothing so unreasonable.
Even though he was looking forward to the day when she moved on, he was already beginning to sense that her leaving would be something of a wrench.
As they'd agreed, there was nothing between them…but he knew that he'd miss her.
Without even realising that he'd moved, he found himself standing by the door to her room.
He put his hand on the handle.
Hesitated a while longer.
Took a sip of the aspirin.
And then, with a guilty look over his shoulder, he opened her door and stepped inside.
She kept the room neat, her bed made and her workclothes carefully preserved on a hanger on the front of the wardrobe.
Her party dress was alongside, bagged in polythene to protect it from dust.
Over on the dressing-table, one of her notebooks lay alongside the photograph album.
He went across to it, still thinking that it wasn't too late to back out and close the door behind him and pretend that he'd never even been in here.
But instead, he opened the book of photographs.
The pictures were strange.
Not all of them, but some.
A number were of the same place, some old village with nobody in it, the first a shot down a dusty road and the rest of individual buildings or, in some cases, of open fields enclosed by split-rail fencing.
The houses were all of dilapidated wood, with the tallest building a spired church right in the middle of everything.
Fir trees grew in amongst the  roofs, and weeds and flowers grew everywhere else.
The village stood next to a lake.
A fast flick through some of the other pages showed images of a more easily recognisable kind — strange faces, old friends, scenes from a life.
He closed the album carefully, making sure that none of the loosened pages could fall out and give him away.
Then, quietly, he left the room.
SEVENTEEN
It was midway through a Friday afternoon, and Adele Venetz had taken the restaurant's van to the cash-and-carry for all the last-minute supplies they'd be needing for Saturday's party catering job, leaving her sister and Alina to manage the business alone.
It was quite a drive and quite a list for when she got there, so she was unlikely to be back before the early evening; but this was no great problem, because they'd soon be closing the doors so that they could make a start on the next day's preparations.
It had been a quiet afternoon so far, and it showed no signs of picking up.
A few day-trippers and walkers had stopped by, but almost no locals at all.
When the outside deck stood empty and all the tables had been cleared and reset and there still wasn't a prospect of any trade in sight, Angelica said to Alina, ‘Come on, let's take a break,’ and they headed into the kitchen.
Alina mostly took her breaks alone; she'd sit in a corner with a magazine, usually one of Adele's old wildlife partworks, and be about as obtrusive as a church mouse until her time was over.
At which point she'd stand, lay the magazine aside, and get straight back to business.
When they did converse, she said little and mostly listened; it had only recently struck Angelica that she knew almost nothing more about Alina now than she had at the end of that first day.
And, as for the reason why it had struck her…
‘I had to make a guess this morning,’ she told Alina, glancing back over her shoulder from the Cona machine as  she waited for the water to run down through the filter.
‘I hope I guessed right.’
‘What do you mean?’
Alina said, warily.
She'd moved over by the window and had been reaching for a chair, but now she stopped.
She wasn't sure where Angelica was leading, and so Angelica went straight to it.
‘Whenever we employ somebody, there are formalities we have to go through.
Tax.
National Insurance.
It can get complicated.’
‘I'm sure it can.’
‘Especially,’ Angelica said, ‘when you're trying to make out a form for somebody whom you know won't appear anywhere in the records.’
She glanced over her shoulder again.
Slowly, Alina closed her eyes.
Her face was as blank as a porcelain mask.
She lowered her head, as if to look at the floor.
Angelica went on, ‘I'm right, aren't l?’
Alina nodded.
‘Want to tell me about it?’
‘Sing for my supper,’ Alina said with a kind of bitter weariness that ran completely against Angelica's perception of her character.
It stung her to a sharp reply.
‘Nothing of the kind,’ she said, the coffee forgotten as she turned to face her.
‘It's just possible that I may be able to help you.’
Still guarded, as if the real centre of her personality stood behind glass and in silence, Alina said, ‘What do you want to know?’
‘You might start by trusting me.
I think I've earned it.
Begin at the beginning.’
Alina looked at her for a while.
It was as if she was deciding.
And then she shrugged.
What had she got to lose, she seemed to be saying, now that it had come to this?
She folded her arms, and leaned back to rest against the work surface behind her.
‘I was never a waitress before I  came here,’ she said.
Her gaze was level, a challenge to disbelief.
‘I've told you that already.’
‘I know, you've learned fast.
What were you before?’
‘I was a schoolteacher.
This was at the language school in Leningrad, with all the lessons in English.
It was a good job, a very good job, but I lost it.’
‘How?’
‘I never knew.
It was one of those mad things where you don't know if you've done something wrong and no one will ever tell you.
What happened was, one of my students wrote something in an examination essay and it got me fired.
I never found out what.
I never got a chance to defend myself and I wouldn't have known the right thing to say if I had.
I couldn't get another job.
After a while I started to get official letters threatening to send me to prison if I didn't find work.
I lost my flat, and I had to move in with friends.
I was living off my car savings for a while, but then they ran out.
For a while I was sleeping on a floor…
I'd never had to live like that before.
I finally got one job offer, but when I turned up to work I found that it had been a mistake.
I'm pretty sure that someone had called them.’
This was worse than anything Angelica had expected.
She said, ‘Is that why you decided to get out?’
‘That, and other reasons.’
Alina looked down.
‘I'd had some old trouble.
They were threatening to bring that up, too.
I couldn't face it.
So I decided to leave.
But the first try was a shambles, and I was caught.’
‘They took you back?’
‘Worse.
I was examined by three doctors and declared insane.
They did that kind of thing, back then.
They put me in the prison hospital.
I was there for nearly six months and by the end of the first week, I wanted to die.
Sometimes I thought I was going to; sometimes I was even more scared at the thought that I wouldn't.
They interfered with me there.
I don't even like to think about it.’
Angelica now knew why Alina had disappeared from the terrace so promptly on the day that Walter Hardy had  hooked out the dead dog.
It wasn't the sight of the dog itself that had driven her indoors, but the certainty that the police would soon be arriving.
Seeing that Alina was upset by the memory, she said, ‘You don't have to go on,’ but now Alina was determined to be heard.
‘Now you know I've no right to be here,’ she said, ‘I want you to know what's waiting for me if ever I get taken back.
I only got out of the hospital because of an old unclosed file, and a doctor from the outside who took an interest in my case.
They didn't officially let me out-I escaped.
Otherwise, I'd still be there.
And that's the reason why they want to get me back.’
‘And how did you reach England?’
‘By using somebody,’ she said, and her voice sounded hollow with guilt.
Angelica, the coffee now standing cold and forgotten in the jug beside her, said, ‘Go to the authorities, Alina.
They wouldn't send you home, not with a story like that.’
‘You can guarantee it?’
If Alina was looking cynical, Angelica could only suppose that it was because she'd earned the right to be.
‘I don't think that you can.
According to the record, I'm a criminal and wherever I am, I'm there illegally.
If the authorities get hold of me, it won't matter what I say — I'll be returned, and then I'll be lost.’
‘But you can't just hide forever.’
‘I have plans.
Please don't worry about me.
I don't intend to leave this valley.’
There was a determination in her eyes now that was almost frightening; how little Angelica had understood, she now realised, reading only the surface and never suspecting that any of this lay beneath.
Alina added by way of explanation, ‘Everyone needs to belong somewhere.
And this is the place that I've chosen.’
‘Well,’ Angelica said, ‘I want you to remember that you've got friends here.
If you should need any help…’
‘When the day comes, I'll ask,’ Alina said.
And then she glanced out of the main kitchen window, the one that  had a partial view of the terrace; Angelica looked as well, and saw that they had a few customers arriving and looking around uncertainly at the unstaffed deck.
Alina said, ‘Do I still have a job?’
‘Of course you do.’
Angelica had already decided that her money could be taken out of the petty cash and then lost in the books somewhere…and if ever they should be caught doing it, she didn't feel that it was a crime she'd be ashamed of.
Alina smiled, with some confidence but also a lot of apprehension still, and she moved around the table toward the door.
She took her notepad from the pocket of her apron as she went, and at the doorway she stopped for a moment as if to gather herself.
She took a breath and, in the space of a couple of seconds, seemed to re-invent the waitress from the refugee.
It was a faintly unsettling transformation for Angelica to witness, an unasked-for revelation of a totally private process.
One shell was discarded and a new one immediately hardened into its place, but for the brief instant in between there was a glimpse…of what?
Angelica couldn't have said.
She reckoned that she could only take on board a limited number of surprises in any given period, and her quota for the year had just been reached.
She already had plenty to think about.
Alina, meanwhile, went on out into the daylight.
EIGHTEEN
Midway through Friday afternoon, the early-shift newsreader watched the red transmission light die on her last bulletin of the day and sat back from the microphone with a sigh of relief.
That was it until handover on Monday, which she hoped would be enough time to shake off the cold that had been dogging her for the last couple of days.
Her name was Isobel Terry, and she was twenty-two years old.
She'd been in commercial radio for eleven months following nearly three years on a regional newspaper; she reckoned to stick around this particular station for another two years at the most.
After that she reckoned that if she hadn't moved on to somewhere bigger, she'd probably be stuck here forever reading out the latest sheep prices at six o'clock every morning.
Isobel was ambitious, and had her sights set on the national news media; unfortunately, so did every other young news-hustler in every backwater station in the country, and few of them were having to contend with sinuses that felt as if they'd been stuffed with pillows.
God only knew what she sounded like on the air.
Inside her cans, she sounded like Elmer Fudd.
‘There's someone to see you,’ the technical operator called through over the talkback system as she pushed her chair back to stand, gathering together her yellow bulletin flimsies with their handwritten amendments.
The TO was only about three strides and two sheets of glass away from her, but the talkback gave his voice the quality of a long distance call.
‘Who?’ she said, and she saw him shrug.
Beyond him  she could see the afternoon DJ in his studio, a couple more strides and another set of double-glazing further on, hunched over his microphone like a harassed co-pilot.
The TO said, ‘He talked to you on the phone and you told him to come in.
That's what he says, anyway.
Amanda put him in the newsroom.’
Isobel stepped out into the corridor, quiet except for the ever-present low murmur of the station's output as it played over unobtrusive speakers.
Dave, the afternoon DJ, was talking over the intro of a record that he was saying had been a big hit in Europe.
Dave talked right on and over the start of the lyric, and then made it worse by trying to pretend that his mistake was intentional.
Isobel winced.
Here on Sheep-shagger Radio, Dave was about as polished as they got.
She passed the sales office and made the turn toward the newsroom.
There was no one in the office, the entire sales team having discovered important appointments that gave them excuses to sneak off home and start the weekend early.
There was only one person in the newsroom, and he quickly got to his feet as she entered.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘I know we already spoke, but what was your name?’
‘Please, call me Pavel,’ he said.
Pavel.
She remembered the call, now; remembered it as soon as she heard his accent.
Something about an emergency appeal to a missing person.
The fact of it was, Amanda should never have brought him in here at all; she should have kept him in Reception, as per company policy.
The man had all the markings of a weirdo.
His clothes, dated and drab, appeared to have been slept in.
He'd had a bad shave and his hair looked as if it was growing back after having been cut too short.
And there were dark rings under his eyes, which burned as if with a fever.
But he'd sounded sincere enough.
And he seemed sincere enough now, his piece of paper held ready in his hands, and  so with the safety of the newsdesk between them she reached across and took it.
She read it through.
She tried not to smile at the wording, and then she handed it back.
‘The name's all we'd need,’ she said.
‘We can handle the other part ourselves.’
‘You do this kind of message?’
‘Sometimes, when we can fit it in.
But we usually work it into the show format somewhere, rather than make it a part of the news.
Did you try the BBC?
They do emergencies on Radio Four, and it's national.’
He nodded.
‘Nothing came back,’ he said.
‘But this is more for young people.
I may have more luck.’
‘If she's in the area,’ Isobel said.
And Pavel inclined his head, conceding the point.
‘So, who is it that's ill?
Someone in the family?’
‘No.
It's her.’
Isobel's eyes widened.
Her antennae quivered.
‘Something contagious?’
Pavel smiled, weary but still polite.
‘No,’ he said.
‘This is for her own safety, as much as anything else.
But please don't say so on the air.’
‘Of course,’ Isobel said, and scribbled a quick memo on the back of some out-of-date wire agency material while the name was still fresh in her mind.
A schoolteacher from Eastern Europe, believed to be touring in the area.
From what Pavel had said earlier he was working his way around the country, from station to station, leaving exactly the same message at each.
‘If anything turns up,’ she said, ‘I'll arrange for word to be left on the front desk.
That's really all I can do.’
‘Thank you,’ he said.
‘I'll call once every morning.’
He probably would, too.
He probably had a list of numbers that he called every day, adding to it as he moved around.
She wondered if he slept rough, or in his car; he looked as if he might.
At the one-way door that led back into the station's tiny  foyer and reception area, she stepped aside for him and said, ‘I hope you find her.’
He smiled weakly.
‘So do I,’ he said.
And after he'd gone, and Isobel had returned to the newsroom to file all the dead stories and check the agency printers for the next hour's updates ready to hand over to Jim, the late-shift newsreader, it briefly crossed her mind that maybe, just maybe,a rising star of journalism with her eye on the national media might have asked a couple of more searching questions.
Might have dug a little for the human interest; might even have probed around to see if there was any backstory worth the follow-up.
But the thought didn't stay with her for long.
Instead, she was wondering what kind of remedy Kate Adie used whenever she got a head-blocker, and whether she'd ever had to read over livestock prices to what was probably a total early-morning audience of three men and a dog.
Their brief talk slipped painlessly from her mind.
While Pavel set out for the next town on his list.
NINETEEN
Diane's employer and his immediate circle arrived on the Friday evening.
The circle consisted of Bob Ivie and Tony Marinello the Old Indispensables, as Dizzy Liston called them — and four examples of the species that Diane had quickly come to recognise as Dizzy's Women.
These were well-bred, impeccably turned-out, and as dim and empty-headed as pumpkin lanterns.
After one drink, their voices could be heard over half a mile away.
Fortunately, Jed was going to be sleeping at Mrs Neary's that night; they couldn't have made more noise exploring the Hall if they'd found it to be haunted.
The preparations for the party were set to move into top gear on the Saturday morning; Diane would have little more to do than to stand aside and watch the professionals at work.
The lights had already arrived that afternoon, the disco would be set up from ten o'clock tomorrow, and a small group of hostesses and security people would be due to arrive some time around three.
The best place for Jed during all of this, she'd decided, would be with his minder; she'd worked out a special weekend rate with Mrs Neary some time ago and had been working on her conscience ever since.
It felt too much as if she was shunting him off for her own convenience, even though she knew that it was the only sane and sensible thing to do.
She'd explained that he'd be staying away for the two nights, which he'd never done before; she only hoped she'd explained it well enough.
Just before seven she  left Jed to pick out some toys and books to be taking with him — and it's got to be a portable amount, she warned and went to check that she wouldn't be needed for a while.
Liston and company were out on the lawn behind the house, where an old-fashioned wrought-iron table and some matching chairs had been set for them in the evening sunlight.
There were the long shadows of wine bottles and glasses across the table, some of the bottles already empty.
‘Mineral water for the invalid,’ she heard someone say as they handed Dizzy a glass, and she saw Dizzy give a wry smile.
‘I suppose that's me,’ he said.
He was in his late thirties, and he had the look of a well-worn schoolboy.
His face was young, but the mileage showing on it was high.
Nevertheless, for all that he'd been around there was definitely something that was attractive and appealing about him; only his eyes gave him away, because they could turn cold and introspective while those around him were whooping it up.
Dizzy knew the exact value of the people he kept, which was why he'd given the estate management job to Diane and not to one of his regular hangers-on.
‘Your lawn's a bit overgrown, Dizzy,’ one of Dizzy's Women said, looking critically at the grass around her feet.
‘You can cut it for me after the party,’ he told her, which everybody took to be a big joke.
Summer in the country , was the toast echoing in Diane's ears as she went back inside; and she shuddered, and wondered if she could think up something really cutting to say the first time one of them tried to treat her like a servant.
Jed had made his selection; three toys stood out on their own in the middle of the floor, these being the ones that he reckoned he could do without.
Diane settled down, and started patiently to negotiate.
In the end she got him down to his Micronauts, his plastic airport, and a bag of Dinky cars.
For books he had two by Maurice Sendak, the Skeleton one, and a well-worn 108  Pinocchio using pictures from the film.
She put everything into a carrier and took this out to the car with his overnight case, and then she came back to get him into his shoes and his coat.
And then, because she didn't want to be saying goodbye to him any sooner than she had to, she took him for a wander through the main part of the Hall to see how the preparations were going.
The lights had been rigged but not yet tested, and cabling still lay everywhere.
Signs for the cloakrooms and toilets were already in place, and two posts and a rope had been set at the top of the stairs to keep visitors out of the private apartments.
It all seemed kind of strange to Diane.
The way she'd always known it, when you decided to throw a party, you threw a party ; you pushed back the furniture, you got all the food together yourself, you invited close friends who knew each other and for a while you let them invade your most private and personal space.
And then when it was all over, you threw open the windows and you vacuumed, and as likely as not while you were doing this you'd find someone left asleep behind the sofa.
Not like this, people hired-in to do everything.
Dizzy might be well-off, but Diane knew from the estate accounts that he wasn't rolling-in-it rich.
The estate and the house might both be high-value assets, but the conditions of his inheritance forced him to keep both intact and he got little currency out of them beyond the woodland leases and the shooting rights.
No, the fact of it was, Diane and her employer might easily have been two different species for the way that they looked at the world.
This wasn't going to be a party.
It was to be a local public relations exercise, bought and paid for nothing more.
In the middle of the hall Diane said, ‘Well, Jed, what do you think?’
And Jed took another look around and made a face that suggested mild indifference lying over mild disapproval.
Diane knew exactly what he meant.
‘Yeah,’ she said.
‘I'll be glad when it's all over, too.’
And then together they walked out to the Toyota.
That night, after Alina had gone out, Pete decided to find out exactly where she went.
She couldn't have gone too far.
She'd been out ten minutes, fifteen at the most.
And wherever she might wander, she always set out in the same direction.
The path down to the lake shore was steep and difficult, and several times he almost fell.
Roots tripped him and rocks made him slip, and in places the path was so soft-edged that it simply dropped away from under him in the darkness.
And yet this was a descent that she made barefoot.
Pete could only guess that she must move with the grace of a gazelle.
A breeze was coming in from the water, stirring the branches overhead and sending a low, unearthly moan through the woodland.
And as Pete emerged by the rocky edge of the water, he saw her.
She was fairly easy to make out against the glitter on the lake.
She looked almost as if she was standing on the surface itself, although Pete knew that there were rocks and shallows and that the effect was no more than illusion.
Her head was bowed, she was leaning forward.
And, as he could now hear, she was singing softly to the water.
It was strange music, full of strange sounds that he knew he couldn't hope to understand.
She was keeping her voice low, much as one might while singing a lullaby to the one wakeful soul in a house full of sleeping children.
He felt his  skin tingle, he felt the fine hair all along his spine react as if a low current had been run through him.
She reached down and, for a moment, Pete was half expecting some response; a stag, perhaps, breaking the surface of the lake and climbing out to her, water streaming from its flanks as it came to her hand.
She stood there like a dark messiah with some unseen flock before her, and Pete couldn't help but begin to assemble shapes out of the grainy darkness and to give them solidity and movement.
But nothing moved, and nothing save the breeze disturbed the calm of the water.
And then she straightened, and the illusion faded.
She spoke.
‘Don't ever follow me again, Peter,’ she said, totally unexpectedly; she hadn't even looked his way, and he felt as if he'd been caught in a searchlight's beam in the middle of some guilty act.
Everything that he'd had in mind to say to her was suddenly gone from his head, his mind as blank as a new wall and his belly full of sudden, inexplicable dread.
She turned to him now.
She was a silhouette against the moonlight that sparkled on the lake.
‘It's not an easy path,’ she said.
‘You could fall.’
There were a hundred things that he knew he ought to say.
But he simply said, ‘I know.’
‘Go back, now, Peter.
Please.’
He wanted to ask her what she thought she was doing.
But instead he turned, and slowly started to make his way back up toward the house.
IV:THE REVELS
Let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we shall die 
Isaiah 22:13
TWENTY-ONE
Ted was having trouble picking out a shirt; his sister had given him a couple of new ones last Christmas, but this was the first time that he'd really had to study them with regard to presentability.
The one with the fine stripes looked slightly flashier, but he'd made a better ironing job of the plain one.
In the end he decided on the stripes — after half an hour of wear, the ironing job wasn't going to matter anyway.
Now he'd have to pick out a tie.
He had two of those, as well…
Ted reckoned that, like Pete McCarthy, he simply wasn't one of nature's tie-wearers.
He certainly hadn't done anything like this in ages.
He'd once thought of asking one of the Venetz sisters out, but they were pretty well inseparable; a turndown didn't worry him so much as the prospect of being accepted by one and so giving offence to the other.
And where would he have taken her?
You could hardly take a woman to her own restaurant, but because of his limited social life he knew of nowhere better.
And somehow, he couldn't imagine either of them coming around to the house for some beers and a pizza and a John Wayne movie on the video.
A problem.
So he'd let it go.
Besides, there was still the shadow of Nerys.
He knew that it was a stupid notion and that she, of all people, wouldn't have wanted him to think this way, but he couldn't help it.
Even though she'd been dead for so long it could sometimes seem that she was still with him, a presence in the next room, someone on the other side of a door who  waited and listened but who never stepped through, except when he dreamed.
He'd known her since they were both thirteen years old.
All right, so he'd never feel that he was betraying her memory.
But sometimes, her memory could be all that he needed.
He could hear the van outside.
Wayne was home, and the two dogs were barking and scrambling to greet him.
Ted stood there waiting with the shirt over his arm, waiting to hear the inevitable sequence completed before he went on; slam the van door, up the outside stairs to the flat over the workshop, another door to slam, and then LOUD MUSIC.
Ted still couldn't work out how Wayne was able to cover the distance from the door to the CD player so fast.
The glass in the windows was shaking even before the dust on the stairs had begun to settle.
Wayne wasn't Ted's only son.
He had another, older boy, Shaun; but Shaun had taken himself to Australia at the age of eighteen and hadn't been home since.
Ted got occasional letters, written in a rush and saying almost nothing.
He had one photograph, from Shaun's wedding, and the photograph's arrival had been the first that he'd known about any of it.
Shaun's last years at school had been difficult he'd even taken a swing at a teacher at one point — and he'd earned a reputation for the motherless Hammond boys that Wayne had found himself sharing even though he'd done nothing to earn it.
Perhaps he'd come back, one day, at least for a visit.
But he was making a life out there, and probably felt that there was no place here for him any more.
Ted would sometimes wonder if he hadn't made Pete into a kind of surrogate son to fill the hole that Shaun had left…it was impossible to say for sure, and nothing to be ashamed of anyway.
He hung his chosen shirt on the front of the wardrobe, and slid back the mirror-door behind it to put the other away.
He was planning on a shave and a slow, hot bath; he might even throw in some of that stuff that Wayne had bought him for his birthday, that came in a dubious-looking  novelty bottle shaped like a tiger's head.
It was nearly two hours yet to the start of the party, he'd have plenty of time.
He had his son, he had his dogs, he had his friends.
He had his memories.
He could hardly call himself lonely, could he?
Wayne had his own hot water supply, direct from the gas-fired geyser that also supplied the workshop below.
When it was running, the geyser roared so loudly that the place felt like a rocket in the middle of a take off.
He turned the music up a little louder, to cover it.
Barely more than half an hour before, he'd driven into the village on an errand for the Venetz sisters and although he saw almost no one along the way, he'd been able to sense a tension in the air; it was a faint background buzz like that of power lines in the rain.
Even at this hour, bedroom curtains were drawn and lights were burning inside.
Party night was big news, and people were starting early.
He didn't mind responding to a panic call at such a late hour, especially not when it meant transporting three microwave ovens up to the Hall and so getting an advance peek at the preparations.
Adele Venetz, the sister that Wayne always thought of as the quiet one, had been sitting at the big rolling-out table as he'd entered the restaurant kitchen.
He'd rapped on the open door as he'd passed it, and said, ‘Who called for International Rescue?’
And then he'd faltered.
Adele had looked up at him, not quickly but as quickly as she'd been able.
She appeared to have been holding a makeshift icepack to the side of her head and a couple of the cubes had skidded out of reach and begun to melt, almost as if she'd been in too much of a hurry to stretch over for them.
From what Wayne had been able to see of her left eye, it had looked as if it had a couple of drops of blood in it.
‘Thanks, Wayne,’ she'd said, only a little unsteadily, and Wayne had been able to see that questions or even  concerned enquiries were definitely not being encouraged.
‘I hope this won't hold you up too much.’
‘Don't worry about me,’ he'd said, but then he couldn't just leave it at that and so he'd added, ‘Will you be all right?’
She'd nodded, barely.
‘I just need to lie down for a while.
Wayne, I'll be grateful if you don't mention this to anybody.’
‘Don't worry, total silence,’ Wayne had assured her and then he'd loaded the ovens into the van and left her to make her way upstairs, touching the wall as she went.
And then, restraining himself from a farewell blast on the Dixie horn, he'd set out for Liston Hall.
With the first of the ovens he'd gone the long way through to the Hall's kitchens, taking in the sights as he went.
It seemed that the hallway itself was going to be the disco area, with a glitterball and nets of balloons overhead and several of those special-effects lights that would make the walls appear to be dripping with coloured slime.
The doors through into two of the biggest reception rooms had been folded back, and a false wall between them opened to reveal what had once been the ballroom and which now, for one night, was a ballroom again.
The whole setup had been quiet, almost deserted; there had been music playing, but that had been somewhere far-off in the house.
Probably Dizzy's gang, keeping out of the way in case the sight of others working made them feel weak.
The scene in the kitchens had been considerably more lively; as he'd shouldered his way through he'd come upon a spectacle of controlled panic with Angelica presiding.
Mixers had been mixing, blenders had been blending, and Angelica had been pushing cloves into the biggest baked ham that Wayne had ever seen.
The three local women that she'd brought in as help for the evening had been buzzing around behind her, greasing dishes and setting up trays and napkin-wrapping cutlery.
‘Oh, Wayne,’ Angelica had said.
‘You're an angel.
Did you speak to Adele?’
A moment's hesitation told her that he had, and that he'd seen.
But all that he'd said was, ‘She'll be along in about an hour.
Just a few things she has to do.’
‘You're a good boy, Wayne,’ Angelica had said, and they'd both known that she was meaning for more than just the errand.
‘I'll even shake paws for a biscuit,’ Wayne had said.
Now, as he was waiting, he took a dispirited look around.
As much as he could be aware of someone else's problems, his own were the ones that preoccupied him most.
All right, so he had a flat, but it wasn't exactly the kind of place that Warren Beatty would have wanted to call home.
Behind him in the bathroom stood a chipped old tub slowly filling with water that was the colour of weak tea; the bathroom walls had been replastered and roughened for tiling, but they didn't have any tiles.
He'd tried posters, but they curled in the steam.
Straight ahead were his sleeping quarters, the lounge, the dining area, and kitchen.
All of this sounded pretty impressive until you understood that they were combined in the one room.
He'd folded his bed back into the sofa, but somehow the sheets always managed to peep out around the edges.
The carpet was in two pieces that didn't match and the cooker was a tabletop model, non-functional except for the hotplate, rescued by Ted from an old Dolphin 20 on its way to being broken up.
Wayne's going-out stuff, all hung over the back of his one upright chair, had the definite air of being from another world altogether.
As a seduction suite it had its shortcomings, he reflected as he unzipped his jeans, stepped out of them, and slung them onto the sofa with the rest of the day's rubbish.
He was working at a distinct operational disadvantage, but he reckoned that this could be changed.
Odds could be altered.
He was already making his plans.
In the constabulary house on the south side of Three Oaks Bay, Ross Aldridge was putting a new message onto the outgoing tape in his telephone answering machine.
Loren was upstairs, engaged in that long getting-ready process that he'd never quite been able to fathom.
He could hear her hairdryer, almost as hard on his nerves as a dentist's drill; it had ruined three attempts to get the message down already, but he didn't want to ask her to lay off for a while in case the uneasy peace was threatened yet again.
Silence.
He gave it another try.
When the message was finished and checked, he went upstairs.
Neither he nor Loren liked the house, much; it had been built not too long after the war, and with its small windows and pebbledash it had none of the atmosphere of the ‘place in the country’ that they'd been hoping for-if anything, it looked more like the married quarters for lower RAF ranks to be found around old and run-down airfields.
He'd had ideas about them buying somewhere of their own, but so far they'd had to stay as ideas.
Loren was sitting in a slip before the dressing-table mirror.
Her hair was pinned back, and she was shaking a blob of some kind of cream onto a ball of cotton wool.
She said, ‘I only hope they can leave you alone for one night.’
‘They'll all be there,’ he said.
‘Nearly everyone got invited.’
‘Not everyone.’
She started to work the cream into the skin around her eyes, staring straight ahead at her reflection as she did it.
‘Some of them around here wouldn't think twice about dragging you away for no reason.’
‘Well, if anything turns up, you can stay.’
‘Oh, thanks a lot,’ she said drily.
Aldridge made no sign or sound as he went through to the airing cupboard to get himself a fresh towel.
These were old grounds, and he didn't want to go over them yet again.
He was wondering if there would be many at the party  likely to recognise him out of uniform.
As he moved back down the short landing toward the bathroom, Loren's raised voice came to him again.
She said, ‘I'm going to enjoy myself tonight, Ross.
I'm not going to let anything spoil it.’
He stopped in the bedroom doorway.
‘Yeah.
Rub shoulders with the local laird.’
‘He'll probably just show his face and then disappear.’
But he could read her too well, and he could see that she was hoping for something more.
She was looking for something memorable, probably for the first time in two years, and he didn't want to deny her that.
He said, ‘Whichever way, it should be a good party.
And it's not a night for trouble.’
There were no sounds of any kind coming from Alina's bedroom, and hadn't been for more than an hour.
Pete listened in the hallway for a few seconds, and then he knocked on her door.
After a moment he knocked again, harder, and he heard her say Come in .
He opened the door, but he didn't step all the way through.
Alina was over on the far side of the room, sitting at her table with the lamp angled to spill across the pages of the scrapbook that lay open in front of her.
The rest of the room was in near-darkness.
She didn't seem to be looking at the album, at least not any more; she didn't seem to have made a start at getting ready, either.
Pete said, ‘You can go ahead and use the shower as soon as you like.’
She looked up at him, and smiled thinly.
‘You first.’
‘There's only enough for one.
You know what the heater's like.’
‘But what will you do?’
‘I've got every pan in the place filled up and on the cooker.
I'll manage.
You wearing your new dress?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
Again, that smile…as if she was barely managing to conceal some kind of pain.
Pete said, ‘Is everything all right?’
She looked at the book first, and then at him.
Her eyes were bleak, reflections of a landscape where nobody walked.
‘I don't think I'm winning, Peter,’ she admitted.
‘Winning what?’
‘My own little battle.
The fight to stay.’
She was serious.
Pete crossed the room and crouched beside her chair.
‘You're doing fine,’ he insisted.
‘You've found a place you like, you've found people you like…you're working and you're not even paying any tax.
That's some people's idea of paradise.’
‘It's not what I mean.’
‘Do you mean the official part?’
Pete said.
‘What have you heard?’
‘Not that, either,’ she said, and she tapped the side of her head with a forefinger.
‘I mean, in here.
This is where I'm losing it.
It's like there's two of me — one who knows what she wants, and the other who tells her what she can have.
And she's a lot stronger than I ever thought she could be.’
Alina was looking totally lost; Pete yielded to an impulse for once, and put his arm around her shoulders.
She felt small, and as frail as a bird.
Wearily, she let herself rest against him.
He said, ‘I didn't realise you felt this low.
I thought you were really happy at the way things were working out.’
‘One of me is,’ she said.
He gave her shoulders a squeeze.
‘Hey, come on,’ he said.
‘Brighten up.
Get yourself ready, and we'll see how they enjoy themselves in the Big House.’
It wasn't much, but it seemed to work; or at least, it was a start.
‘Do my best, chief,’ she said with a smile.
And as Pete was standing, she reached over and closed the scrapbook.
TWENTY-TWO
The party started at nine, and was raging by ten.
Diane could hardly believe how well it was going, and Dizzy hadn't even put in an appearance yet.
Bob Ivie and Tony Marinello were running the bar, having a great time, and making themselves easily popular; they were ignoring Dizzy's Women in favour of the locals, leaving the Sloanes to stand around looking remote and faintly embarrassed in a way that displeased Diane not at all.
Bob Ivie's speciality was his Hawaiian Punch, made to a secret Hawaiian recipe which became less secret every time he mixed up another batch before an audience, and which changed in its details anyway.
Tony Marinello's speciality was to escape from behind the bar whilst Ivie was holding forth, and to ask any unescorted woman for a dance regardless of her age or her inclination.
The agency girls were doing an excellent backup job.
They were zeroing in on the wallflowers, splitting up couples and effortlessly getting them to mix.
There was almost nothing for Diane to do but move around saying hello, accept a couple of dances, and nod amiably to people that she hardly knew.
She saw Ross Aldridge, whom she knew slightly from when he'd processed her shotgun licence application, and wondered for a moment if the rumour was true about how he and his wife had moved to the area a few months after their baby had died.
And then she checked her watch.
Dizzy would be appearing soon.
If everything continued to go like this, there was a fair chance that he'd have the village back on his side for  the rest of the summer.
He didn't have to change, he simply had to present himself as more of a lovable reprobate than as a spirit of corruption; PR was everything, as long as it didn't cross the thin line over into patronisation.
After a quick wave to Ted Hammond across the crowded floor, she managed to catch the arm of one of the hostesses.
‘Everything all right?’ she said.
She could see for herself that it probably was, but she was starting to feel a little useless here.
‘Everything's going fine,’ the girl said, not quite so much of a girl when Diane looked at her close-to.
She was blonde and doll-faced, but her blue eyes gave the impression that she'd just about seen everything, and rather more than was healthy for so short a life.
‘I never worked a crowd as happy as this one with their clothes still on.’
‘Anybody been spiking the drinks?’
‘Not from our end.
Yours?’
Diane shook her head.
‘Not that I know of.
Maybe it's just anticipation.’
‘Well, they're all high on something.
Tonight's not a night they'll forget in a hurry.’
Out in the big hall, the DJ made a smooth change between tracks.
He was running what was mostly a sixties disco with a sprinkling of classic rock and only a few recent standards.
He had big banks of lights and speakers on either side of his console with some lower-level relays here in the ballroom; he'd been running some smoke and dry ice earlier, and some of it still hung in the air and gave the lighted area beyond the doorways the effect of some offworld film set.
She could also see that Pete McCarthy and his waitress had just arrived.
They'd stopped on their way across the marble floor, both of them blue-white in the lights and the fog.
She was saying something to him, and he was glancing around and nodding.
Alina was wearing a plain white dress that left her back and shoulders bare.
She wore no jewellery, and her  hair had been simply gathered and tied.
Even though she'd told herself that she wasn't going to have any thoughts or feelings on the subject at all, the sight of Alina looking so good made Diane feel just a little bit sick.
Maybe there was some envy in it, she could be honest about that.
But mostly it was directed towards herself, and whatever it was in her that seemed to respond to some call given out by the least suitable of men; despite what she'd been through in the past couple of years she appeared to have learned precisely nothing.
Either she'd imagined McCarthy's interest when there was really nothing there, which on its own would be humiliating enough, or else McCarthy was a no-good dissembling two-faced piece of garbage, which was slightly better for her self-respect but still got her nowhere.
But she could at least go over and say hello.
She'd almost started out, but she was stopped by a touch on her arm.
Turning around, she found herself facing the dark, handsome-looking woman who'd arrived with Ross Aldridge and whom Diane assumed to be his wife.
‘I just wanted to say something,’ Loren Aldridge told her, leaning close and raising her voice to be heard over the music.
Diane tried not to wince.
The music wasn't that loud.
Loren seemed to have desperation in her eyes, and the good time that she was having was a fierce one.
Diane said, ‘Feel free.’
‘I'm having a wonderful evening.
This is the best time I've had since I came here.
I just wanted you to know.’
‘That's good,’ Diane told her.
‘Did you dance with Tony yet?’
‘Yes.
He's a wonderful dancer, isn't he?’
‘So they say.’
Diane was starting to wonder if Bob wasn't being a little too liberal with the strong stuff in his Hawaiian knockout juice.
She'd have to mention it to him — and pretty soon, if Loren's slightly wild-eyed look was any kind of an omen.
Loren said, ‘I want you to tell Mister Liston how much  I appreciate this.
The invitation, and…’
She gestured around, lost for a description.
‘Everything.’
‘You can tell him yourself.
He'll be down in a couple of minutes.’
‘Really?’
Loren said.
‘But I won't know what to say.’
‘You could always ask him to dance,’ Diane suggested.
‘Someone has to.’
Dizzy's late and short-lived appearance hadn't been planned entirely for effect; the truth was that he was still fairly weak after his illness.
He couldn't be expected to manage much more than an hour on his feet, after which he'd be living up to his name, although not — Diane hoped — to his reputation.
She looked again for Pete, but Pete was no longer there; and now she could hear a scattering of spontaneous applause —applause!—and a few cheers and whistles which told her that the host had finally arrived on the scene.
People were squeezing by her in the general drift to get a look at him, and she let herself go with the crowd a little in order to see how he was doing.
He was doing fine.
He was, she supposed, a minor celebrity in his own right after all, extensively written-up in the News of the World and a regular in the Grovel columns of Private Eye .
Now he was looking rumpled and approachable, thin and still a little yellow-tinged after the hepatitis.
Diane couldn't deny his charm, even though she knew more about him than most; he came over as something like a wind-up toy that was apt to go bashing itself into the nearest wall without guidance and protection.
The agency girls were taking expert care of him.
Veterans mostly of conferences and corporate operations where the good time masked a definite hidden agenda, they were steering him through the introductions deftly and with an impressive display of memory.
They were supporting him, they were making him look good, and the overall strategy seemed to be working.
Diane felt a sense of relief.
If Dizzy the prodigal was to be received back onto his family's old stamping-ground without too much in the way of resentment, her own job would be a lot easier to carry off.
The pity of it was that she hadn't made a bigger part for herself in the night's scenario; she was getting polite nods and hellos from people that she already knew slightly, and curious glances from most of the others.
It was as if the estate and the valley people were opposing armies under truce, mixing freely but still in uniform.
She spotted Wayne, over on the fringe of the crowd with his girl.
He'd introduced her to Diane about half an hour before.
Her name was Sandra, Sandy for short.
She wasn't tall and she was slightly heavy, but she had a pleasing face with soft eyes; perhaps she'd never be a beauty, but age would never make her ugly either.
She was craning to see over the shoulders of the people in front, and pushing Wayne's hands away as he playfully offered to lift her.
The music changed to slow numbers.
Diane was just thinking that she'd go around to the back and see how the Venetz sisters were getting along with the buffet, when somebody moved in and stood beside her; Pete McCarthy, wearing a more-or-less new jacket and a pleasant smile, his tie already undone.
He was alone.
He said, ‘Happy with the way it's going?’
‘I reckon so,’ she replied.
‘Alina got curious.
She's gone over for a closer look.’
‘And what about you?’
‘I can live without it.
Dance with me?’
‘Sure.’
The marble-floored hall was almost deserted now, just two couples moving slowly under the glitterball light.
There were chairs around the sidelines with one or two pairs of beady eyes watching from the gloom.
It was the kind of music where you had to dance close.
Perhaps that was why he'd waited.
They took hold of each other with an awkward kind of  formality, and he said, ‘I was looking for you earlier.’
‘I've been around,’ she said as they moved out onto the floor.
It was hopeless.
Maybe one day, she was thinking, her head and her hormones might agree over something; and on that day the sun would rise and shine all morning, and fish would leap in the river, and all of her bills would turn out to be rebates.
‘Listen,’ Pete said, and she sensed a deliberate change of track.
‘I'm not sure how to say this, but I want to ask you something.
I've been working on it for most of the week, so don't make me mess it up.
Okay?’
‘Go ahead.’
‘Would you go out with me?’
She waited.
And then she said, ‘That's it?’
‘That's it.’
‘And you're being serious?’
‘Now, wait.
There's been a big misunderstanding and I want to clear it up before it gets any worse.
You get to hear that I'm sharing my house with a five-foot bombshell who can make a grown man go weak at a single glance, and you leap to the obvious conclusion.
Right?’
‘Who wouldn't?’
‘Well, you're wrong.
Dead wrong, and that's what I have to explain.
I like you, Mrs Jackson, and I think I could get you to like me.
And life's too short to miss out on the chance of it for the wrong kinds of reasons.’
‘You can keep talking, Mr McCarthy.
But you'd better bear in mind, I've been worked-over and walked over by experts.
If you're going to tell me that she's your sister, I'd say you'll have to try harder.’
He shook his head.
‘I barely know her.
The more I see of her, the more I realise how much of a stranger she is to me.
She came over to me one night and she asked me for a lift.
She had nowhere to aim for and she was just about destitute, and there was trouble following her as well.
She asked me for nothing  more, she didn't want to cause me problems, but I couldn't just walk away from her.
So I brought her to the valley.
I didn't expect her to stay so long, but I made the offer and I have to stick with it.
We've got separate rooms, we lead separate lives, most days we don't even meet up.
We're only together tonight because you put us both on the same invitation.
I don't know what else I can tell you, Diane, but that's the way it is.
What do you say?’
He seemed serious.
She said, ‘Why are you so keen to convince me?’
‘Say you're convinced, and you'll find out.
Well?’
He was watching her.
Either he was dead straight, or else he was the sharpest operator-bar none, including the guy she'd met on a singles' holiday who'd almost managed to convince her that he was on his final fling with only ninety days left to live — that she had ever encountered.
He was still watching her.
‘I'm thinking about it,’ she said.
With their curiosity satisfied and the music too slow to be interesting, Wayne and Sandy had taken themselves out into the gardens to cool off.
It was dark out there and it was relatively private, and Wayne had managed to spirit out an entire punchbowl, still half-full.
They sat against the wall of the house, just under the stone parapet of the first floor terrace.
Wayne was hoping that nobody else would get any ideas about joining them.
He said, ‘So that's the Lord of the Manor.
What did you think of him?’
‘He's okay,’ Sandy said, in the same kind of tone that she'd probably use to describe an indifferent sandwich.
‘A bit too smooth, though.’
‘He didn't look it,’ Wayne said.
His own feeling had been that Dizzy Liston looked like some amiable, well-heeled scarecrow.
Sandy said, ‘They're the dangerous ones,’ and then she  looked into her glass even though it was really too dark to see anything of it.
‘What's in this stuff?’
‘Fruit juice, mostly,’ Wayne said airily.
‘Maybe a bit of wine.’
‘How strong is it?’
‘Not very.
They water it down, that's how come there's so much of it knocking around.’
Tentatively, he put his arm around her.
She leaned against him comfortably, and he began to wonder about the possibilities in aiming for the wide sleeve of her dress.
‘I expect my mum would like him,’ Sandy said.
‘She likes them well-worn but lovable.
Comes from listening to a lot of Country and Western music.’
‘What would it take to make her like me?’
‘Well, you could stop picking me up in that van.
And you could inherit a couple of million and go to Oxford.
And maybe win a medal for rescuing Prince William from a fire.’
‘You think that would do it?’
‘You'd be about halfway there.’
Sandy turned herself slightly, and Wayne suddenly discovered that he was sitting there with his sleeve strategy in tatters and most of her right breast in his hand.
She wasn't wearing a bra.
He didn't know what to do next.
Sandy, leaning with her head on his shoulder, carried on as if nothing was untoward.
‘She doesn't actually say anything against you,’ she explained.
‘She'd just be happier if you were a drip with glasses and lots of qualifications, that's all.
I mean, I'd like to make her happy, but there are limits.’
‘Yeah,’ Wayne said, still feeling somewhat stunned and very lightheaded.
‘Yeah, I suppose there are.’
She looked down at his hand, which was tense and unmoving.
She said, ‘Are we doing anything here, or what?’
Inside and on the dance floor, Pete and Diane suddenly found that people were drifting back and the music was  getting loud again.
It was a sure sign that Dizzy's fraternisation period was over.
Conversation had now become difficult, and Diane still hadn't given Pete a definite answer to his question.
Nor did she feel quite ready to; and now she leaned close to his ear, and raised her voice.
‘Give me some time,’ she said.
‘I'd better go and see how it went.’
Pete nodded and moved off to look for some more of Bob Ivie's jungle juice, and Diane eased her way through into the ballroom.
She was already starting to feel battered by the increased level of the sound, and it was a relief to get out into the lower buzz and the cooler lights.
The buffet tables were now open, and most people in here were either crowded around them or else standing in line with plates; she could see the two Venetz sisters and their fill-in staff working the tables, carving, serving, and fetching.
They seemed to be doing a good job.
Diane started to scan for one of the agency girls, but then one of the agency girls found her.
It was the blue-eyed blonde, the one that she'd spoken to earlier.
Diane said, ‘Are we a success, or what?’
‘The men all like him, and the women all love him.
But there could be a problem.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Mister Liston's gone back upstairs, and he's taken a lady with him.
The lady didn't come alone, and I'm not sure whether we ought to be doing anything about it.
Diane felt her heart beginning to sink.
Of a number of possibilities, one shone out more bright and unpleasant than any of the others.
‘Oh, hell,’ she said.
‘Not the policeman's wife.
He was going to behave himself tonight!’
‘No, not her.
It's the foreign woman with an accent I couldn't place.
She's with the man I just saw you talking to.
‘Really?’
This was something else…and whilst it might not exactly be welcome, the results would certainly be interesting.
‘Well,’ Diane said, ‘in theory, we're in the clear.
‘Oh?’
‘They came together, but they're not a couple.’
‘Is that what he was telling you?’
There was a certain cynicism in the agency girl's eyes, but Diane wasn't somebody who'd just climbed down off the backwoods bus.
She said, ‘That's what he was telling me.
Now we'll find out how much truth there is in it.
Don't worry about it.’
The agency girl moved on.
Most of her work would be over by now; Dizzy was out of the way, and the party was running under its own momentum.
It would probably carry on like this for at least another hour, and then the first of the departures would begin; the ones with an early start in the morning, the ones with teenaged babysitters, the ones who rarely went out anyway…an hour after that they'd be down to the hard core, and an hour after that it would just be a case of guiding out those last drunks who were too far-gone to find the door.
She wondered what Dizzy and Alina Peterson were doing, right now.
Others besides the agency girl must have seen them leaving together; she wondered how long it would take for the news to reach Pete.
And what, she couldn't help wondering, would happen then?
TWENTY-THREE
The reason for Dizzy's locking of the door behind them became apparent within a minute, when Alina heard a hesitant tap on the other side followed by a young woman's voice calling Dizzy's name.
Dizzy shook his head and put a finger to his lips, calling to her for silence; so Alina waited, and after a while the young woman gave up and went away.
Alina relaxed a little.
Dizzy hadn't even been tense.
He took her through to show her the four-roomed suite that was his private living space within Liston Hall.
The lounge was as big and as bare as a dance studio, with three evenly-spaced sets of french windows on one side that could be opened out onto the unlit stone terrace; the floor was of deeply polished boards with no carpet, the furniture was mostly plain white leather, and at the focus stood a hi-fi system which looked like a stolen chunk of a space shuttle.
Alina turned to Liston.
He was leaning on the wall with his arms folded, waiting.
His little-boy mask had slipped by a fraction, a sure sign of the energies that had been taken from him in the past hour, and someone else was looking out — someone much harder, more calculating.
She said, ‘If it's what you want to hear, I'm impressed.’
‘I'm glad something impresses you.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Nothing.’
He seemed to rouse himself, and as he stepped away from the wall his mask was back in place.
‘You're just not what I'm used to.
How do you think I did?’
‘How do I think you did what?’
‘My public relations act.
I'm under threat of death from Bob and Tony if I don't carry it off.’
He led the way across the room to one of the white sofas, and dropped onto it gratefully without waiting for her.
She said, ‘I saw them earlier.
Do they work for you?’
‘Kind of.
They're friends from way back, they look after me.
It's generally agreed that I need looking after.
I always seem to get into trouble on my own.
My mother always reckoned I'd end up either in prison or in parliament.’
Alina perched herself on the far end of the three-seater.
‘You don't look like a troublemaker to me,’ she said.
‘I don't make trouble, it just follows me around like some dog in the street.’
He gave her a sideways, half-serious look.
‘This is a warning, you realise.’
‘And is there anything else I ought to know about you?’
‘Oh, I'm feckless, shiftless, untrustworthy…
I'm also very, very devious.’
‘So I can see.
Why did you ask me up here?’
‘Why did you come?’
There was silence for a moment as they held each other 's eyes, broken only by the faint sound of dance music from down below.
Finally, Alina said, ‘You made me curious.’
Liston smiled, as a Grand Master might at an adept chess move from a lesser-rated opponent.
‘That'll do as a beginning,’ he said.
‘Look, I'm supposed to go down and do another five minutes of charm and chat with the ladies in the kitchen now they've done their stuff.
Will you stay around?’
‘Why?’
‘Because I'm asking you to.’
‘What if I'm with somebody?’
‘Are you?’
He waited, but Alina didn't reply.
She kept her gaze even.
‘It's your choice,’ he went on.
‘I honestly won't be long.
You can pick out some music and crack open a decent  bottle.
Can't join you in that, I'm afraid, but don't trust the stuff downstairs.’
She seemed to sharpen, and to look at him now with sudden suspicion.
‘Why not?’
‘I know the way Bob works.
I wouldn't put it past him to be slipping something into the juice when nobody's looking.
Guaranteed way of loosening off everybody's self-control.
Problem is, take one too many and you'll start to see hair growing out of the walls.
What do you say?’
‘I'll think it over,’ Alina said, and she got to her feet.
Something in the atmosphere of the room seemed to have changed in the course of the last few moments, and Liston couldn't say for certain what it was.
She said, ‘Can I get some fresh air?’
‘Try the terrace,’ Liston said.
‘You can get a good view of the moonlight on the lake, if you go in for that sort of thing.
See you later?’
‘Perhaps,’ Alina said.
She was already crossing the room to the nearest of the french windows, moving with an urgency that she didn't seem prepared to explain.
‘Your choice,’ Liston reminded her as she stepped out into the air.
Maybe she's a control freak, he was thinking, getting into an unreasonable flap just because she might have taken something that could unclench her a little; but then if he'd kept his mouth shut, she'd never even have known.
A control freak might be interesting to play around with, he was thinking, especially in his weakened condition — get her so far along, and then she'd almost certainly want to do all the work.
But she didn't even look back.
‘What was that?’
Wayne said; but Sandy, it seemed, hadn't heard anything.
‘What was what?’
‘I heard a door,’ he said, glancing up into the darkness 135  in the direction of the stone parapet.
Sandy pulled her dress back up over her shoulders, just in case, and the two of them sat as still as they could and listened.
There was no sound other than that of the distance filtered disco music, but the mood of solitude had been broken.
As he zipped Sandy up, Wayne said, ‘You want to go somewhere else?’
‘If you mean that crummy flat of yours, no.’
‘That's not what I had in mind.’
‘Not to your dad's house, either.’
‘No, better than that.
And really private.’
‘Where?’
‘It's a surprise.
Satisfaction guaranteed.’
Sandy considered for a moment.
Wayne knew how finicky she could be about place and mood, but this plan was one which had all objections beaten before they could even be raised.
Finally, she said, ‘How far?’
‘A short walk in the woods, a warm summer night,’(he was embroidering a little here-the night was warm enough, but it was hardly summer yet)‘moonlight on the water, what more could you want?’
Sandy looked critically at her shoes, and hiccupped.
‘A taxi,’ she said.
‘Well…
I could run ahead and get the van.’
‘Oh, great,’ she said, and she hitched up her dress so that she could get to her feet; there was simply no elegant way of doing it.
‘Come on, I can probably use a walk anyway.
Something in this stuff's starting to mess up my head.’
The ‘stuff’ in question was Bob Ivie's Hawaiian special; between them they'd managed almost to empty the bowl that Wayne had sneaked out.
Wayne had halfway believed in his own account of the innocence of its contents, but now he wasn't so sure.
It didn't taste of anything much, and it didn't hit particularly hard, but then he didn't exactly feel steady on his feet as he came to stand, either.
Sandy was already picking her way through the garden towards the front of the house.
Leaving the punchbowl lying there for the clearup people to find in the morning, Wayne followed her.
Above them on the balcony terrace, Alina Petrovna stood a little way back from the parapet.
She looked at the moon, the lake, and the dark forest beyond, but she saw only defeat.
She might have known that all of her efforts would end like this; it was simply a truth that she hadn't been wanting to face.
She'd been avoiding it for so long, but she had no choice about facing it now.
She moved to the parapet, and paused with her hand on the stonework.
Wayne and Sandy were gone.
It wasn't too late.
She could ignore the call.
She could turn around and go back inside, smile, lose herself amongst strangers again.
She closed her eyes for a second and touched the small space of forehead between her brows.
But the pressure didn't help, and nor did the night air, nor any of the great machinery of circumstance that had, without her realising it, been combining against her to produce this moment.
Again, she looked at the moon.
And then, with a dancer's grace, she cleared the parapet.
She landed with barely a sound.
TWENTY-FOUR
Pete was beginning to think that the party had taken on an unpleasant edge.
The noises had become louder, the lights were brighter and sharper, and the people around him seemed to be turning into over-expansive parodies of their true selves.
For Pete it was almost like being a teenager again, going to see 2001 on magic mushrooms.
They'd tasted like shit but they'd sure done the stuff; everybody else had been whining about the story while Pete had been lying there with his tongue hanging out.
Tonight, only a few minutes earlier, he'd been following handwritten signs down a service passageway to the toilets when, for one brief half-second, he'd seen a local councillor emerging through the doorway with the head of a pig on his shoulders.
It was barely more than a flash impression and the man was turning and the light wasn't at all good; and besides, he pretty much resembled a pig anyway, so the effect was probably no more than a moment's mistake.
But after that Pete had sworn that he'd touch nothing stronger than tapwater for the rest of the evening, and so far he'd been sticking to it.
He couldn't see Alina anywhere around.
He supposed that she had to be somewhere and he reminded himself that they weren't supposed to be together so what did it matter, but still he kept catching himself scanning the crowd for her.
Plenty of known faces nodded back at him, but none of them was hers.
He stopped by a book-lined alcove to remove his tie completely and to get some air.
The books were behind glass, and the reflection that stared back at him showed the face  of a stranger.
He'd no reason to be anxious, and no right to it either.
So stop it , he told his reflection.
‘Ross Aldridge,’ Ted Hammond announced breathlessly, triumphantly, as he appeared at Pete's side.
He was flushed, happy, and in his shirtsleeves.
Pete said, ‘Who?’
‘Name of the local copper that I couldn't remember.
He just left.
If it's the host you're looking for, he's long gone, too.
‘It's tough at the top.’
‘Well, it isn't so great here at the bottom, most of the time.
Do me a favour?’
‘What kind of a favour?’
‘Dance with one of the Venetz sisters for me.’
‘Which one?’
‘Doesn't matter, but we have to ask both because you can't split them up, see?’
Pete took his jacket off, and hung it on one of the bookcase doorknobs.
There was a cloakroom somewhere, but this would do as well.
He said, ‘Okay.
But if either one of them gets frisky, you're on your own.’
‘Deal,’ Ted Hammond said, and they set off to see if the sisters had joined the party yet.
Sandy was a few months younger than Wayne, but unlike Wayne she'd stayed on at school.
Her mother had ideas about her going to university, but Sandy knew her limitations; she planned on a two-year course at a catering college, and had diplomatically said nothing about it yet.
Wayne, in her mother's view, was more than just an ordinary valley kid; he was a walking symbol of everything that she didn't want for her daughter.
It was a big weight for him to be carrying, but there didn't seem to be a lot that he could do about it.
He stayed out of the way as much as he could, and Sandy mentioned him as infrequently as possible.
The one thing that she didn't do was to give him up.
He was walking just ahead of her now, checking out the trail in the darkness.
It was mostly soft grass and woodchips here, and she'd stepped out of her shoes and was now carrying them, walking barefoot.
Wayne said, ‘Feeling any better?’
He was referring to the slight dizziness she'd experienced when they'd first come into the moonshadow of the trees.
‘Yeah,’ she said.
‘A bit.
Must have been all those flowers.
I'm sensitive to flowers.’
‘Is that right?’
‘And perfume.
There's only certain perfumes I can wear.’
‘Better make me a list for Christmas,’ Wayne said, and he gave her his hand to help her out onto the lakeside track.
She stopped for a moment, and put her shoes back on for walking on the hard tarmac.
She was curious as to where they were going, but so far Wayne had refused to say; as far as she knew, this was just one of the Estate roads and it led nowhere.
Sandy said, ‘We'd better not be heading for your place, even if you've been doing it up.
Oil and stuff affect me worse than anything.’
‘It'd take us an hour to get there.
This is really close.’
His shadow touched her lightly on the nose.
‘You're not going to believe your eyes.’
Their destination, Sandy discovered a few minutes later, was the Liston Hall boat house.
He took out the keys that he'd brought from the office back home, and opened the door.
He went in ahead of her and tried the lights; they flickered once, but he seemed to know what to do because he went inside and Sandy heard him thump something, and then all the lights came on.
As she stood waiting, she felt again that wave of dizziness that bordered close to nausea, and she put a hand against the rough wall of the boat house to steady herself.
As Wayne  returned, she quickly took her hand away; she wasn't going to tell him about this, not if she could help it.
He beckoned her in, and took her to the rail to look over.
What she saw under the lights was a boat, a big one in too small a space.
‘We're handling the brokerage on it,’ Wayne explained.
‘Wait until you see inside.’
She had to be careful on the stairway down to the quay, because it was steep and the treads were so narrow.
Wayne helped her aboard and then darted ahead, switching on all the lights and then dimming some of them to create an impression of instant welcome.
When they reached the after stateroom, he left her prodding the waterbed as he fiddled with the stereo to get some low-level background music.
He asked her what she thought.
‘It's just like something in a film,’ she said.
He stood behind her and unhooked her dress; a shrug of her shoulders, and it fell easily to the floor.
She shivered a little as its touch ran over her.
The room seemed to give a lurch, but she ignored it.
She stepped out of the dress and then turned and sat on the bed, rather heavily; smiling at Wayne to show that she was okay, she kicked off her shoes one at a time.
Wayne sat beside her, unbuttoning his shirt.
‘We can run a video if you want,’ he said.
‘There's some really strange stuff in there.’
‘Things are strange enough, thanks,’ Sandy said.
She got to her feet again, hooked her thumbs into her white cotton briefs, and took them off.
That was everything, not counting the thin gold chain around her neck.
Wayne seemed frozen in mid-action as she quickly threw back the top sheet of the bed and climbed in; but then he recovered, and started an awkward fight to get his shoes off without actually untying their laces.
Something bumped against the hull, and sent a faint thud all the way through the boat.
‘What was that?’ she said, half-sitting up and holding the sheet against her.
‘I don't know.
Driftwood, probably.’
‘Are we locked in?’
‘No,’ Wayne admitted.
He might have lied about it if he'd been able to think more quickly, but the truth was out before he knew it.
‘Go on, then, Wayne,’ she said.
‘Just to make it safe.’
Wayne smiled, and she could see that he was nervous; not of the shadows outside, but of the uncertain country that lay ahead.
Once entered, there was no true return.
Shirtless and now shoeless, he went out to put the lock on the boat house door.
As soon as he'd gone, Sandy lay back on the waterbed.
She heaved a great sigh.
She so much wanted this to be exactly right; and perhaps, by the time that Wayne returned, she'd have enough of a grip on herself to ensure that it would be.
A small, sick feeling lay in Wayne like a swallowed stone.
It was starting to go wrong, and he couldn't quite work out how or why.
The participants were willing and the setting was ideal; they'd been close to it often enough, so what was happening now?
Forget it, he tried to tell himself.
Everything's going fine.
Everything's going to be great.
He stepped out onto the deck of the Princess, and looked over the side into the water.
He checked all the way around the boat — or at least, as far as he could — but he saw no driftwood, nothing.
Perhaps it was in the shadows under the overhang, propelled there by the lake swell; but as he was trying to see, the overhead lights blinked once, and then again, and then they went out completely.
The only illumination now was from the dim curtained portholes and the deck light of the boat itself.
He called out, ‘I won't be a minute.
Don't fall asleep on me!’
But there was no reply from inside.
Leaving the lit Princess was almost like leaving home, because its glow in the darkness was so warm.
He climbed to the upper level, and from the top of the stairs he could see a wide slice of moonlight telling him that he'd not only forgotten to lock the door behind them, in his haste he'd neglected even to close it; he crossed the decking and closed it now, switching the key from the outside to the inside and turning it in the lock.
Then he felt his way along the wall to where he knew the faulty junction box to be.
He made a fist and banged on the casing, hard.
There was a loud spat, a brilliant flash of blue that almost burned out his night vision, and a sharp smell of ozone and cinders.
Wayne was so taken aback by this that it was a moment before he realised something else; the hand that had touched the box had come away wet.
He couldn't understand it…but he knew that he'd narrowly avoided a serious shock, and there was no way in which he'd be prepared to touch the box again.
The Princess had spotlights, he'd turn them around this way when it was time to get Sandy to the door and then he'd go back on his own to switch them off.
That wouldn't be easy; even now he was beginning to remember what it had been like when he'd been small and afraid of the dark, unable to sleep without a nightlight.
He decided that he couldn't tell her about this.
Not until afterwards, anyway.
Slowly, carefully, he felt his way back towards the stairs.
The boards were rough and splintery underfoot.
There was a noise as he started to descend; but it was just the boat, moving slightly with the swell of the lake and rubbing against one of those padded joists that stuck out too far from the quayside.
Anticipation was building with every descending step.
He was almost trembling with it.
His grip on the rail was shaky.
On the quay, he almost tripped himself as he went to re-board.
Wayne, he heard in a whisper from behind him.
He spun around so fast that he came close to falling over, his heart leaping like a bird in a snare.
They weren't alone; and then the next thought was that Sandy must have come up from below and was now standing on the quay, but then that thought died as what he'd taken for her shadow came out from under the stairway.
Relief coursed through him like a shot of heroin.
‘Miss Peterson,’ he managed to say.
‘What are you doing here?’
But as she came forward he faltered, and his certainty died; it was her, but it wasn't, in a way that he couldn't even have begun to explain.
What he seemed to see was something else, something that wore her like a shell, and it was walking towards him.
Her skin was blue-green and marbled in the reflected lake water, and her eyes were as dull and expressionless as a shark's.
He wanted to move, to step back, but nothing seemed to be happening.
This wasn't the choice I wanted to make, Wayne , she said.
Please try to forgive me.
And then she reached for him.
Sandy lay still for a while, hoping to feel better; but being flat on her back didn't help, and closing her eyes only made it worse.
Finally, she had to give in.
‘Sorry, Wayne,’ she said, although he wasn't around to hear.
‘Tonight just ain't the night.’
Slowly, almost painfully, she got out of the bed and started to dress.
By now she'd definitely come to pin the blame on the stuff they'd had to drink; every time she even thought of it she came close to throwing up.
It wasn't drunkenness — she'd been drunk twice, and neither time had been anything like this — but something else altogether.
She didn't know what her mother was going to say when Wayne finally got her home; she could only hope that things would improve along the way.
Wayne came down the stairs behind her, walking slowly.
She didn't turn, not wanting to see his obvious disappointment on top of everything else.
‘Another time, okay, Wayne?’ she said, doing her best to sound bright and cheerful and hearing the evidence that she wasn't succeeding.
‘I don't think I'm such a good sailor.
Will you zip me up?’
She'd definitely annoyed him.
He zipped her dress in silence, and his touch was cold.
Sandy tried to think of something to say, something that would explain how she felt; but the image that formed in her mind was of a punchbowl brimming with vomit, and she knew instantly that she was about to do likewise.
Without even looking at him, she dashed for the companionway and the open deck above.
Which was how she came face-to-face with the phenomenon of the two Waynes.
Wayne number two was sitting — or rather, slumped — in the dining alcove of the deck saloon, and he was leaking all over the expensive-looking upholstery.
His head was at a strange angle because of the way that he'd kind of subsided into the corner, and his eyes were slightly open.
They didn't seem to be focused on anything in particular.
His hair was dark and wet, and plastered down close.
Sandy was so much taken by surprise that her sickness was forgotten.
Life had suddenly taken a mis-step, and she was completely thrown.
She turned around, looking to Wayne number one for an explanation.
Everything caught up with her then, and everything slammed into its proper place.
Alina surged up the companionway towards her, eyes burning like new stars.
Sandy drew breath to scream but she was stopped halfway by Alina's clamped-down hand, which filled her mouth and lungs with the rank taste of stagnant water.
Quickly, Alina stepped around her so that she could hold Sandy's head in both of her hands; Sandy made a weak attempt to struggle, but it was like fighting a rock.
Alina gently turned her, so that she was facing Wayne again.
I'll take you to where he is , she said.
He'll be waiting there for you .
Sandy fought for air.
Her vision was starting to blur, with something more than just tears.
Then blackout.
Tom Amis is a carpenter.
Seven days a week he works on the new ski lodge in the woodlands overlooking the valley, his private quarters little more than a sleeping-bag in a back room behind the new reception area.
The bricklayers were the first to leave, followed by the tarmac gang and the plasterers.
Amis is a loner, which is just as well.
Because Amis is alone.
The owner has been calling by every few days to check on progress, but now is in Barbados.
Amis hopes that it's cloudy, but not so cloudy that the owner should come back and start breathing over his shoulder again.
Amis has only three definite things in his life; his skills, his van, and his career plan, and all of them seem to have been taking a beating over the past few weeks.
Two of his new windows, big ones, have warped and had to be redone.
The van has broken down.
And by his career plan he should have been finished and out of here by now, instead of which he's way over time on fixed-price job and his prospects of retirement at thirty-five are receding now even faster than they were before.
It had once seemed like a reasonable strategy for a loner: live cheap, move around, invest everything and then cut loose while still young and really start to live.
But it isn't working out.
The money's mostly there, but the spirit in him seems to have been leaking away.
He's starting to realise that by the time he's in a position to do anything that he wants, there'll be nothing that he really wants to do.
He'll be returning to an empty fairground of deserted stalls, with only the faint remembered echo of the music that he's been ignoring.
He's not just a loner any more.
He's lonely.
But the habit of solitude is something that has to be kicked, like a drug, and Tom Amis isn't sure that he has the reserves.
There's a party at Liston  Hall tonight; he could have gone, but instead he's here, same as every night, in this hundred-year-old hunting lodge with its rambling outbuildings and its faulty generator and only a photograph to talk to.
And the radio.
Some nights, he calls up the late show DJ on the request line.
He never gives his name, and he always asks for the same dedication.
They love that kind of stuff on late-night radio.
They call him the mystery man with a record for his mystery girl; people have been writing in wanting to know more, women especially, but Amis doesn't have the will to respond.
Six months ago he'd have gone for it, maybe written back to some of them, seen it as a way out of the rut that his life had become…but not now.
There's no way of explaining the rules of attraction, and Amis is even less expert than most.
He stretches out on his camp bed.
The lights flicker to the beat of the generator.
He looks at his photograph.
He took it himself, out on the terrace at the lakeside restaurant.
Amis doesn't have much in the way of material goods but his camera, like his watch, is one of the best.
He ran off almost an entire film that day, mostly on views, but of all the shots this one was the best of them.
What does it show?
His waitress.
He stares at the photograph.
He knows almost nothing about her.
But he can't get her out of his mind.
He wonders why.
In another town, outside yet another radio station, Pavel Ilyitch returns to his car.
It's still in the shadows where he left it, grimy windscreen reflecting the neon tracery of a department-store sign on the next block.
Five floors below, somebody is sounding off as the traffic before them makes a slow start at the lights.
Will it be here?
Will this be where he finds her?
Pavel levers himself into his car, forcing movement out of a body that longs for sleep more than anything else.
The most that he can promise it will be a few snatched hours on the back seat in a quiet  place somewhere.
This is how almost all of his days have been spent, casting bait, checking behind him, moving on; apart from odd nights in hostels where he can get a bath and about thirteen hours of near-coma to catch up, he's been continuously on the road since the dawn that he stole the car and the cash that has become his fighting fund.
The car is barely recognisable now; so filthy that some kids have hunger-written their names in the dirt on the boot.
He ‘s had a couple of bumps, as well, one of which has left a long and jagged crease in the body almost from headlight to tail-light; that one wasn't his fault, but he drove away from it fast to avoid the questions that would certainly follow.
The inside is a mess, even though he's come to look on it as his only home and so tries to keep it straight.
He switches on the interior light and picks up a bundle from the passenger seat.
The main part of the bundle is the Daily Mail Yearbook , much-creased and stuffed with notes and odd bits of paper.
It's held together by an elastic band which has two ballpoint pens clamped under it.
He takes the band off and starts to sort through; he ticks off one more name from the Yearbook's list of radio stations, and then copies its telephone number across onto his checklist.
When he's exhausted the list, he isn't sure what he'll do; he's heard of pirate stations and Citizens' Band clubs, but he'll have to find out more.
The idea of giving up is no longer a real possibility.
For Pavel, as for Alina, there can be no going back.
He yawns and then he rests an elbow on the steering wheel, his head on his hand.
Nobody is around.
Nobody will mind if he just grabs a few minutes' rest before he moves on — although rest, for Pavel, has become little more than a bothersome physical requirement with no spiritual element in it.
Pavel is driven, and the edge has become his home territory.
Someone raps on the window.
Pavel is jerked awake; he sees a uniform.
The man mouths at him through the glass.
‘This is the hotel's car park, you know.
Not a public doss house.’
Pavel nods, embarrassed, and he doesn't meet the parking attendant's eyes as he starts the car.
And as he drives away, he's thinking not about the assertiveness of a petty official, but about the horizon.
In the province of Karelia, close to the border with Finland, the horizon beyond the land and the lake is always flat and far away.
This was the landscape in which Alina spent her childhood; he wonders in what kind of landscape she finds herself now, and if her chances of happiness are any greater.
He's doubtful.
Because he knows that no matter how hard you might try to reach it, no horizon ever gets any closer.
V: RUSALKA (I)
TWENTY-FIVE
The next time that he saw Diane was at the funeral, some three weeks later.
She came alone, as a representative of the Liston estate, and she stood alongside him in Three Oaks Bay's tiny hillside churchyard.
Together they watched across the old gravestones as Ted Hammond waited patiently by the lychgate, thanking each of the mourners as they left.
‘I don't know what to say to him,’ she admitted.
‘Who does?’
Pete said.
Ted was looking dignified, but broken.
His clothes didn't fit, his skin was grey, his eyes were dead.
His sister had come over with her family from the next valley and was standing just behind him; Shaun had flown home as well, a taller, broader Wayne-that-might-have-been, but he hadn't yet come out of the church.
When Pete finally turned to move away, Diane had gone.
Standing in her place was Alina, red-eyed and waiting to be taken home.
They'd found them after five days, with Sandy's parents hammering at Ted every minute of the time.
Ted's initial fear was that they'd done something stupid and run away together, but then after a while he'd begun to hope for this and nothing worse.
The missing keys to the boat house and to the Princess had been the clue, spotted by Pete and reported to Ross Aldridge in a phonecall when Ted was out of earshot.
It all made a horrible kind of sense, and he hoped that he was wrong.
But he wasn't.
Aldridge had found the lights shorted out, the cruiser's batteries run  down, and the two children lying just under the surface of the water inside the big sliding gates.
They'd been entwined in an embrace, and Sandy's hair had been spread like a fan; by Aldridge's account it had been a touching, harrowing sight.
The inquest was local, held in the parish hall and presided over by a doctor from the big resort town further down the lake.
The locked doors, the circumstances, and the lack of contradictory medical evidence led to a verdict of misadventure within fifteen minutes.
One of the tabloids got a couple of columns out of it —Teen Lovers' Nude Death Ride on Dizzy's Yacht but mostly the papers left it alone.
The entire village closed down on the day of the funeral, and the trickle of early-season trippers found themselves looking around bemused at the drawn curtains in the houses and the handwritten notes in the shop windows before shrugging to themselves and passing on through.
Two kids drowning in an accident didn't sound like much to the world outside.
Neither Pete nor Alina spoke during the drive home afterwards.
Alina had sniffled her way through half a box of Kleenex from the glove compartment, and she seemed even more disinclined toward conversation than Pete.
He couldn't help noticing how much she was being affected; it was a sign, he supposed, of how she'd come to consider the valley her home and its people her own.
On a day when good feelings were pretty scarce, it didn't seem wrong to spare just one moment to be glad for her.
As always, she went straight to her room when they got home.
Pete went to the refrigerator, took out a beer, and then carried it along with a kitchen chair out onto the porch.
His inclination was to be down at the yard.
But Ted had his real family around him now.
Pete was remembering the night — it seemed like years ago, but it wasn't so long — that the three of them had sat in the Zodiac down in the workshop and Wayne had made some gentle fun of Pete's funeral suit.
He was wearing it 154  again today.
So much change, in so short a time; Pete felt as if he'd aged more in ten weeks than in the ten years that had gone before.
Now he sat out on the porch with his chair tilted back and his feet up on the rail, and he sipped at his beer as he watched the patterns of sunlight on the forest over on the far side of the track.
He remembered what Alina had said to him, way back at that first dawn.
Her instincts were right, this was a fine place to be.
It was just that some days could be rather less fine than others.
After an hour he went to see how she was doing, and to see if she needed anything.
She smiled weakly, and said not.
She was sitting on the bed with her album — that sparsely-peopled record of whatever it was that she'd left behind and she wasn't leafing through it but hugging it close, as if it was a physical source of comfort to her when times were at their lowest.
She said, ‘I've been trying to think about Wayne, but instead I've been thinking about myself.
Isn't that terrible?’
But Pete said that it wasn't, because for much of the hour he'd been doing the same.
It wasn't something that he'd intended, but it wasn't something he could help.
All through the valley people would be reflecting on the brevity of life and their own missed chances at happiness, and thinking of their common frailty in the shadow of the dark beast that had passed so close and taken someone so young.
And then he said, ‘You want to come for a ride in the car?
Get out of the valley for a while, see somewhere new?’
But again she smiled and she shook her head, saying that she preferred to stay here for a while and…just think about things.
And Pete was relieved, because he hadn't really felt like going anywhere, either.
He left her in her room, thinking that perhaps he'd climb up to the rocks on the crest of the headland and watch the  sunlight on the lake until the mountain shadows took it away.
He left her there, on the bed, with the book held close.
And then, when Pete McCarthy was safely out of the way, she opened the book, and the book spoke to her.
You've been unwell , the book said.
My name is Belov.
I'm a doctor .
INTERLUDE: WHAT THE BOOK SAID
He didn't look much like a doctor to Alina.
He was crouched in the corner by the big tiled kitchen range, his sleeves rolled up and his shirt and trousers covered in white ash.
He'd been cleaning out the fireplace and clearing the flue, neither of which appeared to have been used in years.
He was a big, dark, heavy man something in the manner of a friendly black bear, going a little thin on top.
He smiled at her, and started to get to his feet.
Alina said, ‘Am I still in prison?’
‘Technically,’ he said, ‘you never were.
But no, this isn't a prison.’
‘It doesn't look like a hospital.’
‘No.’
What it looked like was a long-deserted log farmhouse, with stale rush matting on the floor and at the windows coarse-woven net curtains that had faded almost to nothing.
Alina was holding onto the door, because the six steps that she'd taken to reach it had almost been enough to exhaust her; Belov dusted off his hands and came over to her now, and he took her by the shoulders and turned her around and steered her back toward the bed that she'd just left.
His touch was like a doctor's, firm and impersonal.
And, of course, she'd seen him before; he'd been the third man on the commission that had interviewed her, the one who'd sat next to the Cheka's doctor and who'd listened to her slurred responses without ever saying anything.
Now he was straightening the covers over her as she lay, utterly spent, and he was promising her answers to her unspoken  questions in the morning.
She could barely turn her head to watch him as he backed out of the room and closed the door; a moment later, the sounds of the fire irons against stone resumed.
It was this strange subterranean thumping that had wakened and drawn her in the first place.
She was still wearing the thin cotton dress that she'd worn in the prison hospital, but now there was a shawl around her shoulders as well.
She didn't know how she'd come by it, and she'd only the vaguest memories of her journey to this place.
Why she was here, she couldn't imagine; but her head was clearer than it had been in a long time, which meant that she must have gone for some hours without any kind of an injection.
There was no denying the fact that there were gaps in her memory because of the drugs.
There was no way of being certain how long she'd spent on the ward; it might have been six weeks or six years, but she was guessing at six months because this had been the first commission review that she'd received.
Unless there had been others, and she hadn't remembered.
They'd taken her from the police cells after two days.
She'd been half-expecting a trial and then a labour camp but instead, there was an ambulance.
Seeing this, she'd known what lay ahead.
They took her out, across the wide Neva river to the north-east of the city, to a long street of factories and high concrete walls where tourists and visitors had little reason to go.
The prison hospital fitted into its surroundings perfectly, a four-storey warehouse of human cargo.
It had small, dark windows in a main building set back from the road behind a staff block and a perimeter wall of newer red brick.
Grim and forbidding were the two well-used words that came to mind as she looked up at the building for the first time; but there were no words that could easily describe the helpless terror that she felt as the side-gate opened before them and the ambulance had driven through.
She'd thought that at least she'd be put with her own kind — border-crossers and minor political dissidents-but it didn't happen.
Her ‘own kind’ were in a minority.
Instead she was confined for twenty hours a day on a ward for the criminally insane, most of them doped and many of them bruised from the warders' heavy handling.
She'd sit in her dressing-gown by the window and try to listen for the electric trams on the distant street, anything to give some kind of shape or structure to her day, but the noise made even this impossible.
And then her programme of treatment started, and the idea seemed to lose its importance to her.
This was better, she thought as she lay on her cot in the farmhouse.
Anything was better than the ward.
At least now she was beginning to get her focus back, even if her strength hadn't yet come with it.
Belov brought her some broth about an hour later, and he helped her up to the bowl.
Apparently his efforts with the kitchen range had finally paid off.
For a while Alina was afraid that she was going to throw it all up again, but she didn't.
Tomorrow , he promised her whenever she tried to ask him anything.
Tomorrow, when she'd be stronger.
And then he left her alone, climbing the wooden stairs to what she would later learn were his own makeshift quarters on the floor above.
If he locked her in, she didn't hear it.
The next morning, she got to go outside.
It was only a few steps, but now she was leaning on his arm for steadiness rather than support.
She felt almost weightless, as if she was made out of eggshells.
The daylight brought tears, and not only because of its brightness.
They were in a village of perhaps a dozen houses and a white log church, out on a plain somewhere under a big, big sky; each building stood well apart from its neighbours with just open common land between them, and the grass on that common land was deep and uncut.
It rippled in the light breeze like a sea.
Alina said, ‘I don't see anyone.’
‘No,’ Belov agreed.
‘Nobody lives here now.’
‘No one at all?’
‘The entire community was resettled a long time ago.
The place hasn't been used since then.’
‘But why?’
‘Well, you know the military.
We're not so far from the border.
Maybe there's a radar station over in the woods, or maybe they want everyone to think there is.’
They were making a slow circuit of the farmhouse and its barn, a lean-to of roughly dressed timber made dark and smooth with age.
The roof was of shingle with planks nailed over.
Alina said, ‘What if we're found?’
But it wasn't something that seemed to worry Belov.
‘I've got permission for us to be here,’ he said.
‘As long as you stay around the village and the paths I'll show you tomorrow, you shouldn't have any problems.’
‘You said it wasn't a prison.’
‘No more so than anywhere else.’
So, another tomorrow.
Alina woke to this one feeling sharp and dangerous and within limits — ready to go.
She found that Belov had laid out her own clothes as she slept; she'd lost weight, she noticed as she dressed, and she hadn't really had much to lose.
After a plain breakfast they went out again, still taking it slowly but this time with more of a distance in mind.
Belov told her the name of the village.
It meant nothing to her.
‘I don't suppose it would,’ Belov said.
‘It's the kind of place that no one ever hears of, where nothing ever happens.
Something happened here, though.’
‘And that's why you've brought me?’
‘Let me tell you the story.
Questions later.’
They took a winding dirt alley that led through the back of the village between houses and outhouses.
By the sides  of the outhouses were stacks of trimmed poles and branches and brushwood, all grown-over with moss.
Alina had assumed that Belov was taking her to another of the buildings, but it seemed now that he was going to lead her out of the settlement altogether.
He said, ‘The farmhouse we're staying in, a small girl lived there.
She slept in the room where you're sleeping now.
She was bright, and she did very well at school.
Most families in a village like this expect their children to work on the farm when they get older, but in this case it was different.
She was an only child, and her parents wanted more for her.
As soon as she was old enough, they were going to send her to stay with relatives in the city so that she could get a better education.
They were tied to the land, but their daughter wouldn't be.
With me so far?’
‘Yes,’ Alina said, although in truth she was wondering what point he might be trying to make.
As far as she could tell, they were completely alone in the village.
Back at the farmhouse they had food supplies in a cardboard box, and Belov himself had taken the role of housekeeper as well as doctor.
Today he was tousled, and even more in need of a shave; under his suit jacket, he now wore an old pullover.
They were passing the last of the houses now.
Ahead lay marshy fields, neatly divided by a raised path consisting of two parallel rails of wood pegged into the ground.
Belov said, ‘This girl was small, and very fair.
They say she looked like an angel.’
He waved his hand.
‘Now, see this house.
The Markevitch family lived here, very big family, lots of sons.
Not enough brains to go around, though, according to the neighbours, and the youngest boy was out of luck.
He was born a simpleton.
When he was seventeen years old, he was still playing with wooden blocks.
But happy.
His name was Viktor.’
They moved on, out toward the fields, and Belov continued with the story.
‘He followed the girl around all the time.
He was like a puppy, completely devoted.
She was only nine years old  and she wasn't much of a size for that, but everybody knew that Viktor was harmless.
A lot of the time she just seemed to forget that he was there, and he'd shamble along behind her just happy to stay close.’
‘How long ago was this?’
‘Quite a few years.
The girl's still alive, but Viktor was drowned.
I'm going to show you where.’
They came to a simple fence which was crossed by a stile, and here Alina rested for a couple of minutes before going on.
The place that Belov had in mind was just a couple of hundred metres further, he told her.
It was reedy marshland here, the grasses awash in several inches of diamond-clear water.
The path zigzagged between dry rises in the land.
On one of these, Belov stepped down from the wooden rails.
‘A lot of this would have been different then,’ he explained.
‘The shape of the marsh has changed over the years, but we're somewhere close to the spot.
They came out along the track we just followed, the very same one.
Only the girl came back, and she was soaked and muddy and she could hardly speak.
Two of Viktor's brothers came out, and found him.’
‘How could he drown?’
Alina said.
She was looking down at the water, which was only inches deep.
‘Nobody knows.
It could have been that someone forced him down, and held his face under.
But that wouldn't have been easy.
He wasn't bright, but he was big and he was very strong.
He'd have struggled hard.’
Belov looked thoughtfully at the ground around them, as if he might still read signs that had long ago disappeared.
‘They called the doctor in from the nearest town, and the local militia chief questioned the girl.
I've seen both of their reports — the file on the case has never been closed, in all this time.
They asked her what had happened, and she said that a rusalka from the lake had hurt Viktor.
You know what the rusalki are?’
Alina peered toward the lake, which was hardly more than a sliver on the horizon.
She said nothing.
‘They're an old superstition, lake spirits in female form.
Very beautiful, very dangerous.
Men can't resist them.
They're supposed to bring a strange kind of ecstatic death by drowning — although it isn't really described as a death at all, more a passage from one world to another.
There's something like it in the folklore of just about every culture.
And no matter how many times they asked the girl, no matter how many different ways they approached it, her story was always the same.’
‘So nobody believed her.’
‘She was a child.
She looked even younger than she was.
What were they going to do, beat it out of her?
Maybe they even tried that.
They didn't put it in the records, if they did.
But the harder they pressed her, the more confused she would probably have become.
Children's fantasies are as real to them as anything else; but not many get thrown up against them so hard.’
‘What happened?’
‘Officially, it became an accident.
What else could they say?
There was nobody else in the area, and there were no other tracks through the reeds.
The girl became so ill that she had to be taken away.
She stayed in the city and never came back.
And that's all anyone knows…except for the girl herself.’
Alina looked at him, but his face gave nothing away.
He seemed open, empty of guile.
She said, ‘I think you're trying to tell me that I should remember something of this.’
‘And do you?’
‘No.’
‘Then I'm saying nothing of the kind.’
They went back.
The subject wasn't raised again.
That evening, Belov set the fire as Alina opened some canned stew.
She was feeling as if she'd made a long, exhausting hike instead of just the kilometre or so that she'd actually walked, but it wasn't a bad feeling.
Most of the food was of a kind that she'd never seen in the shops; there  was no wine or beer, but Belov had a hip-flask of vodka.
There was no electricity, either, but as night fell they lit candles.
Belov chatted easily, although his real talent lay in persuading her to talk without her realising that she'd been persuaded.
All that she really learned about him was that yes, he was a psychiatrist —‘one of the dissertation writers’, as he referred to himself-and that his wife had died after an illness about five years before.
Through all of this there was a shadow falling across the conversation, and it was a while before Alina could bring herself to give it a name.
But it had to be faced, and so she finally said, ‘How long can I stay here?’
It seemed that Belov had only been waiting for her to ask.
‘What you're really asking, is whether you'll have to go back.’
‘Will I?’
‘In theory, yes.’
But there was a faint glimmer in his eyes, like those of a favourite uncle hiding something unexpected behind his back.
‘I may be able to arrange something.
It's mostly a matter of timing…but I'll do what I can.
Please don't get your hopes up.’
There was a long pause.
And then Alina said, ‘Who was the child?’
But now it was Belov's turn to say nothing.
‘Some time later, she lay in her bed without sleeping.
She was wondering if it was true, if he could somehow arrange her release; doctors had ordered her internment, so surely it was possible for another doctor to end it.
But did Belov have the power?
Borrowing her for dissertation research was one thing — she was sure now that this was the reason behind her removal from the hospital — but a release seemed, frankly, unlikely.
She'd seen no trace of anyone else in the village, and no sign of anyone along the afternoon's walk.
There were no locks on the farmhouse doors.
Perhaps, when she'd grown stronger, she could slip away into the night and keep on 166  walking…after all, what was the worst that could possibly happen to her?
The answer to that was, nothing that hadn't happened already.
If they caught her, they caught her.
And if they shot her instead — well, perhaps that wouldn't be quite so bad.
With this thought in her mind and the sound of Belov's restless pacing on the boards up above, she finally drifted away.
When she awoke late in the morning, Belov wasn't there.
She checked his room, but his bed was cold.
His small suitcase had been packed, and looked as if it was ready to go.
She went straight back downstairs, got her own clothes together, and made a bundle with some of the provisions.
Then she let herself out of the farmhouse, and started to walk.
There was nothing to indicate that he was anywhere in the village, and she didn't want to waste time on being any more thorough than this.
She struck out across-country, heading away from the marshes and the distant water with its old-time tales of death.
At any moment she expected to hear his voice behind her, calling her back.
If it came, she wouldn't respond.
There was a woodland of spruce and pine ahead, where the ground began to climb toward a low, sinuous ridge that was the only feature on this otherwise flat horizon; it rose like a shadow from the plain, dense with trees but delicately etched around the edges.
It took her an hour to reach it, and a patrol was waiting.
There were three of them.
With the binoculars that they carried, they must have been able to see her from the moment that she set out.
Two of them stood with their rifles levelled at her and the third raised his palm and made a short, brusque, fly-swatting kind of gesture.
Not a word was spoken, but the meaning was clear; go back, or else.
The ‘or else’ was a possibility that she'd already considered and decided to embrace, if it came.
But she turned around, and began the long, slow walk back to the village.
There was a red car waiting outside the farmhouse when she reached it; the car's wheels had cut deep tracks through the long grass, tracks that were only just beginning to fade as the plains wind breathed across them.
Belov was loading up, getting ready to leave, and he seemed to be in a hurry.
He showed no surprise at her obviously unsuccessful attempt to run, nor did he even comment on it.
Instead, he said, ‘In the car, quickly.
We have to go back to the city.’
And then, when she only stared at the car without responding, he added, ‘I said it was a matter of timing.
Trust me.’
What else could she do?
She trusted him, and climbed in.
As they left the village and found the dirt road by which he'd arrived, she could see that he was nervous.
The road was crossed by a locked-down barrier about two kilometres further on, but Belov had a key and the barrier hardly slowed them at all.
Somebody was out of town for two days, he explained, somebody who would block any proposal for her release as a matter of course.
They'd have to move fast.
Alina said, ‘Are you taking a risk for me?’
But instead of answering, Belov said, ‘Is there anyone you can contact?
A friend you can stay with?
It's better that you shouldn't be too easy to find.’
Alina didn't have to think for long.
She said, ‘There's Pavel.’
‘What does he do?’
‘He's just…well, he's someone I know.
He offered me a place to stay, if ever I should need it.’
Her nerve almost failed her when, more than three hours later, they came into the city along Karl Marx Prospekt and made the turn towards Arsenal Street, where number nine waited for her like the transit house to a hundred-year-old hell.
Belov warned her that she'd have to go in, but he promised her that she'd be going no further than the administration block on the street.
She followed him obediently, out of the daylight.
Once inside he left her in a dim, dingy room where she sat with her bundle and the firm belief that the cruel joke would soon be over and she'd be taken back to her ward.
It had all been a dream; perhaps she'd never even left it.
She signed the forms that he brought her to sign, even though the name on them wasn't always her own, and then Belov slipped them into a file under a stack of others and took them away again.
Half an hour later, he was back.
He led her to a door; the door opened out onto the street.
‘Hurry,’ he urged, checking behind him for witnesses, but she had one more question.
‘Why?’ she said.
But even his eyes gave her no answer.
She saw him once more, a couple of months later.
Somehow he'd managed to trace the block where Pavel lived, and he stood in the stairwell and called her name.
This was all that he could do, because the numbers on the apartment doors had all been defaced by the people who lived behind them.
He was turning to leave, when he heard a door opening somewhere above.
They found her file lying open on the desk in his office.
They'd suspected him of rigging her escape, and now their suspicions were confirmed.
They found no mention of Pavel in the file, nor any address for Alina.
Nor did they find one on Belov's body, when they pulled it out of the river the next morning.
RUSALKA (II)
TWENTY-SIX
Dimly doing her best to remember what they'd taught her at school, Diane believed that she'd managed to work out the map reference by the time that Ross Aldridge arrived at the Hall.
She'd left a message for him about an hour before, within minutes of receiving a call from the foresters' agents.
Together they climbed into her Toyota and, with Aldridge keeping the map open on his knees, they drove down toward the lake shore.
Instead of taking the boat house turning, they followed the shoreline in the opposite direction.
After a few minutes they passed the first of the estate workers' cottages, two storey, stone-built, and around three hundred years old.
After the last of these (which, being the keeper's, now stood empty) the road degenerated into a track, and the track degenerated even more over the next mile until it was only twin ruts with grass between them.
Roots had split the ground in places, and the thickest of these jarred the Toyota so hard that Diane had an uneasy vision of the entire truck falling apart as every spot-weld gave at once, leaving her sitting in the driver's seat with the steering wheel in her hands and nothing but open air all around.
Aldridge, hanging on grimly, said, ‘Does it get any worse?’
‘Don't ask me,’ Diane said.
‘I never came this way before.’
What looked like another fifty yards on the map turned out to be another quarter-mile of cart track.
It brought them out into a grassy clearing by the lake, a shallow bay  with a fringe of stony beach.
Diane pulled in as soon as the ground was level enough.
They got out.
This was one of the older parts of the forest, and its silence was a thousand-year atmosphere so distilled that it was almost physically affecting.
There were high dark trees on every side with slanting shafts of late morning sunlight, with the lake beyond flat and faintly glittering like a slow moving mirror.
‘Hardly anyone ever comes out this far,’ Diane said, walking toward the middle of the clearing where about half a dozen mounds of earth appeared to have been dug over.
‘We lease the land out to the forestry people, and they've been doing a helicopter survey.’
‘When did you get the call?’
‘This morning.
It showed up when they developed Friday's photographs.’
Diane stopped by the first of the mounds, not too close, and waited for Aldridge to catch up.
She already knew what she was going to see, but the knowledge didn't make it any less unpleasant.
The mound was no mound at all, but actually a deer; a very dead deer, and a long way from fresh.
Its eyes and part of its face were gone, and its belly had swollen up hard and tight.
‘You explain it,’ Diane said.
‘I can't.’
Aldridge glanced around the clearing at the others.
‘You'd do better to ask your gamekeeper,’ he said.
‘I would, but he quit just after I got here.’
‘Why's that?’
‘I told him to.
He was taking more from local butchers than he was in wages.
I've advertised for a replacement, but I haven't filled the job yet.
Could this be a revenge thing?’
‘I wouldn't have thought so,’ Aldridge said, walking over to the next one.
‘Not from a keeper, killing stock.’’
Poachers, then, using poison?’
‘We'll need a vet's report to be sure.
But poisoned meat isn't much use to anybody, is it?’
‘Well,’ Diane said, with an edge of exasperation in her voice that she couldn't fully conceal, ‘what do you reckon?’
Aldridge shook his head.
He seemed to be finding it more than puzzling.
The bodies all appeared to be at slightly different stages of decomposition; the one before them now looked to be the most recent of them all.
It carried flies like a nimbus of stars.
He prodded a limb with the toe of his boot, but it was rigid.
He tried harder, and the whole carcase moved a little and water came from the animal's nose and mouth.
Weird, Diane was thinking, as he then put a foot on the animal's side and pressed down.
The reaction was immediate.
It collapsed like a punctured airbag, except that what came forth was not air but rank, fetid water, vomiting out in a copious stream and bringing with it a stench that sent them both staggering back several paces.
‘Christ,’ Aldridge said.
‘I only ever had that once before.
It's a drowning smell.’
Diane knew that she'd gone pale.
‘How could they drown?’ she said.
‘They're yards from the lake.’
‘I don't know.
Could be a disease with the same kind of effect, some kind of bloat.
Look, could you get hold of some petrol and some plastic sheet?’
‘I should think so.’
‘Well, get some of your lads down here before dark.’
He indicated the most recent-looking of the bodies.
‘Have them cover that stag with the polythene and then drag the others together and burn them.
Tell them to use gloves and then throw the gloves on the fire when they've done, and then make sure they all go back and have a good scrub down.’
‘You think it's that serious?’
Diane said as they walked back towards the pickup.
‘I don't think anything.
I'm only playing safe.
I'll get  in touch with the agriculture people and get them to send someone out first thing tomorrow.’
Diane nodded, and then sighed.
‘I could have done without this,’ she said, and then she got into the truck.
Ross Aldridge looked back at the six deer.
‘So could they, I should think,’ he said.
That evening Ted Hammond emerged from his house, wearing the old dressing-gown in which he seemed to be spending most of his time these days, and carrying a stiff drink.
He took one of the outdoor chairs from the stack at the end of the nearest jetty.
It was a fine night, no mist on the lake at all.
The air was warm, and the stars were sharp and cold.
Someone on a boat out there was having a party, people singing and making more noise than the music they were playing.
He wished them well.
But he didn't wish that he was with them.
He sat, contemplating the few lights that showed at this hour.
Some kind of a fire appeared to be burning far away on the opposite shore, a tiny pinhole in the screen of night.
Ted was awake and out here because he'd been hearing Wayne speaking to him, and he was worried about his sanity.
It had happened several times in the weeks since the funeral, and it scared him.
The voice always seemed to come from the shadows or from somewhere just aside from where he was looking; and usually the words didn't make any sense, and they passed through his mind so quickly that they'd gone before he could reach for them.
He resisted any temptation to treat this as some kind of a revelation because Wayne was dead, and talked to nobody.
The plain message to Ted, actual words apart, was that he was cracking up.
He'd spent most of the evening wrestling with the one fragment that he'd managed to retain, picked out of the air behind him as he'd been standing at the cooker watching his soup boil.
He couldn't be sure, but it had sounded like,We're with her, now .
But with who?
His best guess was that the reference was to Nerys, that his unconscious mind had been looking for comfort in the prospect that Wayne would at least be with his mother, in which case he decided that there was probably some hope for his mental state after all.
In many ways, he would have preferred to have been able to give himself over to the delusion and accept it as truth; but there seemed to be a definite boundary here, and it wasn't his choice whether or not he crossed it.
Just before coming out, he'd phoned the health centre and left a message on their answering machine as his first step in getting himself along to a psychiatrist.
It still wasn't too late to back out.
But he didn't think that he would.
The blaze across the water flared, and then died down a little.
The party boat came to the end of its song, and the party people gave themselves a round of applause.
Two small signals in the night, affirmations of existence from two groups of people who knew nothing of Ted or of each other.
We're with her, now.
Ted didn't feel good.
But he felt a little better.
Tom Amis lay on his fold-down bed in a back room of the ski centre, an unread paperback lying open on his chest.
He was bored, and he was lonely.
The road gang had turned up unexpectedly that afternoon and had laid and rolled more than two hundred yards of hot tarmac from the main building all the way around to the other side of the restaurant block; now the place didn't look quite so much like a building site any more, and winter opening seemed more of a possibility.
It had made for a lively few hours but now that they'd gone the place seemed oddly, unnaturally quiet again.
He didn't know when they'd be back; all he knew was that his boss had some kind of private deal going with the gang foreman of a motorway sub-contractor, and the boys always appeared without notice, worked at the speed  of practised moonlighters, and probably got their money in a plain envelope passed under a pub table somewhere.
There were five of them, and whenever they arrived they came up the woodland track on a big spreader wagon with a battered old van bouncing along behind.
They were as ugly as sin and they had no conversation, and he missed them already.
Christ, he thought to himself, I must be getting desperate.
He could have taken the isolation better if it wasn't for the batteries in his radio dying on him without warning; usually they faded over a couple of nights but this time it was just zonk , no signal.
He couldn't even run down to the village to get a new set — they had them in the marina shop at the auto-marine-because his van was temporarily off the road.
Now, when he tried to read instead, the lights kept flickering and screwing up his concentration.
He knew what it was — tank sediment kept getting into the fuel pipe that fed the generator — but short of a total drain and cleanout, he didn't know of any way to cure it.
When it got really bad, like when it cut out completely, he'd take a wrench out and tap all the way along the pipe; sometimes that would help, but having to do it could be a real pain.
Especially if it meant he had to go out into the dark.
He'd never had any particular fear of darkness, but over the past few weeks he seemed to have grown more and more nervous at night.
He couldn't explain it.
But his skin would crawl as if he'd somehow sensed that he was being watched, and he'd switch on every light that he could find, including the big spotlights out over what would one day become the car park.
The entire ski centre would then be laid out before him, a brightly-lit, deserted playland with one sole scared occupant looking out towards the woods.
And then he'd lock the doors to the reception block, and he'd retire to his back room and make himself as small as a child on his bunk in the corner.
Nothing was hanging together right any more.
Everything seemed to be falling apart.
You could even sense it in  the village, ever since those two kids had been drowned; business was running as usual, but the spirit of the place somehow wasn't quite the same.
Most people probably noticed nothing, but Amis, perhaps because he was an outsider, could feel it like a pulse.
Sometimes he thought that he'd have liked nothing more than to be like Michael of the tarmac boys, gap-toothed and thick-headed and with no greater concern than that of pissing his money away at a speed roughly equal to that at which he made it, but he had to make do with the hand that he'd been dealt — thin-skinned and solitary, one of nature's observers.
The lights went out on him.
Damn.
Well, it was late — the simplest answer would be to drop the book on the floor, throw off his T-shirt and his jeans, and crawl under the covers and go to sleep.
But it wasn't that late, and he wasn't particularly tired, and he knew that he'd do little more than lie there on the hard mattress tormenting himself with thoughts of that waitress.
It had been fun, for a while, but he was too old to be entirely at ease with such fantasies.
They were for teenagers, looking ahead to a life where anything wonderful could happen.
At Amis's stage of existence, the options were narrowing fast and he knew that out of all the possibilities, wonderful was hardly the most likely.
He'd spoken to her often enough.
For a while, there, he'd as good as haunted the place in the late afternoons…but then the van had broken down and getting into town hadn't been so easy, and besides the restaurant had become so damned busy that he'd become just another face in an ever-changing crowd.
It didn't seem hopeless.
It was hopeless, and he knew it.
He tossed the book aside and swung his legs off the bed, reaching underneath for the flashlight that he always kept handy.
The generator itself was around the back of the reception block, protected from interference or vandalism by a welded metal walk-in cage inside a lean-to shed.
Amis  never bothered to close the cage door; he had enough keys to lug around and remember, and didn't want to add to them.
The night was warm.
He could see stars.
He'd never seen stars like he'd seen them around here, cold and diamond-sharp and so many.
He walked barefoot around the reception building, on the new tarmac for the first few strides and then onto the beaten earth pathway that would lead to the back, his flashlight beam ranging over the ground as he moved.
There was silence, no regular chug-chug-chug of the working generator, which meant that it had to have stalled.
In the silence he was aware of the woodland, standing just out of reach.
Sometimes he could feel as if this were a frontier post, with everything out there just waiting and passing time until the opportunity came to grab the territory back.
Well, it wouldn't happen.
Too much money had gone into the place for that, now.
Pity that it hadn't extended to something better than this undersized diesel-driven power supply.
Mains electricity was supposedly going to be brought in at some stage, but God only knew when that would be.
Once inside the shed, Amis entered the cage and cast around for the big wrench that he'd taken to keeping in here.
When he found it, he tapped along the feed pipe at random and then gave a couple of good, square bangs on the connectors before he tried the starter button.
The generator caught immediately, coughed once, and then ran on smoothly.
He switched off the flashlight as he came back around the dirt path.
The big lights were on again now, and he wouldn't need it.
Someone was waiting for him.
He stopped, and she turned.
It seemed as bright as day out on the newly-laid forecourt and it was as if she'd been caught by the lights, trapped and dazed like a rabbit on a long country road.
He tried to  speak, and all that he could say was, ‘Where did you come from?’
And Alina said, ‘Is that what you call a welcome?’
For a moment, he couldn't move.
There was no way of explaining this, no parallel that he could reach for other than to say: that he'd once made a wish, and the wish now appeared to have come true.
And then he took a step toward her, the dead flashlight still in his hand, and he said, ‘I'm sorry, you gave me a scare.
How did you get here?’
‘I walked.’
He must have looked disbelieving, because she went on, ‘I walk a lot at night, on my own.
It's a good time for thinking things over.’
‘But it's miles.’
‘Not so many.
And at this hour, I have all the time that I need.’
A sudden realisation seemed to trouble her.
‘Were you sleeping?
Did I come too late?’
‘Sleeping?
No,’ Amis reassured her, hurriedly.
‘Just kind of…lazing around.’
She nodded, as if this was what she'd been expecting, and then she took what was probably her first real look at her surroundings.
A designer village, was the intended effect; sidelights along the pathways, mauve-tinted floods on the buildings, and a mini-spot on each of the directional signs wherever two paths joined.
When the place was up and running, with guests in all the woodland chalets and the cafeteria open until late, it would feel safe at any hour; and now that he was no longer alone here, it seemed that way now.
She said, ‘So this is where you've been working.’
‘Yeah,’ Amis said.
‘Want to take a look around?’
His head was spinning as he led her into the reception building.
What was he going to say to her?
And why was she really here?
All that he could think of was to show her his work on the counter and the panelling, which was probably as good as anything that he'd ever done.
For a moment, when he'd first stepped back from it, he'd  experienced the satisfaction of the true craftsman.
By comparison, what he'd been doing in the cafeteria block was mere journeyman stuff.
He'd show her, and even if she didn't appreciate the work it would perhaps give him a moment to think, to recover his poise.
She said, ‘Did I really scare you?’
‘Surprised me, that's all.
I don't see many people up here.’
She looked out of the big foyer window, which ran from the floor almost to the ceiling, at the empty pathways and the silent buildings outside.
She said, ‘It's quiet.
I think I could like it here.’
‘So did I. The feeling wears off.’
She stared out for a moment longer, and then she turned her attention back inside.
She gave him a brief smile, and a thrill ran through him like a low current of electricity.
She moved over and touched the polished wood of the counter.
She said, ‘How much of this did you do?’
‘All of it,’ he said.
‘All of this, and the panelling, and all the carving.
Are you really interested?’
‘Of course,’ she said, and then she looked at him.
‘You always work alone?’
‘It's what I prefer.’
‘And there's no one else here.’
‘No.’
She let her hand fall from the counter, her eyes still on him and seeming to see deeper into him than was immediately comfortable.
She said, ‘And are you happy?’
She'd caught him off-guard again, because this wasn't what he was expecting.
It was a serious question.
But he couldn't bring himself to give it a serious answer.
‘Well,’ he said.
‘What's happy, anyway?’
But she wouldn't be put off.
‘I know what you're feeling,’ she said earnestly, ‘that's why I came.’
She took a step toward him.
‘I think I can help you.’
Oh, wow…but now, inexplicably, he felt an urge to  back away, to turn and run from her.
Still trying vainly to keep it light, he said, ‘Thanks for the thought.’
‘I mean it,’ Alina said, her gaze so searching now that Amis couldn't break contact or look away.
‘I know what it's like.
You sit up here alone and you think of all the friends you made, and lost.
You think of women you've known and wish you'd known better, and you wonder what they're doing now.
You look at your life, and it's like all the good things you ever wanted are loaded up onto a train that you didn't run quite fast enough to catch.
And you know what you miss most of all?’
He tried to crack a grin, and his face felt like breaking plaster.
He said, ‘Why don't you tell me?’
‘You miss having someone you can trust enough to tell them about it.
You think that you'll die without there being anyone who's ever seen who you really are.
Now, tell me if I'm wrong.’
‘What do you expect me to say?’
But her gaze was beyond words; even if he said nothing at all, she could read him with ease.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘I can give you what you need.’
‘Really?’
One simple word, and his voice caught on it and gave him away.
‘Turn around,’ she suggested, her hand on his arm as she steered him to face the big window.
‘Look outside.’
The lights out there were flickering again, probably getting themselves ready for their second failure of the night.
He'd be alone, in the dark, with Alina.
He said, ‘I thought about asking you up here, sometime.
I thought about it a lot.’
‘I know,’ she said.
‘Hold your breath.’
‘Why?’
‘Don't speak, just listen.’
By now, he was ready to do anything that she asked.
She stood on tiptoe and reached up to cover the lower part of  his face with her hand.
To do this, she had to press against him.
He was putty, she was the sculptor.
She whispered softly into his ear, ‘Do you see the lake from here?’
He couldn't speak because of her hand, but he made a negative-sounding grunt.
This wasn't exactly comfortable, but he could stand it for a while longer.
‘It doesn't matter,’ she went on.
‘Try to think about it.
And think about this.
When I first came here, I was like you.
An outsider.
We're all outsiders in our way, but for me it was even worse than most.
But then I finally stopped resisting and found that there's a life in the land beyond the life of any one person, Thomas; the lives of the people only stand in the way.’
He didn't want to push her away, but he was getting close to his limit; his blood was starting to pound in his ears and he was seeing haloes around all of the lights outside.
‘Join us,’ she whispered, and then two things happened; there was a sharp pain, almost as if he'd swallowed broken glass, as she started to take her hand away, and in that same moment the generator missed another beat and caused the lights to drop for barely a fraction of a second.
The blip of darkness seemed to sweep around the site like a wave.
The glass before them became like a mirror for the briefest time but it was a distorting, ghost-train mirror, more shadow than substance-with his mind adding hallucinatory details to the little that he could see.
He saw not Alina, but something with eyes of blazing green; her hair a long mane strewn with weeds, her dress a dripping shroud, her teeth sharp, her skin pale and scaly as a snake's.
It was over as soon as it had happened, and as he turned in panic he could see that in reality she was exactly as before…except that she was looking at him now in a way that was more detached, stepping back as if to observe whatever he was going to do next.
He took a breath.
But nothing happened.
He tried again, but the air simply wouldn't come.
He looked at Alina, wanting to ask her what she'd done; but she was standing just out of his reach, and watching him with something that looked like compassion.
He was straining hard now, and still nothing was happening; everything had gone a couple of shades darker, and the roaring in his ears drowned out everything else.
He put his hands to his throat, anything to ease the pain and help him to get just a little air…
To find that she'd pinched his windpipe shut.
It must have been in that one moment of darkness, as she'd been taking her hand away.
He couldn't believe the strength that it must have taken.
But he had to.
Why?
Why had she done this to him?
His chest, his entire frame, were like a fire-walker's bed of coals.
But he wouldn't give in to it.
Oh, Christ, just for one breath!
He turned from Alina, trying to retch but with his clogged windpipe preventing even that; he threw himself toward the doors, trying to get out into air, air that he couldn't quite reach.
He burst out into the open.
His tools were all over in the cafeteria, there had to be something that he could use to open himself up.
He'd saw his own damned throat open, if he had to, but he wouldn't let this happen .
He was lying at the bottom of the steps where he'd fallen, pulling up into a near-foetal curl that he couldn't prevent.
He was being drawn into that single point of pain that burned like a hot light.
He was only dimly aware of Alina coming down the steps toward him, only dimly aware of her crouching by him to smooth the hair from his forehead.
He started to shiver, completely out of control now.
He could see the end coming, and it was just as she'd said; the friends he'd made and lost, and the women that he wished he'd known better.
‘There, there,’ he heard her say.
‘It'll soon be over.’
And it was.