

Obituary: Francis Goodman
By TERENCE PEPPER
FRANCIS GOODMAN was one of the many bright talents that flourished in the art of taking fashion and portrait photographs in London in the 1930s.
‘Franzi’ was born in London in 1913, but was brought up from 1919 onwards in Munich, where he first experimented with photography.
The German-Jewish family moved back to London in 1931, where the 18-year-old Goodman took his first job as an apprentice to the leading commercial photographer of the day, Shaw Wildman.
Wildman pioneered advertising and fashion photography in Britain, specifically outdoor location work, as well as creating natural indoor lighting.
Darkroom work for Cecil Beaton (whom he also regularly photographed) and for Peter Rose Pulham (whose studio he took over in Berkeley Square when the latter went to Paris to become a painter) provided Goodman with the visual stimulus that helped create his most imaginative work.
By the mid-1930s his work was regularly appearing in all the society magazines as well as in Harper's Bazaar (then under the creative art editorship of AY McPeake), in the company of his avant-garde contemporaries such as Rose Pulham, Winifred Casson and Barbara Ker-Seymer and other innovators of the time.
Goodman's Thirties portraits taken in the studio often relied on specially-painted backdrops, such as John Banting produced for his work with Ker-Seymer, or echoed the classic compositional motifs pioneered by Hoyningen Huene and adapted by Wildman.
Unfortunately, most of his work from this period — with the exception of two portraits of Anna May Wong and Gertrude Lawrence — was lost in the Second World War, and is only traceable in the prestigious pages of The Studio's Photography Year Book of 1935.
Known as FJ Gutmann in the 1930s, he anglicised his name to Goodman for the war years, serving in the ranks as a soldier before becoming attached to the Royal Air Force's Photographic Interpretation Unit at Medmenham by the war's end.
He returned to portraiture in 1945, this time working out of the studio in his sitters' home environment with three portable floods.
An album of Goodman's contact prints, interleaved with letters from his sitters, survives in the National Portrait Gallery, and includes a variety of subjects from the worlds of art, theatre, design, cinema and society.
Georgia and Sacheverell Sitwell pose pensively.
His portraits of Terence Rattigan, Ralph Richardson and Peter Ustinov capture in their concentrated poses their innate intelligence and creative flair.
The baroque furnishings or simple motifs that accompany other subjects such as the stage designer James Bailey or Anne, Viscountess Norwich, give the portraits a resonance and pay tribute to the influence of Peter Rose Pulham as well as showing Goodman's own mastery of lighting to create sculptural effects.
Graham Sutherland, opposite a whole page of contacts, enthuses in a 1946 letter: ‘Your photographs are wonderfully good; easily the best we have ever had taken, and I can see how important was the time and care which you took over the composition and lighting and the idea…
I like them all without exception.’
In the 1950s Goodman moved into more social photography for William Hickey, as well as fashion for magazines such as the Gentlemen's Quarterly, using trend-setters such as Douglas Fairbanks Jnr, Patrick Lichfield and David Hicks to model clothes.
But most of the rest of his career was as a travel photographer working for P & O and Union Castle, as well as the tourist boards for the Bahamas, Barbados and Jamaica, where he went every second winter to photograph personalities such as Joan Crawford or Richard Lester, and incidentally took the last photographs of Ian Fleming and Noel Coward.
Goodman was always hard up and enjoyed the friendship and generosity of friends such as Francis Bacon who would help him out.
Always self-deprecating and modest, he fought bravely a long struggle against cancer, remaining cheerful and full of amusing unrepeatable anecdotes.
After much hesitation he had at last begun work on an autobiography which, sadly, remains unfinished.
Obituary: Chen Boda
By ANDREW HIGGINS
AN IDEOLOGUE dependent on others for ideas and a power broker with no real authority of his own, Chen Boda became one of China's most feared and then reviled political hatchet men thanks to one all-important trait — his unflinching loyalty to Mao Tse-tung.
As Mao's personal secretary and speechwriter for over 30 years, Chen was one of the ‘Great Helmsman’ 's closest confidants, writing countless tracts and playing a key role in the Cultural Revolution, Mao's catastrophic campaign to purify the Communist party hierarchy and revive what he imagined to be China's fading revolutionary ardour in the 1960s.
Born in the coastal province of Fujian in 1904, Chen began serving Mao in Yenan, the remote village in northwest China where the Red Army took refuge and regained its strength at the end of the Long March in 1937.
While holding no important posts within the party and often dismissed as little more than a colourless clerk of little talent by Mao's colleagues, he distinguished himself as a devoted and tireless servant both of Mao and his new wife Jiang Qing — qualities that would later prove far more important than any formal title.
After the Communist victory in 1949, Chen followed Mao to Peking, where he worked quietly and largely anonymously for nearly a decade.
But, as Mao grew increasingly suspicious of and isolated from more distinguished revolutionary veterans, he turned increasingly to his secretary for help as he tried to rally support for more radical, leftist policies.
Appointed to the politburo and then made founding editor of the theoretical journal Hong Qi ('Red Flag') in 1958, Chen wrote numerous articles attacking ‘revisionism’ and supporting Mao's disastrous ‘Great Leap Forward’, an ill-conceived and brutally executed drive for rapid industrialisation and rural collectivisation now blamed for the deaths of more than 15 million people.
Chen is credited with coining the term ‘people's commune’, the now discredited model of huge collective farms that, according to Mao, would catapult China into a state of pure communism almost overnight.
But as with all his writings, he contributed phrases rather than ideas, relying on Mao for the latter.
The subsequent economic ruin forced Mao to rein in the ‘Great Leap’ radical experiments in social engineering.
And, as Mao's reputation slipped, so too did Chen's.
In 1966, however, when Mao began his dramatic bid for absolute power, using young Red Guards to discredit and persecute his old rivals within the party, Chen again rose to the occasion, acting as a mouthpiece for Mao's increasingly scrambled thoughts and policies.
Chen is even said to have written, or at least supervised at Mao's behest, the Cultural Revolution's best-known tract — an hysterical call to arms against ‘counter-revolutionaries’ printed in the People's Daily in April 1966 under the title ‘Sweep away all ghosts and monsters.’
To carry out a wholesale purge of the party apparatus, Mao appointed Chen as head of the Cultural Revolution Group, a kitchen cabinet of loyal disciples, including Mao's wife Jiang Qing, that was to lead the assault on the party hierarchy.
The group was finally disbanded in 1969, by which time China had been plunged into virtual anarchy and economic collapse.
Again forced to moderate his ambitions, Mao called in the army to restore order.
During his nearly three years as effective day-to-day leader of the Cultural Revolution, Chen, along with Jiang Qing and Mao's security chief Kang Sheng, helped orchestrate campaigns of vilification and persecution against thousands of party cadres, including the then head of state Liu Shaoqi, who later died alone in a bank vault used as a cell.
In a move for which he would later pay, he called for the persecution of Deng Xiaoping, who was banished from office and attacked as second only to Liu as China's ‘leading capitalist roader’.
Perhaps still smarting from his lowly position and lack of respect in Yenan 30 years before, he publicly condemned Deng as arrogant and dangerously ambitious: ‘To discuss with Deng Xiaoping as equals is more difficult than to put a ladder against heaven.’
As the fervour of the Cultural Revolution wound down, Chen too fell from favour, losing, it would seem, even Mao's confidence.
With no real power-base of his own, he was one of the first radicals to suffer disgrace.
Linked to an alleged coup attempt by Mao's then heir-apparent Lin Biao in 1971, Chen was arrested and reviled as a traitor.
His exact involvement, if any, with Lin Biao's purported plot remains — like the entire episode -shrouded in mystery.
To this day the party has never quite healed the deep wounds left by what remains probably its most traumatic internal crisis.
After years of silence about his fate, Chen reappeared in public in 1980 to stand trial along with Mao's widow Jiang Qing and other members of the so-called ‘Gang of Four’.
Given a relatively lenient sentence of 18 years (Jiang Qing and others were given suspended death sentences), Chen was later released from jail ‘in consideration of age and poor health’.
Despite his notoriety during the Cultural Revolution, Chen even secured a limited rehabilitation in the last years of his life and was allowed to do historical research at the Literature and History Museum in Peking.
In an unusual concession to a man once pilloried daily for his association with the Cultural Revolution and Mao's despised widow Jiang Qing, his remains were cremated at Peking's Babaoshan cemetery, a privilege normally reserved for senior cadres.
The People's Daily, the Communist party organ, published news of his death nearly two weeks late but avoided any harsh commentary.
Such signs of relative forgiveness on the part of the leaders he had persecuted so relentlessly in the past, particularly Deng Xiaoping, offer perhaps the clearest insight into Chen's career: he had never been a political force in his own right but merely a faithful interpreter and executor of Mao's will.
Obedience, even misguided, is a quality the Communist party admires.
Obituary: Denis Serjeant
By MICHAEL MANSER
LIKE the Royal Academy of Arts, Denis Serjeant, its Surveyor, was brilliant and mildly maverick.
His achievements at the RA in his 10 years of office were immense, innovative and all modestly carried through.
As architect to Burlington House, he was conscious of his debt to his predecessors: Sydney Smirke, EM Barry, Norman Shaw.
He introduced new boilers in the boilerhouse under the main galleries; he installed a completely new steel structure in the ceiling above the entrance hall — without harming the ceiling paintings by Benjamin West and Angelica Kauffmann; he rebuilt the goods lift to carry loads of up to three tonnes into the galleries; he refurbished the public cloakrooms.
More recently, he relocated the Schools Canteen from dingy basement to gleaming mezzanine and at the time of his death had nearly completed his greatest coup.
This is an ingenious and unique method, devised with Professor Pat O'Sullivan, of environmental tuning in the great Victorian galleries.
Rather than imposing artificial conditions, Serjeant allied Victorian engineering to twentieth-century control systems: he deployed the forces of natural convection, rather than cumbersome, mechanically-powered plant, to ensure a regulated flow of humidified and heated air through the galleries.
This will have been achieved at modest cost with, it seems likely, triumphant results.
Born in 1927, Denis Serjeant qualified as an architect the hard way, by taking external examinations whilst articled to an Oxford architect.
There followed three years in a furniture factory and 10 years working in the architectural practice of Sheppard Robson, where he was involved in educational buildings, including the chapel of Churchill College, Cambridge.
Serjeant was then stricken with severe arthritis and was for a period chair-bound.
Unable to practise, he turned to teaching at Cheltenham School of Architecture close to the home he had designed and substantially built at Malvern, despite his affliction, and became deputy principal.
He also initiated the successful architectural competition for the regeneration of a run-down area of Worcester.
In 1979 Serjeant's former employer Richard Sheppard recommended him for the post of Surveyor to the Royal Academy.
The offer coincided with a move to separate the Cheltenham Schools of Architecture and Art, with which he disagreed, so he applied for the post and succeeded despite his now apparent and debilitating illness.
Denis Serjeant and the Academy were a natural union.
In his letter of acceptance he wrote, ‘I gladly accept and I shall do all I can for you,’ and he did literally that.
He loved the place and everyone it involved.
In the then president, Sir Hugh Casson, he found a kindred spirit.
When asked later how he knew where to begin he replied, ‘I didn't — and Sir Hugh Casson said ‘Just absorb the atmosphere’.'
Serjeant sustained his increasingly serious illness with signal fortitude and uproarious humour.
His many enthusiasms extended to owning a couple of elderly Rolls-Royces, attempting to restart a School of Architecture at the RA, submitting with success his own drawings to the Summer Exhibition and vigorously supporting home-town local causes, including the Malvern Arts Club.
He had a passionate interest in music and opera which led him to design several operatic sets.
In appearance tall, bald and gangling, eyes alight with pleasure, tufts of hair in disarray, he was the personification of a slightly mad professor.
His ritual annual speeches, as he welcomed the assembly to the Royal Academy evening of the RIBA Council Dinner Club, were exponentially hilarious.
Last July, in peak form, pirouetting on his toes and gesticulating wildly, he was wickedly funny and amazingly indiscreet.
At the same time he could be penetratingly serious; but, above all, he was poignantly lovable.
Obituary: David Cathcart King
By JOHN R. KENYON
DAVID KING, ‘King of the Castle’, was one of the great authorities on the medieval castle and author of a definitive catalogue of all castles built in England and Wales.
Born in 1913, he was educated at Clifton College and went on to read law at Bristol University.
His service in the Royal Artillery in the Second World War took him to the Middle East, and there he was able to develop his interest in military architecture through the study of the citadel at Damascus, and the siege of the crusader castle of Krak des Chevaliers.
The results were eventually published after the war.
King lost a leg during war service in Italy, an event which makes his thorough surveys of castles, notably those in Wales, even more remarkable.
He made teaching his career and taught history and mathematics in preparatory schools in Somerset.
His spare time was devoted to the study of the castle, in which he was ably assisted by Clifford Perks, his former collaborator on several papers, and later by Mark Cheshire, a former pupil.
In the 1950s and 1960s the royal castles were examined in detail by various authorities, but it was the great baronial buildings in Wales that attracted King.
From the 1950s through to the early 1980s he published an important series of papers, the majority in the Cambrian Archaeological Association's Archaeologia Cambrensis, notably on the Pembrokeshire castles of Carew, Manorbier and Pembroke, and the native Welsh castles of Dinas Bran and Caergwrle in the north of the principality.
At the same time as he was working on individual buildings, King produced his lists of all the castles in Wales and the Marches, as well as more detailed papers on the counties of Breconshire and Cardiganshire.
His fieldwork in England and Wales led him to visit virtually every castle with visible remains, from humble earthwork upwards, culminating in the publication of his Castellarium Anglicanum (1983).
This two-volume work details all the castles built in England and Wales, and reference will always be made to it as long as castles are studied.
However, it is King's work in Wales that is his great legacy.
He was a frequent attender of the Chateau Gaillard European Castle Studies conferences, and contributed several papers to the published proceedings.
He always had a deep interest in siege engines and the construction of scale working models of these machines; one of the memorable events of the Chateau Gaillard conference at Durham University was witnessing David's experiments with his machines on the campus lawns, using marbles for ammunition.
In 1962 he was elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London and later, from 1976 to 1977, he served as President of the Cambrian Archaelogical Association.
In 1987 the University of Wales Press published a collection of essays written by his admirers in his honour.
COURT CIRCULAR
By JOHN R. KENYON
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 3 October: The Princess Royal, President, Save the Children Fund, this morning visited the Save the Children Fund Shop at 104 High Street, Orpington, and was received on arrival by the Save the Children Fund Area Representative for South London (Lady Neil).
Her Royal Highness this afternoon opened the new Head Office Building for the Woolwich Equitable Building Society, Watling Street, Bexleyheath, and received a donation from employees for the Save the Children Fund.
The Princess was received on arrival by the Chairman of Woolwich Equitable Building Society (Mr Alan McLintock).
The Princess Royal, Chancellor of the University of London, this afternoon visited the Institute of Zoology at London Zoo, Regent's Park, in celebration of the accession of the Institute of Zoology of the Royal Zoological Society to the University of London and was received on arrival by the Lord Mayor of Westminster (Councillor Simon Mabey).
This evening Her Royal Highness, Patron of the British Nutrition Foundation, attended a Dinner at the Natural History Museum (Chairman of the Council of the British Nutrition Foundation, Dr Jack Edelman).
Mrs Malcolm Wallace was in attendance.
Subsequently Her Royal Highness, Patron, Swansea Festival of Music and the Arts, attended a concert given by the London Philharmonic Orchestra in the Brangwyn Hall, Swansea.
The Princess of Wales travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Miss Anne Beckwith-Smith and Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN were in attendance.
The Lady Mary Mumford was in attendance.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Duchess of York opens the new terminal at Kent International Airport; and later, as Patron of Museums Year 1989, visits the Minster Agricultural and Rural Life Museum, Thanet, Kent.
The Princess Royal, President, The Save the Children Fund, visits the Lifechance Project at Cricket Road, Cowley, Oxford; later, as Patron, Universiade ‘91 World Student Games, visits Sheffield; and, later, attends the Annual General Meeting and Conference of the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux at York University.
Princess Margaret, Grand President of St John Ambulance Association and Brigade, attends a reception and dinner to be given by Garrard and Company in aid of the Order of St John.
The Duke of Gloucester attends a Gala Concert and Dinner hosted by The National Trust, at Osterley Park House, Isleworth.
The Duchess of Kent, as Patron of the Royal Northern College of Music, presides at the launch of their Appeal; opens Phase of the Manchester Science Park; and attends the South Manchester Health Authority's Annual Nurse Prize Giving Ceremony.
Princess Alexandra opens the 1989 Park Lane Hotel Antiques Fair, London W1.
Appointments
Gazette Page 21
Anniversaries
By JOHN R. KENYON
On this day: Peterborough Cathedral was consecrated, 1238; Miles Coverdale's translation of the Bible was published, 1535; William Smith founded the Boys Brigade, Glasgow 1883; the first public escalator was opened, Earl's Court underground station 1911; Hitler and Mussolini met at the Brenner Pass, 1940; the USSR launched Sputnik 1, the world's first artificial satellite, 1957; the first transatlantic passenger jet service started operating, 1958; USSR's Lunik III, took the first close-up pictures of the moon, 1959; Pope Paul VI visited New York, the first pope to visit America, 1965.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 21
Wills
By JOHN R. KENYON
Sir Douglas Peter Crossman, of Sandy, Bedfordshire, former chairman of Mann Crossman Paulin and later of Watney Mann, chairman of the Brewers’ Society 1968-69 Deputy Lieutenant of Huntingdonshire 1958 and chairman of the National Union of the Conservative Party 1969, left estate valued at £6,277,893 net.
He left £1,000 to the Parish of Waresley, Sandy, for the upkeep of the church.