

Locked into poverty by poor language
By JANET DALEY
SOME months ago I saw a television documentary on hostels for young homeless people in London.
The voice-over described the need for accommodation for the thousands of unemployed youngsters who pour hopefully into London every year, while the camera panned around the sparse but well-kept lodgings.
We found ourselves in the kitchen where a well-groomed girl was washing up -one of the tasks for which residents were responsible in this co-operative household.
As the narrator explained that ‘Jane would soon have to move on’, because she was reaching the limit of her maximum stay in the council-owned hostel, we watched her rinse the sink, wipe the draining board and hang up the dishcloth.
After the hostel, the voice persevered, the future for Jane looked bleak.
She had no prospect of a job and, without even a roof over her head, she was an automatic candidate for cardboard city — the community of derelicts who survive on the capital's streets, in danger of sinking into a subculture of drugs and crime.
I was frankly suspicious.
Why should this presentable, able-bodied girl who seemed so willing and meticulous in carrying out her chores, find herself in such a hopeless position?
Surely London employers were suffering from a desperate shortage of school-leavers?
Even without paper qualifications, a well-motivated young girl should be able to find work as a shop assistant, a waitress, an office junior.
There had to be some missing piece to Jane's story.
Then she was interviewed.
Out of the mouth of this serious, pretty girl came an impenetrable, sub-literate provincial dialect.
As it happens, it was Geordie in origin but it might equally well have been Liverpool or Sheffield.
Jane was not without either self-respect or sincerity.
She was not even inarticulate in the sense that she could express her own feelings convincingly.
She was just very nearly unintelligible and her speech was full of that idiomatic ungrammaticalness which characterises the true dialect speaker.
Her 12 years of compulsory schooling had left her exactly where they had found her — locked into the social and economic limitations of the milieu in which she was born.
Who was responsible for this pleasant girl being effectively unemployable?
Educational dogmatists who insist that middle-class values (and hence, speech) must not be foisted on working-class children; a society which has never had any real commitment to the idea of education as a key to social mobility; guilt-ridden liberal sentimentality about working-class cultural identity.
Complacency about teaching people to speak their own language has passed through many historical phases in Britain.
When education in the true sense existed only for the inheriting classes, acceptable spoken English was something one was raised with at home.
When the public schools were created to educate the children of the middle classes (as opposed to the aristocracy, who were educated by tutors) they could inculcate a more formalised standard English which would equip their pupils for empire, civil service and the cosmopolitan professions.
For the rest, standards of literacy were offered which were appropriate to the needs of an industrial workforce.
As compulsory state education absorbed the higgledy-piggledy assortment of church, charity and board grammar schools which had emerged over the 200 or so years of industrial Britain, the essentially utilitarian character of schooling was never quite extinguished.
Unlike the Calvinist idea of education which prevails in the United States where education is seen as essential to an informed, participating democratic citizenry, British education existed to produce people who would occupy certain slots in a structure.
Schooling was to train you for some largely predetermined end, whether it was a middle or a working-class one, not to equip you with the flexible, self-determining wherewithal for an open-ended future.
Hence, the traditional indifference (now obscured by educational theorists' cant) to the need to give children the uniquely essential means for social liberation: an ability to speak and write their own language correctly.
I am not talking here about accents.
There is no need to enforce a certain form of pronunciation on the varying regions of Britain (although the dropped ‘h’ is a borderline case — it is probably sufficiently stigmatising to require correction).
It is systematically ungrammatical colloquial speech which embeds people in their feudal ancestry.
American schools are widely criticised in Britain for their ‘authoritarian’ teaching of spoken and written language.
The rigidity of American standards is closely related to the seriousness with which meritocracy and classlessness are taken as ideals.
For the United States, the assimilation of wave after wave of immigrants into an egalitarian society was more than a pious hope.
It was an economic and political necessity.
It is only in the last generation that British education has begun to grasp the idea that schooling should maximise the opportunity of every individual child.
It was a cruel irony that that this movement coincided with a muddled, patronising reluctance to admit that working-class life was culturally impoverished.
Self-improvement and upward mobility became suspect in the general Sixties backlash against bourgeois materialism.
As a result, those at the bottom of the social heap were abandoned in a perverse kind of educational apartheid.
People like Jane are left to pay the price.
Smacking — a mother's dilemma: How should a child be punished?
Lee Rodwell on the conflicting views that leave her feeling muddled and guilty
By LEE RODWELL
MY MOTHER smacked me.
I smack my children.
The difference is that she never felt guilty about it, whereas I, who have devoured baby and child books since my first pregnancy test was positive, do.
I feel guilty because the current childcare experts tell me that — in the words of Penelope Leach (psychologist and author of the classic Baby and Child)— smacking is wrong.
That it is a short-cut to nowhere.
That, far from producing better disciplined people, smacking makes it much more difficult to teach children how to behave.
Yet parents who smack their children are far more common than those who do not.
John and Elizabeth Newson, authors of a report into the extent of parental punishment in the UK published yesterday, say: ‘The majority of British parents interviewed seems to believe that physical punishment is an inevitable and probably necessary aspect of ordinary child upbringing.’
The message behind the report is that the majority of parents has got it all wrong.
The research, carried out over 30 years by the joint directors of the Child Development Research Unit at Nottingham University, shows that two-thirds of babies are smacked before the age of one, that three-quarters of four-year-olds are smacked once a week or more, and that by the age of seven, 22 per cent have been hit with implements.
By the age of seven, differences between boys and girls have emerged, with boys being more likely to be smacked once a week than girls.
The report has been published by Approach (the Association to Protect All Children Ltd), a new charity linked to Epoch (End Physical Punishment of Children), a national campaign which was launched in April.
When I read the Epoch literature I am always convinced by it.
Epoch says you should withdraw your attention when faced with a tiresome child.
If the behaviour cannot be ignored and it makes you cross, say so.
Talk, scream, walk out of the room, send the child out of the room — but do not smack.
It is only later, when I am faced with real life, that the theories no longer seem so reasonable.
Lynette Burrows agrees.
A teacher and mother of six children (the youngest is now 12), she used to run a playschool and was also a registered childminder.
A new edition of her book, Good Children, is being published this autumn.
She says: ‘These theories bear no relation to what children are really like.
Take the point about withdrawing attention.
For someone like me with a lot of children it would be like running a penal colony.
‘You'd have to remember who you weren't speaking to, who was on fatigues.
Why should you have to go round with a frozen face because a child has kicked the cat?
It creates an unpleasant atmosphere for the other children and you are effectively punishing yourself.
‘For some children it would give them the opportunity to wreak mayhem, while other, more sensitive children would be deeply affected out of all proportion to what they had done.
Smacking, on the other hand, is a short, sharp shock.
‘As for saying that smacking can escalate into abuse, surely that's true of emotional punishment too.
If you are too stupid to know when to draw the line physically then you will be too stupid to know when to stop emotionally as well.
‘It's absolute piffle to say that smacking children teaches them that using violence is OK.
There are two kinds of violence — good or bad.
It's the difference between the person who knocks you down to take your purse and the person who knocks him down to come to your rescue.’
Burrows believes that smacking is as necessary as kissing and cuddling, and finds it ironic that the same kind of arguments about parents not knowing when to stop are used to undermine our instincts in both cases.
She says: ‘Smacking is a way of educating the aggressive instincts of children.
Aggression isn't something children learn from their parents, they are born with it.
I've talked to some of my son's teachers about bullying in schools and they say that these children whom no one has ever laid a finger on cannot imagine the pain they inflict on others.
‘The other point is that once you have established a good system of discipline, you don't have to smack very often.
My children were rarely smacked after the age of nine or 10.
They knew the limits.’
Burrows also believes that smacking can be started at an early age.
She disagrees with Leach's statement that ‘two-year-olds cannot be good or naughty on purpose because they do not yet know right from wrong or understand what makes the difference’.
Burrows says: ‘You can have a one-year-old on your lap who discovers it is possible to stick a pencil up your nose.
One child will respond to the idea of not hurting mummy.
Another will want to do it again anyway for the effect.
These children are not wicked or evil — but the love of power is there.’
Nor does she see anything wrong in smacking a toddler who is having a tantrum.
Smacking, says Leach, will not help the toddler's anger, frustration and fear, which create tantrums in the first place.
But Burrows counters: ‘Children need the security of knowing they have a mother who is bigger and stronger than they are, who is in control.’
Child psychiatrist Dr John Pearce, author of a number of books about the role of parents, including the recently published Bad Behaviour, is one expert who tries to tread the middle ground.
While accepting that smacking is universal, he believes there are better methods of teaching children what is acceptable or unacceptable behaviour.
He says that ‘when children have limited communication and language skills, you often need to reinforce what you say to them in a physical form.
So when you remove a young child's hand from an electric plug you tap the back of it and accompany this action with a firm NO.
‘Equally I believe that you should stop using smacking as a way of punishing a child when that child is big enough to hit you back — and that's at quite an early age.
If you continue to smack a two-year-old you are likely to make him more physical, you are effectively telling him that smacking (ie, hitting people) is OK.’
That view is reinforced by the Newsons, who say: ‘The measures that stand out as the most predictive of criminal record before 20 years are having been smacked or beaten once or more a week at 11, and having a mother with a high commitment to formal physical punishment at that age.’
And although the Newsons concede the chicken and egg possibility — do you smack a child because he is delinquent, or is he delinquent because he is smacked?— they argue that their findings do not support the old belief that sparing the rod spoils the child, but suggest that at the very least, mothers who smack do not succeed in producing non-delinquent children.
So where does all that leave me?
Muddled, mostly.
Probably with two juvenile delinquents (now aged five and eight) in the offing.
Burrows makes me feel slightly less guilty, and the less guilt, the better -for me and the children.
As a mother I warm to someone who observes that so many of the modern theories on childcare ‘show utter contempt for women's judgement’, and who points out that, when it comes to smacking, ‘if we were talking about any other activity which was so widespread, people would say this was a method which was tried and tested and obviously worked.
Do these experts really think that mothers are so inept that they would go on doing something that is so ineffective?’
Perhaps I should leave the last word to my son.
Asked about my smacking him, he said: ‘I don't like it,’ adding, ‘It doesn't hurt.
It's better when you send me to my room when I'm naughty.
Then I can play with my toys’.
Hardly the ultimate deterrent?
Baby and Child by Penelope Leach is published by Penguin; The Extent of Physical Punishment in the UK by John and Elizabeth Newson is published by Approach; Bad Behaviour by Dr John Pearce is published by Thorsons; Good Children by Lynette Burrows is published by Newpoint Publishing.
A common or garden dispute: Peter Dunn and his beech hedge are maturing after a boundary battle
By PETER DUNN
A BEECH hedge, we thought, would be just the job.
A joy for all seasons, a haven for blackbird and robin and a screen between ourselves and our neighbours that we might go about our separate business unobserved.
Nobody, after all, moves to the country to share the kind of backyard intimacy readily available to mock-Tudor freeholders in the suburbs.
Autumn saw the planting of the bushes.
Spindly creatures barely 18ins tall, fertilised with optimism, they formed a picket line 150ft long up the garden's steep slope to a field of grazing horses.
‘My surveyor says you'll have to move some of those bushes,’ said my neighbour cheerily.
‘They're on my land.’
And thus a boundary dispute was born.
The burgeoning of the property-owning democracy and the flight of refugees from city life has turned boundary disputing in the country into a sport on a scale comparable with fox-hunting or skittling.
The only difference, as any apple-cheeked country solicitor will tell you, is that in boundary disputing the only winners are apple-cheeked country solicitors who collect large fees from pushy incomers unable to live at peace with one another.
In the old days, when land was concentrated in the hands of the few, sensible rights of way were established between cottages tied to the Big House in order that Yeoman A could get to the pump shared with Yeoman B; Yeoman B, hurrying about his master's affairs, could cross Yeoman A's garden to get to the shed where the gaffer's carts were kept.
Since the freehold all belonged to the boss, wrangling over ownership was beside the point.
Also, I suspect, the real country people were better disposed towards each other, materially poorer perhaps, but richer in consideration and manners.
The battles and skirmishes of middle-class rural boundary disputing are of interest only to their panting protagonists.
Few of us, driven by the irrepressible instincts of the Stone Age, are capable of recognising that shifting your hedge is rather like moving the sitting room furniture around.
No one else notices, but it alters the way you go about things.
In the normal course of building and landscaping, the division between two adjoining cottages is marked by the internal wall which separates the two dwellings.
Twenty years ago, in all innocence, the occupant of my house stuck up a little fence, 15ft long, inside his own boundary.
It has left one of my downstairs windows stranded next door with a Cyclopean view of the neighbours, occasional week-enders, sun-bathing on their colourful suites of beach furniture.
The rest of the boundary was, until the beech hedge, unmarked.
Running along its dandelioned, rag-worted length, however, was next door's right of way, the classic ingredient of a truly ferocious, utterly trivial boundary war.
Boundary disputing is a demeaning sport.
It drains humanity of its humour, reduces adults' behaviour to that of petulant children.
My neighbour would patrol his right of way from time to time, an absurdly dignified figure in his familiar DIY boiler suit and woolly hat.
One evening, perched in his landing window, he shot towards my wife with an air rifle and I reported him to the police.
I put up an entirely illegal barbed wire fence.
He tore it down.
We faced each other across 12 ludicrous inches of disputed Dorset couch grass breathing stertorously.
Two years on and £1,000 poorer (I've had to foot his costs to buy him off my land) the lawyers have patched up some sort of agreement.
Next door has given up a right of way that goes nowhere.
The beech hedge is trying to set an example by maturing.
Boundary disputing is more than demeaning; it is also expensive.
What has emerged in my neck of the woods is how common such conflicts have become in the newly-prosperous backyards of rural Britain.
There is a corker gathering steam not far from my cottage over the siting of a compost heap.
In the next village, where neighbours were quarrelling over a shared driveway, the judge pleaded with them, in vain, to go away and spend their money on a sea cruise.
The case cost the loser £10,000.
He also sold up and left because the only alternative in these miserable circumstances is to spend the rest of your life living next door to someone who will never speak to you again.
The judge was, of course, right.
Most rural boundary disputes have their roots in the lackadaisical practices of country solicitors who never placed much importance on proper searches.
‘Everyone wants to defend what they've got,’ one of them says.
‘And what they've got is a legacy from the old days, all those little terraced cottages which never had boundaries at the back.
Over the last 20 years people have been buying as opposed to renting and once they own something they want to keep it separate.
The problems arise through what I call ‘rural conveyancing’ because years ago such conveyancing wasn't done with the necessary attention to detail.’
Perhaps it would be better if the sport of boundary disputing was taken out of the hands of lawyers who are, by nature, adversarial.
This seems to be the view of Lord Donaldson, that truly sagacious Master of the Rolls, who has just called for a new corps of paralegal ‘civil justices’ to get people like me off the hook.
More power to his noble elbow.
Rural Britain is full of retired brigadiers and industrial captains, chaps who got where they were through diplomacy, cunning and an instinct for knocking heads together when the bugle blew.
Why not, as Lord Donaldson seems to be suggesting, appoint them to Rural Boundaries Tribunals, a sort of bucolic Acas, with powers to sort out neighbours who have temporarily taken leave of their common sense.
They may not always exhibit the wisdom of Solomon but at least they might know where to draw the line.