

East Germany accuses Bonn over refugees
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague and PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
AS SOME 3,000 East German would-be emigrants poured into West Germany's embassy in Prague yesterday, the East Germans, apparently furious at the latest development, accused West Germany of ‘gross breach of trust’, claiming that Bonn had promised to stop the flow.
About 150 East Germans also entered the West German embassy in Warsaw.
In East Germany, the pressure for change continued to build, with about 10,000 demonstrators in Leipzig demanding reforms.
Some of them chanted ‘Gorby, Gorby’ in what was described as the largest protest in 35 years.
Government officials in Bonn said that the Soviet Union had played a key role in obtaining the agreement under which the thousands who had taken refuge in the Prague and Warsaw embassies were taken to the West at the weekend.
As news of the exodus spread, more East Germans, who were already in Prague, made their way to the embassy yesterday.
At one point more than 100 an hour were entering the embassy.
Police tried to pull away refugees climbing over the embassy's back fence last night, but they moved aside when the West German ambassador, Hermann Huber, appeared in the garden and said: ‘Let them go!’
Members of a group attempting to reach the embassy the night before said policemen had hit them with rubber truncheons and turned them back.
As dawn broke yesterday, the same group, this time led by a mother with a baby in arms, faced down the police patrols and reached the embassy successfully.
On Sunday West Germany had complained about the police presence around its embassy, and the slackening of restrictions is thought to have reflected an apparent Czechoslovak desire to remain as far as possible on good terms with both Germanies.
West Germany has so far denied, although with a detectable degree of ambiguity, that any deal was made, preferring to point to the humanitarian reasons for allowing an evacuation of the embassy, and the pressure supposedly exerted on East Germany by the Soviet Union to bring the occupation to a speedy end.
But from East Germany's angry response to the opening of the embassy doors -echoed, ominously, by Czechoslovakia — it appears that East Germany was at least expecting a quid pro quo.
The desire of Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, to deliver the West German side of the bargain appears to have been dissolved by the prospect of television pictures showing young East German families, including pregnant women, hungry and crying on the pavement outside an unwelcoming West German embassy.
News of the Prague embassy's open door seems likely to provoke a greatly increased flow of new emigrants from East Germany.
Czechoslovakia remains in effect the only country to which East Germans can travel without a visa.
Although a change in this policy is now much talked about, it would be a dramatic concession of failure by the leadership, deeply unpopular, and therefore thought unlikely at least until after the increasingly macabre celebrations of East Germany's 40th anniversary on Saturday.
East Germany closes border as 6,000 more leave
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague and PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
IN ANOTHER spectacular climbdown by East Germany, more than 6,000 East Germans, who had filled the West German embassy in Prague beyond bursting point, were allowed to leave for the West last night.
Earlier, East Germany imposed restrictions on travel to Czechoslovakia.
In the week of their country's fortieth birthday, East Germans were effectively imprisoned within their own borders.
Early yesterday morning the West German Embassy in Prague had done what it always denied it would do, and closed its doors.
The move — taken after senior Red Cross officials in the embassy said further arrivals would jeopardise the position of those already inside — left 1,200 new arrivals, including hundreds of small children and babies, sitting forlornly on the pavement for most of the day.
Inside the embassy, conditions were said to be worse that ever, with intense pressure on sanitary facilities.
More than a thousand children were inside; on Monday night, most had slept three to a bed.
East Germany's climbdown came after intense diplomatic pressure from Bonn.
Crisis meetings were held in Bonn and East Berlin all day, but Helmut Kohl, the West German Chancellor, was refused a telephone conversation with the East German leader, Erich Honecker.
In Moscow, Pravda published fierce criticisms of Bonn's open-door policy, complaining of an ‘assault on the stability in the centre of Europe’, and of a ‘noisy propaganda campaign dripping with chauvinism’.
Chartered trains were due to leave Prague yesterday evening, but had failed to appear more than two hours after the appointed time.
A West German government spokesman said there had been technical hold-ups, but he was confident the refugees would leave soon.
The key to yesterday's deal is that a problem of this magnitude is now unlikely to happen again.
So long as East Germany kept its Czech border open, any evacuation of would-be emigrants from the embassy was only a temporary solution, signalling to still more East Germans that a conduit to the West existed.
However, the problem is by no means solved.
Even though travel to Poland, for example, involves considerable difficulties for East Germans, several hundred have been able to seek refuge in the West German embassy in Warsaw.
The East German-Czechoslovak border is one of the most lightly fortified in Europe.
East Germans in Prague said they had seen building work begin at the weekend to make it more effective.
But many more East Germans may try to cross the Czechoslovak border illegally.
Others will continue to have legitimate reason to visit Prague.
There were more than eleven million trips from East Germany to Czechoslovakia last year.
East Germany has not introduced the tough visa requirements necessary for travel to, for example, Hungary.
During the early part of the day in Prague, East Germans waited quietly, apparently believing that the crowd outside the embassy was in fact a queue.
Even when told of the embassy's closure, few seemed alarmed: ‘Well, they can't just leave us here, and we're not going back, so they'll have to do something,’ said one.
Television pictures of the huge and well-organised exodus from the embassy over the weekend had clearly instilled a touching — and, so far at least, ultimately justified — faith in the Federal Republic's ability to look after all Germans, both East and West.
As the day went on, some became impatient.
About three hundred burst through a police cordon between the park behind the embassy and the road outside.
Using a stray plank, and ropes thrown over by those inside, they scrambled over a 12ft wall into the embassy grounds.
Police at first used rubber truncheons to prevent them, but then stood back.
Fifteen East Germans were slightly injured and one was receiving medical care for internal injuries.
The Labour Party Conference: Kinnock sets out policies to win power: Warmly-received conference speech seen as change of gear for Labour in run-up to general election
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
NEIL KINNOCK yesterday set investment in education and training as his top priority: the ‘commanding height’ to be scaled by the next Labour government.
In his address to the party conference at Brighton, Mr Kinnock said Labour was now ready, eager and able to take power from the Conservatives at the next election, and his confidence won him one of the most prolonged and enthusiastic ovations received by a Labour leader for many years.
His attack on the Conservative government, given added impact by passages of scathing wit, also included an analysis of Margaret Thatcher's ‘out-of-touch, out-of-date’ foreign policy.
Identifying her attitude to the emerging democracies of the Soviet bloc, disarmament, South Africa, the environment, Third World debt, and the EC, Mr Kinnock said: ‘Margaret Thatcher shows that she's from the Greta Garbo school of diplomacy.
‘I want to be alone.’
That's the constant theme.’
Colleagues said last night that the speech marked a change of gear — as Mr Kinnock moved away from party organisation and policy and accelerated into the election campaign.
Lord Callaghan, the last Labour prime minister, said: ‘What happened in the 1980s was a temporary aberration from what has always been the real position of the Labour Party, and Neil Kinnock has recaptured the traditional position.’
But Mr Kinnock stressed in his speech that given the inevitable and unprecedented ‘mess’ which would be left behind by Mrs Thatcher, a Labour government would have to set — and unflinchingly stick to — four basic priorities.
Warning that there was no single mechanism which would catapult Britain to economic strength, Mr Kinnock said: ‘Research and development, transport and communications, science, education and training; they are the priorities.
They are the productive base of our economy.’
They were prerequisites —‘an unparalleled priority’— for dealing with inflation, the balance of payments deficit, unemployment, and funding the party's policies for social justice.
Having delivered his ‘tough’ message, Mr Kinnock turned to prime targets of the Conservative record — topped off with high interest rates, which he likened to a policy of assassination for mortgage-holders.
Even if the Conservatives took ‘the brakes off’ in the run-up to the next election, people would not be deceived.
‘It's one con-trick too far.’
Analysing the difference between Labour and the Tories, Mr Kinnock said that while Labour planned ahead for the future, the Government waited for the future to come and hit them.
They had neither made adequate preparation for the Single European Market nor allowed for proper funding for the Channel tunnel.
‘That attitude towards the future is not good enough for the British people.
It's not good enough to serve the future.
They're not good enough for the British people.
We are now.’
Concluding, Mr Kinnock looked beyond the conference: ‘It is an encouragement, an inspiration to see this party working together, coming to a joint position on objectives, and of not only telling itself, but exuding to the British public the feeling that we are fit to serve our country.’
At the start of his speech Mr Kinnock repeated that Labour would win ‘with no horse-trading and no electoral pacts’.
The party now offered ‘the kind of socialism that the British people want'- defending the NHS, opposing poll tax and the erosion of civil liberties.
The Labour Party Conference: The priorities: education, transport, science, research
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
EDUCATION AND training were now the ‘commanding heights’ of every modern economy, Mr Kinnock told the conference.
He said: ‘Now and for all time in the future, human skills and human talents will be the major determinants of success or failure — not just for individuals but for a whole society in all of its social, cultural and commercial life.’
That was why investment in training would be the ‘most important’ priority of all.
But he also emphasised the need for greater spending on transport and communications, science and research and development — programmes which could yet take priority over health spending under a Labour government.
Mr Kinnock said: ‘We are going to start to combat the transport congestion and make investment in communications without which commercial Britain will judder to an expensive halt in a very few years.
‘We are going to build up the commitment to science because if we carry on like the Tories are, our country is going to be shoved down to the second or third division of modern industrial nations’.
As for investment in public and private research and development, Mr Kinnock said: ‘If we are going to rival our competitors, we are going to have to start by catching up with them.’
Noriega troops foil Panama coup attempt
From LERNA LLERENA of Reuters
PANAMA CITY — Troops loyal to the Panamanian military leader, General Manuel Noriega, put down a coup attempt by junior officers in the capital yesterday after a day of heavy fighting, a spokesman for the Panama Defence Forces said.
At least 20 of the rebel junior officers who staged the uprising surrendered by late afternoon.
The Noriega forces had gained entrance to the barracks headquarters where a group of army offices mutinied early yesterday.
‘Everything is under control,’ said Major Edgardo Lopez Grimaldo, a spokesman for the PDF and a senior Noriega aide, as the rebels, in civilian dress, were led from the barracks by members of the 2000 Battalion, the general's elite combat force.
In Washington, the White House said the coup attempt appeared to have ended in failure.
President Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, admitted: ‘It does appear that his (General Noriega's) forces are in control.’
Mr Fitzwater reiterated President Bush's denial earlier in the day that the United States, which has indicted General Noriega on drug trafficking charges and has been seeking to oust him for nearly two years, had initiated the revolt.
A communique read on Panama's national radio in the afternoon denounced the coup attempt and said General Noriega was still in control of the country.
The statement poured scorn on a rebel broadcast several hours earlier saying that the junior officers, led by a group of captains, had ousted the military leader and his general staff.
The broadcast said the coup attempt was led by Major Moises Giraldi, head of the battalion responsible for General Noriega's security.
It was also signed by two captains, Javier Licona and Jesus George Balma, known to be unhappy at recent promotions of majors loyal to the general, at the expense of officers considered of questionable loyalty.
Jose Blandon, former head of intelligence for General Noriega, now in exile in the US, said he understood that the latest attempt was timed to coincide with military exercises which stranded loyal troops on an island several miles from Panama City.
Fighting centred on the main barracks, the Balboa port section of Panama City, close to the main bridge leading over the canal, and in the old part of the capital, which is a maze of slums and anti-military feeling.
The decisive battle for control of Panama was fought at the building that houses military headquarters.
The compound is about 800 yards from the Pacific entrance to the Panama Canal, where the 12,000 US military personnel of the US Southern Command were put on full alert.
American helicopters hovered near the Panamanian Defence Forces headquarters, and US soldiers in combat gear took up positions a few hundred yards away to block a road leading to the canal.
Witnesses reported seeing dead soldiers and hearing rocket and machine-gun fire.
No casualty figures were available, but civilians living near the headquarters fled.
Woman ‘was seized during SOS call’
By HEATHER MILLS
A PREGNANT woman who was beaten and stabbed to death in daylight had been abducted as she telephoned for help on the M50 motorway, a court was told yesterday, writes Heather Mills.
Just 700 yards away her baby son and 11-year-old sister sat in her broken-down car, Shrewsbury Crown Court was told.
The civilian operator who took the SOS call may have heard the voice of her killer.
He then heard the sound of a car driving away.
Two days later, the battered and bloodstained body of Marie Wilks, 22 and seven and a half months pregnant, was found dumped down an embankment two miles along the motorway.
A knife wound had severed her jugular vein and her jaw was broken from a punch or a kick, the jury was told.
Edward Browning, 36, a nightclub doorman, has pleaded not guilty to murdering Mrs Wilks.
Supreme Soviet bans strikes by workers
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
THE Soviet parliament last night imposed a ban on all strikes in industries essential for the smooth functioning of the economy this winter, and authorised the use of troops if neccessary to guarantee an immediate end to the rail blockade by Azerbaijan, which is crippling neighbouring Armenia.
The almost unanimous passage of the decree, by 364 votes to 6, came at the end of a day of turmoil at the Supreme Soviet sitting in the Kremlin.
A compromise solution, it was secured largely thanks to unashamed procedural bullying by Mikhail Gorbachev, who warned that only unequivocal, draconian measures could avert a slide into economic chaos.
The measure applies to the transport sector, to the fuel and energy industries, and to metallurgical and chemical enterprises.
Above all it is aimed at the country's railways, where disorganisation and disruption and not only in politically-inflamed Soviet Transcaucasia have caused dangerous shortfalls of coal and oil stocks at power stations, and of other raw materials at factories across the country.
The outcome was none the less a climbdown for the government, which was obliged to drop its original plan to outlaw strikes in all sectors of industry for 15 months, amid deep divisions among parliamentarians over the extent of the powers to be granted.
Instead, the new provisions will operate only until passage of a draft law on strikes, which itself bans such industrial action where it would endanger ‘lives and health’.
This Bill, which sets out detailed mechanisms for settling disputes, could be passed early next week.
This in turn will be supplemented by other key decisions last night: for a law — unprecedented here placing emergency powers at the government's disposal by the end of October, and for another Bill within a month to regulate rail traffic.
In the meantime, central and local authorities have been told to take ‘immediate’ steps to stamp out vandalism and sabotage on the railways.
But the success has been hard-won.
Its manner has exposed the procedural inexperience of the first full-time Soviet legislature and the ideological divisions of its 542 members.
In the past, such a sweeping move would have taken the form of a peremptory decree, but the new parliament is committed to doing everything by the rules.
Thus the overnight talks produced a woolly draft which Leonid Abalkin, the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic reform, attacked as ‘too weak to have any effect’.
By 391 votes to 6, the proposed text was sent back to the drafting committee.
Three hours of frantic work in the afternoon produced a new one, pushed through without ceremony by President Gorbachev.
Even so, it offers no guarantee of an early end to the month-old blockade of Armenia by Azerbaijan, an extension of their feud over the region of Nagorny Karabakh.
The rejected text gave the parties until Monday to resolve the dispute, failing which the government would take full powers for the railways in Transcaucasia, and send in the army to guard bridges and tunnels, and ensure the safety of rail workers.
Now they have been told to restore normal services ‘without delay’, but no deadline is stipulated.
Today the Azerbaijani leadership is to hold emergency talks on the crisis.
The venomous exchanges between deputies from the two republics in the Kremlin yesterday offered little hope that reason would prevail.