

Education: Pupil pioneers enter the land of uncertainty: Five weeks into the new national curriculum, both teachers and pupils find they need further enlightenment.
Elisabeth Dunn reports
By ELISABETH DUNN
DRAINED by the exercise of inferring what was holding together two pieces of stick inside a cardboard box, a first-year science pupil at Gillingham comprehensive school in north Dorset advanced the opinion that the national curriculum was ‘just another posh name for different subjects’.
She had done science before; this was just more science.
No big deal.
After a month of putting government education ideology into practice, life in her classroom is pretty much what it always was.
Even as the first-year girl drew her inferences, her headmaster, Manuel Lenarduzzi, was preparing for last night's meeting with her parents and those of other first-year children who are the guinea pigs of the new system and whose future is one of attainment targets.
Much of Mr Lenarduzzi's material for the meeting, designed to clarify the national curriculum, relied on inference because, as yet, only maths and science is actually taught under the guidelines issued by the Department of Education and Science, and nobody knows how attainment testing will work.
Rumour and uncertainty abound, suggesting, this week, that pupils' achievements will be measured by formal test rather than by their teachers' assessment.
But who knows what the grapevine will bear next week?
For all the absence of Bakerthink in the classroom, it would be misleading to suggest that nobody had taken any notice of the Education Reform Act.
At Gillingham, in close consultation with the primary and middle schools which feed the comprehensive, the science department is working on the list of 17 attainment targets including (5) Human Influences on the Earth,(15) Using Light and Electro-Magnetic Radiation, and (17) The Nature of Science.
Children's grasp of these knotty subjects is monitored and tested through the four Key Stages (aged 5-7, 8-11, 12-14 and 15-16) of their educational career.
But here, Mr Lenarduzzi and his staff perceive a recurrent problem: ‘How do you know when a child can do something?’ he asks.
To a roomful of shoulders raised in perplexity, he warms to his theme: ‘Is it when he has done something once?
Does he have to do it twice or explain how he's done it?
These questions are fundamental.
You are making a statement about a child and it is going on the child's record.’
For the past decade, the teachers at Gillingham have been working towards something which looks very much like the national curriculum, to ensure a smooth transfer to the new system.
They agree that a regular comparison of notes with primary schools (which they have always enjoyed, if at lower intensity than presently) improves all their pupils' chances of entering secondary school by the same starting gate.
They are heartened by finding common ground between English and science for, if nothing else, the introduction of the national curriculum has encouraged teachers from different disciplines to talk to each other: ‘At one time, we could conceive of ourselves as subject teachers,’ said Mr Lenarduzzi.
‘Now we are curriculum teachers.’
And yet their horizon is not without its clouds.
The spectre of standard attainment targets (SATs) looms.
The targets will be the means by which pupils' progress is measured.
Gillingham's head of curriculum, herself an English teacher, reports with approval that at present GCSE in English is judged 100 per cent on coursework.
The introductory document on national curriculum English hints at formal examinations at the end of key stages and this saddens her.
Mr Lenarduzzi endorses her view: ‘If our concentration is going to be on testing, then that would not be welcome.
Our concentration has got to be on the teaching and on the stretching of children.
Few firms, if any, spend most of their resources on testing their product instead of producing it.’
He frets that, when it comes to the point, the requirements for SATs may not tally with the requirements for GCSE; that he may have to regroup the whole school to align pupils according to their ability rather than their age.
And what, he asks, will happen to the child who does not, bureaucratically speaking, have special educational needs but who never manages to get past Level 2 in any given attainment target?
Mr Lenarduzzi's sleep is also disturbed by the thought that the interests of the nation may only be served at the expense of local needs or, indeed, that purely academic considerations might distort the wider implications of a proper education.
‘The needs of a rural, 11 to 18 school are very different from an inner-city upper school.
We must have sport, drama and music to enrich the children, but I also have an objective to make the children aware of city life and the wider world outside the community of small agricultural villages.
This year, we sent 79 children to Germany, 42 children to France on two-week exchanges, 70 children on a weekend trip to France, the fifth-years went on a trip to Paris.
They need to be aware of a world outside their very pleasant rural environment.
‘It would be a great tragedy if I lost the freedom to pursue educational objectives such as these.
What could I tell the parents about the national curriculum?
I'm afraid that the answer to most of their questions is: ‘We do not yet know.’'
Education: Zoo trips hold on to their place in the management plan
By ELISABETH DUNN
AT THE Landscore primary school in Crediton, Devon, there is palpable evidence of the enthusiasm with which the national curriculum has been embraced.
The school has a new science teacher with a PhD and £1,700 worth of new mathematical and scientific equipment — mostly instruments for weather-watching.
There is also an abundance of paperwork.
Mrs Janet Postance, Landscore's head, carries about with her a cardboard box which might once have held apples, now replaced with documents relating to the national curriculum, the Devon Education Authority curriculum and her own school curriculum.
For the moment, she is concerned with plaiting the three strands.
Traditionally, her top class has spent a residential week at Paignton Zoo and she is determined that, given the restriction on charging for activities within school hours, the tradition will be maintained ad infinitum.
It is no chimpanzees' tea party.
Pupils are required to write a biography of Herbert Whitley, the zoo's founder, to give an account of the explorations of Christopher Columbus, Captain Cook and David Livingstone, to study a species of animal in depth and to produce an organised diary of their week.
Thus the expedition is neatly manipulated to include many of the requirements of the national curriculum: ‘We are very keen to make sure that we don't lose all the good things that have been going on in schools,’ she says.
She defines as one of the good things the non-specialist character of primary school teaching.
‘We would never let it become specialised, although, as children grow older, we've got to move towards a middle school model, so there is specialised teaching in maths and humanities; they actually go to different teachers for four complete sessions a week.’
Until now, much of the thrust of the national curriculum has gone into preparing teachers.
In harmony with the new British philosophy of dynamism and efficiency, senior teachers favour the language of commerce in discussing the implementation of the curriculum.
Mrs Postance's opposite number at the Haywards primary school at the other end of town, Mike Palmer, talks of ‘tooling up’ for the undertaking: ‘I've had to use a large slice of my in-service training budget to release staff during the school day for quite substantial periods to match up their plans for the following year.
‘One of the things that has been most useful has been our non-pupil days.
They have given staff in schools the space to meet as a group and get to terms with issues over a longer period, complementing the series of other meetings and team meetings that go on anyway.
We have a management plan now -and we haven't called it that before.
We don't want it to make teachers more accountable.
Its primary function is to sharpen up the best of good practice.’
It nevertheless has increased teacher's accountability.
Mrs Postance recorded 29 governors' meetings between November last year and May — a sequence of events that has left parents on the governing body reeling from an onslaught of Key Stages and Attainment Targets.
Mrs Postance believes that the heavy digging already completed to prepare the ground for the national curriculum has had a beneficial effect, at least on the teachers, even if the children have yet to reap the harvest: ‘It's focused our minds on what we are teaching.
We welcome it and we feel very positive about it.
But it has to be applied properly or it will not improve the quality of education.
And if it does not do that, we've all been wasting our time.
‘If there is one worry about it, it is that the national curriculum and the attainment targets will only partly tell you about a child.
They will not tell you whether a child is going to be a good citizen, when he's nice to know or whether he's well motivated.
They will not tell you a lot about what's going to make him tick as an adult, except that he might be good at a particular academic subject.’
Education: The head who split a village: Simon Midgley on the latest argument between progressives and traditionalists
By SIMON MIDGLEY
A LEICESTERSHIRE village is riven by controversy in a dispute over ‘progressive’ versus traditional teaching methods in a local primary school.
Friendships have been sundered, mothers have heckled one other in the street and schoolfriends have been separated in the row which has involved the withdrawal of scores of children from the Lady Jane Grey School in Groby, a commuter village near Leicester.
The row culminated in the headteacher, Jim Nind, asking to be transferred to another post and four of the seven teachers, apparently exhausted by the events, going on sick leave for a week.
Rival groups of parents have formed, some welcoming the head's departure, others petitioning County Hall for his re-instatement.
The question is whether young children learn best by studying at their own pace through relatively informal ‘activity’ methods in small groups (which, to some parents, looks suspiciously like playing), or whether they should learn the three Rs sitting at their desks in a more competitive and disciplined environment.
Leicestershire is widely regarded as a pioneer of ‘progressive’ primary methods.
The saga began last year when the council opened a new open-plan primary school to relieve overcrowding in Groby's two existing primary schools.
Jim Nind, a teacher with progressive views on primary teaching, was appointed head and the school opened in August 1988 with 137 pupils.
Within weeks, some parents started taking their children away from the school.
Yesterday the roll stood at 107 pupils, though the school has room for 210.
The gist of the parents' complaints is that children were allowed too much freedom and that there was too little formal instruction in the three Rs.
Terry Mulloy, chairman of the governors, who has a five-year-old son at Lady Jane Grey, says that if children, while being taught reading in a small group, got bored they would be allowed to wander off and do something else.
After attending a local nursery school, some children had been able to write their own names.
After a short period under Mr Nind's regime, they had started writing their letters backwards.
Another parent, Susan Dungworth, transferred her two eldest boys, aged 10 and seven, to Martinshaw, another local primary.
She says that the pupils were ‘not pushed or encouraged to do more than the basic minimum’.
In their new school, their mother says, the Dungworth boys are ‘very happy’ taking spelling tests once a week and sitting down at desks.
Yvonne Clark also moved her six-year-old son Ryan to Martinshaw this August after a year at Lady Jane Grey.
She says that there was no regular programme of formal lessons where entire classes studied maths or science together.
Instead, children were asked to complete so many compulsory pieces of work in a week.
They could choose when to study what and play the rest of the time if they chose.
Competition was frowned upon, she said.
At football matches, parents were asked not to cheer.
Praise was never given to an individual child but only when the entire class did well.
‘My son is quite a bright little boy,’ she says.
‘He could read and write before he went to school.
Surely if he has got it you ought to encourage it…
When it comes down to it you look after number one.
We decided to do what was best for Ryan.’
Other parents are just as vehement in their support for Lady Jane Grey.
Tina Dicks, whose son Thomas, aged six, attends the school, said: ‘My little boy is extremely happy there and is coming on by leaps and bounds.
Personally I cannot see what all the fuss has been about.’
By enjoying learning, she said, pupils understood and remembered things much better.
Desma Hagan, who has a 10-year-old son with special educational needs and a six-year-old daughter at Lady Jane Grey, said: ‘It is a really very good school.
The teamwork done there with the headmaster and teachers could not be better.
People tend to think, because they are not doing sums on paper they are not learning maths — but they are.’
They learn maths through playing with dominoes or measuring the size of rooms, she says.
And they are taught in a caring way, about people and the environment.
Her son had made 10 months' progress in a year, against his usual six months before he started at Lady Jane Grey.
Mr Mulloy says that Lady Jane Grey is now paying more attention to the three Rs than it did previously.
But Pat Butler, a school governor and a Conservative county councillor, is less sanguine.
She said more parents were rumoured to be planning to transfer their children.
Were that to happen, she says, ‘they,’(presumably the local education authority) would have to ‘do something’.
Mr Nind this week declined to make any comment.
Education Viewpoint: Who will stand up against the idea of student fees?
By NGAIO CREQUER
I AM a romantic.
I am very fond of poetry by John Donne.
I believe that one day Manchester United will again win the league title.
I also became a university student in the days when it was axiomatic that higher education was ‘free’.
Without a student grant I would never have got there.
It does not matter what happens to the public reputation of John Donne.
He is still there for me.
United, even if they have sold Strachan and Whiteside, still have Hughes, who scores goals Roy of the Rovers only dreamed about.
I suppose it will be said that it is the height of romanticism to cling to the idea that universities can remain largely publicly funded and that students will not inevitably have to pay fees.
But there I disagree.
I find it astonishing that, in less than a year since proposals on these lines by Robert Jackson, the higher education minister, were leaked, the majority of university vice-chancellors should have moved to a position whereby they are actively pursuing the option of charging students the full cost of their courses.
They say this is only one of several options.
But the only others they put forward at their recent press conference were a graduate tax, rejected by the Government under its student loans proposals, or a decline in the quality of higher education.
Once vice-chancellors start to think the unthinkable, then the issue becomes part of the agenda and it becomes harder to retreat.
Fees are now legitimate.
Instead of lobbying harder for increased funds for higher education, vice-chancellors have accepted the Government's arguments on their own terms and betrayed their consituency -their students.
Because, even if there were a scholarship scheme, it would not be enough.
Some of the poorest students might be assisted, but, as with legal aid, those just above the threshold would lose out.
And it is the students from families with no tradition of higher education — the new students everyone claims they want to recruit — who will be those most put off.
The prospect of students saddling themselves with enormous debts to pay their course fees and their maintenance is a frightening one.
Does anyone believe that, over time, the scholarships would keep in line with the fees?
We would end up with fewer students.
The country has to decide whether higher education is not only a private good but a public good.
It is the country which needs more graduates, it is industry which says demand outstrips supply.
The vice-chancellors asked for papers to inform their debate on fees at Leeds.
Only two vice-chancellors responded, and they both support some form of fees.
Was there really no vice-chancellor prepared to put another view?
The Government faces a difficult time as it prepares to get its legislation on student loans through Parliament.
Now is the time for vice-chancellors to go in hard and exact promises of increased funding.
Both sides want ‘dialogue’.
John MacGregor, the Secretary of State for Education, has shown with the teachers that he actually listens to what they say.
This is a remarkable change in Government practice.
There is a great opportunity to be seized.
Access cards for access to higher education will not work.