

Law Report: Employee not entitled to payment from redundancy fund: Secretary of State for Employment v Levy — Employment Appeal Tribunal (Mr Justice Wood, Mr R J Lewis and Mr J A Scouller), 4 October 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
‘Pay’ within article 119 of the EEC Treaty did not include a statutory redundancy payment or a statutory payment under section 106 of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
Accordingly, article 119 did not apply to the Employment Secretary's liability to make section 106 payments, and an employee who had become entitled to a state pension and was then dismissed for redundancy was not entitled to a payment from the Employment Secretary under section 106.
The EAT, by a majority, allowed the Secretary of State's appeal against an industrial tribunal's decision to award the applicant the sum of £4,513.50 to be paid by the Secretary of State out of the redundancy fund under section 106 of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978.
Article 119 of the EEC Treaty provides: ‘Each member state shall…maintain the application of the principle that men and women should receive equal pay for equal work.
For the purpose of this article, ‘pay’ means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether in cash or in kind, which the worker receives, directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment from his employer.’
The applicant was employed by a company from 1959 to 1987 until she was dismissed by reason of redundancy when she was a few months over 60.
She was disentitled to a redundancy payment by section 82(1) of the 1978 Act, which denied redundancy payment to women aged 60 or more.
She applied to her employer for a redundancy payment but was refused because of lack of funds.
She then applied to the Secretary of State for payment under section 106.
The Secretary of State maintained that because of section 82 the applicant was not entitled to a statutory redundancy payment.
The tribunal decided that a payment to be made under s 106 was ‘pay’ within article 119 of the EEC Treaty and, therefore, the Employment Secretary was liable to pay a payment.
The Employment Secretary appealed.
John Mummery (Treasury Solicitor) for the Employment Secretary; Richard Cole and Fernanda Pirie (Free Representation Unit) for the employee.
MR JUSTICE WOOD, giving the majority judgment, said that Mr Cole's submission that there must be implied into every contract of employment a term that the Secretary of State should make a payment under section 106 in the event of a redundancy and of an insolvency of the employer could not be accepted.
The wording of section 106 and of article 119 was clear.
A statutory payment under section 106 did not fall within the definition of pay in article 119.
The applicant then submitted that a statutory redundancy payment was ‘pay’ within article 119 and that on the employer's default to make that payment the Secretary of State guaranteed the sum under section 106.
When considering whether a statutory redundancy payment was pay within article 119, it was essential to appreciate that today there existed contractual redundancy payments — arising out of the contract of employment — and, by contrast, statutory redundancy payments arising out of the statutory scheme in the 1978 Act.
The following features of a statutory redundancy payment emerged:(1) The obligation was imposed on the employer;(2) It only arose on dismissal and might never arise if an employee worked until retirement, whether voluntary — early retirement — or at an agreed date, each of which was based on contract;(3) It only arose if certain preconditions were proved;(4) It applied to all employees who had worked for at least two years with an employer;(5) Certain classes of employee were excluded, eg redundant employees refusing suitable alternative employment; employees under a fixed-term contract of two years or more, who had renounced their redundancy rights in writing;(6) A voluntary redundancy could be under a contractual statutory scheme, and under such a contractual scheme it was often the equivalent of early retirement by agreement;(7) In no way could a redundancy payment be described as a deferred emolument or pay; it was a monetary compensation for the disappearance of a job.
The employee's problems arose because by section 82 the ages used for disentitlement were those at which the old age pension was payable — 60 for women and 65 for men.
A member state was entitled to discriminate in the ages at which men and women became entitled to state pensions but it was not acceptable for a distinction to be made between the sexes as to the age of retirement: see Marchall v Southampton and SW Hampshire Area Health Authority (Teaching)(1986) ICR 335; Roberts v Tate & Lyle (1986) ICR 371.
In order to comply with Community law, it was now necessary to agree the same date of retirement for both sexes.
Thus, on the basis that state pensions became payable to women at 60 and to men at 64, if the retirement age was 55, neither would be in a position to claim a pension on retirement; if it was 60, women would, but men would not; if it was 65, women would have been able to receive since 60 and men would not.
Community law would not have been transgressed.
The logic of choosing pensionable ages for the purposes of disentitlement under section 82 must be that after retirement there could be no redundancy.
Having been referred to the cases dealing with the issue of pay within article 119, including Defrenne v Belgian State (no 80/70) and Worringham v Lloyds Bank Ltd (1981 ICR 558), there was no support for the submissions made on behalf of the employee.
Hammersmith and Queen Charlott Special Health Authority v Cato (1988) ICR 132 was distinguishable in that a contractual redundancy was being considered.
From article 119 itself and guidance from the cases, a statutory redundancy payment was not ‘pay’ within article 119.
Mr J A Scouller gave reasons for dissenting.
The Labour Party Conference: Straw calls for UK to become best trained and educated nation in Europe
By JUDY JONES
THE NEXT Labour government will abandon the ‘corrupt priorities’ of the Tories' education policies and make Britain the brains of Europe, Jack Straw, the party's education spokesman said yesterday.
He told the Labour conference: ‘It is no wonder that we are running a £20bn sterling trade deficit.
For all those countries with whom we are failing to compete invest more in education, in science and training than we do.
Our aim is nothing less than than to make Britain the best trained and educated nation in Europe.’
Speaking the day after Neil Kinnock depicted education and training as the commanding heights of every modern economy, Mr Straw insisted: ‘We do not believe in the best for the few, but the best for all.
In education, quality and equality must go hand in hand.’
Labour's plans include a programme to provide nursery education to the parent of every child aged three or four who wants it and a doubling of the proportion of young people aged 16 to 18 in full-time education and high quality training within a decade.
They also promise a ‘return to learn’ entitlement of up to a year's full time education for people aged more than 50 and who left school at 15 or earlier.
Mr Straw said: ‘The Government says it wants an expansion of higher education.
But by the introduction of student loans, and the end of free tuition, it will make entry into higher education dependent more than ever on the size of a parent's bank balance.
It's private schools today.
It will be private universities tomorrow.’
Tory policies had brought only teacher shortages and administrative chaos.
Its use of public money to set up a network of city technology colleges in joint ventures with businesses mocked the needs of the majority of children.
Up to 10 times more taxpayers' money was being invested in a single CTC than in all the county schools in the surrounding area, he said.
‘No government which cared for the education of all our children would conceivably follow such corrupt priorities as this one.’
Rodney Bickerstaffe, general secretary of the public employees' union Nupe, said that local management of schools, giving schools control over their own budgets would mean less money for education.
‘Local management of schools has done to education what opted-out hospitals has done for the NHS.
Our schools will be filthy because of cuts in hours of non-teaching staff.’
Eileen Lindley, of Doncaster, criticised the Labour leadership's intention to extend the national curriculum into the private sector.
‘There should not be any private schools.
Labour has to create a state system which is so good that no one will want to send their children anywhere else.’
Promises to establish Muslim schools could land a future Labour government with a problem as potentially explosive and insoluble as the Irish question, Neil Fletcher, Labour leader of the Inner London Education Authority, said yesterday at a conference fringe meeting.
The party's policy review paper says Muslims and other minority religious Home groups should be entitled to voluntary-aided schools provided they follow the national curriculum.
The Labour Party Conference: Left-right tension shows in debate on employment law
By BARRIE CLEMENT and STEPHEN GOODWIN
CRITICAL decisions on how employment laws would operate under a Labour government will be left until after the general election, Michael Meacher, the shadow Employment Secretary, said yesterday.
A new policy adopted by the conference failed to define a ‘lawful trade dispute’ and which forms of secondary action would be allowed.
Mr Meacher said that such details would have to be worked out between ministers and their officials, but he is likely to be pressed to be more specific.
The party's new policy is that workers taking sympathy action would have to demonstrate a ‘genuine interest’ in any dispute.
A Labour government would have to define what that meant.
Norman Fowler, Secretary of State for Employment, is likely to exploit the differences already emerging yesterday between right and left-wing union leaders over how far the definition should go.
Jimmy Knapp, left-wing leader of the National union of Railwaymen believes that his members had a ‘genuine’ interest in the miners' strike because pit closures would mean fewer coal trains.
Bill Jordan, right-wing leader of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, however argued yesterday that secondary action should be limited to direct suppliers and direct customers.
Mr Meacher indicated that a Labour government would be likely to set up new industrial courts presided over by judges with experience in industrial relations and two lay ‘assessors’— one employer and one trade unionist who would advise the judge.
The form of the system would be settled within the next three to six months he said.
Labour's new policy, overwhelmingly endorsed, draws on Conservative legislation by backing pre-strike ballots and the democratic election of union leaders.
It does not restore the immunities enjoyed before 1979, but it confirms the right to strike and gives strikers protection against dismissal.
The rights of union membership would also be guaranteed.
Following the experiences of the dockers in the summer, Labour will seek to limit the opportunity of employers to seek interlocutory injunctions to stop strikes which have been endorsed by lawful ballots.
Discussions will be held with the TUC to see if there should be a threshold of union membership after which recognition by employers would be automatic.
A composite motion seeking the right to ‘struggle without restriction’ and strike without ballots was decisively defeated.
Mr Meacher said provided there had been a majority ballot decision trade unions must have the full protection of the law to pursue a lawful trade dispute.
Labour was determined that no judge would be able to circumvent protections provided by Parliament by ‘inventing new torts or arbitrarily changing the definition of a trade dispute’.
Ron Todd, general secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, said they found in this year's dock strike that some judges had changed little since the days of the Tolpuddle Martyrs or Taff Vale.
‘The truth is, that whatever we had done, both the Tory laws and the procedures of the courts are totally biased against unions and working people.’
He continued: ‘I am looking forward to the next Labour government throwing out the Tory anti-union laws and giving working people the protection that they need to conduct legitimate industrial action.
‘The days must go when they can wake up a judge at dead of night, give him a drop of brandy, show him a headline from The Sun and get him to sign an injunction,’ Mr Todd said.
The debate revealed again the traditional animosity between the right-wing engineers and electricians unions and the left-wing miners' union.
Eric Hammond, the electricians leader, said the Labour Party could not afford to return to the Seventies of ‘mindless militancy’.
Nor would rank and file trade unionists give up their rights to be ballotted on strike action and the appointment of officials, Mr Hammond said.
From the opposing camp, Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers, was cheered when he likened the review report to In Place of Strife — the Wilson government's attempt to curb union power.
‘As far as we are concerned, if nurses are in conflict with their employer -and they are the least-able section of our society to fight — it is incumbent upon workers to take a stand to support nurses and other workers.’
Mr Scargill pointed out that the Polish union Solidarity, repeatedly praised from the rostrum, had not held a ballot before taking strike action.
To jeers and a shout of ‘Join the Tories!’,
Mr Jordan, told the miners' leader: ‘The armies of mass pickets have been demobilised and the next Labour government must not call them up.
Because, Arthur, today's party is a party of law makers, not law breakers.’
John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB general union, said the trade union laws had been judged by the International Labour Organisation, a UN agency, to be in breach of international conventions on eight counts.
‘Tory laws have put Britain in the dock alongside Chile and Korea and all those nasty dictatorships that everybody here despises,’ he said.
‘That's industrial law in Britain today.
So let us have no talk of building on the existing legislation.
You cannot build a fair system on that stinking swamp of menace and malice and neglect.
The whole lot must be swept away.’
The Labour Party Conference: Buy-back call on water firm land sales
By STEPHEN GOODWIN and JUDY JONES
CONFERENCE delegates yesterday swept aside a warning from the party leadership and called for the next Labour government to take back into public ownership immediately land sold off by privatised water companies.
The party is committed to renationalising the water industry, but Syd Tierney, on behalf of the National Executive Committee, said it could not promise to buy back, ‘acre by acre’, any land which is sold.
The demand, contained in a composite resolution passed on a show of hands during a debate on the environment, would cover land ‘of environmental value or of natural beauty’.
John Cunningham, the party's environment spokesman, told the conference the public detested the notion of water privatisation.
‘It goes against all common sense to take the most fundamental element of ecosystem, with the land and habitats it supports, and sell it off for profit, as the Tories are trying to do,’ he said.
The 500,000 acres of water authority land, much of it in national parks and areas of outstanding beauty, was ‘a massive inducement’ to the City to take over the industry.
‘It is an invitation to asset stripping.’
He told delegates the party's programme for improving and protecting the environment was founded on four principles —‘a presumption against pollution; the principle that the polluter pays; precaution as the basis for all policy; and freedom of environmental information’.
Declaring global warming, caused by the build up of carbon dioxide and other gases, to be ‘the most worrisome’ of all environmental threats, Dr Cunningham promised a major long-term programme of energy conservation.
‘This implies intervention in the economy in a way that is anathema to the Tories.’
But he said Labour did not agree that Britain could or should abandon development, either for itself or for the developing world.
‘Improved economic performance is, on the contrary, a prerequisite to the solution of the problems we and they face.
To argue otherwise is to betray millions of people, to condemn them to squalor, poverty, disease, starvation and death.
‘The problem for this Tory government is that their ideology is out of phase with the demands of ecology.’
Successful policies had to be complementary to sound environmental practice.
‘It demands intervention and planning, interference in the market — something we know this Prime Minister can never stomach.’
Labour would create an independent environmental protection agency, appoint a ‘green’ minister, introduce new planning laws and give local authorities powers and resources to improve the environment in their area.
Judith Chegwidden, of Putney CLP, said a Labour government must be tough enough to face up to special interest groups and those, including herself, who had ‘dangerous consumerist tendencies and want to own motor cars in urban areas — cars that pour out pollution and make people's lives a misery’.
John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, made a blistering attack on the Government's under-investment in rail, and promised that Labour's transport policies would be geared to preventing environmental damage.
While the Government's plans to double spending on roads were at odds with its proclaimed conversion to green issues, Labour's new policies recognised the need to drastically cut congestion and pollution from vehicle emissions.
‘We have got to do a great deal more about restrictions on motor vehicles and give the cities back to the people.
After 10 years of the Government's ideological obsession with privatisation, deregulation and competition, and reduced financial support, we have a transport system which is the shabbiest, most expensive, most congested, most environmentally damaging and least safe of any economy,’ he said.
Mr Prescott, who was given a rousing reception after his election to Labour's national executive earlier this week, condemned Paul Channon, the former Secretary of State for Transport, for refusing to accept that government policies had played a part in the series of transport disasters that had occured over the last two years.
‘Now we have got Cecil Parkinson, a kind of Paul Channon with a chin and a smile, Maggie's trouble-shooter.’
But Mr Parkinson was more concerned with getting a cheer at a party conference than with implementing the policies the country needed, he said..
Bill Morris, of the Transport and General Workers' Union, also blamed government neglect of public services for the tragedies at Lockerbie, Clapham and Zeebrugge.
Supporting Labour's blueprint for an integrated transport system, he said: ‘Never again must we see a Prime Minister chasing coffins and attending funerals because of a lack of proper investment in transport.
Labour must offer a real voice for our passengers.’
Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the National Union of Railwaymen, predicted that the Government's scheme for selling off British Rail would help to guarantee the defeat of the Tories at the next election.
‘There is no doubt that in private ownership, services will take second place to the search for profit, and there will be horrendous operating problems,’ he said.
The Labour Party Conference: Leaked document ‘shows scope for price increases’
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
SCOPE for sudden increases in water prices, spelt out in a document leaked to the Labour Party, will remove all effective protection from consumers when the industry is privatised, John Cunningham, the shadow Environment Secretary, said yesterday.
The Labour spokesman produced a leaked draft of the water prospectus, which contained details of the mechanism for passing unforeseen costs on to customers.
‘The documents show that the companies will be able to go straight to the director general of water services for extra price increases,’ he told the conference.
The ‘cost pass-through’ mechanism is designed to override the five yearly profit limits set by the director general, called the K-factor.
Dr Cunningham said this meant prices would rise ‘for the slightest reason.
. Consumers will pay and shareholders will be protected’.
The document, released to reporters at a press conference, catalogued the unforeseen ‘changes of circumstances’ that could warrant additional price rises.
It cited legislation affecting the water industry, and EC regulations and decisions.
Ann Taylor, a Labour environment spokeswoman, claimed this meant consumers would be forced to pay for new sewage works if the European Commission banned the dumping of raw sewage at sea.
At one point, the prospectus states: ‘A Water Service Company may at any time require the Director General to determine whether, and if so how, K should be changed where other circumstances which would not have been avoided by prudent management action, have a substantial adverse effect on its water or sewerage business.’
Dr Cunningham told the press conference: ‘There is virtually no protection for water consumers in these proposals at all.’
The draft prospectus was accompanied by balance sheets for the water authorities projecting their finances 10 years ahead.
He told Labour delegates, ‘Over the next 10 years the water authorities are looking to pay out about five and a half billion pounds in dividends alone.
You can add to that an extra billion to pay for the interest in their borrowing.
That's seven billion pounds consumers are going to have to find.’
However, Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment, said the proposals for passing unforeseen costs on to consumers were well-known and accused Dr Cunningham of whipping up unjustified concern.
And an Environment Department source insisted that the balance sheets were merely working assumptions used to calculate the initial ceiling on water company profits.
The projected dividends were not intended to be a forecast.
The Labour Party Conference: Policies approved
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
The conference approved the People at Work policy review which proposes: Replacing Tory trade union legislation with positive rights.
A change in the law to allow ‘sympathetic’ action.
Review the use by employers of interim injunctions to stop disputes.
Restoration of trade union immunity for certain kinds of secondary action.
Change in the law to stop sequestration of all a union's assets by the courts.
A Charter of Rights for Employees, including making it unlawful to dismiss an employee for industrial action.
A big expansion of child-care facilities, and full-time rights for part-time workers.
The conference approved the Physical and Social Environment policy review which proposes: A Ministry of Environmental Protection and an independent Environment Protection Executive.
A Wildlife and Countryside Service.
A Food Standards Agency to take responsibility for food hygiene and safety.
A Clean Water Act A ‘polluter pays’ principle and a ban on import and export of all toxic wastes.
A major housing programme.
A Freedom of Information Act Today the conference will debate health and care in the community; local government and the poll tax; the policy review group report Democracy for the Individual and Community; constitutional reforms; law and criminal justice; funding for political parties; Northern Ireland.
The Labour Party Conference: ‘Sun’ photograph criticised
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
A photograph on the front page of The Sun newspaper claiming to show three Labour Party delegates asleep during Neil Kinnock's keynote speech was criticised yesterday.
Derek Gladwyn, chairman of the conference arrangement committee, said: ‘The people photographed were not delegates at all.’
The Labour Party Conference: Caustic Skinner sees no future for nice people
By JOHN PIENAAAR
THE POLICY overhaul was running smoothly and the conference looked like an adman's dream.
However, the chairman of the Labour Party was somehow managing to keep his spirits up.
‘It could be another two years before the election,’ Dennis Skinner reflected between stultifyingly cordial debates, ‘and if it is, there is going to be a lot of water flowing under political bridges.
‘The thinking is that everyone should be placid and passive, as if you can creep up to the polls in carpet slippers.
It won't work.
We are all supposed to look like nice people, with nice habits.
There's a song about that.’
And just to prove it, he crooned out a few bars in an impressively melodious baritone: ‘Nice people with nice habits, and got no money at all.’
The left-wing MP for Bolsover's term as party chairman ends tomorrow, but no one believes that this will lower the profile of one of Labour's most colourful and respected figures.
Down in the foyer, the audio tape of Mr Skinner's chairman's address to conference was already outselling every other cassette.
And descending from the dizzy heights of Labour's megalithic conference platform, he was as caustic as ever of the slick political selling job it symbolised.
‘It gets bigger and bigger every year.
Now it looks like a scene set from Beau Geste, or one of those biblical epics.
We are the extras.’
This week, as usual, he was scorning the attractions of Brighton's restaurants and plush hotel bars.
The option of a room at the five-star Grand Hotel was turned down in favour of bed and breakfast in St George's Terrace.
‘When it comes to 12.45 I go behind the Ben Hur scenery and have a sandwich.
That's it.
I have never sat down and been waited on hand and foot, ever.’
Despite his busy schedule, he made time to visit the conference ‘Geordie night’— a gathering of north eastern MPs and activists — and was to be found one evening at the Brighton Trade Union and Labour Club with his friend Michael Elliot, a political comedian with whom he toured the coalfields during the 1984-85 pits strike.
In the hall, he has been making his accustomed mark from the chair.
More than once, right-wing union leaders have been left fuming in their seats as a stream of party activists were called to the rostrum.
A highlight of his week was the speech attacking nuclear power by Arthur Scargill ('a real professional').
A low point was the removal of Ken Livingstone from the NEC.
But he perked up quickly and promised: ‘We will keep up the argument.’
The Labour Party Conference: Conference quotes
By JOHN PIENAAAR
‘Concern for the environment has always topped (our) agenda.’
Syd Tierney, NEC member ‘The days must go when they can wake a judge at dead of night, give him a drop of brandy, show him a headline from The Sun, and get him to sign an injunction.’
Ron Todd ‘If we are going to have a comedian as leader let's at least go for Dennis Skinner or Ben Elton.’
Hard left pamphlet ‘You all sound so unhappy; it's been the best week of my life.’
Eric Hammond, EETPU ‘Today's party is a party of law-makers, not law-breakers.’
The Labour Party Conference: Less priority given to NHS spending plans
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
SPENDING ON some areas of the National Health Service could be downgraded in Labour's list of priorities as a result of the leadership's determination to make the productive economy the centrepiece of the party's programme for government.
Labour is certain to retain its commitment to spend more on the health service with a promise to restore the resources to the hospital sector it has lost in real terms since being in office.
But it has has dropped the commitment to increase NHS spending by 3 per cent a year in real terms on which it fought the 1987 general election.
Robin Cook, Labour's spokesman on health, said he believed that commitment may turn out to be ‘too modest’ by the time of the next general election.
‘What I will be looking for is a commitment that spending (on the NHS) will be a priority and that the money is there,’ he said.
Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, set out education, transport, science and research as key priorities for the party's programme in government in his speech to the conference on Tuesday.
The aim is to build Labour's credibility by creating an economy which will sustain higher spending on its social programme.
Party leaders will work on identifying the priorities for Labour's first term of office over the next year.
Shadow Cabinet ministers yesterday appeared united behind the leadership's strategy, but it could involve some tough choices.
Mr Kinnock underlined his determination to adhere to a prudent expenditure programme in an interview on the BBC World at One programme yesterday.
He said: ‘It's a question of definitions of purpose of establishment in a tough fashion — it cannot be anything else — of priorities.
And then, very much closer to the election and possibly even after the election really seeing what the possibilities are given the economic context of the time.’
The Labour leader added that the Treasury could not get its own estimates right.
For the Opposition to make guesses at costings would be aimless.
‘It is better for us to say we are going to have to institute a series of strict priorities.
It is no use us trying to clobber the economy with high taxation any more than it's any use Lawson clobbering the economy with high interest rates…
Prudence is the hallmark.
Any ambitions we have have got to be within the terms of those realities.’
The Labour Party Conference: Maxwell forced to run gauntlet
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
ROBERT MAXWELL, publisher of Mirror Newspapers, was last night forced to run an embarrassing Labour Party gauntlet of workers sacked at his Pergamon Press company last May.
His annual conference reception, at the plush Grand Hotel in Brighton, was marred by what he was reported to have described as a ‘media circus’ of camera crews and reporters as former employees protested at their treatment.
Earlier, two Labour MPs, Brian Sedgemore and Tony Banks, were escorted from the hotel by police in an attempt to prevent them presenting a petition on behalf of 23 Pergamon Press workers sacked for going on strike.
Mr Sedgemore was later allowed into the hotel to put the protesters' case to Mr Maxwell, and the MP said afterwards that the millionaire publisher — who he described as a distinguished socialist — had insisted that he would under no circumstances take back his former employees.
‘In fact,’ Mr Sedgemore said ‘his actual words were: ‘Grass will grow on my hands before I consider their re-employment’.'
When Mr Maxwell eventually came out of a hotel lift to attend his own reception, he crossed the hotel lobby and went down a corridor, followed by shouts of ‘scab’ and other abuse.
Asked if he felt embarrassed, Mr Maxwell said, ‘I am as keen as a lovely lady.’
During conference debate on industrial law, Brenda Dean, general secretary of the print union Sogat, attacked Mr Maxwell over the treatment of over 100 workers at the Nuffield Press in Oxford who, she said, had to agree to individual contracts or be sacked at the end of the week.
They had been told their union was no longer recognised.
Inspectors of schools ‘poorly equipped for curriculum’
By PETER WILBY
SCHOOL INSPECTORS employed by local authorities are poorly equipped for their future role of monitoring the national curriculum, a report from the Audit Commission for Local Authorities says today.
In some authorities, the inspectors — who are quite separate from Her Majesty's Inspectorate — spend as little as 3 per cent of their time on direct observation of classrooms.
Authorities often had little idea how inspectors were spending their time, the commission reports.
Howard Davies, the commission's controller, says that, as schools are given more financial and managerial independence over the next few years, authorities should monitor quality on behalf of ratepayers and parents, rather than pretending that all their schools are equally good.
He said: ‘If the crypto-market in education is going to work, parents will need hard information, rather than relying on gossip in the local pub.
I am not sure that many authorities appreciate this.’
The commission's report is based on investigations in 20 local authorities and on postal surveys.
Many authorities have advisers rather than inspectors indicating a belief in a supportive, rather than judgemental, role.
There are 2,500 inspectors and advisers in England and Wales, costing £65m a year or £8.05 per pupil.
But the size and role of the inspectorate varies widely.
In Rotherham, for example, there is one inspector or adviser to every 106 teachers, against one to every 313 in Leeds.
In 63 out of 78 authorities in the postal survey, one or more subjects in the national curriculum do not have a specialist adviser.
Yet in 13 of the 63, music or physical education, or both, have more than one.
On average, 22 per cent of the inspectors' time is spent on inspection, including observation, recording and analysis.
The commission says: ‘Advice in total is taking too large a proportion of the effort, around three times as much as is spent on inspection.’
It adds: ‘The major influences on the use of inspectors’ time appeared to be ad hoc requests both from institutions and from a variety of officers, and the personal professional interests of individual advisers.’
New inspectors and advisers, who are usually drawn from the ranks of teachers, are rarely trained, it says.
Administrative support is inadequate, so that inspectors spend too much time on routine, low-level, clerical tasks.
The commission calculates that all authorities will need at least 17 inspectors to cover the national curriculum as well as major areas of education such as primary, secondary and special needs.
Assuring Quality in Education: The role of local education authority inspectors and advisers.
HMSO, price £4.50.
Comprehensives opt to keep status quo 
By NGAIO CREQUER, Education Correspondent
GOVERNORS at two linked comprehensive schools in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, have voted unanimously to seek opting-out status because they fear moves to introduce selection and impose grammar schools.
The Stantonbury schools, popular community comprehensives with a total of 2,240 pupils, have two governing bodies.
Both voted to invoke the procedure by which a school seeks to become grant-maintained.
Second meetings, as required by law, have been fixed for next month.
If the applications are pursued, it would embarrass the Government.
The Tories proposed the idea of allowing schools to opt out to enable them to get away from‘loony left'authorities.
Milton Keynes is the only division in Buckinghamshire which does not have selective education.
The governors fear that a move to set up a panel to consider the introduction of grammar schools threatens their status and stability.
Tory councillors attempted a similar move 18 months ago, but gave it up after a panel reported that any reorganisation would cause 10 years of disruption.
Peter Tinworth, chairman of the governing body of one school, and a Tory party member, said: ‘We want to protect the character of our school, which is very successful.
If grammar schools were introduced then the existing comprehensives would suffer.’
Rosalind Wingrove, education committee chairman, said it had set up a panel to consider how best to consult parents.
The matter still has to go before the committee and the county council.
Two-tier criminal offence urged for computer hacking
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
MOVES to outlaw ‘hacking’ will not tackle sophisticated computer crime unless a line is drawn between amateur hackers and professional criminals, a lawyer said yesterday.
Mark Tantum, a senior lawyer at the Serious Fraud Office, told the International Bar Association conference in Strasbourg that a bank robber who turned from a mechanical to an electronic chainsaw to open the cash-box deserved different treatment from the hacker who simply accessed computer systems.
‘A two-tier offence is crucial if professional criminals are to be deterred from entering this profitable area,’ he said.
The lower-tier offence should cover simple hacking and the other, hacking with intent to steal or damage.
The gravity of the second would be reflected in heavier sentences.
A two-tier system would justify the vast resources that were needed to support investigations into computer-assisted crimes.
Collecting evidence was an enormous task involving tracking communications from their source across networks to target computers.
Mr Tantum criticised a suggestion made by the Law Commission this year that hacking in its simple form should be an offence which did not give the police powers to arrest suspects or search their premises.
‘Without those powers, hacking would be almost impossible to prove, short of a confession from the culprit.
Other countries seem to have recognised the need to give the police full investigative powers as well as treating hacking simpliciter as a relatively serious offence.’
He hoped the commission changed its mind on both counts.
It will publish final recommendations to the Lord Chancellor next week.
Describing English rules of admissibility of computer-related evidence as a nightmare, Mr Tantum warned that any new crime would be difficult to prove.
The rules mean that police would have to take control of the computer as soon as possible after the offence and establish that it was working properly at all times.
Fathers and other family members who admit they have sexually abused children in the home should not have to face criminal prosecution, the conference was told.
Caroline Willbourne, a London barrister specialising in family law, said decriminalisation of sexual offences within the family where the offender admitted the abuse was in the interests of child victims.
Court proceedings should be of a civil rather than criminal nature, she said.
‘You often find the civil court has dealt with the abuse and the perpetrator in the context of what is in the best interests of the child.’
But she added that prosecution and imprisonment by a criminal court did not serve the interests of the family as a whole, or of the child who remained part of it, or how victims would deal with contact with the abuser after release.
Ms Willbourne also called for the civil courts to be given new powers to exclude an abuser from the home instead of the child.
The Ukrainain State Dancers start nationwide tour
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
Members of the Ukrainian State Dancers, founded 50 years ago, display their skills before the start of their first British nationwide tour in 10 years.
They open tonight at Chichester Festival Theatre, West Sussex, the first of 20 engagements between Aberdeen and Paignton, and give their final performance in Cardiff on 30 November 
Du Maurier will
Home News Page 6
Business plan
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
Labour-controlled Kirklees council, West Yorkshire, is reorganising its bureaucracy on commercial lines, with an executive board of directors and bonus incentives.
The council, which includes Huddersfield and Dewsbury, is making five departmental directors and the assistant chief executive redundant.
Prince's cash
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
The Prince of Wales is to help to fund a £5m inner city regeneration project in Birmingham.
The Duchy of Cornwall is investing £2.5m in the scheme to build 79 small business workshops in the Jewellery Quarter.
The money will be added to a £934,000 Department of the Environment grant and £1.6m from the city council.
Pilot ditches jet after hitting ship
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
A Sea Harrier pilot ditched his aircraft in the English Channel after damaging a wing while attempting to land on the carrier HMS Ark Royal.
The pilot apparently hit its mast.
He flew to the Royal Naval Air Station at Yeovilton, but damage to the wing meant he was unable to land, so he flew to open sea, put the plane in a nosedive and ejected.
The pilot was rescued by helicopter.
Man shot dead after party
From PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES in Strasbourg
A 19-year-old man died after being shot in the head in a north London street as his girlfriend and two-year-old daughter looked on, police said yesterday.
Alton Lawrence was shot soon after leaving a family birthday party on Tuesday night.
Scotland Yard want to hear from anyone who saw the shooting in Nevill Road, Stoke Newington.
‘Nightmare’ of Ripper wife
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
SONIA SUTCLIFFE was upset by the fact that Private Eye called her Rowenta Ripper, or simply Mrs Ripper, the Court of Appeal was told yesterday.
On the second day of the magazine's appeal for a retrial of the libel action in which Mrs Sutclife was awarded £600,000, Geoffrey Shaw, her counsel, said: ‘This woman has undergone more stress since 1981 than any of us are every likely to undergo.
‘This was the wife of Peter Sutcliffe, who woke to a nightmare in January, 1981, and it was a nightmare that never went away.’
The jury that awarded her £600,000 may also have thought she had suffered enough in her life, he said.
Earlier, Mr Shaw had asked Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, to order photographers not to pursue or harass Mrs Sutcliffe outside the court.
‘She doesn't want such photographs taken because she would not feel safe on the streets,’ he said.
Mr Shaw said that a jury's task in awarding damages would be very difficult: ‘It is probably a unique case, with a unique plaintiff, whom they probably felt shouldn't be made to suffer any more.
It was probable that with a type of aggravated libel, and a defence that was blatantly bogus and came apart during the trial, they decided to add a nought to the amount of damages.’
Lord Donaldson asked if he was seriously suggesting that juries would multiply the award by 10 times.
Mr Shaw answered: ‘But they do, my lord.
And it can be seen…in recent libel awards.’
‘There must come a time when it is called to a halt,’ Lord Donaldson said.
Earlier, Lord Donaldson had commented that the £600,000 would give Mrs Sutcliffe a permanent income of some £60,000 a year for life — and when she died the £600,000 would still be intact.
‘This a pension of £60,000 plus £600,000 at the end — is it really possible?’ he asked.
Blood cholesterol filter to be given clinical trials
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
A TREATMENT to filter excess cholesterol out of blood is to begin clinical trials in Cardiff and London.
The technique, apheresis, involves passing blood from the patient through two filters.
One removes the red blood cells, leaving the plasma; the second removes the fatty cholesterol.
The blood cells and plasma are then remixed and returned to the patient, who is conscious throughout.
The procedure takes between two and three hours.
When apheresis is used in combination with the new drug simvastin, it can reduce cholesterol levels by up to 75 per cent.
It costs about £600 a treatment and has to be done every two weeks.
People with high levels of blood cholesterol are at an increased risk of a heart attack.
Doctors at Leicester Royal Infirmary are to assess the benefits of giving magnesium to heart attack victims immediately after an attack.
Magnesium is thought to affect the heart muscle.
Preliminary research suggests that this can improve their chances of recovery, and a four-year study with 2,500 patients is under way.
Prince to invest 2.5m pounds in city's jewellery centre
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
(First Edition) THE Prince of Wales is to help to fund a £5m inner city regeneration project aimed at transforming a derelict area of Birmingham into a small business centre.
The Duchy of Cornwall is investing £2.5m in the scheme to build 79 small business workshops in the city's Jewellery Quarter.
It is the first time that Prince Charles has given direct financial help to a run-down urban area, and the Duchy has been granted a 125-year lease on the 0.6 acre site.
The Duchy's investment will be added to a £934,000 grant from the Department of the Environment and £1.6m from Birmingham City Council.
Work on the Jewellery Business Centre, which is expected to create more than 250 jobs, is due to begin next February.
David Landale, Duchy secretary, said there were numerous requests for help, but the Birmingham project ‘caught the Prince's imagination’.
He added: ‘This will be the pattern for future similar investments, and because it is a welding together of all those strands of interest which the Prince of Wales has, we consider it to be a very exciting new venture.’
ILEA leader warns of sectarian conflict
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
(First Edition) PROMISES to establish Muslim schools could land a future Labour government with a problem as potentially explosive and insoluble as the Irish question, Neil Fletcher, Labour leader of the Inner London Education Authority, said yesterday.
Separate schools for children of different religions would lead to segregation and sectarian conflict similar to that in Northern Ireland, Mr Fletcher said.
Labour was in danger of backing ‘the mullahs and the bigots’.
The party's policy review has said that Muslims and other minority religious groups should be entitled to voluntary-aided schools (for which nearly all the costs come from public funds) provided they follow the national curriculum.
At present, only the Christian churches and the Jews have voluntary-aided schools.
At a fringe meeting at the Labour conference in Brighton, Mr Fletcher named three MPs who, he said, backed Muslim schools because their constituencies had ‘been manipulated by unrepresentative fundamentalists’: Jack Straw (Blackburn), the education spokesman; Roy Hattersley (Birmingham Sparkbrook), the deputy leader; and Ken Livingstone (Brent East).
He said: ‘How would a political party as totally committed as the Labour Party to equality of treatment and of opportunity for girls and women, lend its support to the introduction of schools in which men exercise all the power, and women are assigned a subordinate and restricted role?’
Patten turns down Foxley Wood plan for ‘instant town’: The decision to halt a scheme for 4,800 houses signals a shift in government policy, Richard North reports
By RICHARD NORTH
CHRIS PATTEN, the Secretary of State for the Environment, yesterday announced that he was overturning his predecessor Nicholas Ridley's ‘mindedness’ to allow an instant, private new town to be built on the Berkshire/Hampshire borders, south-east of Wokingham.
In a decision which was widely predicted, Mr Patten has declared himself minded to uphold the view of the department's inspectorate that Consortium Developments, representing several of the country's major home-builders, had not made a sufficiently strong case for the development of 4,800 houses in what is an abandoned quarry and a conifer plantation.
Explaining a new policy drift which will respect local political will at the expense of new development, Mr Patten said: ‘Over the next 10 or 12 years we are going to need substantial numbers of new houses.
At the same time we can expect people's interest in green issues and concern for their local environment to grow.’
The decision is part of a much wider shift in government thinking, in which Mr Patten has clearly been given Cabinet permission to distance his own policy from that of predecessors, such as Michael Heseltine, and, to a lesser extent, Mr Ridley, now Trade and Industry Secretary, who believed that economic success depended on getting the planner off the backs of business and citizen alike.
Mr Patten yesterday issued a draft housing planning policy guidance note, which will update previous documents.
The new policy will drop, for the first time since its introduction in the early Eighties, a presumption in favour of house-building at the expense of other conservation considerations.
It reiterates a growing theme in government thinking: that if the local authorities would only firmly write their own development plans — as they are obliged to do, but which few have — then environment ministers would feel obliged to honour them.
Mr Ridley's ‘mindedness’ to allow Foxley Wood depended on his view that it was a sounder way of ensuring Hampshire's share of new housing in the South-east than the county's own thinking, which assumed finding dozens of smaller sites.
The new decision does not let Hampshire off the hook — the county must still find room for 66,500 new homes — but it accedes to the county's own view that it can find the space more sensibly outside the north-east or central parts of the county.
Dudley Keep, chairman of Hampshire County Council's planning committee, described Mr Patten's move as ‘a victory for people power’.
He said: ‘We are absolutely delighted.
The new Secretary of State has recognised what we said all along should be the right and reasonable level of development in Hampshire.
It is also important that he has endorsed the county council's structure plan.’
But Lord Northfield, chairman of Consortium Developments, said: ‘Foxley Wood is not going to go away…
A new settlement is going to be needed.
How many green fields will the county use, instead of our gravel working?
‘This is a fudge rushed out to win cheers and adulation at the Conservative Party conference.
But the hard decision about how housing in Hampshire is to be provided has been weakly postponed,’ he added.
Fiendishly complicated balancing act that demands a subtle mind
By RICHARD NORTH
CHRIS PATTEN'S decision is not quite the fudge that Lord Northfield, the developers' chairman, called it yesterday.
Certainly, Mr Patten, a Roman Catholic, ought to be able to appreciate casuistry.
But the decision is not quite that either.
It is, rather, the example of what a robust and subtle mind can do when it comes to shifting British planning policy around the table a bit.
No other sort of mind is up to the demands of the system, which needs to seem to have judicial impartiality and a rocklike permanance while also being quickly responsive to the latest political fads.
Green has overtaken growth as the leading ‘g’ force in government thinking.
The planning system is designed to provide the reliable, long-term rules by which citizens know their surroundings, and house values, are not going to be altered by sudden development.
But it also has to provide the means by which a modern society provides houses and gardens — which the British love — where once they huddled in two-up-two-downs and the spec-built terraces which pre-dated the loathed Sixties ‘slums in the skies’.
A decade ago, planning ministers were writing policy which said that houses must be built where the market wanted them, and quick.
Mr Heseltine, its chief architect, was one of the first to dump it, especially when he fought the proposal of Consortium Development to build a town whose name was as instant an invention as its community would have been: Stone Bassett, like Consortium's Tillingham Hall before it, was turned down by Mr Ridley, who was not the permissive planning minister he was often thought to be.
Mr Patten's new policy guidance does not say the South-east's housing provision can be held static, and it reminds planners that their job is to provide an adequate flow of land into new housing.
He believes that about a million new households will form in the South-east by 2001, most of them the sons and daughters and new elderly of the region itself.
He said yesterday that the share of urban land in the South-east would grow by about 1 per cent, at the expense of rural land.
Mr Patten also said that he believed in the validity of the present system for predicting what housing needs will be.
It is a fiendishly complicated negotiation between demographers and planners at local, regional and national level.
To that extent, he is going along with the orthodoxy, and not disturbing the papal infallibility of his predecessors and the process they have established.
But his latest ‘papal bull’— that is what planning guidance notes are, announcing changes and yet stressing tradition as they do — emphasises that ‘town cramming’ is to be frowned on.
This is the process whereby every scrap of green land in a town is up for grabs by development.
Contradictorily, Mr Patten also declared himself in favour of seeing urban land recycled — it already provides nearly half the land used for new homes.
Yet only weeks ago he was saying that existing derelict land was needed for greening the cities, and providing amenities for citizens.
All the same, the Foxley Wood decision can be seen as sound enough.
Hampshire said it did not want to duck its share of the South-east's demand for housing, but would find land enough in the south of the county in preference to development nearer London.
Mr Patten spent much of yesterday emphasising that he wanted to respect local decisions, and that once the regions and his department had worked out overall allocations, it was for local electorates to decide where they put the bricks and mortar.
However, there are planning experts who say Hampshire has been adept at arguing down what its proper share should be.
Quite likely, within a year or two, it will be told to increase its share.
When it does that, Foxley Wood might be in the frame again.
Or perhaps the Government may decide that the provision of cheap houses to its young supporters in the South-east is not as important as holding the thin green line, while cultivating the older guard.
That is the drift of policy announced yesterday.
Move brings mixed reactions
By RICHARD NORTH
OPINIONS were mixed on yesterday's announcement that Chris Patten does not want Foxley Wood to proceed.
Peter Cole, chairman of Bramshill Parish Council, in whose bailiwick the town would have fallen, said: ‘I might have an extra beer today, but I am saving the champagne for another 21 days.
‘As things stand Mr Patten is minded to turn down the application, but there will be a 21-day stay of execution for appeals.’
He said the parish, which has just 100 people on the electoral roll, would have been swamped by the new town.
Mr Cole said the area was used for horse-riding, was a haven for wildlife and people came from miles around on summer evenings to hear the nightjars.
Mr Patten said that he had not turned against the idea of any and all new towns: ‘So long as the location is right and so long as people can have real confidence that a decision in favour of a new settlement will relieve development pressures elsewhere, then new villages and new settlements could have a part to play in increasing the acceptability of new housing decisions.’
He also rejected claims that he had corrected errors of judgement by Nicholas Ridley.
‘Mr Ridley is not guilty of having made mistakes…the Tory party always has been, and will be, a green party.’
Richard Bates, senior planner for the Council for the Protection of Rural England, said it was clear Mr Patten was weighing the balance in favour of countryside protection.
But David Hall, director of the Town and Country Planning Association, described the decision as an abdication of Mr Patten's responsibilities as the minister also responsible for housing and regional planning.
‘Without a regional programme of new settlements there will continue to be sprawl around old market towns and villages, a continuous free-for-all among the house builders, and an excess of appeals for the Secretary of State to consider.’
Peer tells of horror at being branded as a war criminal
By STEPHEN WARD
A PEER with a distinguished war record who became a Conservative minister, Warden of Winchester College and businessman, yesterday described to a High Court jury his horror when he realised a pamphlet described him as a war criminal.
Lord Aldington was taking the witness stand on the third day of his libel action against the historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy and Nigel Watts, a property developer, who circulated a pamphlet describing him as responsible for repatriating 70,000 Yugoslavs and Russian Cossacks to be massacred by the communists in 1945.
The defendants maintain that their allegations are true.
Asked how he reacted to the distribution of 10,000 copies of the pamphlet to Winchester parents, staff, old boys, MPs, peers and the Press, Lord Aldington said: ‘Horror.
Horror that anybody should actually think these things about me or indeed anybody else.
‘Absolute horror, and then recognition that it had gone to the parents at the school for which I was responsible, and that this would inevitably result in the headmaster being approached by some parents objecting to having their child in a school with a warden like this.
‘I decided that I had to put the headmaster in a position to answer and it was this problem that worried me most — more than the outrageous charges against myself and the effect on my family.
The only way I could show that in my opinion they were absolutely wrong was to start an action for libel.’
Earlier Lord Aldington had been asked by his counsel, Charles Gray QC, about his war exploits as Brigadier Toby Lowe.
He was awarded the DSO and the military CBE by the British, the Croix de Guerre by the French and made a Commander of the Legion of Merit by the Americans.
Lord Aldington, 75, a frail and stooping figure, was allowed to give his evidence while seated.
His first action had been in Greece in late 1940: ‘We soon went to the border, and the Germans invaded from Bulgaria and Yugoslavia which they had romped through.
‘I fought a number of battles but for the last 10 days before we left, because things didn't go too well, I was commanding the rearguard on the Aegean Sea.’
He then spent between three and four weeks in Crete before moving, just after the German parachute invasion began, to Egypt.
‘I was in the desert from 4 July until just after I was captured and escaped in May 1942,’ he told the court.
‘I was captured in Rommel's last push.
There was chaos.
It was a very fluid, much like a naval war.
We were overrun by two German Panzer divisions.
‘They kept us in a marshalling area surrounded by tanks being repaired.
Some British armoured cars came and began shooting from a distance, and in the chaos I shouted out to four or five brother officers and we drove off in a truck.
We were fired at but not hit.’
He had then fought from Tripoli to Tunis and in July 1943 was shipped with Montgomery's Eighth Army to Sicily.
In September they had invaded the toe of Italy.
They encountered fierce resistance as they fought their way up to Austria for two years.
The fighting had stopped on 29 April 1945, and he had spent 11 days in Allied-occupied Austria, leaving on 22 May.
It was during this time that as a senior staff officer of V Corps he had been involved with some of the orders to repatriate the Russian and Yugoslav prisoners.
Mr Gray said the defendants accused the peer of having disobeyed an order issued by the Allied Forces HQ on 17 May 1945 known as the ‘Distone’ order.
This directed that a number of Czechs and dissident Yugoslavs, who had infiltrated an area in Austria east of that covered by the Allied V Corps, should be treated as disarmed enemy troops and evacuated to British concentration camps in Italy.
An earlier order the same day, known as the ‘Robertson’ order, had ordered the repatriation of all Russians and Yugoslavs in V Corps' area.
Mr Gray said the Distone order had not been to V Corps, but to the neighbouring XIII Corps, and Lord Aldington had been correct to follow the Robertson order.
Mr Gray read from the peer's service record showing he had left Austria on 22 May, before some of the crucial decisions about the repatriations were taken.
Richard Rampton QC, for Count Tolstoy, said he would be contesting this date.
Lord Aldington told the jury that the fate of many of those repatriated was awful.
‘But in May 1945 I did not know that they would be killed and I did not know until Count Tolstoy drew it to my attention in 1979, 1980 and 1985.
‘It was quite appalling and, had we known it was going to happen, I'm certain we would have found a different way of dealing with our problem.’
The hearing continues today.
RAF technician preparing for Red Arrow display
By STEPHEN WARD
Nigel Graham, an RAF technician, preparing a Red Arrow aerobatic display aircraft for a flight at RAF Scampton in Lincolnshire yesterday to mark the end of the team's 25th anniversary 
Security forces judged in grades of disapproval: An Irish delegation is to discuss security leaks with Peter Brooke today.
David McKittrick considers the subtleties of the issues
By DAVID MCKITTRICK
AS FAR AS Irish nationalists are concerned, the British security forces in Northern Ireland have never been in the running for prizes for popularity.
The 10 per cent or so of the population which votes for Sinn Fein appears to approve of, or at least to tolerate readily, the IRA's attempts to kill soldiers and policemen.
Non-violent nationalists condemn IRA actions but have traditional political reservations about the presence of the Army, and complain about security force policies, tactics, and the behaviour of individual troops and police officers.
Within this general picture of disapproval there are gradations.
The most unpopular of the security forces is the Ulster Defence Regiment, the locally-recruited and predominantly Protestant force.
Next, according to those who monitor the pattern of complaints, come certain regiments of the regular army; then the Army in general; and finally the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
Even when allowance is made for the authorities' claim that many complaints are made for propaganda, this pattern is well-established.
It helps to explain why the UDR is kept away from the toughest republican areas.
Among nationalist politicians, the main question on the UDR is whether the force should be abolished or whether, with radical changes, it could be rendered more acceptable to Catholics.
The UDR's low reputation among nationalists was reflected in the 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement, which looked forward to increasing the number of Catholics in the RUC but refrained from mentioning the UDR.
The communique which accompanied the agreement accepted the principle that, when the UDR and the Army came into contact with the public, a police officer should, whenever possible, be present.
That this objective has not been achieved continues to irritate Dublin.
When the current collusion controversy began, it was assumed that the bulk of the problem lay with the UDR.
Dublin regarded the revelations with dismay, but also saw them as an opportunity to renew and step up its criticisms of the regiment.
On 15 September, the Republic spent seven hours presenting its damning view of the UDR to Peter Brooke, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
But the pattern of leaks since then has complicated things for both the British and Irish.
It is now accepted that UDR members and RUC officers have been leaking to loyalists.
It is possible that Mr Brooke, or a successor, may begin to think in terms of reducing the UDR's role and size, and perhaps even phasing it out.
No such options exist for the RUC.
It is the largest and most central of the security forces: the Army and UDR take their orders from it.
It has increased from 3,000 to almost 13,000.
Many nationalists also admit that the RUC has shown improvement, while the UDR has not.
Dublin is uncomfortably aware of this.
On one level the Republic often criticises the northern security forces, but it too relies on the RUC: the Garda co-operate with the northern police force and do not, as a matter of policy, deal with either the Army or the UDR.
It also, more generally, looks to the RUC as the force most concerned with combating the IRA.
For this reason, Dublin's instinct will be to concentrate complaints on the UDR.
The police will not escape criticism, but this will tend to be softened by the unacknowledged consensus that the RUC is essential to the security approach of both governments.
IRA gunmen kill wrong man in street attack
By DAVID MCKITTRICK
THE IRA in Belfast yesterday shot the wrong man when they killed a laboratory analyst, writes David McKittrick.
The organisation claimed he was a Catholic who had been involved with the Army, the Royal Ulster Constabulary and loyalist terrorists.
But the RUC said last night: ‘The victim of this foul murder was an entirely innocent man who was on his way to work.
No explanation by the IRA can take away from that fact.’
The man shot outside a north Belfast school at breakfast time was James Henry Babbington, 52, a Catholic.
He was walking along a quiet street when gunmen shot him several times in the head.
The IRA statement of responsibility had incorrectly named another man, the brother of a well-known Belfast republican, as the victim of the shooting, accusing him of having a bizarre paramilitary career stretching for more than a decade.
The intended target was last night believed to be in RUC protective custody.
The IRA claimed the man, although a Catholic, was a ‘hit man and intelligence officer’ for the extreme Protestant Ulster Freedom Fighters and had been involved in a number of gun attacks on nationalists and republicans.
It further alleged that he had been a ‘fifth columnist’ working for the Army in west Belfast in the 1970s, and had been given immunity by the RUC to carry a gun and carry out robberies.
A second man was later seriously wounded in another north Belfast incident.
A relative of the Sinn Fein councillor Alex Maskey, he was shot in an industrial estate at lunchtime.
Responsibility for the attack was later claimed by the loyalist Ulster Volunteer Force.
Tories face increasing pressure on poll tax
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
MINISTERS HAVE failed to find a way of fending off Conservative Party conference pressure for extra funds to ease the introduction of the poll tax, it emerged yesterday.
Meetings between the Prime Minister; Chris Patten, the Secretary of State for the Environment; and Nigel Lawson, Chancellor of the Exchequer, have been unable to come up with an agreed solution to put to today's Cabinet.
It is now unlikely that a solution will be found in time for next Wednesday's debate on the poll tax at the Tory conference in Blackpool.
David Hunt, the Minister for Local Government, will be vulnerable to an angry reaction when he tries to answer the expected protest from the Tory grass-roots — and Tory councillors in particular.
Nine Conservative MPs from the right and left of the party, including three former ministers, met Mr Patten last night to press their case for additional funds.
They said afterwards that Mr Patten listened sympathetically but gave no specific response.
The leader of the MPs' delegation, Sir Rhodes Boyson, the former local government minister, said afterwards that they had asked for an extra £650m to offset the sums which some local councils will have to raise in poll tax to the pay their contribution to the nation-wide poll tax safety net.
But it is clear the Treasury is holding out against providing substantial extra central funds, arguing it has no way of being sure that extra money will go into reducing the impact of the tax, rather than into increased spending.
Sir Rhodes urged Mr Patten to reduce poll tax levels in London by imposing a cap of £300 per adult, and he asked for special help for those people living in low rateable value homes built between 1860 and 1930.
He said afterwards that he and his colleagues impressed on Mr Patten their fear that the tax could be a ‘poisoned chalice’ if it was not made attractive to voters.
He had not found a single Tory MP who disagreed with his efforts to ameliorate the introduction of the tax in England and Wales next April.
Policeman on M50 saw alleged killer, jury told
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
AN OFF-DUTY police inspector saw the alleged killer of Marie Wilks but dismissed him as a good Samaritan, the M50 murder trial was told yesterday.
Insp Peter Clarke told the jury that he drove past Mrs Wilks, who was pregnant, after he saw the man pull on to the hard shoulder, towards a telephone box where she was making an SOS call to police headquarters.
‘My obvious reaction was that he had gone to help her,’ Mr Clarke, a community affairs officer who was travelling to police headquarters, said at Shrewsbury Crown Court.
‘There was no reason for me to pull in.’
The court has been told that, minutes later and in daylight, Mrs Wilks, 22, was abducted, then stabbed to death.
Her body was found two days later, at the bottom of a motorway embankment.
Her jugular had been severed.
She had left her son Mark, aged 13 months, with her sister, Georgina Gough, 11, in the broken down Marina car, while she walked the half-mile to the emergency telephone.
Edward Browning, 36, a nightclub bouncer, has denied murdering Mrs Wilks on 18 June last year.
She was killed on her way home to Warndon, Hereford and Worcester, after spending the day with her husband Adrian at a Territorial Army camp in the Forest of Dean.
Mr Browning, of Vicarage Road, Cwm-parc, Mid Glamorgan, is alleged to be the driver of a silver C-registration Renault 25 seen parked on the motorway at the time Mrs Wilks was killed.
Mr Clarke said that it was the children who first drew his attention.
‘I saw a child walking along the hard shoulder and she was carrying another on her hip.’
Cross-examined by John Griffith Williams QC, about why he did not stop for the children, he said that he was concerned not to hit them and instinctively moved away into the fast lane.
‘Was it not an instinctive reaction to break and see if you could help them, just in case you had to stop to do something about them?’
Mr Williams asked.
‘My concern was to keep away from them,’ Mr Clarke replied.
Mr Williams: ‘Although you did not, would you expect that some people seeing young children on the motorway would be so concerned as to slow down?’
Mr Clarke: ‘I would expect that most would stop and offer assistance.’
But, as he passed the children, he saw he was closing fast on a grey saloon car, which ‘appeared from nowhere’ in the fast lane, he added.
Mr Clarke said he assumed it had done a U-turn across the central reservation.
It accelerated and moved into the slow lane, as he passed.
He then noticed Mrs Wilks at the telephone box and, in his rear-view mirror, he saw that the grey saloon car had pulled on to the hard shoulder and was heading towards her.
Mr Clarke said that he commented to his wife: ‘That must be the reason why he came across.
He's come to help her.’
Farmer's fight for bronzes hits setback
By GERALDINE NORMAN
A SUFFOLK farmer trying to recover a hoard of Romano-British bronzes, which he claims were illicitly excavated from his land, has been told that the Office of Arts and Libraries cannot help him, writes Geraldine Norman.
John Browning, whose farm at Icklingham, near Bury St Edmunds, covers the site of a Roman villa, saw Charles Henderson, head of the office, yesterday.
He was told that the government department, with general responsibility for arts policy, has no means of helping him to reclaim the bronzes from the Ariadne Galleries in New York.
Mr Browning, who believes the bronzes were smuggled out of the country and later bought by the galleries, said that he felt he had been ‘led up the garden path’.
Last July, when recovery of the bronzes was taken up with Richard Luce, Minister for the Arts, an MP was told that Britain ‘has existing channels for international co-operation to help trace stolen works of art’.
However, it appears that there is no way of reclaiming stolen objects once they have been traced, largely because the UK has never ratified the 1970 Unesco convention on prohibiting the illicit export of cultural property.
Mr Browning said: ‘I shall now look for a lawyer to explore what the Ariadne Galleries are prepared to offer me.’
Suffolk police have arrested six men on suspicion of involvement in the theft of the bronzes.
Deaf woman stabbed in flat
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
A DEAF woman with speech difficulties was stunned, sexually assaulted and stabbed repeatedly by a killer who got into the flat where she lived alone, a court was told yesterday.
Suzanne Greenhill, 20, had been blindfolded — depriving her of the last sense she could have used to identify the attacker — and her underwear had been stuffed in her mouth.
Her partially-clothed body was found in a pool of blood three days later by her finance, Anthony Wesson, 25, at her home in Tewkesbury Walk, Newport, Gwent, Cardiff Crown Court was told.
Philip Price QC, for the prosecution, said Mr Wesson, who is deaf, ran to a woman neighbour.
‘She heard some sounds of howling.
He was on his knees outside the door of the flat with his hands encircling his head, making howling noises,’ he said.
Timothy Jack Robson, 28, a friend from schooldays who is also deaf, has denied murdering her on 28 June 1988.
A social worker is interpreting the proceedings for Mr Robson, a carpenter, who has speech difficulties.
His then wife, Tracy, told police he had returned unexpectedly early that evening to their home in Gaer Park Drive, Newport, Gwent, Cardiff Crown Court heard.
Mr Price said her statement described Mr Robson as having a swollen hand and scratches on his face.
He was shaking.
He had washed his bloodstained clothes, and the next day scrubbed blood from his trainers.
Fibres from the red acrylic jumper Mr Robson was allegedly wearing on the evening of the killing were found on Ms Greenhill's body, Mr Price said.
A stocking footprint in blood at her flat was consistent with the size and shape of Mr Robson's foot, he added.
Mr Robson had told his wife he had been scratched by a woman during a pub fight.
He had asked her not to tell the police.
Council ‘made deals after auditor intervened’
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
HAMMERSMITH and Fulham Council in west London continued to take out options on the London money market even after the intervention of the district auditor, wrongly thinking that it was reducing its holdings, the High Court was told yesterday.
John Howell, for Anthony Hazell, the district auditor, said on the second day of a hearing into the legality of the council's £6bn deals on the market: ‘The council sold 49 gilt options on the mistaken belief that it was reducing its exposure.
‘It may be that those involved in the sale of gilt options did not realise that they actually increased the risk to which the council was exposed rather than reducing it.’
The council should have stopped these dealings when the district auditor began to question their legality in the summer of 1988, but the new options were taken out between then and 23 February this year, when the council decided to cease making payments on the transactions.
During the 1987-88 and 1988-89 financial years, 592 deals were made with a notional value of about £6.1bn.
Estimates of the council's losses vary between £69m and £406m, depending on how they are assessed and on interest rate movements.
Mr Howell said no legal opinion had been sought before entering into the transactions, although a council memo suggested that visits should be made to other local authorities.
‘What you will note is strange about this, is that advice was not sought from the council's own solicitor,’ Mr Howell said.
Councillors were not kept informed of the deals either.
The first reference to them was contained in the Annual Borrowing Report dated 4 January 1988.
However, Mr Howell said ‘it gave no indication of the number of transactions arranged, the income and expenditure they had produced, the type of risks involved, the scale of any potential gains and the exposure to loss’.
It was a brief paragraph under the heading ‘temporary investments’.
A similar paragraph was contained in the subsequent year's report, but otherwise no information was given to council members about the deals.
The auditor is seeking to have the transactions declared unlawful because they were ultra vires— beyond the council's legal powers.
If he succeeeds, the council will be barred from paying the losses incurred on the transactions.
Five banks have been added as parties in the case.
John Chadwick QC, representing four of the banks, yesterday argued that they were innocent parties in these transactions.
He said: ‘The banks entered into these transactions in good faith.’
The case continues today.
In Tuesday's report on the High Court case, the name of the fifth bank was wrongly given by the court as Mitsubishi Finance Corporation.
The correct name is Mitsubishi Finance International.
Extradition plea
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Britain's longest-serving unconvicted prisoner, Lorrain Esme Osman, who has spent nearly four years in custody pending attempts by Hong Kong to extradite him on fraud charges, asked the High Court to rule that he was being held unlawfully.
The hearing is expected to last 10 days
Tamils arrive
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Four Tamils who were deported to Sri Lanka more than 18 months ago arrived back at Gatwick Airport after a successful appeal from outside the country.
They will now renew their application for asylum.
Mother improves
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Aisling Barnett, who had a liver transplant after a television appeal for a donor, showed the first signs of consciousness.
Her husband Colin noticed responsive movements in her hands and jaw as he continued a bedside vigil.
Hotel blaze
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Four floors of a hotel development in central London were destroyed in a fire.
It took more than an hour to control the blaze at the former Langham Hotel.
No one was hurt.
Papers dumped
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Police in Kent are investigating the discovery of a briefcase of Army training material found dumped outside the Intelligence Corps at Ashford.
An Army spokesman said the documents were of low classification and details of IRA activities in them were ‘purely fictitious’.
Deal funerals
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
The last of the funerals took place in Deal, Kent, for the Royal Marines bandsmen killed in the IRA bombing.
Two separate services were held in the barracks church for five of the victims.
Party charge
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A businessman who helped organise the weekend acid house party where violent scenes left 16 policemen injured appeared in court charged with riot.
David Lambert, 35, a video producer from Clapham, south London, was refused bail by magistrates at Reigate, Surrey.
The Department of the Environment said it was looking at the legal position of local authorities wanting to control parties.
Ford claim
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
Car workers' unions are today expected to demand a wage rise of at least 10 per cent for the Ford motor company's 31,000 hourly paid workers, when negotiations open in London.
Unions representing 12,000 Ford salaried employees have already lodged a claim for a ‘substantial’ rise.
Man dies in crash at rail crossing
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
One man died and another was critically injured when their car was hit by a train at an unmanned railway crossing.
The vehicle was shunted more than 200 yards down the line in the accident, which happened on the Halifax to Leeds line at Ducketts Crossing, West Yorkshire, at 4.45pm.
British Rail has launched an inquiry, but a spokesman said the alarm bells and gates appeared to be working properly.
Camera case man hunted
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A police search is under way for a businessman accused of attempting to export a military camera to the Soviet Union after he failed to appear for committal proceedings at Rugby Magistrates Court.
Colin Gibbins was arrested this year by the customs authorities after they seized a high speed Imacon 790 camera, worth £250,000, at Birmingham Airport.
Mr Gibbins, 46, of Drayton Leys, Rugby, broke a £20,000 bail bond by failing to turn up in court on Tuesday.
The case was adjourned for five weeks.
Customs authorities confirmed that Mr Gibbins owns property in Moscow, but dismissed reports that he had gone abroad as speculation.
Health cash ‘crisis’ faces hospitals
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
INNER LONDON health authorities face a £13m overspend this year, according to confidential figures compiled for London health authority chairmen.
The projected deficit, even after internal savings in some districts, comes amid signs of mounting pressure on NHS budgets in and around London from under-funding of pay awards, rising demand and the treatment of increasingly complex cases.
Queen Mary's Hospital at Sidcup has cancelled all waiting-list surgery for ‘at least’ five weeks after more patients than planned were treated in the first five months, producing a £205,000 overspend on top of £200,000 it has to find for under-funded pay awards and other pressures.
At St Bartholomew's Hospital, 75 beds have closed; Parkside Health Authority has closed a 20-bed ward it had just re-opened to try to tackle waiting lists; and proposals to close some beds at the London Hospital are expected to go next week to Tower Hamlets Health Authority, which faces a £1.3m overspend.
Pressure on emergency services, rather than cash problems, has led to Whipps Cross Hospital in Waltham Forest closing for this week to all but the most urgent waiting-list cases.
According to the confidential figures, the 12 inner London authorities face an underlying deficit of almost £30m this year, and have identified £18m of savings.
The figures are due for revision before being put to David Mellor, Minister for Health, next month.
The Department of Health is understood to be highly sceptical.
But one health authority finance officer said it looked ‘inconceivable’ that the budget could be balanced without service cuts, in the winter or next year, unless extra cash was provided or health ministers allowed the deficit to be carried forward.
‘We are getting hugely conflicting messages from the NHS management board.
On the one hand we are being told we must deal with the deficit, and on the other that we must not close things and rock the boat with the NHS White Paper around.’
The document shows that, allowing for deficits carried forward to this year and other factors, and before this year's savings, Bloomsbury has to save £8m to balance its budget, Lewisham £6.6m, Riverside £3.1m, Wandsworth £2.8m, Hampstead £1.4m, West Lambeth £1.5m, with the rest, bar Greenwich, facing forecast deficits of at least £1m.
A leak of an early draft of the White Paper on community care led to a clash yesterday between Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, and Harriet Harman, Labour's health spokesman.
The document says the new ‘enabling’ role of local authorities as purchasers and providers of services for the elderly, mentally ill and handicapped will mean greater use of private home helps and other services.
It showed the White Paper would be ‘a blueprint for privatisation’, Ms Harman said, ‘with no protection for those who use the services’.
Mr Clarke said social services departments would ‘use their own, voluntary or private provision, according to which they judge the best way of providing the best quality service’.
Charge of rape on mentally handicapped girl dropped
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A CHARGE of rape on a mentally handicapped girl was dropped yesterday after a judge ruled she could not give evidence against her alleged attacker.
The girl, now 16, was 14 at the time of the alleged incident.
A medical report estimated she had a mental age of seven years and nine months.
The charge of rape against Michael Richardson, a homeless, former fairground worker, was dropped after Judge Blofeld ruled in Norwich Crown Court that the girl could not be sworn in to give evidence.
Richardson, 37, who met the the girl while she was walking her dog beside the river near her home in King's Lynn, Norfolk, was given a 16-month sentence for having sex with a girl under 16, the legal age of consent.
Judge Blofeld said: ‘I am unhappy that an incident that requires a court hearing cannot have one.’
Richardson, he added, had ‘set out to gratify himself casually’.
The girl's mother was outraged by the ruling.
She said: ‘He has got away with less than two years in prison.
It is not fair.
We don't feel justice has been done.’
The judge's ruling comes at a time when many legal experts are pressing for young children to be allowed to give evidence in court.
Maureen O'Hara, of the Children's Legal Centre, said: ‘The 1933 Children and Young Persons Act does not define an age when children are competent to give evidence, but case law has tended to set a figure of around seven or eight.
‘We think that a girl with a mental age of seven years and nine months is quite capable of knowing when she has been raped.’
The medical report shown to the court from the King's Lynn Health Authority on the girl's mental faculties assessed her on a variety of indicators, including mental arithmetic, reading ages, concepts, and spelling.
While she scored above eight on several factors, the judge was particularly concerned with her score of around six-years-old on the ability to answer questions.
An added problem in this case was that she was too old to give unsworn testimony.
David Cocks QC, chairman of the Criminal Bar Association, gave a speech on the subject earlier this week to the Bar conference.
He said yesterday: ‘The problem is that the law is artificial.
It relies on the physical age rather than the mental age.’
A Home Office Advisory Working Group, chaired by Judge Pigot, on the question of children's evidence will report imminently and is expected to recommend that children as young as four or five should be allowed to give evidence if a judge rules that they are competent.
Mr Cocks said: ‘Some four or five-year-olds are perfectly able to give a coherent account of themselves, while some 16-year-olds cannot.’
Safety data ‘kept from motorists’
By ANDY GLINIECKI
DATA OF the sort released in Sweden, which warns that motorists are three times more likely to die in crashes in some makes of car, is kept from British drivers, the Consumers' Association says today.
The association's magazine Which? says that insurance companies and the Department of Transport collect accident details that could throw light on the cars which best protect their occupants, but this information is not made public.
Current regulations on safety are dismissed as ‘woefully inadequate’ and the association calls on drivers to boycott models if manufacturers fail to make safety a priority.
Which? has deduced from safety inspections over the past six years that models from Audi/VW, Saab, Vauxhall and Volvo are ‘clear leaders, showing an across-the-range application of thoughtful protective safety and design’.
The single Mercedes tested was also ‘very good’.
But it adds: ‘Six makers lag behind the mediocre majority — Citroen, Daihatsu, Hyundai, Skoda, Yugo and, by far the worst, Reliant with its Rialto.’
The best small car was the five-door Vauxhall Nova 1.3L, while the best medium-sized car was the Volvo 360GLE.
The best large cars were the Audi 80E, the Saab 900, the VW Passat CL, and the Vauxhall Cavalier.
The best luxury car was the Saab 9000i.
Mike Bennett, Reliant Motor's marketing director, said: ‘We have no reason to believe the Rialto is less safe than any other lightweight vehicle.’
Two die in tenement explosion
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME
A MAN and a woman died yesterday in a suspected gas explosion that destroyed a six-storey tenement block in the centre of Edinburgh, writes Mark Douglas Home.
Five other people — three of them women — were injured, including a man of 19 trapped for four hours.
Recue teams were planning to search the 50ft pile of rubble throughout the night and today.
Five people with addresses at the building had not been traced.
The woman victim was named as Nicola Marie Donnely, 21, a student of printing at Napier College in the city.
The dead man, aged 25 to 30, was not named.
Colin Cranston, deputy firemaster in the Lothian and Borders brigade, said late last night his team of 60 rescuers had uncovered two cellars where any survivors were likely to be.
There was no chance of survivors being found in other parts of the collapsed building.
‘You have five storeys compressed into one.
Their chance would be diminishing as each hour goes by, but we have not reached the stage that we can confidently say there is nobody alive in that building.’
The blast, at 7.25am, devastated the terraced building in Guthrie Street, causing all the internal floors and walls, and the entire back wall, to collapse.
The upper floors were private flats.
The ground floor and basement were the offices of an Edinburgh University student charity.
Rescue teams found four survivors soon after the explosion.
Two walked from the building, another was taken from a damaged building near by, and the fourth was found on top of the rubble underneath a bed.
Search operations had to be suspended temporarily at one stage while the roof was demolished because of the danger of it falling in.
A British Gas spokesman said investigations into the cause of the blast were continuing.
Police released a list of survivors: Henry Wyllie, 20, Helen Lawrie, 48, and Paula Gaunt, 28, were discharged from hospital after treatment; Dawn Howbridge, 19, and Martin Baptie, 19, were said to be satisfactory in hospital.
About 1,000 BP employees in Glasgow evacuated their offices for two hours yesterday after a pipe in the chilling plant of an air conditioning system broke loose, releasing gas into the building.
Speelman returns to battle
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
PLAY RESUMES today in the Pilkington Glass world chess championship semi-finals.
Jonathan Speelman will be grateful for yesterday's rest day, which gives him a chance to recover his equanimity after a depressing loss in the second game.
Speelman and Timman had agreed a draw on Tuesday night in their adjourned game from the first round.
Speelman with the white pieces has often been accused of having a rather wimpish opening repertoire, and on this occasion he gained nothing from the advantage of the first move.
Between moves 9 and 13, he adopted a convoluted plan that seemed only to tangle his own pieces.
He already stood worse when he overlooked Timman's clever 14th move, which forced the win of material.
Timman now leads 1 1/2 -1/.
The match is level, Karpov 1 Yusupov 1.
Safety at N-plant ‘breached’
By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor
THE NUCLEAR installation inspectorate is to prosecute the Central Electricity Generating Board for two alleged breaches of safety regulations at the Dungeness B nuclear power station in Kent.
It is the first time the inspectorate has taken the board to court for an alleged lapse of safety.
In both cases the alleged safety violation concerns operators dropping nuclear components.
On 4 February this year, the station operators dropped a complete nuclear fuel assembly into the core of one of the reactors, putting the reactor out of commission.
It has still not been restarted.
The second alleged breach happened less than three weeks later where, as a result of actions by CEGB inspection team, a 2.5 tonne component was dropped 27 feet.
The inspectorate said the radiological consequences of both failures were negligible.
But the inspectorate is prosecuting to underline the importance that it attaches to nuclear workers following proper procedures.
The prosecution alleges that the CEGB is in breach of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965, which empowers the inspectorate to grant a licence to operators.
The inspectorate attaches mandatory conditions to the site licence -covering, for example, the need for maintenance to be carried out as specified in the maintenance instructions — and for inspections and tests also to be conducted in accordance with written procedures.
It is expected that the case will be heard at Folkestone Magistrates' Court in Kent on 16 November.
The maximum fine under the legislation is £2,000 for each offence, although the magistrates may commit the cases for trial in the Crown Court which can impose an unlimited fine.
The prosecution over safety in an Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor, reactors which form part of the electricity industry privatisation, will come as an extra embarrassment to the Government and will further dent City confidence in the value of the nuclear assets.
Ambulance disruption set to worsen
By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor
EMERGENCY ambulance services face serious deterioration from today as officers join the overtime ban amid calls to tighten industrial action.
Roger Poole, chief union negotiator, said there was a real risk of a major breakdown in the 999 service.
‘Someone is going to get hurt.
That's bound to happen in a dispute like this,’ he said.
Mr Poole is to lead a delegation to Blackpool next week to see Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, who will be attending the Tory conference.
The 3,500 ambulance control assistants and officers were due to start their action at midnight last night.
They are joining 19,000 ambulance crew members protesting against a 6.5 per cent pay offer.
Mr Poole said there was evidence that some ambulance workers in the shires had been breaching the ban at the request of managers.
‘Now we're saying that there has to be a complete ban on overtime and that they should resist moral blackmail.’