

Football Round-Up: Thomas eases the doubts
By NEIL MORTON
ON A night of hat-tricks in the Littlewoods Cup last night, Michael Thomas made a powerful case to be considered as an England understudy for the Polish expedition should Bryan Robson suffer a relapse, writes Neil Morton.
The midfielder struck a superb second-half treble as Arsenal pummelled Plymouth 6-1 at Home Park.
Thomas's contribution could not have been more timely, Tommy Tynan having equalised an own goal by David Byrne.
Sheffield Wednesday, curiously, were the most prolific scorers, but only one goal ahead of Luton, finalists for the past two seasons, who defeated Third Division Mansfield 7-2 (11-5 on aggregate).
Steve Whitton and Dalian Atkinson were Wednesday's discoverers of the lost art; Luton's hero was their £900,000 Danish acquisition, Lars Elstrup, who scored three following his double in the first leg.
In the only giant-killing acts, Tranmere, top of the Third, defeated Ipswich, struggling in the Second, with a Chris Malkin goal (2-0 overall) while Exeter ensured that the Fourth will have at least one representative in the third round.
After overcoming Blackburn 3-0 at home in the first leg, due largely to an injury to Rovers' goalkeeper Terry Gennoe, they were beaten 2-1 last night but prevailed on aggregate.
A 119th-minute goal by Tony Cascarino enabled Millwall to scramble through against Stoke.
Cascarino's decider came with the game heading for a shoot-out.
Teddy Sheringham had levelled the aggregate score (43).
Norwich preserved their unblemished away record, winning 2-0 at Rotherham thanks to Dale Gordon and Robert Fleck.
Racing: Cordoba shouts the odds
By JOHN KARTER
JUST possibly Cordoba (3.10) may prove to be the biggest talking horse since Mister Ed, the supernag of American television fame.
More probably, however, Cordoba is yet another potential champion from Michael Stoute's Newmarket production line, an opinion the son of El Gran Senor can underline by galloping off with today's Middle Park Stakes at Newmarket, writes John Karter.
Well before Cordoba made his debut over today's course two months ago, his name was being whispered behind many a well-respected hand as the one to be on for next year's 2000 Guineas.
And having been backed for the classic at long odds before his Newmarket introduction, Cordoba became clear favourite for the 2000 after treating his six opponents like seaside donkeys.
Stoute has stated that Cordoba's Guineas odds are absurdly low, but there is no doubt that he holds the colt in extremely high regard.
On actual racecourse achievement, Rock City is head and shoulders above Cordoba and the rest of today's field, having won Royal Ascot's Coventry Stakes and the Gimcrack Stakes at York.
However, Rock City looked a shadow of the brilliant juvenile who dominated those events when a well-beaten fourth behind the French colt Machiavellian at Longchamp.
He was apparently found to be running a temperature, but after a long season of competing in the best company, he may be past his best.
Willie Carson, Rock City's rider, has a significant ride to start of the afternoon when he partners Nashwan's half-brother, Mukddaam (1.30), on his first racecourse appearance, which has been delayed by injury and hard ground.
Mukddaam easily disposed of his more experienced stable companion, Marienski, in a racecourse gallop at Newbury, and as the latter ran creditably in last Saturday's Royal Lodge Stakes, Mukddaam clearly shares at least some of Nashwan's ability.
Carson is not without a chance on Murango later in the afternoon, but preference is for Petite Rosanna (next best 3.40), for whom the booking of Steve Cauthen looks significant.
Petite Rosanna lost a shoe when fancied for a big handicap at Newbury last time.
Cauthen could have a major chance on Spritsail if that horse's poor run at Ascot last week could be ignored.
However, it may pay to take a chance with SESAME (nap 2.35), who has been running creditably in top class events and could oblige at attractive odds.
Racing: Certain pride for Elsworth
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
DAVID ELSWORTH will have a lot more to occupy his thoughts this winter than a certain grey steeplechaser.
Desert Orchid's trainer can fill the gaps between the great horse's latest achievements by dreaming of his first Classic success with Dead Certain, who became clear favourite for the fillies' Classic with a courageous victory in yesterday's Cheveley Park Stakes at Newmarket.
‘You've got to do something in the close season when there's no jumping,’ Elsworth joked, making light of a triumph that clearly thrilled him enormously.
And if it seemed surprising to reflect that the supremely versatile Hampshire trainer has not yet struck in our Classic races, it was even more incredible to learn from the man himself that Dead Certain's victory in the richest two-year-olds race ever run in this country was his first success in a group one event.
And glory in the 1,000 Guineas may well be a lot more than just a warming winter thought because Dead Certain beat as competitive a field as there has been for a juvenile filly's race for many years.
Always up with the pace, she responded instantly when Cash Asmussen asked her to repel the challenges of the favourite, Chimes Of Freedom, and Line Of Thunder.
Those who follow cash of the other sort were chasing fool's gold.
The market signals proved totally wrong as Dead Certain drifted out ominously in the betting and Chimes Of Freedom was backed as if defeat was not even a remote possibility.
Money cascaded on to Henry Cecil's filly, including one individual bet of £50,000 to £55,000, but in the end she was even edged out of second place by Line Of Thunder.
The reason for the apparent lack of confidence was clearly the fact that Elsworth had suspended operations for some while because of coughing in his yard and had not had a winner for almost six weeks.
Dead Certain had been as badly affected as any, but Elsworth simply would not run a horse of that class in such a race unless he believed it was capable of giving of its best.
‘I think she had done enough at the end and it was beginning to hurt,’ Elsworth said.
That was more a reflection on Dead Certain's ring rustiness than her stamina and Asmussen said: ‘She's a very good filly and I'm sure she'll stay the Guineas mile because she's got such a lovely relaxed temperament.’
Dead Certain's win yet again brought home the fact that there is life after the Maktoums.
Toby Marten, Dead Certain's owner, paid only 5,800 guineas for her and even after stumping up £10,000 to supplement her for yesterday's race, he is still well over six figures in the plus in prize money, not to mention Dead Certain's enormous intrinsic value.
William Hill made Dead Certain their 12-1 Guineas favourite but Corals offers only 8-1.
William Hill price In The Groove, another of Elsworth's fillies, at 20-1.
In The Groove, who runs at Phoenix Park on Saturday, has not achieved nearly as much as Dead Certain, but Elsworth rates them on a par.
Corals cut Cacoethes from 6-1 to 5-1 co-favourite with Aliysa and Young Mother for Sunday's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe after it was confirmed that Steve Cauthen will ride Guy Harwood's colt.
Ten horses were withdrawn from the Longchamp race at yesterday's forfeit stage, including Khalid Abdullah's Assatis, which means that Pat Eddery is almost certain to ride the owner's other runner, French Glory.
Legal Case's connections were the only ones to pay the £30,000 supplementary fee.
Racing: Ratings added to the service
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
THE RACING service of The Independent has been improved with the introduction of individual ratings to the form guide.
The horse with the highest rating in each race is deemed to have the best chance on form, though other influences will be discussed in the guide.
In theory, a horse with a rating two points higher than his rivals is considered to be 2lb — the equivalent of a length over a mile and a half -superior.
Each day's race cards will indicate which meetings are to be shown live in betting shops by Satellite Information Services (SIS).
In addition, where necessary there will be notification of horses ‘out of the handicap’, and who are therefore at a disadvantage.
These horses have a Jockey Club official handicap rating that merits carrying a weight lower than the minimum weight allotted for a race.
Other innovations include a comprehensive presentation of results from the previous day's principal meeting, featuring the breeding of winners, the successful trainer and owner, extended distances, and details of the first six finishers.
Every Monday, there will be an in-depth statistical look at the performances of leading trainers and jockeys, with particular reference to the stables and riders in form.
Television channels' tunnel vision: Rumbles of discontent with teasing highlights surround the Football League's deal with ITV.
Patrick Barclay reports
By PATRICK BARCLAY
THE Football League's new relationship with ITV has brought clubs a lot of money, irregularly distributed.
It has brought the viewer expanded coverage, irregularly spread; although the season began on 19 August, the first live match will not be broadcast until 29 October.
But David Dein, the Arsenal vice-chairman martyred for his part in the deal, insists that it is working ‘eminently satisfactorily’.
Dein lost his place on the League management committee because it was felt that the interests of the so-called ‘Big Five’ clubs, including Arsenal, had been pushed too hard.
The then League president, Everton's Philip Carter, went too.
A year on, Dein is unrepentant.
He hears the rumbles of discontent — but points to concurrent rises in viewing figures and attendances.
‘In any case,’ he says, ‘the world is changing.
Television can no longer be considered an intrusion into football.
The game is going to be TV-driven in the future, and rightly so when the worldwide trend is towards seated stadiums with reduced capacities.’
Football is, of course, already a television sport in France, where the satellite station Canal Plus is noted for its quality of production — and the football industry for the size of its wallet.
Little Monaco, with their English Third Division crowds, could easily afford to tempt Glenn Hoddle from Tottenham; Marseille, who paid £4.5m for Chris Waddle, were said to have earned that and more from television alone in the previous year.
Spurs would be lucky to receive £1m from ITV this season.
So ITV is driving a comparatively modest engine.
But its skill at the wheel remains a matter of legitimate debate while the audience is temporarily neglected.
Piecemeal highlights are all very well, but viewers tend to be creatures of habit and, at present, a short burst of goals every Saturday night is just a tease; an uninitiated visitor would never guess that football was the national game.
Within ITV's ranks, there is concern that last season's gains have been wasted.
The overlord Greg Dyke, having paid a minimum of £11m a year for exclusive rights to the League (at the current rate of inflation, the four-year, index-linked bill could soar over £50m), hit his audience target of eight million when Manchester United beat Liverpool thrillingly on New Year's Day.
Then came Arsenal's unforgettable finale at Anfield in May, watched by nearly 12 million people (more than the BBC got for the FA Cup final).
‘The viewers were hungry,’ one member of staff said.
‘We could have re-established ourselves as the football channel.
But, when the League re-started, we gave the public nothing.’
Trevor East, the new producer of The Match, explains the decision to wait for late autumn: ‘People are reluctant to watch televised football or anything else on a sunny afternoon.
Ratings dip right across the board.
In any case, we have only 18 matches live and need to have some week-by-week continuity, building towards the climax.
The deal doesn't buy us a match every week.’
So why not a proper highlights package on Saturday night, or non-live Sundays as some regions are already trying?
‘It depends on ratings for the short Saturday-night slot.
At the moment, they are not encouraging.’
The consumers would appreciate some stability.
Perhaps more variety, too, although enthusiasts' assertions that not everyone is obsessed by the ‘Big Five’ are countered by East who, as a football nut and a director of Derby until he moved into his current post, knows all the arguments.
‘We're not a public service,’ he says, ‘and we won't attract viewers by going to half-empty stadiums.
They want to share in big-match atmosphere.’
For the clubs, as ever, the issue is money, most of which goes to the First Division.
Even those who never appear receive £200,000 a year.
But this is not enough for the likes of Coventry, who are prominent among the complainers.
Millwall take a different view.
Their policy is to get in among the big clubs on merit, thus forcing television's hand.
Naturally, East warms to this.
‘Clubs will get on the box,’ he says, ‘if they are doing well and at home to one of the big boys.
That's when they fill the terraces.’
The inbuilt bias towards the big clubs has undoubtedly fuelled inflation in the transfer market; one has only to look at Manchester United, who raked in nearly £1m from television last season.
But transfer money is not lost to the game — it circulates, by and large— and clubs have used their new wealth in different ways; Dein says it has helped Arsenal to develop their ground.
‘The deal has been very good for football,’ he says, ‘and I believe that television is going to be accepted as a very important tool in the game's administration.
After Lord Justice Taylor's report, a lot of the bigger grounds have reduced capacities.
Ours is down to 49,000 — and that is still the largest in the League.
So there are going to be more lock-outs.
Television can meet the excess demand.’
Enticing marriage with no promises: Neil Wilson on sport's need to balance the benefits and blights of TV exposure
By NEIL WILSON
NO BRITISH sport owes more to television than athletics.
You only have to look at the balance sheet its treasurer John Lister will present to its annual meeting in December, a million pounds sitting on reserve.
At that meeting he will be able to announce to clubs that ITV has agreed to pay more than £7m over the next four years, an extension of a contract in which it paid £10.5m over five years.
The debt goes deeper than money.
Television, both BBC's coverage for 20 years and ITV's for the past five, not only attracted lucrative sponsorships but developed a greater interest among the young.
The Pascoes and Fosters on the box fired the imaginations of the Coes and Crams and they in their turn the Jacksons and Backleys.
‘Prime exposure, that's the key benefit to any sport on television, and the presentation of a sport in a positive way,’ said Alan Pascoe, athlete turned TV commentator who is chairman of the sport's marketing agents.
‘Many sports are very envious of athletics.’
So where is the catch?
Does a marriage of convenience between sport and television come with a promise to love, honour and obey?
‘Any risks are far outweighed by the benefits,’ Pascoe argues.
‘A sport just has to be a bit flexible.’
Athletics arranges its annual fixtures in consultation with television.
No point in fixing dates when television's cameras are tied up elsewhere.
Similar co-operation follows in the scheduling of a meeting's main events.
Nothing must clash with a commercial break or run into the news.
Occasionally athletes are kept waiting at the start for a minute or so until television is ready.
It is a small price, Pascoe believes, and one which sport should accept as reasonable.
‘The discipline television imposes can be helpful,’ he said.
‘There's not many sports that can't learn about presentation from television.’
A sport, like a new spouse, can be so infatuated with its glamourous partner that it loses its head.
Basketball in Britain did when Channel 4 offered to screen a game each week.
Suddenly sponsors appeared from everywhere, the sport thought it was Christmas and expanded out of control.
Now Channel 4 has gone and the sport is back where it was six years ago.
Some predict bowls will be the next to suffer.
‘It is the sports which can get it wrong,’ Pascoe warned.
‘They must always be careful when they adjust and react to television that they don't change the nature of their sport.
But the dictation and domination some predicted for athletics hasn't happened.’
A sport's first concern, Pascoe says, should be its own development and that means presenting itself in the best possible way.
‘They should not see television as a panacea for all financial ills.’
As Jonathan Martin, the BBC head of sport, put it: ‘It's not just about having the biggest cheque on the table.
It's what television does with your sport in terms of scheduling and presentation that matters.’
Commonwealth Games: Cost plan devised by AAA
By NEIL WILSON
SCOTTISH, Welsh and Northern Irish athletes will be able to prepare for next January's Commonwealth Games in Auckland at training camps in Australia in spite of the financial constraints which have imposed limits on the size of their teams.
The Amateur Athletic Association, the English body which manages the financial affairs of British athletics, is increasing its annual donation to the other three countries by £20,000.
It is intended to cover the extra costs of sending athletes to the southern hemisphere immediately after Christmas to train in warmer weather.
The first £10,000 has been shared out already, and the rest will be paid in the next half financial year.
John Lister, the Welsh treasurer of the AAA/BAAB, promises that the payments will continue annually.
‘When the British Amateur Athletic Board was in financial crisis three years ago, we had to cut the grant to the Welsh, Scots and Irish,’ Lister said.
‘Now we can afford to restore it, and by doing it immediately it gives their athletes the same advantages England's will have.’
The four home countries' teams have been invited to a pre-Games warm-up meeting in Sydney, where the Kenyans and Canadians will also compete.
But without television coverage, the promoters could not afford to meet the costs, and the Scots, Welsh and Irish looked like missing the opportunity.
Tennis: Becker tells of refuge on the East side
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
BORIS BECKER spoke here yesterday of how he tried to find the perfect antidote to New York by taking a week's holiday in East Germany after winning the United States Open last month.
‘It was as bad as when I won Wimbledon in 1985,’ the 21-year-old multi-millionaire said of the response to this journey to the hamlet home, 50 miles south of East Berlin, of the grandmother of his girlfriend, Karen Schultz.
‘There were only about 10 houses in the place, but there were so many people, you couldn't believe it.
We arrived at the little house in the evening and already there were a few people there.
The next day was frightening.
A couple of hundred people came, and all of them seemed to stay overnight.
I enjoyed myself.
I couldn't do much, but my mind was free and clear.
The trip was a good experience.’
Having watched television documentaries about life in East Germany, Becker was keen to see for himself for the first time.
‘What shocked me was that one wall could make such a difference,’ he said.
‘It was hard to believe the change you could see by moving just a couple of kilometres out of West Germany, one of the richest countries in the world.’
As a further 11,000 refugees were arriving yesterday in the hope of sharing this prosperity before the back door from Czechoslovakia was closed again, Becker added: ‘I am not surprised that they want to come.
I am only surprised that, suddenly, it's so many.’
For Becker, a sporting life with capitalism has returned to normal as he mulls over details before signing a commitment to the mega-buck Association of Tennis Professionals Tour, which starts in January.
He is here playing in the Stuttgart Classic.
The East Germans have enough to think about without troubling themselves about tennis, but it is odd they do not have a single international player of note, bearing in mind the success of Czechoslovakia and the involvement of other Eastern bloc countries.
‘I can only guess at the reason,’ Becker said.
‘Tennis came back to the Olympics for the first time in Seoul, and maybe now that it is recognised again as an Olympic sport, it will become more important in East Germany.
In the end, they will have players.’
Players who have had serious injury problems to contend with this year have used the $350,000 (£212,000) Stuttgart event as part convalescence.
Miloslav Mecir, whose season has been handicapped by back trouble, assured himself of a place in the semi-finals along with Becker with a 6-2, 6-1 victory against Austria's Thomas Muster yesterday.
John McEnroe joined Mecir and Becker by defeating Henri Leconte 7-5, 2-6, 6-4, and Ivan Lendl's 6-4, 6-4 victory against Carl-Uwe Steeb put Leconte out of the tournament.
Tennis: Durie's brief dream turns to grim reality: Our Correspondent reports from Tokyo
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
THE LONG and winding road that Jo Durie's career has followed over the past 10 years, took another nasty twist yesterday when she missed the chance to keep Britain in the Federation Cup.
With Clare Wood having lost the opening rubber of their second-round encounter against Austria to Judith Wiesner in straight sets, Durie needed to upset the form book.
For half an hour or so she had Barbara Paulus, ranked 21st to Durie's 102nd, chasing shadows as she won the first set 6-2.
‘Jo played that set like a dream,’ said the team captain, Ann Jones.
Unfortunately, Durie woke up and subsequently allowed Paulus to take command from the baseline.
Once the Austrian had levelled the match it became evident that Durie was on shaky ground.
Paulus could sense it too as she moved in for the kill to claim a 2-6, 6-4, 6-3 victory.
‘When I win a first set like that, I panic.’
Durie said.
‘It's because I haven't been winning for a while and I am desperate.
It's difficult to get matches under your belt when you're like that.
Winning has to become a habit.’
At the age of 29, Durie must be wondering how much longer she has left to get hooked on that habit which she toyed with briefly six years ago when she reached the lofty heights of the world's top five.
Any form of a comeback could be thwarted by Durie's dismal world ranking.
Because of a succession of injuries and poor results she now stands at 102nd, her lowest-ever position.
It is a ranking that is likely to mean a spell in the qualifying competitions of the world's tournaments.
There was a morsel of consolation for the British team of Durie and Anne Hobbs before they left for home however, when they won the doubles contest against Petra Ritter and Paulus 2-6, 7-6, 6-3, saving three match points in the process.
The most strenuous victory of the day was claimed by the Spaniard, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario who survived several nerve-racking moments before beating Brenda Schultz, of the Netherlands, 2-6, 6-4, 10-8.
Sanchez's victory earned Spain, the second seeds, a quarter-final confrontation with the Soviet Union.
At the top end of the draw, the United States swept to a 3-0 win over Denmark and will next face Austria.
The most intriguing quarter-final will pit Czechoslovakia against Steffi Graf's West Germany.
Squash: Maclean finds the key to pick Umar's lock
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
BRITAIN delivered its third significant blow in two days to the world champions, Pakistan, when Mark Maclean put the seventh-seeded Umar Hayat Khan out of the World Open here yesterday, and became the first Scotsman ever to reach the quarter-finals.
The London-born, Cardiff-based man, from Edinburgh, has always been hard to pin down.
Yesterday, he produced his second extraordinary escape act in succession by coming from behind to win 10-15, 9-15, 15-13, 15-12, 15-10, against an opponent who has been in both of the last two world title-winning teams.
Maclean also had been two games down, and had had to play two match points, before surviving on Tuesday against England's promising 17-year-old, Simon Parke.
The suspicion exists that Maclean picks locks with a bent pin as a hobby.
He was 9-13 down in the third game this time, when he somehow slipped free.
‘I thought I was out,’ Maclean said, ‘then I hit a couple of shots out of my arse, and I was in.’
These ‘couple of shots’ were, in fact, four winners, which were immediately aided by a penalty point and abetted by a change in fortunes in refereeing decisions.
Maclean also concentrated on getting the ball past the talented Umar and denying him further chances to hit crisp drives into the nicks and towards difficult angles.
It earned him a quarter-final today with Jahangir Khan the title-holder, from Pakistan.
The former title-holder, Jansher Khan, also from Pakistan, plays Bryan Beeson, who became the second Briton to reach the last eight by overcoming Jason Nicolle, 15-7, 15-13, 15-6 in a tussle of English giant-killers.
On Tuesday, both beat members of the Pakistan team who defend the world title next week, in Singapore.
Was Brett upset to have beaten his brother?
‘I would rather it hadn't been him, but he's done it plenty of times to me,’ was the answer.
Cricket: Subba Row to retire next year
By DEREK HODGSON
RAMAN SUBBA ROW, the chairman of the Test and County Cricket Board since 1985, last night announced his intended retirement next year.
He will thus vacate possibly the most influential post in English domestic cricket when the game is at a watershed.
In his statement, Subba Row, who is 57 years old, stressed that he believes that five years in office is sufficient, and that negotiating the International Cricket Conference agreement on South Africa, announced in January, was quite enough to be remembered by.
Subba Row, also the chairman of Surrey and a former England and Northamptonshire batsman, will remain a powerful voice but clearly wishes for someone else to take the responsibility for the hazards to come.
In order to prevent a drain of young English cricketers to South Africa during the winter, the TCCB has to provide a suitably well-rewarded alternative and it is in this area that Subba Row's successor will need to shine.
The advent of satellite television and the imminent breaking of what has been a BBC monopoly of cricket offers opportunties of expanding TCCB income.
Other controversial topics during the next year include a restructuring of the county programme, the state of pitches, the height and durability of the seam and a continuing inquest into the inability of the 17 county clubs to produce Test-class players.
A public relations executive, Subba Row was a skilful diplomat accustomed to getting his own way and his methods did not always appeal to some of the county clubs or to the elder statesmen of MCC.
What history will say of his tenure of office is that he had very difficult decisions to make in awkward circumstances and while England's international team suffered an unimaginable decline most of the 17 first-class counties, his prime concern, flourished more than might have been expected.
Baseball: Oakland take lead on Stewart's arm
By DEREK HODGSON
THE OAKLAND Athletics came back to win the first game of the best-of-seven American League championship series with a 7-3 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays, on Tuesday.
Toronto's starting pitcher, Dave Steib, took a 3-2 lead into the sixth inning, but Mark McGwire hit a lead-off home run to tie the game.
In the same inning, Carney Lansford grounded to shortstop, in what appeared to be an inning-ending double-play with the bases loaded.
But a hard-sliding Rickey Henderson forced Jays second baseman, Nelson Liriano, into throwing past first base, allowing two runs.
The Athletics added two more runs in the eighth inning on a wild pitch and a single.
Oakland's Dave Henderson scored the A's first run with a homer in the second inning and they scored their second on a single by Dave Parker.
Oakland's starting pitcher, Dave Stewart, recovered from a shaky start to allow just five hits over eight innings, before giving way to relief pitcher, Dennis Eckersley.
Toronto had scored on a sacrifice fly and a single in the second inning and on a home run by Ernie Whitt in the fourth inning.
Athletics: Thompson in doubt for Auckland
By DEREK HODGSON
DALEY THOMPSON is doubtful for the Commonwealth Games in Auckland, in January, after undergoing an operation on his left knee, in Zurich last week.
Thompson, in an interview on BBC Television's Sportsnight programme, says he is neither pessimistic nor optimistic about his prospects for the Games but is convinced he can still be an athletics force for the next four or five years.
He said last night: ‘I've had a spot of bother for the past four or five years with my knee so I had these X-rays done and they found a bone growth about the size of a pea.
‘They also found that my kneecap was not quite straight so they moved it over.
There were also floating bits of cartilage running round the knee.
They told me that in four or five years, it could get worse and would get arthritic.
So that's why I had it done.
‘They told me that as long as I did not rush back too quickly, I should have another four or five years.
I'm not necessarily out of the Commonwealth Games.
I shall know when I'm a fit man.
‘If I'm not there, I will not worry.
I shall be happy for the fellow who takes my place.’
Asked about politics intruding in the Games, Thompson said: ‘The Games are always vulnerable.
But as a competitor, you do not think about politics and you just hope everyone will be there.’
He was far more forthright on the omission of Steve Cram.
‘It's bad news about Cram,’ he said.
‘I think it is bad management.
I feel very strongly that a man like Cram, who has served his country very well in the past and won a host of medals, deserves more loyalty.
‘The people who do the selecting know very little about the sport.
They do not want to select.
They do not want to be in the position of having to make decisions.
‘Steve Cram and people like him should be there.
He is the first or second greatest miler in the last 10 years.’
Cricket: Yardley's golden age of graft
By DEREK HODGSON
NORMAN YARDLEY died yesterday, aged 74, three months after suffering a stroke; he will be mourned and missed by cricketers everywhere, writes Derek Hodgson.
Yardley was a golden boy pre-war who achieved almost every prize life and sport had to offer except, probably, the two he craved most: recovering the Ashes from Australia and taking Yorkshire to the County Championship.
As a right-hand bat and useful seamer, he captained St Peter's, York, when hardly out of short trousers, won his Blue as a freshman at Cambridge and, in turn, captained his school, university, county and country.
From then his career was hard graft: succeeding Brian Sellers as Yorkshire's captain he had to rebuild the side which, although talented, never managed more than a shared title; he won his England place on merit before succeeding Wally Hammond as captain when he had to face Don Bradman's Australia.
He accepted disappointment and defeat with dignity.
After retirement he became a respected commentator, chairman of selectors and eventually president of Yorkshire (1981-4) until, saddened by the internal strife, he resigned from an office in which he took great pride.
Yardley was proud that he was one of the few bowlers who could claim to have dismissed Bradman three times in Tests.
Drugs in Sport: Counsel on attack
By DEREK HODGSON
ROBERT ARMSTRONG, the senior counsel at the Canadian Federal Inquiry into drug abuse in sport, wound up its hearings in Toronto by saying that the International Amateur Athletic Federation had failed to tackle the problem of drugs in athletics.
‘There is a moral crisis in sport, not only in Canada but on a worldwide scale,’ he said.
The inquiry was set up after Ben Johnson was disqualified at last year's Olympics.
Last month, following Johnson's admissions at the inquiry that he had taken drugs and not failed drug tests, the IAAF decided to strip him of his world records retrospectively and enacted legislation which would punish any athlete who passed a drug test but subsequently admitted he was an offender.
‘It may do no more than further entrench the conspiracy of silence,’ Armstrong said.
‘You may wish to ask yourself whether there really has to date been a desire to address the drug problem in sport with firm conviction.’
Justice Charles Dubin now has the task of ploughing through 14,500 pages of evidence from the inquiry's 119 witnesses before making known his findings, probably in January.
Meanwhile, Mel Levine, a United States Congressman, is introducing a Bill in Washington today which will put trading in 24 types of anabolic steroids, used to enhance muscle growth, under the Controlled Substances Act.
Golf: Olazabal returns
From NORMAN DABRELL in Stuttgart
A SPANIARD defends his German Masters title this week, after being stung into winning last year when he was left out of the Suntory World Matchplay Championship, while an Australian plays here having sacrificed a lucrative place in this year's matchplay event, writes Norman Dabrell from Stuttgart.
Jose-Maria Olazabal starts the defence of his title today in illustrious company, teeing off with Bernhard Langer and Mark Calcavecchia, looking to pick up a £55,000 first prize.
With Severiano Ballesteros, Nick Faldo, Ian Woosnam and several leading Americans also in the field, Olazabal does not have the incentive of trying to gain a place in next week's World Matchplay at Wentworth: he has already been invited to play in the event this year.
The Australian, Craig Parry, misses Wentworth, but by his own volition.
Parry has turned down an offer to play in the World Matchplay and with it, an automatic £12,500 reward, and has also decided to pull out of a couple of rich Japanese tournaments, so that he can play again next week in the BMW International.
‘I feel there is more prestige in winning the order of merit,’ Parry said.
‘I want to play on the US Tour eventually, too, and the Americans don't care how much money you have won.
But they would be impressed by you winning the order of merit — especially in Ryder Cup year.’
Equestrianism: Smith makes most of Picnic
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY at Wembley
STEVEN SMITH'S perseverance with the brilliant but wayward Brook Street Picnic paid off last night at the Horse of the Year Show, when he won the £4,000 first prize for the Leading Show Jumper of the Year title.
Formerly partnered by Nick Skelton, Picnic had proved to possess a distinctly awkward streak.
But he answered all the difficult questions that Harvey Smith's younger son asked of him last night to defeat a flying round from Philip Heffer on Viewpoint.
Emma-Jane Mac filled third place on Everest Oyster with the only other clear round of the jump-off.
Jos Lansink's first visit to The Horse of the Year Show could reward him with a Jaguar car, if he can maintain the form shown on the last three days.
When he won yesterday's NM Financial International, the Dutchman was left as the only rider who is still in with a chance of winning this special prize.
Known as the Everest Challenge, the car is offered to any rider who can jump two clear rounds in four specified contests and then win Saturday night's Grand Prix.
It had seemed an impossible target until yesterday, when Lansink produced his third double clear round in the specified series.
Now the Dutchman's goal has been reduced to two clear rounds in this evening's Modern Alarms Cup and victory in the Grand Prix.
‘For sure I'd like to win the car,’ said Lansink, who finished third behind the Whitaker brothers in August's European Championships on Optiebeurs Felix.
He had the Jaguar prize firmly in his sights when opting for a steady clear round in Tuesday night's Rover Classic, instead of attempting a time which might have made it more difficult for Nick Skelton to win on Burmah Serenade.
Yesterday Lansink, 28, relied on the eight-year-old stallion, Libero.
First to go in the two-horse jump-off, he was able to claim his first ever Wembley victory after Michael Whitaker had 12 faults on another stallion, Next Didi.
Whitaker may well have parted with a horse of remarkable talent four years ago when he sold U2 to the Edwards family in Shropshire.
Now aged seven, this Irish-bred son of King of Diamonds was ridden by Carl Edwards to become overall winner of the three-part National Grade A Championship.
Equestrianism: Action to curb horse abuse
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
THE International Equestrian Federation is taking action to combat both physical abuse of horses and drug misuse to protect the reputation of the sport, writes Genevieve Murphy.
The federation's president, The Princess Royal, said yesterday that a new medication control programme would be based at a laboratory in Newmarket and that there would be substantially increased stewarding, possibly assisted by the installation of video cameras.
‘A small minority of competitors are very much in danger of spoiling the good image of equestrian sport,’ she said.
In future, offenders are likely to be punished with ‘a short, sharp ban’ rather than a fine.
The Princess appeared to be at pains to avoid sensationalism as she declined to specify the abuses that the federation is aiming to stamp out.
However, there was the tacit admission of drug abuse in the tightened medication programme and a passing reference to the practice of ‘hyper-sensitisation.’
The latter is designed to encourage the horse to avoid hitting fences by applying an irritant to its legs.
‘We have started research into ways of detecting that type of abuse,’ the Princess said.
The forbidden practice of rapping, whereby the horse's legs are hit with a hand-held pole while it jumps a schooling fence, was not mentioned by name.
But the additional security, to be introduced at all international shows, is clearly aimed at stamping out that method of encouraging horses to jump clean — as well as reducing the possibilty of them being nobbled.
Two years ago, the Princess said that show jumping was ‘in serious danger of becoming a second-rate circus.’
That threat, she said, was the reason why interested parties had come together to work for an improvement.
Sport in Short: Tennis
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
PAT CASH, the former Wimbledon champion out of competition for six months after surgery on a ruptured Achilles tendon, plans to make his comeback at the Hopman Cup in Perth over Christmas.
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Swimming
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Student Sports
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
THE ORGANISERS of the World Student Games to be held in Sheffield in 1991 intend to foot the bill for the Games, which will have to be staged for the first time without direct financial help from the host government, by raising £18m through sponsorship.
They hope to attract eight to 10 corporate sponsors with worldwide rights to put the Games' logo on products, sponsors of the five purpose-built stadia which are now under construction and local firms.
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Snooker
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
SCOTLAND took the Amateur Home International Championship for the first time with an 11-7 victory over the Republic of Ireland at Prestatyn yesterday.
Sport in Short: Sailing
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Rugby Union
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Ice Skating
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
SUZANNE OTTERSON, the 15-year-old Scottish junior champion who was making her senior debut, gave a flowing performance to finish fourth in the short programme and move up to fifth place overall with the free skating to come.
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
ALEXANDER MOGILNY, the Soviet forward who defected during the world championships in Stockholm, is among the Soviet contingent appearing in the NHL, which begins its 1989-90 season today, for the first time in the League's 73-year history.
Mogilny is playing for the Buffalo Sabres, while other Soviets include the New Jersey Devils' Viacheslav Fetisov, the former national captain, and the Vancouver Canucks' forward pair of Vladimir Krutov and Igor Larionov.
Sport in Short: Gymnastics
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Golf
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Football
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Cricket
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Boxing
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
DAVE McAULEY has been given the go-ahead by a British Boxing Board doctor to resume full training after arm and foot injuries for his IBF flyweight title defence against Dodie Penalosa, of the Philippines, which the IBF insists must take place by 7 December.
Sport in Short: Bowls
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
JOHN BELL, the 1984 world championship fours gold medallist, has withdrawn from England's Commonwealth Games team for personal reasons.
His place at No. 3 goes to Gary Harrington.
Sport in Short: Basketball
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Baseball
Sport Page 37
Sport in Short: Badminton
Sport Page 37
Rugby Union: Oswald spurs Pontypool assault
By ROBERT COLE
Pontypool.. 34 Swansea..... 6 AT 37, and with more than 500 club games, 41 caps, and three British Lions tours behind him, Graham Price should be basking in the glory of one of Welsh rugby's greatest careers.
But old habits die hard, especially those fashioned in the Pontypool front row, and the easy life has been postponed for yet another season.
This term, though, there is a special reason for the archetypal tight-head cornerstone of the Pontypool pack to prop on — the All Blacks.
While the rest of Wales quakes in anticipation of next week's invasion by the world champions, Price is merely looking forward to another tussle with the ultimate rugby enemy.
Ten times he went into Test battle with them, winning once in 1977 in a Lions' jersey, and his experience and example will be crucial when the revamped, and increasingly successful, Gwent side meet the tourists in 13 days time.
It will not merely be his insight into the All Blacks' tactics and mentality which will prove valuable.
The Bay of Plenty No. 8, Dean Oswald, will offer a more contemporary view.
His influence in stemming the Swansea flow could not be overstated and he now looks certain to face his fellow countrymen in two weeks' time.
After Gerald Williams had caught Pontypool on the hop with a 16th minute try, converted by Mark Wyatt, the Kiwi import changed the whole course of events.
It was his pick-up and feed from a scrum which sent David Wright in for the first of his tries and then the No. 8 charged over from a similar situation to grab the lead on the stroke of half-time.
Once in the lead there was no stopping the home side as they reinforced their gathering momentum with five second-half tries.
Football: United divided in a search for dignity: Derek Hodgson reports on the story behind Knighton's impact on Old Trafford and football
By DEREK HODGSON
THE Michael Knighton Story, already sold to a tabloid, began publicly as recently as 18 August when it became known that he was buying the controlling interest in Manchester United from Martin Edwards.
Knighton, Derbyshire-born and a professional for a year with Coventry City, was a teacher until 1984 when he took up property dealing.
He was largely unknown to football when last June he was introduced to Edwards, the chairman and majority shareholder of United.
In the ensuing month he persuaded Edwards to sell, accepting the stipulation that Edwards should retain his £80,000-a-year job as chief executive for three years.
The terms were staggering to anyone naive enough to think football was only a game.
On the morning of 18 August The Independent, along with other media, reported that Edwards was prepared to sell for £20m.
The new season was two days away and Alex Ferguson, a manager trying to compensate for a previous disappointing campaign, had spent £2.5m on two midfielders, Mike Phelan and Neil Webb.
The following afternoon the sale was announced at Old Trafford and the name of the new chairman revealed.
Knighton, a small man with a ready smile, crisp, cool and articulate, flanked by PR men, made a good initial impression and left only one small but nagging doubt.
In answer to my question as to the source of his income he replied: ‘I have been extremely fortunate.
You could say the secret is location, location, location.’
That one small doubt became a huge question mark two days later when, before the opening home game with Arsenal, Knighton took the field in a United playing strip (having refused the previous day to be photographed holding a United shirt) and juggled, headed and kicked a football in front of a at first incredulous and then delighted Stretford End.
There is nothing illegal nor immoral in a club chairman's demonstration of ball skills but the contrast, in a day, between the image of a shy, reclusive, multi-millionaire property tycoon and that of a terrace tearaway was too sudden to digest.
Within days rumours began to circulate that Knighton would have difficulty in raising the £10m he needed to buy out Edwards, the £10m reserved to buy out other shareholders and the £10m pledged to the rebuilding of the Stretford End.
It also emerged that United's new No. 1 fan had tried to buy Bolton Wanderers in 1988.
One tabloid, threatened since with a writ, went as far as to say that he would not be able to find such a sum.
In mid-September the rumours reached a climax after two named backers withdrew their support.
Knighton remained ummoved as the money rolled out, Ferguson paying more than £4m for Gary Pallister, Paul Ince and Danny Wallace.
Indeed Knighton seemed to have re-established control and credibility when David Murray, the wealthy chairman of Rangers, announced his support ‘and advice’.
Then came yesterday's news that Knighton was reportedly negotiating a sale, including a £6m profit and a three-year contract with the club for himself, with one of three groups: the United directors Amer Midani and Nigel Burrows, the media tycoon Eddie Shah, and the former estate agent and local radio entrepreneur (and Blackpool FC chairman) Owen Oyston.
Midani, the wealthy Lebanese who had always believed that he had first option should Edwards ever decide to sell, after trying to buy the club himself, insisted more than once: ‘United must not be caused embarassment,’ and seemed to be the one participant in what became an increasingly shabby affair who was conscious that great dignity was at stake.
To have the affairs of a club of such majesty as Manchester United conducted in a hole and corner manner has sickened more than many of their vast, worldwide following.
How much the shenanigans in the boardroom have affected the team's performance on the field is hard to say but those performances, even allowing for another sad catalogue of injuries, have been inconsistent at the least.
Fewer than 27,000 were at Old Trafford on Tuesday night to see the sequel to a thrilling first leg of a Littlewoods Cup-tie against Second Division Portsmouth.
Even five years ago an attendance of less than 35,000 would have been thought surprising.
It was symbolic of United's plight that Sir Matt Busby, nominally the club president, sat all alone, smoking his pipe, in the directors' box.
Basketball: Royals are waved aside
By DUNCAN HOOPER
Hemel Royals.. 60 Reykjavik..... 64 (Reykjavik win 118-105 on agg) KODAK HEMEL ROYALS followed Manchester Giants out of European competition last night when they lost to Reykjavik of Iceland in the first round of the Korac Cup, writes Duncan Hooper.
Like the Finnish club who eliminated Giants from the Cup Winners Cup on Tuesday, Reykjavik followed the fundamental principles of playing aggressive defence, making simple passes and taking open shots.
But such simple tactics seemed beyond the inexperienced Hemel team, who were repeatedly caught out by American Jonathan Bow's eye for the easy basket.
Having started the match eight points down from the first leg, Hemel spent the first half apparently doing everything they could to double the deficit.
They almost succeeded, so that by a combination of close range misses, poor handling and half-hearted rebounding they trailed 33-27 at the break.
Hemel's Darin Schubring, who caused a two-hour delay in last week's first leg when he demolished the backboard, looked less dangerous on the rare occasions he had the ball.
The second half opened with Hemel threatening a stunning transformation as they outscored their opponents 9-2 to go one point ahead on the night and seven down overall.
But the effort proved too much to sustain and Reykjavik scored the next 13 points to put the issue beyond doubt.
Football: Nayim is the root of Southend's downfall
By PATRICK BARCLAY
Southend United.... 3 Tottenham Hotspur.. 2 (aet; score at 90 min 3-2; agg 3-3; Tottenham win on away goals) TOTTENHAM ended last night playing party tricks to waste time at Roots Hall, but it had taken them nearly two hours to establish a semblance of control over Southend in a throbbing, snarling, extraordinarily eventful Littlewoods Cup second round, second leg.
Having overcome the dismissal of Paul Stewart in the 49th minute, Spurs were forced into extra time by Gary Bennett's second goal.
Ultimately it was Nayim's audacious away goal that ruled, but only in the closing minutes had the Londoners enjoyed a moment's respite from the pumped-up Fourth Division team, who had Roy McDonough sent off for a reckless tackle near the end.
The contrast in styles could hardly have been more stark.
Right away Southend revealed their tactics: long, hanging balls played behind Spurs' back line.
And right away they worked, five minutes of chaos in Terry Venables's rearguard ending with Dave Martin heading home a corner to bring the sides level on aggregate.
Spurs clearly felt the loss of their big centre-back Guy Butters, who had reported sick on the coach journey to Essex.
The sheer fury of Southend's running kept Spurs under pressure and in the 41st minute Gary Mabbutt, newly cautioned for bringing down the impressive David Crown, gave the ball to him.
Crown squared from the byline for Bennett to shoot gleefully into the net.
But it was always an open contest, with Spurs' determinedly creative football making chances, and the home lead lasted only two minutes, Gary Lineker setting up Paul Allen.
Stewart's departure, after an incident that left Paul Roberts holding his face, did not seem to affect Spurs unduly.
Indeed their confidence soared with Nayim's exposition of mental and physical agility in the 55th minute.
Closely marked, he suddenly hooked the ball over his head and ran free to slip the ball between Paul Sansome's legs.
By now Spurs' defence looked more solid.
They had shuffled at half-time, moving Steve Sedgley back from midfield and Pat van den Hauwe to left-back.
But they could not quell Crown, who got his head to a free kick in the 68th minute, nor Bennett, who pounced.
Each side in turn went close to dispensing with extra time, Crown hitting a post then Paul Gascoigne having a chip turned on to the bar.
But Spurs lasted longer, the sparkling Nayim being denied another goal after a colleague was spotted offside while he completed an intricate run.
Manchester City erased the memory of last season's FA Cup third-round defeat against Brentford.
The Third Division side, holding a 2-1 advantage from the first leg of their Littlewoods Cup tie, were well placed at 1-1 before Trevor Morley struck twice in as many minutes and David Oldfield added another to wrap up City's 5-3 aggregate win.
Football: Drinkell lifts spirit level
By JOE LOVEJOY
Coventry City.. 3 Grimsby Town... 0 (Coventry win 4-3 on agg) GRIMSBY played for 87 minutes of this Littlewoods Cup tie with 10 men, and their prospects of defending the two-goal lead they brought to Highfield Road disappeared with Tony Rees, who was sent off for a coward's foul on Greg Downs.
Kevin Drinkell, Coventry's record signing from Rangers, ushered the club with whom he began his career towards the exit with a debut goal of which dreams are made.
Kevin MacDonald settled it with an even better one, drilled in from handsome distance.
Both sides were fired up — too much so — in some cases — and a spiteful start brought warnings for David Speedie and Keith Alexander before the third-minute incident which saw Rees dismissed for stamping on Downs with the full-back prostrate and helpless.
A man short, the Fourth Division side held their more illustrious opponents at bay with no great difficulty until midway through the first half, and the crowds had fallen into an apprehensive silence when Drinkell revived their spirits.
The newcomer could scarcely have opened his account in more spectacular fashion, scoring with an overhead kick from 10 yards after Speedie had nodded on a cross from Trevor Peake.
It was a goal of the highest class, reflecting the progress the 29-year-old striker has made in the five years since he left Blundell Park to earn fame and fortune with Norwich City and Rangers.
Speedie should have brought the aggregate level after 25 minutes, but leant back as he met a lay-off by Cyrille Regis, and his shot ballooned over the bar.
He is a better finisher than that, of course, and amends were duly made in the 43rd minute when he brought it to 2-0 on the night and 3-3 overall by meeting David Smith's low centre from the left with a 12-yard volley of stunning velocity.
Understandably, given their numerical disadvantage, Grimsby made little headway in attack, although Alexander, at 6ft 4in, was of a nuisance value against a defence deprived by injury of Brian Kilcline's aerial authority.
It was Alexander, formerly of Barnet, who demanded the only save Steve Ogrizovic was required to make — a low shot from the edge of the area forcing the man-mountain goalkeeper to go down with a motion usually greeted with cries of ‘timber’.
Regis and Gary Bannister were both denied at close range before MacDonald spared us extra time with a rising 25-yarder which found the top left corner of Steve Sherwood's net.
American Football: Shell is the history man
By MATTHEW TENCH
ART SHELL'S appointment as the new head coach of the Los Angeles Raiders makes him the the first black in that position in modern NFL history, but the club's owner, Al Davis, immediately played down the importance of the move.
‘It will only really be meaningful and historic if he is a great success,’ Davis said soon after firing the existing head coach Mike Shanahan.
Shell, 42, said: ‘It is an historical event and I understand the significance of it, but the main thing is I know who I am and I'm proud of it.
But I'm also a Raider and I don't believe the colour of my skin entered into this decision.’
Shell was an outstanding offensive tackle during his 15 years with the Raiders until his retirement in 1982, when he became an assistant coach with the club.
The only other black to be a head coach in the NFL was Fritz Pollard, who led the now-defunct Hammond Pros from 1923 to 1925.
Civil rights organisations have long criticised the league for not having a black head coach despite the fact that many of its greatest players have been black.
Baseball has had four black managers since Jackie Robinson broke the sport's racial barrier in 1947.
Two of them — Frank Robinson of Baltimore and Cito Gaston of Toronto had their teams contending for the American League East title when the regular season reached its climax last weekend.
The sport's most prominent black is Bill White, president of the National League.
Shell has yet to discuss a contract with Davis, but said: ‘I have no problem with that.
When I was a player, I'd go into his office and we'd talk contract for five minutes about other things for 30 minutes.’
Shanahan took over the Raiders in February last year having previously been the offensive co-ordinator with the Denver Broncos.
He guided them to a respectable 8-8 record last season, but with a cluster of outstanding players on the club's roster there was a heavy weight of expectation for the campaign which began four weeks ago — notably from Davis himself.
In those circumstances the Raiders' record of three defeats in four games proved unacceptable.
‘I wouldn't admit a mistake even if I made one,’ Davis said.
‘This is not done in anyway to downgrade anyone else.
‘When I hired Michael, I thought our organisation needed a fresh implementation of ideas to go along with what we were doing.
I felt what was happening was we were going not in the direction of addition, but of total change.
‘I'm sensitive to my head coach, it's the toughest job in America, possibly including the President of the United States.
You are dealing with the lives of people and under the microscope every day.’
Football: Knighton seeks help to rescue his United deal
By FRANK KANE
MICHAEL KNIGHTON has been offering Manchester United to a circle of prominent businessmen in the North-west in an effort to salvage his £20m takeover of the club, it emerged yesterday.
He has been in contact with Eddy Shah, the former national newspaper proprietor; Owen Oyston, who owns Manchester's Piccadilly Radio and Blackpool football club; and Amer Midani, the Lebanese-born director who is the second largest shareholder on the United board.
Shah said he wrote to Knighton when his offer to buy out the shareholding of United's chief executive, Martin Edwards, was first made public, and received a phone call last Friday from Knighton, who asked him if he wanted to participate in the deal.
Shah declined, but said he would be willing to help finance it for a fee.
Shah said that he was later offered Edwards's 51 per cent holding, which Knighton has agreed to buy for around £10m, but only on payment of a £6m premium.
Shah made a counter offer, which expired last night, with a £1m premium.
The former Today owner said he had seen documentation from Scottish financial institutions which put Knighton's personal net worth at ‘around £3m’, and added: ‘I think he should now step aside and let somebody in who has the interests of the club at heart.’
A confidant of Owen Oyston, the Lancashire businessman who owns the Miss World beauty competition business, said that Knighton and Oyston met at Manchester City's Maine Road ground last Saturday.
‘A proposition was put to Owen, and he is considering it,’ the source said.
Meetings between the two men lasted into Saturday night and continued at a religious service on Sunday.
Oyston's position is complicated by his involvment in Blackpool.
Football League regulations impose limitations on an individual's ownership of shares in more than one club.
However, it was suggested that he could overcome that hurdle by signing the Blackpool involvement over to his wife.
‘Owen would want to be a significant force at United.
He wants to be the real power there, rather than a minority,’ the aide said.
It is believed that Knighton has also had talks with Midani, at which he offered him control of the club, with Knighton himself staying on as vice-chairman.
Knighton told the Manchester Evening News: ‘There has been a whole lot of speculation and a lot of misinformation.
There is no question of me not being involved in a United deal.
At this time I do not intend relinquishing the deal.
I shall be staggered if I am not involved with the club at the end of this month.
I shall have a lot to say when the time comes.’
Despite his insistence that the deal is on schedule, it now looks certain that the offer as it currently stands will not proceed.
A close associate of Knighton said that one option being considered was to sell on part of his Isle of Man holding company, M K Trafford, through which the offer is being made.
The same source estimated Knighton's asset backing at as much as £25m, mainly in the form of property in the north of England and Scotland.
He is believed to own around 40 properties there and in the Isle of Man, as well as a large private art collection which could be worth £1m.
Knighton has promised to post a formal offer document to shareholders by 11 October, but he could run into problems with the City Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, which is likely to require details of his financial backing.
This would normally be given in the form of a letter of authentication from a reputable bank.
There is also uncertainty surrounding the role of David Murray, the Rangers football club chairman, who has acted as a middle man in the negotiations but who has denied he has any financial interest in the takeover.
Knighton has hardly been out of the news since announcing his intention to buy United on 18 August, the day before the Football League season began.
The following day he introduced himself to the Old Trafford crowd by appearing in playing gear and juggling with the ball before United's game against the champions Arsenal.
Rugby Union: Andrew gives French lesson
From STEVE BALE at Parc des Princes
France.......... 27 Home Unions XV.. 29 THE LIONS' claws have not been drawn by the two months they have had apart since Australia.
The 11 tourists, with a lot of help from the four friends who made up last night's team, gave an astounding display to inflict on France their first defeat here for seven years.
Their makeshift pack performed heroics, and the backs found the spirit of adventure whose absence was so often criticised Down Under.
Its product was two tries by Gavin Hastings, who totalled 22 points, and one by Rob Andrew.
What made it more extraordinary was that everything had conspired against them, from the Home Unions committee's refusal to grant them official Lions status right through to the kick-off.
The Lions — well, they were wearing those familiar red shirts — scored a magnificent try only 64 seconds into the game.
Each member of the back row handled in a drive off a scrum and when the ball came back Andrew looped round Jeremy Guscott to score at the posts.
This was augmented by Hastings's conversion and two penalties, and only now, with more than a quarter of the match gone, did France pull themselves together and begin to pull back the Lions' lead.
Didier Camberabero kicked a penalty and converted a characteristic try by Serge Blanco.
But as soon as Blanco had dummied past a static defence Lions countered with their second try, in first-half injury time.
This time Damien Cronin kept going a move that seemed about to die and Hastings just made the line near the corner.
This dispirited the French at the moment their fortunes were improving, and their problems were exacerbated when Hastings added his third penalty and his second try in the first 10 minutes of the second half.
Again the try came from a concerted attack involving forwards and backs, Guscott and Brendan Mullin barely managing to squeeze the last two passes away.
France conjured a breathtaking try on the counter-attack, by the new flanker Philippe Benetton, which Camberabero converted and after Andrew had dropped a goal produced a furious finale in which Camberabero scored two penalties and a converted try.
The Lions were thankful that Hastings landed his fourth penalty.
Rugby League: Widnes enter dreamland
By PAUL WILSON
Widnes............ 30 Canberra Raiders.. 18 FOR 20 minutes at Old Trafford last night, it looked as if Graham Lowe might be proved right.
British Rugby League, the former Wigan coach had said, was living in dreamland if it thought its standards had risen to match those of Australia.
The Foster's World Club Challenge, attended by 30,786, proved, however, two things other than that the competition deserves to continue: the best of Britain can live with the best of Australia; and Widnes are a team of immense character.
The opening minutes, however, were ominous.
Widnes were stopped in their tracks by the ferocity of the Australian tackling, while Canberra gained yardage relentlessly, barging through the defensive line at will and utilising the width with effortless passes.
The first try came after a period of sustained pressure, when Mal Meninga had the strength to force over from close range.
The second arrived only two minutes later, and again Meninga was involved, this time with a forceful run up the right wing before crisp passing allowed Chris O'Sullivan a clear path to the posts.
Once the English champions found their way into the Canberra half, 27 minutes into the game, they made their first attack count.
Tony Myler made the initial breakthrough, then Joe Grima's surge was finished in the left corner by Paul Hulme.
Jonathan Davies could not manage the touchline kick, but was successful from a similar position five minutes before the interval, when inspired play by Derek Pyke and Philip McKenzie presented Martin Offiah with a try with virtually his first touch of the ball.
So Canberra turned round with a 12-0 lead cut to 12-10, knowing they were not going to get everything their own way.
Any relief Widnes might have felt at the non-appearance of the injured Meninga after half-time evaporated when Myler departed with a head wound a minute after the restart.
In the 45th minute, the French referee sent Daley to the sin bin for his recklessly high challenge on Davies, allowing the Welshman's touchdown in the right corner to stand.
Ahead for the first time, Widnes scored two tries in Daley's absence, Offiah claiming a second, after an astute pass by Grima, then finding huge spaces in a disoriented defence to give Richard Eyres sight of the line.
Daley's return prevented a further score until five minutes from time, when Widnes went the length of the pitch when Barry Dowd broke to give Darren Wright a try.
Walters scored a try on a last-minute consolation raid for Canberra.
Football: Graham wings in to wound Chelsea
By JONATHAN FOSTER
Scarborough.. 3 Chelsea...... 2 (Scarborough win 4-3 on agg) NOT SINCE Charles Laughton has Scarborough produced better theatre than the thunderous denouement which barged Chelsea off the Littlewoods Cup stage at Seamer Road last night.
Mathematics if not logic equated the two-goal lead Chelsea had established on the hour with a third-round place for the First Division side after the two clubs had drawn 1-1 at Stamford Bridge.
But Scarborough had been an urgent Fourth Division yard and a sturdy tackle better from the opening minutes of the second leg, when Dave Beasant had needed to stretch twice to low drives.
And from the wings of obscurity Tommy Graham emerged in the 67th minute to meet Martin Russell's cross with a header that summoned an onslaught.
Graham, the 31-year-old brother of Arthur, was one of four veterans last night of Scarborough's rise from the Conference: one of those latent talents who has lain mostly latent.
Graham relished the opportunity to upstage Chelsea and found in the talented Russell the width to dominate the game from midfield.
So Chelsea had more reason than alliteration to fear a third successive failure to reach the third round.
What Scunthorpe managed last season Scarborough achieved despite the disappointment of seeing one of their most sustained periods of pressure relieved with the Steve Clarke goal which gave Chelsea the lead.
The defender scored with a 25-yard drive after 53 minutes, his long run one solution to Chelsea's midfield indifference.
And it was with a certain indifference that, six minutes later, Chelsea hoisted a long ball under which Kerry Dixon loitered.
Not for the first time, Kevin Blackwell chose to sprint rashly from his goal; both he and Dixon were beaten by the bounce, and Kevin Wilson outstripped his marker to score.
But Graham and Russell, if anything more composed, made them defend that advantage, and the Chelsea defence responded with a disorder to which only Ken Monkou was an exception.
After 70 minutes, Paul Robinson, a tall, long-necked forward, stubbed Scarborough's second from close range.
Blackwell was immediately inspired to a fine save, and, in the 73rd minute, the ball was played forward quickly.
Clarke seemed momentarily to have the legs of Steve Norris, but as the Scarborough forward edged ahead Clarke used his arm to restrain him.
Russell converted the penalty, Beasant (and Chelsea) going completely the wrong way.
Football Round-Up: Thomas quick to do the trick
By CAMERON KELLEHER
ON a night of close finishes in Littlewoods Cup second round second leg matches, away goals ensured safe passages for West Bromwich Albion and Crystal Palace.
A John Thomas hat-trick enabled Albion to take the aggregate score to six apiece with a 5-3 win at Bradford, while Palace won 3-2 having lost 2-1 in the first leg of their clash with second division basement dwellers, Leicester City.
The Welsh international Dean Saunders also got in on the hat-trick act as Derby County overturned a 2-1 deficit against Cambridge United with a 5-0 victory to leave them 6-2 overall winners.
Not to be outdone, Liverpool defender Steve Staunton capably filled the striking boots of Ian Rush for the second half, scoring all three goals in their 3-0 win over Wigan for an 8-2 aggregate result.
Terry Gibson was on target twice to help Wimbledon eclipse Port Vale 3-0 for a 5-1 win on aggregate.
LITTLEWOODS CUP Third-round draw: Tranmere Rovers v Millwall; Everton v Luton Town; Aston Villa v West Ham United; Middlesbrough v Wimbledon; Sunderland v Bournemouth; Crystal Palace v Nottingham Forest; Manchester United v Tottenham Hotspur; Newcastle United v West Bromwich Albion; Southampton v Charlton Athletic; Manchester City v Norwich City; Derby v Sheffield Wednesday; Exeter City v Blackpool; Arsenal v Liverpool; Swindon v Bolton Wanderers; Queen's Park Rangers v Coventry City; Oldham Athletic v Scarborough.
Ties to be played week beginning 23 October.
The Football League's attempts to bring their 14-month search for a chief executive to an early conclusion by choosing between Gordon Taylor of the Professional Footballers' Association and Arthur Sandford, chief executive of Nottinghamshire county council, look destined to fail.
The League's management committee has decided to invite the two candidates it agreed upon on Monday for interview, but the head-hunting process which has caused so much vexation is threatening the ultimate embarrassment.
Both men are unhappy about the maladroit way the matter has been handled, and are in the mood to refuse to be interviewed.
Sandford, a lawyer before becoming the youngest chief executive in local government, was upset when his name was leaked to the press, and Taylor is incensed to find himself suddenly only a contender for a job to which he was appointed in August.
Bryan Robson was yesterday officially added to the England squad for the World Cup qualifying game with Poland in Chorzow next Wednesday.
Boxing: Mason's seventh heaven: Ken Jones reports from the Royal Albert Hall
By KEN JONES
A CONSIDERABLE future opened up for Gary Mason here last night when he knocked out Tyrell Biggs as the bell rang to end the seventh round.
By then both men were heavy-legged and Mason's inexperience at this level of boxing looked like becoming a decisive factor until he closed in and sent the American down with a short right to the temple and then a following left hook.
Biggs rolled over on to his back and remained motionless for more than two minutes after referee Larry O'Connell had completed the count.
If not a thoroughly convincing victory it further establishes Mason in the heavyweight division and his career will now take definite shape.
Nevertheless he will be required to introduce more variety into his boxing and before the end came there were once again serious doubts about his stamina.
The most obvious manifestation of this came when he remained almost immobile in the centre of the ring while Biggs picked him off with jabs from long range.
But Biggs also ran out of steam as the contest progressed towards the later rounds although he managed to conceal this inadequacy from the British champion.
A delighted Mason could not be sure which punch ended Biggs's interest in the proceedings and no one could be sure about the outcome as the bell approached.
Before a demoralising defeat when challenging Mike Tyson for the world heavyweight championship two years ago Biggs would have probably been too dangerous a proposition for Mason but something has gone from him since then and he was unable to fulfil bold pre-fight assertions.
Both men took heavy blows and by withstanding the best of the American's punches Mason at least emphasised that he has a strong enough chin.
It was not a contest to excite the audience and there must have been some anxiety in Mason's corner as it approached a critical stage.
Mason was ahead but Biggs for a while looked the stronger man and employed his superior technique to suggest that Mason might be running into trouble.
He took four of six rounds and yet without ever making his supporters believe that a decisive victory was on the cards.
Despite being out-jabbed, the British champion kept boring forward and when he got inside, taking punches in order to do so, he landed some solid right hooks to the head and the body.
There was never much conviction in the way Biggs fought, his attitude more that of a man boxing from memory rather than one attempting to resurrect a shattered career, and Mason was never persuaded that genuine peril might result from exchanges in the middle of the ring.
The manner of Biggs's defeat was to say the least surprising and on this evidence Mason has still a long way to go before he can think of himself as a genuine contender for the world championship.
Rugby League: Grainey grasps the reins at beleaguered Salford
By PAUL WILSON
TOMMY GRAINEY was appointed caretaker coach at Salford yesterday, in the wake of Kevin Ashcroft's unexpected resignation.
Grainey, formerly assistant to Ashcroft at the Willows, will select the side for the home match against Leigh on Saturday, doubtless with reservations about his first match in charge being televised live.
Salford intend to advertise for a full-time successor to the First Division's longest serving coach.
Ashcroft, who took over at Salford when Alex Murphy left in 1980, has had two spells at the Willows, broken by a couple of seasons at Warrington between 1982 and 1984.
A close working relationship with John Wilkinson, the club chairman, developed over the last five years, and Ashcroft's position was considered one of the First Division's safest.
What unseated the 45-year-old coach, who volunteered his resignation and left ‘the best of friends with everyone’, was Salford's worst start to a season for years.
The club have twice narrowly avoided relegation in the last three years, and survived last season only because of a bright start, but have yet to pick up a point in the present campaign after playing five league games.
‘We had six good seasons under Kevin but I suppose his departure had to happen,’ Wilkinson said.
‘It's been a hard start and results have not been right.
The club have to come first.’
Only Barrow keep Salford off the bottom of the table, and while the Cumbrians already appear resigned to relegation, the Mancunians, who have spent considerable sums on rugby union internationals such as Adrian Hadley and Peter Williams in recent seasons, had their sights set higher.
Just 12 months ago, Salford were contesting a Lancashire Cup final against Wigan, but whoever succeeds Ashcroft will be given a more familiar brief, simply to avoid the drop.
Ashcroft's efforts in recent seasons have been worthy of Houdini, but this year, if Sheffield Eagles continue to confound their doubters, Salford could have the strongest claim on the spare relegation place.
Nicky Kiss, the Wigan hooker, is out of tonight's Lancashire Cup semi-final at Oldham with a trapped nerve in his back.
Oldham, unsurprisingly, named the same side as the one who won at St Helens in the last round.
Football: Wolves are tamed by Villa
By PHIL SHAW
STEVE BULL, the striker England feel they can do without, again emphasised the power that has set him poles apart from other strikers, at Molineux last night.
But Bull's eighth goal of the season was Wolves' only reward for their territorial dominance, and Aston Villa squeezed into the third round by virtue of the early goal Derek Mountfield had added to their first-leg advantage.
Bull's reply prompted a hurricane finish by the Second Division side after a period in which Villa looked to have weathered the storm.
In the last minute, Bernie Gallacher, the Villa full-back, denied Wolves the chance of extra time when he headed Shane Westley's header from under the bar.
Wolves have now failed to progress beyond the second round since they won the then League Cup in 1980.
If the result was not one for Graham Turner to celebrate on the third anniversary of his takeover at Wolves, the manner of their performance should certainly cheer him on his 42nd birthday today.
It took Wolves 15 seconds to bring a Black Country barrage from the stands with their first, booming aerial ‘pass’ for Bull to pursue; a further 30 seconds for Villa to concede a corner; and two minutes for Nigel Spink to be forced into a sprawling save by Mark Venus.
A pass from Venus sounds like the definitive long-ball game, and Villa's central defenders, Paul McGrath and Mountfield, did well to defend a series of attacks that came out of the night sky.
Villa took the lead in the 15th minute against the run of play.
Barely 60 seconds after Spink had saved Bull's header at full stretch, Wolves were caught ball-watching by Gordon Cowans's curling free-kick.
Mountfield, prising himself away momentarily from the Tipton Terror, met the ball at the far post to score the kind of goal that was his trademark at Everton.
Bull's equaliser, though it took an hour to arrive, might also have been stamped ‘copyright’.
Nigel Vaughan's cross from the left tempted Spink to leave his goal, but Bull ignored the on-rushing keeper and headed the ball into an empty goal from 12 yards.
Football: Robson and Pearce join the party
By PHIL SHAW
BRYAN ROBSON was yesterday officially added to the England squad for the World Cup qualifying game with Poland in Chorzow next Wednesday.
Robson, who came through Manchester United's Littlewoods Cup tie with Portsmouth at Old Trafford on Tuesday without problems, will join up with the England party tonight at their team hotel.
Now fully recovered from a hairline crack of the shin, Robson spoke to the England manager, Bobby Robson, this morning to tell him that he had suffered no reaction from the Portsmouth game and was fit and well for the Polish trip.
Bryan Robson said yesterday: ‘I'm feeling great.
When I was injured in the first match with Portsmouth at Fratton Park I didn't expect to be playing again in a fortnight.
I had a second X-ray on my injury last week and it showed that the crack had healed.
I was surprised when the doctors said the injury had gone.’
The England captain, who missed the World Cup match with Sweden in Stockholm last month because of bruised ribs, was happy with his performance against Portsmouth, saying: ‘I was pleased to get through the 90 minutes.
I was involved in some fairly strong tackling and didn't feel a thing.
Now I have another week to get my fitness up to the right level.’
Bobby Robson said: ‘I spoke to Bryan and he declared himself fit and willing to join up with the party.
That was just the news I was hoping for.
‘It is a real bonus after I fully expected him to be unavailable for the Poland match.
I'm looking forward to the match and to seeing him training.
‘It really has been an amazing recovery and I understand he gave an outstanding performance in his comeback match.’
Bobby Robson received further encouragement when Stuart Pearce, the Nottingham Forest captain reported fit after taking part in the 3-3 Littlewoods draw at Huddersfield.
Forest prevailed after extra time on the away-goals rule.
Pearce, who was suffering from an ankle injury, came through unscathed and will be joining the England party at Burnham Beeches, Buckinhamshire, today.
David Seaman, the Queen's Park Rangers goalkeeper and Peter Shilton's international deputy, has also recovered from injury so the only England doubt now is John Barnes, the Liverpool winger who pulled a hamstring in training.
Barnes still has a week to recover, but Liverpool's manager, Kenny Dalglish, is making no predictions.
‘We shall have to wait and see but Bobby Robson will be the first to hear,’ Dalglish said.
England require just one more point to ensure their place for the World Cup finals in Italy next summer and Robson said: ‘Everybody knows the importance of the game.
It's important that we don't lose but we won't be going there for a draw.’
FIFA has designated next Wednesday's World Cup tie between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland in Dublin as a ‘high risk’ match.
The Football Association of Ireland said last night that it was unhappy with FIFA's decision.
Joe Delaney, the FAI's security officer, said: ‘FIFA have known for long enough when and where this match would be played and the background to it.
Yet when we played in Belfast, that was not considered high-risk.
We are surprised FIFA have waited until now to make their high-risk ruling, particularly as Northern Ireland cannot now qualify for the World Cup finals.’
Rugby Union: Orrell in search of a repeat victory
By BARRIE FAIRALL
ORRELL, the North's only representatives in the Courage First Division, who are anxiously looking for their first League win of the season, can take some comfort from the news that Les Cusworth will not be around to torment them when Leicester visit Edge Hall Road on Saturday week.
Cusworth, England's former stand-off who still turns it on for the Tigers, leaves for a fortnight's holiday next week.
Orrell, though, may feel that they could have coped with Cusworth after causing one of last season's League upsets by winning 27-15 at Welford Road.
In order to build up for the trip to Orrell, Cusworth is omitted from the Leicester side to face Coventry at home this weekend.
His place will be taken by Jez Harris in one of three changes from the team beaten at Llanelli, Alan Warwood coming into the centre for the local county captain, Kevin McDonald, and Malcolm Foulkes-Arnold replacing Alex Gissing in the second row.
Paul Dodge, once the hard centre amongst England's backs, is recovering from a pulled hamstring and expects to make the Orrell trip, but there are still doubts about the fitness of John Wells, the England B flanker whose hamstring problems may keep him out for two more weeks.
Down in the South-West, Simon Halliday has been elevated to the captaincy in the build-up to the December divisionals.
The Bath and England centre will assume the role in a warm-up game against Cornwall, last season's beaten County Championship finalists, at Exeter on 31 October.
The South-West — whose Bath-Bristol-Gloucester resources have appeared in the past to resemble rugby's equivalent of the Bermuda Triangle — are set on improving their disappointing Divisional Championship record, and their success against Leinster in Dublin last week was seen as a first step in the right direction.
While Halliday takes on a new role, David Irwin is just happy to return to the scene.
Irwin, the centre whose back injury ruled him out of Ireland's tour of North America, plays his first game for four months when Instonians take on Malone this weekend.
Irwin has also been selected as captain to face Connacht in Galway on Saturday week by Ulster, who tackle the All Blacks in Belfast on 21 November, three days after the Dublin international.
There is mixed news concerning two of England's leading hookers — Brian Moore and Steve Brain.
Moore, who has been resting since the Lions tour, plays his first game of the season for Nottingham, at Northampton on Saturday.
Brain, the Rugby captain, is out for a minimum of three weeks with a dislocated collarbone.
Derek Quinnell, a Lions selector last season in spite of being ditched by Wales as an assistant coach after that traumatic tour of New Zealand two years ago, is back in the Welsh Rugby Union framework as a selector for the Welsh under-20 squad.