

LEP disappoints with half-time 9.5m pounds
By HUGH SHARPE
SHARES of LEP, the freight-forwarding and security monitoring company, were marked down 15p to 150p yesterday when its half-time figures failed to meet some market expectations.
The company's co-brokers, Hoare Govett, had hoped for £12m before tax; in the event the figure was £9.54m, still 89 per cent up on the corresponding period's £5.04m.
Hoare said last night it now expected to be trimming its full year forecast back from the £30m pencilled in so far.
Other brokers expect between £29m and £31m.
Around 50 per cent of half-time profits were contributed by National Guardian Corporation, the US security monitoring business where LEP increased its stake last year from 40 per cent to 100 per cent via a £50m shares exchange deal.
NGC's physical security arm has now been sold for $20m.
For a write-off of £471,000, the company has pulled out of freight-forwarding from all but one South American country, Venezuela, because of the problems of repatriating earnings and coping with hyper-inflation.
John Read, the chairman, said that Profit Freight Systems, the company's 59 per cent owned US arm, lost £1.5m after running into a price battle with a competitor.
PFS expects to be back in the black for the full year.
Prem, LEP's new testing equipment for the Aids virus, is now on the market and should make a ‘useful contribution’ to profits this year.
The interim dividend is up from 1.45p to 1.75p.
Earnings per share rose 65 per cent to 5.6p.
The company's gearing is 90 per cent.
Borrowings largely relate to NGC, which had £80m of debt at the time of takeover and which finances its rapid growth from cash flow.
The half-year interest bill was up 77 per cent at £8.5m.
United Scientific blasts Meggitt bid
By HUGH SHARPE
United Scientific Holdings wheeled out one of its Scorpion tanks to blast an unwelcome £102m takeover from Meggitt.
Its defence document posted yesterday claims the bid has no industrial logic and undervalues USH whose share price closed at 152p compared with Meggitt's 134p a share offer and 151p partial cash alternaive.
Galliford reports a 30% improvement
By ROBERT COLE
GALLIFORD, the construction company, boosted full year returns by 30 per cent on the back of a full one-point increase in pre-tax profits margins to slightly more than 5 per cent.
Group pre-tax profits to 30 June increased from £7.11m to £9.22m on turnover ahead just 3 per cent to £181m.
Housebuilding profits rose from £1.6m to £3m although the company warned that the division's returns would fall this year.
George Marsh, managing director, said that housebuilding was now ‘bumping along the bottom’.
Galliford completed 150 houses in East Anglia, with the average sale price increasing from £42,000 to £56,000.
The greater part of group sales are in commercial construction and civil engineering, and Galliford hopes to take advantage of increased infrastructure spending in the next deacde, particularly on water and road projects.
CRH, the Irish-based international building materials group, has acquired two Dutch companies for Ir £11.7m (£10m).
The move strengthens CRH's retailing operations in the Netherlands and will lift its annual clay brick production in that country above 50 million.
New trust aims to halt trend
By ALISON EADIE
IVORY & SIME, the Edinburgh fund manager, has launched a new investment trust which it hopes will arrest the trend towards institutional ownership of investment trusts and switch back to individual ownership.
The Optimum Income Trust, which will give an income return of 8.5 per cent, is to be marketed to financial intermediaries as well as stockbrokers.
It will have a minimum size of £27.5m and a maximum of £67.5m, depending on the level of take-up.
The trust is designed to meet the terms of qualification for Personal Equity Plans, the opportunities created by the segregation of husband and wife taxation next April and the needs of the private investor and his independent financial adviser.
It will invest about 80 per cent of its funds in blue chip UK equities.
It aims to achieve a high level of income for ordinary shareholders as well as providing capital growth.
A minimum 17.32 million ordinary shares have been underwritten by S G Warburg, the merchant bank, and a further 25.2 million are available for subscription.
Zero dividend preference shares are also being issued in a ratio of 37 for every 63 ordinary shares.
They will qualify for capital growth but no income.
Photo-Me beats forecasts with 15m pounds
By HUGH SHARPE
PHOTO-ME International, the world's biggest photo-booths operator, yesterday announced slightly better than expected full year results.
Pre-tax profits advanced by 35 per cent to £15.23m on turnover up by 23 per cent to £94.46m.
The dividend total is doubled to 6p through a final payment of 4.8p, covered comfortably by earnings per share of 28.34p up from 19.72p.
Photo-Me's shares gained 5p to 560p.
Terence Chute, the chairman, explained that over the past year the company has invested over £11m in revenue producing equipment, with existing operations being upgraded and new subsidiaries launched.
He added that the group is well-placed to make acquisitions.
Photo-Me's identity card venture is still at an embryonic stage, accounting for only 2 ½%; of turnover.
The company hopes to win business from Football Association clubs to produce membership cards for supporters.
Managing director David Miller said that the ID interests could tie in nicely with the photo-booth business.
‘Most of us use the booths at one time or another, and they are the obvious place to go if you need a picture for your identity card.’
The company is splitting its 5p nominal shares into units of 2½p to increase their marketability.
More than 75 per cent of the equity is in the hands of professional investors, many of them through Swiss nominee names.
Microfilm buys in US
By HUGH SHARPE
MICROFILM Reprographics, the microfilming company, is paying $5.3m for the micrographic division of American Management Systems of Washington.
The division's business is in microfilming computer output and laser printing.
Its profits before tax for the current year to 31 December are forecast at $900,000 on turnover of $6.5m.
A placing of 970,000 new Microfilm shares at 420p a share will be used to fund the acquisition, which follows the purchase of US microfilmer, CMC, for £11.9m in September last year.
Microfilm also announced full year results yesterday showing a 50 per cent increase in pre-tax profits to £6m on turnover up from £15m to £24.2m.
Richard Hayman of merchant bank Morgan Grenfell said the rise in turnover reflected the inclusion of CMC.
He added that CMC boosted profits by about £1.3m.
News in brief 
By HUGH SHARPE
TSW-TELEVISION South West reported taxable profits of £3.19m for the year to 31 July, compared with £3m in the previous year.
Earnings per share were a shade higher at 8.54p (8.43p).
A final dividend of 3p increases the total payout by 1p to 4.15p.
Purchases and disposals TYNE Tees TV is buying the Television Centre in Newcastle upon Tyne from Tritel, a subsidiary of Mecca, for £4m cash.
James Finlay improves profits
Business and City Page 26
Abtrust New Dawn to raise 18.9m pounds
By ALISON EADIE
ABTRUST New Dawn Investment Trust, which specialises in the developing markets of the Far East, is raising £18.9m net through a conditional placing and offer to shareholders.
The offer is on the basis of one new share for one old at 128p per share.
In addition a series B warrant will be issued with every five new shares.
The cash raising exercise comes just five months after the £15m launch of the trust by Aberdeen Fund Managers via a placing at 100p per share.
Hugh Young, fund manager, admitted that with the benefit of hindsight the original launch was not large enough.
The original money was quickly invested and there has since been a stream of rights issues, particularly from companies in Thailand where the fund is 37.8 per cent invested.
The Indonesian market has also opened up to foreign investment allowing up to 49 per cent of any listed company or new issue to be bought by foreigners compared with only 11 companies being open to foreign investment previously.
Mr Young said he has had to sell stock he would prefer to keep in order to take advantage of new opportunities.
The Indonesian stock market, where 6.9 per cent of funds are invested, has risen 53 per cent since Abtrust New Dawn was launched and the Thai stock market 30 per cent.
The trust has appreciated 60 per cent in value since its launch.
It second largest area of investment is Taiwan (17.2 per cent) and third is South Korea (16.3 per cent ).
Institutional shareholders have agreed to subscribe for 35.8 per cent of the offer.
Mr Young said that now the trust had its core holdings, the second tranche of money would be invested more slowly with some held back for new opportunities.
Armchair Investor: Betterware
By ALISON EADIE
WOE betide a small company in an unfashionable sector.
If few analysts follow it, the general tide of the market will wash the company away, even if it is countercyclical.
Thus shares in Betterware Consumer Products dropped 12p to 180p yesterday as the market knocked the retail sector for six in the wake of the interest rate hike.
How many of the sellers understood that Betterware is a beneficiary of high interest rates?
The company is based on a novel concept of direct selling, which involves representatives knocking on doors with catalogues and selling household goods on the back of it.
When times are hard, more people apply to be representatives and Betterware expands its distribution base.
This is done at little cost as representatives are paid on a commission basis.
Also the company has net cash of around £2.5m, and so enjoys extra income with higher interest rates.
The market reaction was even more bizarre considering Betterware reported an increase in first-half pre-tax profits of 52 per cent to £1.12m.
Earnings followed to 7.31p and the interim dividend is to be 2.15p (1.8p).
Acquisitions Geeco and Concept Housewares are being integrated, and Betterware is selling the SABCo factory in East Kilbride for about two-and-a-half times purchase price.
Assuming profits of £2.9m this year, the shares are on a prospective multiple of under 10 and are good value.
Keep buying.
Market Report: Fragile Footsie plunges to a ten-week low
By DEREK PAIN
SHARES shuddered yesterday as interest rates were increased by one percentage point.
At one time the broadly-based FT-SE share index plunged 42 points.
It closed 30.5 points down at 2,281.6, its lowest level for ten weeks.
Datastream calculated that £6.85bn was wiped from share values.
A combination of bargain hunting, a firm Wall Street opening and the clear reluctance of building societies to rush to increase mortgages helped the market stagger off the floor.
But the undertone was exceedingly fragile, with many traders prepared to bank on the FT-SE falling below 2,200 points in the next few weeks unless the 15 per cent rates do turn out to be just a short-lived shock.
Consumer and building stocks were the major casualties.
Stores, already bombed out, suffered some humiliating falls with the Next profits downturn merely emphasising the deepening problems of the high street.
Hard-pressed Dixons fell 7p to 134p and Kingfisher 15p to 310p.
Among breweries Allied-Lyons tumbled 8p to 514p, and on the building pitch Barratt Developments lost 9p to 173p.
But it was not all gloom.
Nomura, the Japanese owned securities house, remains bullish.
Strategist Nicholas Knight believes that on a two-year view shares are a buy.
‘The rise in base rates does not unduly threaten the shape of the economy and the market going into 1990-91’, he said.
And it was not all deep depression yesterday, with the likes of Boots and Morgan Grenfell in fine form.
Boots' progress was accompanied by a variety of stories as in often busy trading the shares gained 9p to 294p.
Talk of more profit upgradings and lucrative sales of bits and pieces of Ward White Group went the rounds.
But the favourite, if unlikely, yarn was the sale of its less-than-inspiring pharmaceutical division, which recently disclosed an apparent flop by its much-vaunted heart drug Manoplax.
Fisons, active lately, was the suspected buyer.
The shares edged ahead 1p to 333p.
Morgan Grenfell jumped 30p to 399p.
At one time the shares hit 416p.
They started the week at 336p.
The rumoured sale of Willis Faber's 20.5 per cent holding again excited the market.
Willis said it had not ‘adjusted’ its stake and had ‘talked to no one about it’.
Morgan declared: ‘No discussions with any third party are in progress.’
Rumours that the Willis stake was about to change hands ahead of a bid have fuelled the progress.
A variety of Continentals have been named as possible buyers.
The latest favourite is Credit Suisse.
Jaguar had a a hectic session, with one market maker briefly quoting 1,200p after seemingly misunderstanding a transatlantic message.
The shares hit 750p and closed 36p higher at 669p.
The hovering presence of Ford and General Motors remained the most significant influence.
Rumours that a Continental predator lurked also lingered.
The share advance came against more poor trading news, with Jaguar's US sales down 19.1 per cent last month.
Polly Peck, the international trading group, edged ahead 4p to 330p.
Shares of its Hong Kong subsidiary were suspended, and after the market closed it was announced that Polly may buy the 30 per cent of the company it does not already own.
Cadbury Schweppes fell 6p to 396p as 25 analysts trudged around its Bourneville plant.
Lep Group, the transport business which is attracting increasing US investment, fell 16p to 149p after it announced interim profits of £9.5m against £5m.
Georgina Philippou, at stockbroker Marshall & Co, is looking for more than £30m (£18.5m) for the year.
Union Discount, the discount house, was unchanged at 555p.
Ubiquitous New Zealand investor Sir Ron Brierley has lifted his shareholding by 175,000 shares to 25.4 per cent.
Savoy Hotel bucked the downward pull with the ‘A’ shares climbing 10p to 873p.
Amstrad, following extensive option trading with more than 3,200 contracts, was at one time down 5.5p at 57p.
The shares closed at 61p.
Ferranti was unchanged at 57.5p following a meeting with institutional shareholders.
Newcomer Partridge, an antique dealer, reached 137p from a 130p placing.
Tullow Oil slipped 0.5p to 17.5p as it moved to the USM.
Nearly £7bn was wiped off share values following the increase in interest rates.
The FT-SE 100 index plunged 42 points at one stage before closing at 2,281.6, down 30.5.
The narrower FT 30 lost 24 points on the day to 1,866.2.
Gilt-edged stocks increased by around an £1/8 Marks & Spencer retreated with the rest of the high street pack.
Mark Husson and Nick Bubb at Morgan Stanley are worried about a sales drop-off in the second quarter and difficulties at the Brooks Brothers US operation.
They have cut this year's profit forecast by £18m to £570m.
Next year's hope is now £620m against £660m.
The shares lost 6p to 192p.
The EMAP publishing group continues to pursue Builder Group, which produces business journals.
Yesterday it emerged that EMAP had lifted its stake to 10.3 per cent, buying a further 200,000 shares.
Builder shares, which came to the stock market last summer at 125p, rose 3p to 251p.
Many suspect EMAP sees the 147-year-old company as a long-term bid target.
View from City Road: Past continues to haunt Next
By DEREK PAIN
NEXT'S problems on the high street are rooted in uncontrolled expansion and poor merchandising.
This was the main message behind a worse than expected slump in interim pre-tax profits from £30.9m to £16.2m and the likelihood of a full year pre-tax loss, after incurring exceptional costs estimated at a cool £50m, to £55m.
The inadequacies of Next's inherited high street formulae have been cruelly exposed by the slowdown in consumer spending, reflected in a slump in profits at Next Retail from £7.6m to just £1.7m.
It is also disappointing to see that home shopping, in the shape of Grattan, has failed to recover from the travails of last year's postal strike and turned in a fall in profits from £14.3m to £8.6m.
And even in an area which is working well, Next Directory, the company failed to capitalise on strong demand, which lifted sales by 49 per cent, because it did not hold enough stock.
On the high street a sales rise at Next Retail of just 3.6 per cent compared with an increase in trading space of 17.6 per cent speaks volumes about Next's unbalanced expansion.
David Jones, chief executive, is acting in a determined way to remedy the ills of the past and will reverse some of George Davies' more grandiose schemes.
Next the Jewellers, which lost between £1m and £2m in this half, is in the process of being sold to its management.
‘Many many millions of pounds’ have been lost by small stand-alone outlets and Next's 15 large stores operating from over 10,000sq ft.
Most small outlets will be closed and the large stores reduced in size with perhaps four closures leaving Next as a medium-sized specialist retailer operating from 3,000sq ft to 4,000sq ft stores.
Provisions against redundancies and the write-off of fixtures and fittings is one element in the £50m-£55m bill for exceptional costs.
The rest is to cover the costs of moving to the £46m centralised home shopping warehouse at Listerhills, Bradford.
But all the remedial measures will not produce benefits for some time, in the case of remerchandising a year at least.
Trading remains tough with like for like sales down 2.5 per cent since 1 August at Next Retail.
Grattan is only 5 per cent ahead which looks a poor defence against wage costs rising by 8 per cent and high street occupancy costs by 20 per cent.
Pre-tax profits of £30m to £40m point to a p/e of over 15 at 104p, down 21p, which is less support than a yield of 9.5 per cent if the final holds.
View from City Road: Beware the Bambi factor
By DEREK PAIN
BENEATH the hype, Mickey Mouse, the Magic Kingdom and the publicity that has led to more than 100,000 people already enquiring about Eurodisney shares in the UK alone, there remains a disconcerting truth about this international share offer.
The shares, priced at FFr72 (707p) yesterday, represent a risky investment that even on the company's own projections will not give a decent return for another 10 years.
For a comparison, think of Eurotunnel, although Eurodisney is above ground, on budget and only two-and-a-half years from expected completion.
The assumptions made in the prospectus are mind-boggling.
More than 11 million people are expected through the doors at the Paris site in year one (1992), rising to more than 16 million by its peak.
A second park, the theme of which Disney has not yet decided, is projected to welcome eight million in its first year (1996).
This would make them respectively the first and fifth most popular tourist arractions in the world, with the ones in between being the three existing Disney theme parks.
Furthermore, Disney is assuming 60 per cent of these visitors will come from France, which mean 26 per cent of the company's population will visit Eurodisney each year.
These visitors are projected to spend more than Ffr 9bn a year by 1996.
At 707p a share, which is higher than the top end of the range indicated in the pathfinder prospectus, Eurodisney offers an average return of 13.3 per cent, compared to more than 17 per cent for Eurotunnel when it was floated.
This is pretty low for a speculative investment and assumes the company is capitalised at 12.5 times earnings in the year to 31 March 2017.
A combination of a six month construction over-run and attendance of only 10 million cuts the return to 12 per cent.
Eurodisney and its advisers, SG Warburg, can feel confident that the issue will go well because of the interest already shown in France, where half the £607m of shares will be issued.
They have fired this interest by spending £44m on the issue, aiming it primarily at the retail investor when one might expect an issue of this sort to be more suitable for institutions.
As with a privatisation, small investors may be tempted by short term profits and, like Eurotunnel, the issue is a hostage to many variables.
Treat with caution.
View from City Road: Boiling under Jaguar's bonnet
By DEREK PAIN
THE RISE in the Jaguar share price yesterday owes much to the no smoke without fire school of investment analysis.
Despite the carnage elsewhere, the shares ended the day 36p better at 669p and had been much higher.
However, there is a danger that the smoke could be little more than a pungent sign of burning fingers.
The transatlantic gossip of a bid battle for Jaguar between Ford and General Motors looks optimistic.
Much of the frantic activity in the share register can be attributed to the arbitrageurs rather than the titans of the motor industry.
The simple fact is that Ford cannot begin to exercise its stated intention of building a significant stake in Jaguar for another two weeks.
General Motors, it seems, has not yet applied for the necessary US permision to conduct a similar exercise.
There is also the small matter of the Government's golden share which can block a hostile bid for Jaguar and does not expire until the end of next year.
For investors to expect battle to commence given these circumstances is ambitious.
A more likely scenario is that GM and Ford will vie for a strategic yet friendly investment in Jaguar.
That would certainly suit the Jaguar management's book and has less potential for political embarrassment than an unruly hostile bid.
However, it will not provide the bumper take-out price implied by the recent performance of the Jaguar share price, offering instead some guidance as to what it might be in the future.
With Jaguar revealing more misery in the US where September sales were down 19.1 per cent year on the year, the company needs the takeover interest to keep its share price alive.
Column Eight: Donald in, but Mickey ducks out
By SIMON PINCOMBE
It seems the French got the better part of the deal when the Eurodisney share price was announced in the City yesterday with all the overkill we have come to expect from the Americans.
While the crowds at the Broadgate arena were treated to a medley of Disney hits, including ‘Zip-a-dee-doo-dah’ and ‘Whistle While You Work’, the obligatory Disney characters were wheeled out hand in hand with the company's key executives.
Frank Wells, president of the Walt Disney company, arrived with Minnie Mouse, and Jim Cora, executive vice president of Eurodisney, with Donald Duck.
But where was Mickey Mouse?
Alas, he was detained in Paris where he was revealing the price to the French, accompanied by Pluto and Scrooge McDuck.
Forced to convene yet another extraordinary meeting by sacked directors trying to get back on the board, Amalgamated Financial Investments has sent out a suitably apologetic letter to shareholders.
It explains that the meeting will be held on 20 November, 15 minutes after the agm.
The letter notes that the time and date have been chosen inter alia to ‘minimise further unnecessary costs to our company.’
The meeting will be held at Claridge's.
Charterhouse Tilney, the agency broker, continues to pick off the City's rising stars with consumate ease.
Yesterday it secured the services of Rob Crookall, a salesman known in the market as Wunderkind.
His resignation was winging its way to Sheppards yesterday afternoon.
It has been a rough week down at Eurotunnel as you might imagine.
Following lengthy pleadings with the bank manager, there has also been the delicate matter of explaining rampant construction costs to incredulous shareholders.
Just how rough can be judged by the fact that Annabel Salmon, Eurotunnel's official spokeswoman, yesterday called off her engagements on the grounds that she has lost her voice.
Another spotty youth has hacked his way into the shadowy world of US defence.
The 15-year-old computer boffin from New York has been charged with juvenile deliquency after he broke into the computer system of Grumman, the US defence contractor.
The precocious meddler actually managed to gain access to a computer used by Grumman to handle military customers including the Pentagon, police said.
Grumman said he was caught because his entry was picked up by its own computers.
Even so, it was not sure how many times he had tried it.
LVMH adds 30m pounds to Guinness' 246m pounds
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
GUINNESS is on the look-out for more deals along the lines of its link-up with Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy, the French luxury goods and drinks group in which Guinness has a 24 per cent stake.
LVMH added £30m to the £246m pre-tax profits Guinness announced yesterday for the period to 30 June, when only a 16 per cent stake was accounted for.
City analysts are forecasting that its contribution could be as much as £80m for the full year.
Anthony Tennant, the Guinness chairman, said: ‘The synergistic benfits of our deal with LVMH are already coming through strongly, without all the costs and upset of a contested bid.
We would be happy to do more ventures involving cross-shareholdings, especially in Europe.’
The half year result was a 34 per cent rise over last time, and at the higher end of City estimates.
The interest charge, at £35m against £24m, was lower than many had expected.
Mr Tennant explained that this was partly because payments for the LVMH shares had been delayed, but added: ‘We are not really exposed to UK interest rates.
Most of our debt is in the form of US dollars or French francs, where rates are a good deal lower.’
Interest cover is eight times.
The French connection was also a factor behind the growth in the fastest growing areas of Guinness's business, the Far East, where the two companies have joint distribution agreements.
Profits from that area rose from £34m to £53m.
Mr Tennant said that Japan, where import tax rates were lowered in favour of foreign companies, was buoyant.
He was also confident that Korea would soon liberalise its domestic market.
North America was more problematic, with profits down from £56m to £53m.
This was because of de-stocking and running down of high volume, low margin brands, and a change of year end at the Schenley offshoot last time.
He expected the full year contribution to be unchanged from £143m.
European profits rose from £30m to £42m.
Spirits accounted for 74 per cent of profits at £209m, with brewing adding £39m.
There is now full time working at all the operational distilleries for the first time in eight years.
On earnings of 17.9p against 13.5p, the interim dividend is 4.4p (3.5p).
The shares went against the market to add 4p at 572p.
Littler to head clearing committee
By JOHN MOORE, Assistant City Editor
SIR GEOFFREY LITTLER, a former Treasury official and currently a director of NatWest Investment Bank, has been asked by the International Stock Exchange to head a committee which will develop proposals for a clearing house in securities.
The move follows the announcement in July by the International Stock Exchange that it intended to set up a clearing house to handle existing and projected settlement services in London.
It would be a joint venture, the exchange indicated, with the exchange perhaps owning 40 per cent with the remainder controlled by 20 or more institutions, such as banks, registrars, securities houses and large financial institutions as well as some listed companies.
Other members of the Littler committee named yesterday are Jonathan Agnew of the British Merchant Bankers Association; Martin Cruttenden of Lloyds Registrars; Ian Cormack of Citicorp; Pen Kent of the Bank of England; William Legge-Bourke of the International Stock Exchange; Andrew Palmer of Associated British Investors; Herschel Post of the International Stock Exchange; and Alex Tweedie of the Committee of London and Scottish Bankers.
Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the exchange, said he believed that the clearing house ‘will involve market users more directly in the development of settlement systems and so enable the UK to achieve the rapid development of a paperless settlement, payments and registration system for domestic equities.
It will also facilitate important future developments such as cross-border settlements.’
Sir Geoffrey intends to call a meeting of the committee early next week.
Strong & Fisher slips
By JOHN MOORE, Assistant City Editor
SHARES in Strong & Fisher slumped 33p to 181p after the fashion leather group reported a sharp decline in full-year profits stemming from tough market conditions and labour shortages.
Taxable profits fell from £7.81m to £1.17m in the year to 30 June on group sales down about £20m to £91m.
Earnings dived from 32.7p to 8.8p per share, but the final dividend of 8.3p improved the total to 12.3p (12p).
The decline was attributed to ‘very soft prices’ for finished clothing leather in the second half, which eroded profit margins.
Difficult market conditions were exacerbated when Korean tanners entered the UK and New Zealand raw material markets, driving up prices.
In addition the company suffered from the introduction of mechanical skin strippers into many UK abattoirs, which interfered with the quality of output.
Hot summer was healthy for Etam
By TERENCE WILKINSON, Assistant City Editor
ETAM, the fashion retailer, saw its profits before property income rise by 10.3 per cent to £6.3m in the six months to 12 August.
But, despite this resilient performance, its share price dropped 14p to 192p on fears of a renewed slump in high street spending.
Etam sales, up 32 per cent to £84.3m on an increase in trading space of 29 per cent, appeared to benefit from the hot summer weather and its low-priced fashion for younger women seemed not to suffer greatly from the effects of higher mortgages.
Pre-tax profits showed a more modest 2.5 per cent increase to £6.3m in the absence of last time's £409,000 of property profits, and after a slightly higher tax charge earnings per share were almost unchanged at 6.22p.
But the half-time dividend is up 15 per cent to 1.95p.
The warm weather which helped Etam in the summer has proved to be a disadvantage in the run-up to autumn trading and the chairman, Alan Howard, says the group has been trading slightly below budgeted levels.
But like-for-like sales in real terms are nevertheless holding steady.
The group's Snob subsidiary is steadily raising its sales per square foot and management has made a breakthrough at the previously troubled Peter Brown menswear acquisition, which has performed markedly better since June.
Physical expansion is set to continue in the remainder of the current year with 20 trading outlets, representing 100,000 sq ft on top of the existing 694,500, due to open.
British Steel in 330m pound deal
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
BRITISH STEEL yesterday snapped up the country's biggest steel stockholding company in a £330m deal which gives it control of 20 per cent of the UK market and turns two Lancashire businessmen into millionaires many times over.
In its first major acquisition since privatisation a year ago British Steel is buying C Walker and Sons, of Blackburn.
The £330m cash being paid makes this the biggest sale ever of a family-owned company.
Sir Robert Scholey, the chairman of British Steel, conceded yesterday that the move was largely a defensive one to prevent the business falling into the hands of an overseas predator.
Walker is British Steel's largest single customer, accounting for about 7 per cent of its total output of 13.1 million tonnes.
C Walker and Sons was founded in Blackburn 30 years ago by two brothers, Jack and Fred Walker, with a few thousand pounds of capital and has grown from a business with a turnover of under £100,000 in the late 1950s to a £620m concern with 3,400 employees in the UK and Ireland and profits last year of £48.4m.
Following the sale Jack Walker, now a consultant to the company, will retire permanently to his Channel Islands home to run his small aviation business.
Fred Walker, who still lives locally, will also retire as chairman.
Their interests in the company are held in a family trust.
The deal, which needs the approval of the Office of Fair Trading and the European Commission, will give British Steel control over 35 per cent of the UK stockholding industry and 5 per cent of the European Community stockholding market.
Stockholders account for 60 per cent of the 20 million tonnes of steel sold in the UK each year.
British Steel already held 15 per cent of the stockholder market through its own service centres operation.
Walker, which bought out GKN's steel stockholding interests two years ago, has a market share of 20 per cent.
Sir Robert said British Steel would now ‘rest content’ at the combined figure of 35 per cent.
The acquisition of Walker will put British Steel on a par with its rivals in Germany and France which control up to 70 per cent of the stockholding outlets through which their steel is sold to industrial customers.
Sir Robert pledged that Walker would continue to operate as an autonomous business and ruled out closures in its network of distribution centres.
BT cuts prices 8% in rivalry with Mercury
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
(First Edition) BRITISH Telecommunications is to cut prices on some transatlantic services in the face of fierce competition from Mercury Communications.
The cuts, of about 8 per cent, are on BT's digital private circuits and come into effect on 1 January 1990.
But they leave BT more expensive than its rival.
Tony Booth, managing director of British Telecom International, said: ‘Competition is becoming cut-throat in the transatlantic services.
We have decided on the cuts as a result of strong competition from Mercury, whose prices until now have been around 20 per cent lower than ours.’
He believes that quality of service will allow BT to fight back without further reductions.
Although Mercury has made little impact in local telephone services, it has begun to make an impact on BT's operations in long-distance and overseas links.
Private circuits, based on dedicated lines for large corporate customers, are increasingly important as a revenue stream for BT.
Mr Booth said that BTI is concentrating more and more on multinational customers.
The final hurdle in the race to become West Germany's second cellular radio operator was reached yesterday when 10 consortia, including many British companies, submitted the last part of their bids.
BT, which is bidding in a consortium including Daimler-Benz, says that the investment in setting up the network would be £850m.
But it said that Germany's cellular subscriber base could soar to three million by the year 2000, compared with 150,000 today.
Other UK companies in the bidding include Racal, Cable and Wireless, and Securicor.
McCaw of the US, in which BT has a 22 per cent stake, is involved in a separate bid.
Economic Outlook: Raising the stakes with bank base rates
By SARAH HOGG
It is a golden political rule for Chancellors that they must ensure a pre-election boom and should never waste one post-election.
Nigel Lawson may have won his prime minister the 1987 election, but it has become ever more clear that he let his boom run on too long and too strong thereafter.
He was not, of course, alone in this.
Worldwide, the economy has continued to come on stronger than almost anyone forecast, which is why European central bankers agreed to throw another brick at it yesterday.
The policy stakes have been raised; but nowhere more so than in Britain, which will be the luckiest to avoid a (pre-election) recession.
Since the stock market crash at the end of that year, policy has however been dogged by an excessive fear of recession, and it would have compounded this mistake to have failed to raise British base rates to 15 per cent this week.
But Mr Lawson has now succeeded in doubling rates since the spring of last year; we are into the second half of this parliament; and there can be no certainty that this is the top of the ladder.
The Government's immediate choice this week was hardly calculated to appeal to the prime minister.
Either the Chancellor could raise interest rates ahead of the Germans, which would demonstrate the ‘national sovereignty’ in monetary matters on which Mrs Thatcher sets such store.
But it would leave the Government exposed to the full force of house-buyers' fury, with no international excuse for forcing an increase in mortgage rates that would probably have occurred anyway.
Or he could follow the Germans, who have duly provided him with an excuse for higher base rates at next week's party conference — but have also made it abundantly clear that the Bundesbank is the dominant monetary authority in Europe, and our much-vaunted independence is so much poppy-cock.
Pound peg The second option was obviously the more attractive, for it pegged this latest rise to 15 per cent base rates firmly on the exchange rate.
The Government could not risk the pound by allowing the return on mark (and franc) assets to rise relative to the return on sterling assets.
Since Mr Lawson has long been in favour of a stable exchange rate — and since industry has enthusiastically supported him, by expressing its enthusiasm for membership of the European Monetary System — it is ill-placed to argue against an increase in base rates at a time when sterling was threatening to fall below three marks, although the Confederation of British Industry has predictably grumbled that the rise was unnecessary.
It could hardly complain it was unexpected.
A weak exchange rate transmits inflation, and the Chancellor has made it abundantly clear his present priority is to get inflation down.
But that is not the whole story.
After all, Mr Lawson has taken pride in the fact that recorded inflation is coming down, which makes it difficult to explain to — say — the Tory party conference why interest rates have to follow the Germans up.
The obvious proximate cause was last week's trade figures, and these spell serious trouble for the Chancellor.
It is indeed true that balance of payments deficits can be sustained for longer than they could a generation ago; we would have never got this far without a much worse sterling crisis if that were not the case.
The most damaging feature of the August figures, however, is that they showed no sign, after a year and a half of severe monetary tightening, that the worst was over.
From which it is possible to draw one of three conclusions.
One is that Mr Lawson has not yet succeeded in getting a handle on domestic demand, and the signs of success this summer were misleading.
The second — Mr Lawson's line -that demand is indeed slowing down, but that it takes a long time to affect the balance of payments.
The third is that will have singularly little effect, because of industry's narrow base and uncompetitiveness, revealing our dependence on the deus ex machina of North Sea oil.
A very great deal hangs, of course, on the difference between the second and third answers.
We are only just beginning to see the first stirrings of a new debate on industry's competitiveness.
But it is the first possible answer that presents the immediate worry.
It is one thing to ask whether Mr Lawson's chosen strategy of maintaining a ‘firm’ exchange rate and slowing the growth of demand will produce good long-term results.
It is another to ask whether he has even begun to succeed in his short-term struggle to stop the rot.
Trading forecasts On this there does not, at least, seem to have been a great internal dispute.
After the last rise in base rates, all sources of advice to the Chancellor do seem to have taken the view through the summer that the squeeze was working.
The Chancellor might be forced to raise rates again if sterling took a nosedive, but he did not need to sit with his finger on the trigger.
Sterling strengthened, and the Chancellor did not cut rates; but nor was he under pressure to raise them.
As the CBI figures showed increasing anxiety about future orders, there was more fear that the deceleration might be too abrupt.
The inflation figures, and even pay settlements, have been less awful than might have been expected.
And there are two views of the money numbers, even among monetarists.
It was not only the trade figures that have reversed this view, but they clearly affected the markets most.
Admittedly, they are sufficiently erratic to give point to the Treasury's plea not to place too much weight on each month's figures.
But this plea has worn a bit thin.
A cumulative succession of nasty surprises has dealt a further destructive blow to an advantage Mr Lawson has enjoyed for so many years that he may have come to taken it for granted: the effect on expectations of confident and respected official forecasting.
For all the Chancellor's efforts to tell us things will come right in time, it will take real, hard evidence that the deficit is coming down to protect Mr Lawson from the bitter mercies of the markets.
Guilty plea made in US defence scandal
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
THE brother-in-law of James Guerin, the US industrialist accused of defrauding Ferranti of more than £150m, pleaded guilty in US court yesterday to two counts of bribery in America's WedTech defence scandal.
Carl Jacobson faces up to 10 years in prison for relaying bribery money to the US navy official responsible for awarding lucrative contracts to WedTech, a New York contractor, and United Chemcon, a Lancaster, Pennsylvania company associated with Mr Guerin's International Signal and Control Corp.
Mr Guerin is suspected of misrepresenting dozens of contracts during the sale of his company to Ferranti in 1988.
Mr Jacobson admitted to conveying $120,000 from Jimmy Christian, the black president of United Chemcon, to Richard Ramirez, the US navy official responsible for granting contracts to black and Hispanic businesses.
At Mr Ramirez's request he also transmitted $60,000 from WedTech to a company controlled by the official after he left the government.
‘He said it wouldn't be a problem,’ Mr Jacobson said.
‘As it turned out, it was.’
As part of his plea agreement with the government, Mr Jacobson is cooperating with the continuing investigation into defence industry corruption.
The WedTech scandal has also resulted in the convictions of a number of US politicians and military contractors.
Mr Jacobson refused to answer any questions following the hearing, except to say he hasn't seen his brother-in-law.
Mr Guerin has not been seen since the scandal broke, and has been communicating with the authorities through his lawyer in Philadelphia.
Donald Trump puts American Airlines into play
From LARRY BLACK in New York
THE UPHEAVAL in the US airline industry continued yesterday, with property developer Donald Trump announcing an unsolicited $7bn bid for American Airlines, the country's largest carrier.
The flamboyant Mr Trump, who earlier this year bought part of strike-bound Eastern Airlines, is offering $120 a share for American, a large premium over its $83 opening on Thursday.
The stock of American's Dallas-based parent, AMR Corp, jumped sharply on the news, but there is considerable scepticism on Wall Street over Mr Trump's intentions.
The airline's management, in a brief statement, reiterated its intention to remain independent.
Meanwhile, prospects for a $6.8bn purchase of the US' second-largest airline, United, sank further on word that the airline's machinists union is refusing to participate in an employee buyout scheme.
The deal, which would give British Airways a 15 per cent share in United, is already threatened by new US government restrictions on foreign ownership of American carriers.
Mr Trump, who has a penchant for naming his many buildings, hotels and casinos after himself, purchased what is now the Trump Shuttle from Eastern's parent company, Texas Air Corp, in April for $365m.
Mr Trump would not reveal details of his financing for the proposed purchase which comes at a time of growing concern among US regulators over the heavy debt loads the carriers are acquiring.
Analysts suggested Mr Trump, aware of long-standing takeover talk surrounding American, was simply putting the airline ‘into play’ in hopes of reaping stock-trading profits.
The price he is offering is fair, based on operating profits without liquidiating the airline, said analyst Louis Marckesano of Philadelphia's Janney Scott Montgomery.
‘But the question here is ‘Is this for real?’
American, other analysts noted, has had several months to prepare contingencies for a hostile takeover attempt, and probably has a restructuring deal of its own waiting in the wings.
Foreign participation in such a scheme is unlikely, given the apparent opposition of Washington, and the fact that American chairman Robert Crandall is an outspoken critic of such an arrangement.
Lufthansa is a likely partner, should American change its mind, suggests Mr Marckesano.
Last week, the US Transportation Secretary, Samuel Skinner, ordered KLM, the Dutch flag carrier, to reduce its equity involvement in the recent buyout of Northwest Airlines, the fourth largest US carrier, by Los Angeles businessman Al Checchi.
KLM's share of the $3.65bn buyout is considerably smaller than BA's $750m participation in United, but some analysts have suggested regulators might be swayed by the fact that the airline's staff will control the company.
The United machinists complain the scheme leaves the airline with too much debt.
In testimony before a US congressional committee earlier this week, the machinists' union said the takeover was based on a ‘ludicrous’ business plan, and threatened an extended campaign to block the deal.
KLM, meanwhile, is expected to maintain a reduced involvement in Northwest, ‘keeping its foot in the door’, one analyst suggested, until US policy of foreign ownership becomes more clear.
Mr Checchi, for his part, said yesterday that he does not intend to seek a new partner to replace the $225m shortfall, but will instead repay KLM out of operating profits -a move analysts said would further endebt the airline.
Business and City Summary
From LARRY BLACK in New York
Hoylake withdraws action: Hoylake has withdrawn its court action against the insurance commissioners in nine US states, challenging their right to review its bid for BAT Industries.
It acted at the request of Axa Midi, which has reaffirmed its agreement to buy BAT's subsidiary, Farmers, should Hoylake win.
Disney at 707p: The Eurodisney share issue, which is being made in six European countries, has been priced at Fr72 (707p) and will raise £607m, giving investors 49 per cent of the project.
View from City Road, page 25 Polly buys in: Shares in Polly Peck Far East have been suspended ahead of a general offer by majority shareholder Polly Peck International for the remaining equity.
Steel purchase: British Steel has made its first major acquisition since privatisation, buying private group C Walker & Sons, of Blackburn, for £330m.
Page 25 New dawn for Abtrust: Abtrust New Dawn Investment Trust is raising £18.9m through a placing and offer which it will invest in developing markets in the Far East.
Page 26 Moet sparkle for Guinness: Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy, in which Guinness has a 24 per cent stake, contributed £30m to Guinness's £264m half year pre-tax profits.
Page 25 Defence group defends: United Scientific Holdings said the Meggitt bid had no industrial logic and undervalued USH.
Page 26 Next tumbles: Next's pre-tax profits nearly halved to £16.2m at the halfway stage as it revealed problems rooted in overexpansion and poor merchandising.
View from City Road, page 25 Telecom price cut: British Telecom is to cut prices on some transatlantic calls by up to 8 per cent in response to competition.
Markets tumble: The FT-SE 100 index fell 30.5 points to 2,281.6 as a reaction to the 1 per cent increase in base rates.
It was 42 points off at its nadir.
Market report, page 25 Accountancy merger: Coopers & Lybrand's Dutch practice is to merge with Deloitte Dijker Van Dien of the Netherlands.
The move follows Wednesday's announcement of a merger between Coopers and Deloitte Haskins & Sells in the United Kingdom.
Jaguar leaps: Jaguar shares jumped 36p to 669p, having reached a high of 750p, on the suspicion of US stakebuilding.
View from City Road, page 25 Galliford margins rise: A percentage point rise in margins helped construction group Galliford boost half year profits by 30 per cent.
Page 25 Car sales down: Some 171,730 cars were sold in September, a 10 per cent decline on a year ago and the first fall since April 1987.
This page Etam bucks trend: Etam showed there was still growth in the high street, increasing half year profits net of property by 10.3 per cent to £6.3m.
Page 25 World Markets New York: In mixed trading the Dow Jones average struggled to hold recently won high ground.
By the close it was up 2.47 points at 2,773.56.
Tokyo: Index-linked buying just before the close drove prices up and enabled the Nikkei average to end with a gain of 140.19 points at 35,522.99.
Singapore: Prices closed narrowly mixed in moderate trade.
The Straits Times index was 3.28 points easier at 1,404.98.
Sydney: Shares finished marginally weaker but off their lows, with the All Ordinaries index down 3.1 points at 1,772.5.
Bombay: An official denial of moves to end price controls on steel triggered nervous long liquidation across the board.
Johannesburg: Interest was minimal and the market closed weaker, with the general index 19 points down at 2,710.
Paris: The CAC-40 index climbed 9.37 points to 1,918.41 in a robust response to increases in European interest rates.
Frankfurt: Cautious trading ahead of the Bundesbank's interest rate announcement took the DAX index 2.94 points higher to 1,616.21.
Madrid: The construction sector showed the biggest losses as the index slipped 1.31 to 323.31.
Stockholm: Dealers welcomed the rise in other countries' interest rates as it closes the gap with Sweden's own high rates, which are unchanged.
The market index eased 0.06 per cent.
Germany gives Europe the lead: As banks raise UK interest rates to 15%, the highest level since 1981, building societies are set to follow
By MICHAEL PREST
INTEREST rates obediently rose accross Europe yesterday after the Bundesbank, the West German central bank, increased its lending rates by one percentage point and its counterparts participated in a co-ordinated attempt to suppress the dollar and maintain exchange rate parities within the European Monetary System.
As soon as the Bundesbank announced at 2pm that its discount rate would go up to 6 per cent and its Lombard emergency funding rate to 8 per cent, the Bank of England pushed up the base lending rate of British banks to 15 per cent , the highest for eight years.
But the carefully prepared general rise in European interest rates immediately prompted concern that it represented German worries about domestic inflation and the ability of the Bundesbank to persuade other countries to follow its policy, rather than an expression of the determination of the Group of Seven, the leading industrial nations, to control the dollar.
Neither the US nor Japan raised its rates.
But the European increases, although anticipated for a while, depressed stock markets.
In London the FT-SE 100 index fell 30.5 points to close at 2,281.6.
The index has fallen by about 5 per cent over the past month.
Money market rates strengthened, however.
The key three-month interbank sterling rate rose by 3 16 per cent to 1415 16 -147 8 per cent.
On the London International Financial Futures Exchange the December short sterling interest rate contract collapsed to 85.25 just after the interest rate rise before closing at 85.37, down 0.23.
The interest rate rises did appear to succeed in depressing the dollar.
In London the Deutschemark closed 0.97 pfennings higher against the American currency at DM1.8845.
The yen gained Y1.35 to trade at Y142.25 to the dollar and sterling rose by 0.57 cents to $1.6102.
Of the 12 members of the European Community only Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain did not raise interest rates.
The Bank of France pushed up its intervention rate by 0.75 per cent to 9.5 per cent and its five-to 10-day repurchase rate rose by the same amount to 10.25 per cent.
The Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark and the Irish Republic increased interest rates by one percentage point.
Italy did not raise rates because they were considered high enough already and its inflation has been falling.
Like Spain, Italy did not want to raise interest rates and put further upward pressure on its currency within the EMS.
But, outside the EC, Switzerland and Austria also raised their rates.
The Swiss discount rate rose half a percentage point to 6 per cent.
These widespread changes underlined the power of the Bundesbank and its currency.
In a statement the German central bank said the rises were intended to ‘prevent an overheating of the economy and to avoid the danger of seeing prices and costs rising’.
Germany has become increasingly concerned about the danger of importing inflation through an undervalued currency despite a massive balance of payments surplus, particularly within the EC.
The German authorities are also worried about the impact of tax changes next year.
It was the fourth rise in German interest rates this year and the first time for several years that they have risen by a full percentage point.
7.5% inflation predicted by end of year
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
INFLATION is widely expected to accelerate towards 7.5 per cent late this year after yesterday's one point increase to 15 per cent in base rates made higher mortgage interest rates inevitable.
Some City economists warned that there was a risk inflation may rise even further because of the impact of higher mortgage rates on wage claims in the forthcoming pay bargaining season.
Mortgage rate increases are likely to take effect in November and thus reverse a widely expected fall in inflation for this month.
Inflation in August, the latest month for which figures are available, was 7.3 per cent, and it is forecast to be unchanged when September figures are released next Friday.
But in October, the rate is expected to slow to around 63 4 per cent because a mortgage rate rise in October 1988 drops out of the annual comparison.
City economists predicted that building societies could lift their mortgage rates as much as 1.5 per cent— to 15 per cent on average — although initial indications from the societies pointed to a rise of no more than 1.25 per cent .
Because housing is given a weighting of 17.5 per cent in the retail price index, an increase of this order is likely to add 0.4 and 0.5 points to the inflation rate in November, assuming there are no other pressures on prices that month.
Most economists believe that the tighter squeeze on the economy would now lead to a more rapid deceleration in inflation in the first half of next year than had been expected before yesterday's base rate increase.
But some warned that the impact of higher mortgage rates on wage negotiations risked increased pressure on prices in the months ahead.
Glenn Davies, chief economist with Credit Lyonnais Securities, a French securities firm, said higher mortgage rates ‘will push inflation up towards 8 per cent by the end of the year.
What does that do to wage claims?’
Negotiators for 33,000 manual workers at Ford Motor Company yesterday put in a bid for a ‘substantial rise’— thought to be at least 10 per cent.
The Ford talks are expected to have a significant impact on pay talks throughout manufacturing industry in the next six months.
They are likely to influence, for instance, the negotiations between leaders of 2 million engineering workers and the Engineering Employers Federation.
Engineering workers are also asking for a ‘substantial rise’ in pay.
Official figures out yesterday indicated that British consumers saved at the lowest rate for 31 years while living standards actually declined 0.6 per cent between the first and second quarters of the year.
Savings as percentage of total personal disposable income fell to 3.2 per cent in the second quarter from 5.2 per cent in the first three months, the lowest ratio since 1958.
Angry response from business and union leaders
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
BUSINESS and union leaders yesterday reacted angrily to the latest base rate rise, warning it would force up inflation, undermine industry's confidence and put jobs and investment at risk.
Sir Trevor Holdsworth, president of the Confederation of British Industry, described the rise as ‘unnecessary and unthinking’.
More businesses would defer decisions on investment and the rise in interest rates would reverse the downward trend in inflation, he told a Bristol press conference.
‘It looks like a short-term reaction to a short-term situation, partially sparked off by the ridiculous reaction to the August trade figures,’ Sir Trevor added.
Meanwhile John Edmonds, general secretary of Britain's general union the GMB, claimed the rate rise would throw 250,000 people out of work.
‘This will mean a miserable winter for house owners but a disastrous one for a quarter of a million working people.
Economists have told me this could be the final push that will consign up to 250,000 people to the scrap heap.’
The base rate rise is also certain to hit sales of new cars, which fell in September for the first time in 18 months, according to new figures released yesterday.
Car sales had been the one area of consumer spending undented by the Chancellor's high interest rates strategy.
But motor industry executives now expect the decline in sales that showed through last month to accelerate in the remainder of the year.
Sales last month, at 171,730, were 10 per cent down on September 1988 — the first time there has been a month on month decline since April 1987, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
Simon Foster, director of the SMMT, said he expected sales in the final quarter of the year to be below those in the last three months of 1988.
‘The Government's monetary policy has already lowered demand for other consumer goods.
The motor industry is still buoyant but cannot remain immune from the trends in the rest of the economy.’
Despite the fall in September sales, the figures produced by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders show that total sales in the first nine months, at 1,919,338, are still 5 per cent up on the same period last year.
Estate agents put on brave face
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
THE BIG residential property lenders and estate agents were showing fortitude in the face of the inevitable after yesterday's base rate rise.
The most optimistic forecast severely reduced activity in residential property; others expected static house sales until the end of the year.
A serious reverse in house prices is a universal fear.
Joe Bradley of Prudential Residential Property Services said the move was ‘not in any way the end of the private property market.
House prices have been adjusting downwards in the South-east for over a year.
They are 10 to 15 per cent lower and asking prices now are more realistic.’
Mr Bradley forecasts wage settlements running at 8 or 9 per cent.
From this, he argues, property prices can only benefit.
The Abbey National was less sanguine: ‘This could effectively put a seal on the property market to the end of the year,’ said a spokesman.
‘There can be no collapse in the property market because sellers have a real reluctance to sell if they can't make last year's prices.
Properties will stick rather than prices fall.’
Barclays Bank said that the market was ‘static and may even worsen.
Vendors who need to sell may be forced to discount prices to get their properties away’.
Homeowners are cushioned from rise
By MARTIN BAKER
HOME LOAN borrowers have been partially cushioned from the full effect of the doubling of base rates in the last 18 months.
The two key protective factors are the highly competitive nature of the mortgage market and the preponderance of mortgage budget schemes which are altered just once a year to cater for interest rate fluctuations.
Lenders' keenness to write business has seen mortgage rates sink below base rates.
Many building societies have pared this down yet further by offering ‘loss-leader’ discounts on standard loan rates to attract new business.
Roughly half the leading building societies' borrowers repay on budget schemes.
They will pay nothing more now, but will have the delayed interest on at least two mortgage rate rises to account for when the new yearly rates are fixed early in 1990.
The anticipated increase in rates to 14.75 per cent would mean a hike of 95p per thousand pounds borrowed without the benefit of income tax relief.
The monthly bill for a repayment loan of £100,000 would cost £1,117.73, an increase of more than 8 per cent after tax relief.
A loan of £30,000 would add more than 7 per cent to a monthly £298.22.
The figures are all the more startling when compared with mortgage bills of 18 months ago, when base rates hit a low of 7.5 per cent.
Assuming a standard loan rate of 14.75 per cent, a typical £60,000 repayment mortgage would cost £669.77 per month.
This represents an increase of £188.63 per month, 39 per cent more than in May 1988.
Share prices tumble
By MARTIN BAKER
LONDON share prices tumbled in the wake of the interest rate rise with £6.85bn wiped off the stock market's value.
The FT-SE 100 share index was down 42 points at one stage but recovered in later trading to end the day down 30.5 points at 2,281.6.
Share prices that had remained nervously stable during the morning fell dramatically once interest rates began to rise.
However, much of the fall was due to share prices being marked down rather than a flood of selling and trading volume at just under 500 million shares was little above normal levels.
The stores and building sectors were among the hardest hit as traders anticipated a continuing squeeze in the high street and on house prices.
Some analysts were gloomily looking to the FT-SE 100 index to fall below the 2,200 level if the 15 per cent base rate is maintained for any length of time.
But the bearish view was not universally held and Nicholas Knight, the UK equities strategist at Nomura, said: ‘The market may go lower but the time to buy is now.
The bad news is now largely behind, the good news is to come.’
Mortgage lenders' reaction is divided
By PATRICK HOSKING
MORTGAGE lenders were divided yesterday on how they would respond to the base rate hike, but a 1.25 per cent increase in ordinary mortgage rates to 14.75 per cent seemed the most common reaction, probably from 1 November, writes Patrick Hosking.
Lenders fell into two camps, depending on how much they fear a further drying up of already moribund mortgage demand.
Abbey National predicted an increase of between 1 and 1.5 per cent.
The Woolwich hoped to confine the rise to 1 per cent.
But the gloom deepened during the afternoon as more of the big societies said an increase was inevitable.
By evening the largest society, the Halifax, had dropped an earlier hope it might be able to resist the rise.
Banks are expected to follow with similar increases.
Wholesale-financed lenders, already charging 14.75 per cent, will face pressure to raise their rates close to 16 per cent .
However, National Home Loans said it was ‘virtually certain' it could hold out against a rise until Christmas.
The rate increase is doubly painful for societies with large loss-making estate agency chains.
Commodities: Coffee
By PATRICK HOSKING
DELEGATES to the International Coffee Organisation meeting in London said they expected to begin drawing up a framework within which economic clauses could eventually be reintroduced into the agreement.
Prices steadied and ended the day largely unchanged after November traded down to £677 a tonne, the lowest for 14 years.
Cocoa was also weak and oil futures slipped after the International Energy Agency estimated Opec's September output at 22.3 million barrels per day.