

BOOK REVIEW /Thatcher's early days on the seat of power: ‘Margaret, Daughter of Beatrice’— Leo Abse: Jonathan Cape, 12.95 pounds
By AUBERON WAUGH
IN A LONG apologia for having had the temerity to undertake a psycho-biography of Mrs Thatcher, Leo Abse denies that his book is a personal attack on her, but agrees that it may have some admonitory function in warning people not to acquiesce too readily in the disposition of someone who would appear, on his argument, to be gravely unbalanced.
His justification for the necessary invasion of privacy is the familiar -and thoroughly respectable — plea that politics should and must be personalised.
Politics has very little to do with issues; it is all to do with the personal vanities and ambitions of politicians.
Or so he says at the beginning of his book.
By the end, with an extended sermon on the emptiness of individualist ethics, he is pleading for a return to the benevolence in public affairs which Thatcher cannot supply by nature of having been denied her mother's breast, given the wrong sort of potty training, etc.
There are two objections to this sort of psycho-biography.
The first lies in the extent to which all evidence adduced depends on guesswork.
Abse has not put Thatcher on the analyst's couch, and does not pretend to have done so.
Everything is taken from previously published material.
The only really solid piece of evidence is the fact that Thatcher made no mention of her mother in her Who's Who entry.
She also referred to her mother in a slightly dismissive way in the course of two reported interviews.
There is no direct evidence on the breast or the potty.
‘When Thatcher was on the pot, it is my belief she was peremptorily required by her mother and grandmother to do her duty,’ writes Abse, and proceeds to build a gigantic edifice on the assumption: ‘A mother who is peremptory when the child wants satisfaction at the breast, is the same severe mother who denies her child the pride in her own first creation, her faeces,’he explains.
Abse is most emphatic that mothers should congratulate children on their first excretions, and praise the resulting faeces.
In this, I think he is out of date.
Really bloody-minded children, I have been told — the MPs of the future, perhaps — deduce from all this lavish praise that the faeces are something worth keeping, and refuse to perform on that basis.
But this does not stop Abse constructing an elaborate thesis based on Thatcher's ‘sphincter morality’, for which her mother, Beatrice, should really take the blame: ‘Thatcher succeeded in initiating the electorate into a new form of gambling: her personal need to end the earlier constraints which she had endured, outlawing the joys of shitting and coprophilia, drove her to open the doors of the Stock Exchange, and end its exclusivity.’
This would seem a benign effect of Thatcher's bad potty training, except that Abse has a bee in his bonnet against gambling.
The second real objection to this form of psycho-biography is that as soon as Freud is quoted as gospel, the whole argument descends into music hall burlesque for everybody but dedicated Freudians.
‘The aetiology of the urge to gamble lies in joyless masturbation and early, still-unresolved bisexuality,’ proclaims Abse, after Freud.
Most intelligent people who have not accepted Freudian indoctrination will ask him to tell that to the Marines.
Where Thatcher is plainly an ambitious woman, Freud reveals that the source of human ambition is urethral eroticism: the pleasure accompanying the function of urinating.
Her affection for the Bomb is explained by the fact that it is energy-charged and penis-shaped.
All of which is quite funny for a bit, but becomes boring because it is obviously such rubbish.
What is particularly boring about it is that all the arguments are circular.
Having observed Thatcher's boorish behaviour, Abse comments: ‘Such a jealous and ruthless super-ego can only have been formed by a prohibiting mother who is brusque and prematurely insists upon early toilet training.’
From that possibility, he goes on to blame bad potty-training for all her character defects.
Which is a great pity, because if one cuts out all the Freudian claptrap, Abse has produced a brilliant character analysis of the Prime Minister, and of the whole Thatcher phenomenon, which succeeded in scaring the wits out of me.
It is enough to attribute the rage with which she invests every issue to primal narcissism, the rage provoked by any threat of helplessness.
We can observe that she is happy only when she is furious, and do not need to have it suggested that her earlier nickname of ‘Thatcher Milk-Snatcher’ derived from her own breast-deprivation, which denies her all happiness and allows her ‘only the sadistic triumphs of tawdry political and military victories.’
It is a useful thought that Thatcher's main feelings may be those of control, triumph and contempt.
It is not useful to insist that these are the result of potty-training.
But I am prepared to accept that her delusions of grandeur are a form of psychosis connected with ageing and that her refusal to consider retirement springs from an awareness that it is she, not the country, who is in danger of falling to bits is she desists from hyper-activity.
Abse's book is full of long digressions — on gambling, Ulster, pornography, spies (among whom he counts the acquitted MP Will Owen), Welsh devolution, Woodrow Wyatt, Enoch Powell and Keith Joseph, Welsh devolution, the ‘wondrous possibilities’ of in vitro fertilisation, the horrors of a Conservative Chief Rabbinate, the security services.
Some may find this tedious, but I enjoyed them all.
Abse is an intelligent, well-informed man and a good writer, when he can be weaned from his Freudian claptrap and its related jargon.
His main thesis, that Thatcher's defective personality and failing judgement, allied to a fierce determination to survive, supported by ruthless henchmen, make her a danger to the country, may well stand up.
He makes little of the Gibraltar shootings, which first convinced me she was unreliable.
But it will be enough for many people that the Poll Tax will cost her the next general election.
Something needs to be done.
Abse puts his faith in Heseltine, whom I have never been able to take seriously as a politician.
Perhaps we should all start trying, since he is the only one who has dared raise his standard against her.
I wonder how he performed on the potty?
It is time we were told.
The week Labour's left was routed
By PETER KELLNER
MORE than anything else, this week's Labour Party conference should kill off a ritual that has been acted out over the years in a hundred radio and television studios.
The ritual went like this: Whenever Labour made news — at a conference, during a policy dispute, before a tense meeting of the National Executive Committee — politicians and commentators would be sat in front of a microphone and asked: ‘Will the left defeat the leadership?’
Like most people responding to this question, I would reply along the following lines: ‘No.
Neil Kinnock has more complete control over the party than any leader since Attlee.
The left is in a small minority in every bit of the party that matters — the executive, the Shadow Cabinet, the party conference.
But the left still has enough supporters in the unions and the constituencies to make a lot of noise and win some votes.
To that extent, it still is a force to be reckoned with.’
No longer.
This week the left lost its residual power to rock Mr Kinnock's sleek new social democratic boat.
Ken Livingstone's ejection from the executive was merely the most public manifestation of a profound shift in Labour's internal ecology.
For understandable reasons, neither side is prepared to proclaim the change too loudly: the left hates admitting defeat, while the right does not want to offend too many loyal party members by appearing triumphalist.
But it is hard to fit the evidence to any other conclusion.
The left used to have two ways to amplify its voice at the party conference.
The first was through the block votes of sympathetic unions.
The second was through elections to the constituency section of the executive.
There were some issues on which the left was always trounced — over the Militant Tendency, for example.
On other issues, such as nuclear weapons, it could construct a broad enough coalition to determine party policy (or, at the very least, limit Mr Kinnock's room for manoeuvre).
Now, for the first time since the early Seventies the left has no power to tether the leadership on anything significant.
As late as last year a narrow conference majority wanted to hold the party to unilateral nuclear disarmament.
This week, 60 per cent voted for multilateralism.
That vote was predicted, so the occasion lacked drama.
The announcement of the executive election results minutes later was altogether more dramatic.
Constituency delegates decide seven of the 29 places.
During the late Seventies and early Eighties, all, or almost all of these places went to the fortunate members of the left's slate.
Every so often, someone would buck the trend: in 1982 Mr Kinnock was dropped from the slate, but kept his place.
Generally, however, the best way to become one of the seven constituency representatives on the executive was to win the approval of those who set the slate.
It now looks as if membership of the slate is rapidly becoming a disadvantage.
Mr Livingstone's vote was down 30 per cent compared with last year; but all other left-wing candidates lost votes, too.
Their overall support was down by almost 20 per cent.
Prominent critics of the left, by contrast, saw their votes rise: Robin Cook by 18 per cent, Bryan Gould by 12 per cent , Gerald Kaufman by 11 per cent .
John Prescott, who did not stand last year, leaped to third place above both Tony Benn and Dennis Skinner, who used to come first and second.
What happened this week was a sharp acceleration of a process that started in the mid-Eighties.
In 1983, when Mr Kinnock was elected leader, candidates on the left's slate won 74 per cent of constituency votes.
Last year they still commanded a majority — 54 per cent.
This year their vote fell to 45 per cent.
Only three of their candidates were elected.
The left's slide is not over.
Individual members are increasingly being balloted for the executive.
The more ballots spread, the worse the left performs.
If some of Labour's rising stars, such as Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, stand for election, even Mr Benn's place could be in jeopardy.
It is possible that within two or three years the left wing will not have a single executive member it can truly call its own in the constituency section.
The disintegration of the left's main power-base will have far-reaching consequences.
The first is that it will be harder for the Tories to portray Labour as a party gripped by extremism.
That charge has been wrong-headed for some years; nevertheless, it has been sustained by enough left-wing activity to feed Conservative propaganda.
The second consequence is that ambitious left-of-centre politicians no longer need to genuflect to the far left to advance their career.
Future Neil Kinnocks — or David Blunketts or Michael Meachers or even Ken Livingstones — will find that their best strategy in their early years in national politics will be to act and speak in a way that appeals to ordinary television-watching, newspaper-reading Labour Party members, rather than to the left's hyperactivists.
In other words, ambitious Labour politicians will have to apply the same skills that win national elections to internal party contests.
Third, Labour can now proceed to dismantle the block votes of the trade unions confident that these are no longer needed to keep the party sane.
For some years leading Labour politicians have offered two separate justifications for the block vote — one in public, the other in private .
Their public defence is that the system brought together the industrial and political arms of the labour movement: abandon the block vote and you betray Labour's parentage.
Privately, however, many leading Labour MPs admit that this is a specious argument.
Instead they have used block votes like bulbs of garlic — to keep away the vampires of the left.
Now it is clear that by extending one-member-one-vote to the choice of constituency delegates, Labour can safely inject democracy into the party conference without fearing nasty side-effects.
The fourth consequence of the humbling of the left is potentially the most important.
Too often the leadership's victories over the left have had an unsavoury, pyrrhic quality.
Administrative means — like the block vote -have been used to solve political problems.
Debates over important issues, from nuclear weapons to public ownership, have been settled by manipulation rather than persuasion.
Few of Labour's keenest supporters could accuse either the right or the left within the party of approaching fresh issues with an open mind.
Loyalty to leader or faction has generally taken precedence over original thought.
That can now change — indeed, if the block vote goes, it will have to change.
Reason and persuasion will become the currency of Labour Party policy-making.
Yesterday's debate about electoral reform could provide the model.
The issues cross left-right divisions, and have therefore escaped the usual deadening control of faction-politics.
For once, both sides want to win over waverers; and if Labour scraps the block vote, there is a fair chance that eventually the merits of the arguments will determine the policy Labour chooses.
It will be a novel and healthy way for Labour to enter the 1990s.
World View: The virtues of old history: Lawrence Freedman argues that the key to coping with the future lies in past events
By LAWRENCE FREEDMAN
The news from California of the death of history now turns out to have been exaggerated.
Contrary to Dr Francis Fukuyama's analysis, published in The Independent on September 20 and 21, ideological conflict is not the sole motor of history, and even if it were, this rich seam of dispute has yet to be fully exhausted.
That this now seems to be generally agreed is a relief to historians, who otherwise faced mass redundancy.
At most they would have remained as caretakers of the museum pieces of the past, reminding the young in this brave new, smug, boring, consensual world of the bad old days when people felt deeply about big issues and the future was uncertain.
In practice history is being created this moment at a dizzying pace.
Europe is emerging from a period when basic political relationships had congealed.
Things have become much more fluid.
As Soviet order is relaxed in Eastern Europe, nations which had been kept in their place are reasserting their identities and rediscovering old aspirations.
This has an unavoidable knock-on effect on Western Europe, as evidenced by the revival of the ‘German question’, and it will eventually lead to Washington reappraising its security interests.
All this new history makes old history even more important.
It can help us explain why the entrenched and the familiar can suddenly appear conditional and temporary, and inject meaning into those long-forgotten disputes which are bubbling to the surface, especially within the Soviet bloc.
It provides the stock of examples and analogies which politicians can plunder to justify policies for a novel and complex situation.
History orients us to the present.
But history can also play tricks on us.
There is a gap between the studies of the historians, continually re-interpreting the past, and the more general set of remembrances drawn upon in public debate.
Here the link with evidence may be tenuous, with the result that national myths are bolstered and well-known but inappropriate events from our past cited in support of current policy.
The need to avoid bad history is the reason the debate over the teaching of history in schools is so important: what is the proper balance between traditional concerns with royalty and battles as against the need to understand the great political movements of our time and the social and economic conditions which spawned them?
Between a focus on Britain and a broad appreciation of the world of which it is but a part?
There is a particular problem with contemporary history.
Schools have shown increasing interest in it, helped by such excellent organisations as the Institute for Contemporary British History, but there is limited room in the curriculum for the twentieth century, let alone for the period from when the text books end and memory begins.
Attitudes to the recent past are largely shaped by experience and the nature and extent of these experiences vary.
This is very much a generational problem.
Consider, for example, the new students who this week begin courses at universities and polytechnics.
Because of the limited recruitment and early retirements in recent years, most of their teachers will come from what is loosely known as the ‘Sixties generation’.
That is, their memories may just go back to Suez, they can remember where they were when Kennedy was assassinated and their formative political years were dominated by the Wilson government at home and the Vietnam war abroad.
The new students, however, were born when Heath was Prime Minister and negotiating entry into what was then the Common Market.
They cannot remember when Britain was not part of the European Community or when there were not ‘troubles’ in Northern Ireland.
They were toddlers at the time of Watergate, not yet 10 when Mrs Thatcher came to power, Nato decided to introduce cruise and Pershing missiles and the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.
They were but 11 at the time of the Falklands War and turning 14 as Gorbachev entered the Kremlin.
Teachers and students alike are governed, by and large, by people born during the inter-war years, when the Spanish Civil War and appeasement were the great issues.
This is a generation for whom the war years remain vivid and the Empire had real meaning.
Casual references by our political leaders to what seems to them to be the quite recent past can be lost on a young audience.
The new students are also new voters.
It is a matter of politics as much as education whether they grasp the flow of history and understand how events flow into one another.
If they are to be discerning consumers of political rhetoric they need not only to recognise the references but also to treat with suspicion attempts to make points through the mere mention of Suez or Munich.
These events are too often used as nuggets quarried from the record and displayed for our current instruction.
But their details are often still controversial and their meaning can only be appreciated by placing them in context.
An awareness of old history encourages caution when it is appropriated for a contemporary cause.
We are familiar enough with the role of historical myth in Northern Ireland or in the Arab-Israeli dispute.
Now it is becoming a powerful factor in the new, frenzied politics of Eastern Europe.
A dramatic example of this is the publicity given to the secret annexes to the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
These demonstrate the basis upon which Stalin seized Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and so undermine the legitimacy of continued Soviet rule.
Another example comes with Auschwitz, the Nazi concentration camp in Poland.
At its peak some 12,000 innocents were gassed there each day.
The majority of victims were Jews but they were not alone — as many as 4,000 gypsies may have been killed there in one session.
It is a relevant example because it involves one of the most searing of twentieth-century experiences, replete with both personal and broader political consequences, and it has recently been in the news.
The full horror of Hitler's ‘final solution’ is generally appreciated, although some, such as Mr David Irving, still attempt to deny its magnitude.
However, even those who do not doubt the terrible things that happened can still squabble about their meaning.
For example, in 1984 10 Carmelite nuns gained the support of the Archdiocese of Krakow to establish a convent just outside the walls of Auschwitz but in 1987 a number of leading Polish Catholics accepted that this was offensive to Jews and that the convent should be relocated.
Earlier this year Cardinal Glemp repudiated this agreement but he has now been prevailed upon to honour it.
The most disturbing aspect of this incident was the evidence it provided of a residual antisemitism in Poland, disproportionate to the residue of a once-great Jewish community.
Unwittingly perhaps, Cardinal Glemp reflected this when he enjoined Jews not to speak from ‘the position of a people raised above all others’ and added, in a classic restatement of the myth of Jewish omnipotence: ‘Your power is in the mass media, at your immediate disposal in many countries.
Do not use it to spread anti-Polonism.’
To understand why Jews should be bothered by Catholics praying at this site it is necessary to go back to the role played by the Catholic Church in fomenting antisemitism, the passivity of the Pope during the war while the exterminations were underway and even the suspicions caused by the reception of Austrian President Kurt Waldheim, with his dubious war record, by the present Pope, John Paul II (from Poland).
To understand why Jews should be so possessive about a collective tragedy which touched many others, it is necessary to remember that this was mass murder specifically designed for Jews in which others were caught.
Cardinal Glemp was persuaded to recant in meetings with British Jews who, to their credit and in contrast to many of their American compatriots, took the route of quiet persuasion rather than shrill denunciation.
Afterwards the Cardinal accepted that he had not appreciated the strong feelings of Jews on this issue and that he now hoped to find out more about the Shoah (the Hebrew word for the Holocaust).
This might seem naive but it is all too possible.
Before the war the Jewish and Gentile communities lived in ignorance of each other and since the war state censorship has failed to allow a full discussion of past antisemitism (which persisted in some ugly incidents after the war).
One of the tasks for the Solidarity government is to ensure that a revival in the Polish spirit does not preclude an honest appreciation of the nation's history.
It is encouraging that an exhibition on Polish-Jewish life has opened in Krakow.
Equally, Jews may come to recognise how Poles feel that the suffering faced by the nation as a whole in the war was overshadowed by the Holocaust.
When old nationalisms come to the surface, having been suppressed for decades, it can be in a pure and dangerous form.
The few remaining Jews in Eastern Europe are being allowed a greater degree of freedom, but so are antisemites.
The rise of ethnic violence throughout the Eastern bloc is unfortunately the other side of the coin to self-determination.
History provides us with no guide as to how all this will work out, but it does remind us of the need for sensitivity when dealing with powerful social forces.
If post cold-war Europe is not to be violent and conflictual then the sources of rivalry and mistrust need to be addressed head-on.
If its post cold-war generation is not to be continually confused by unexpected developments then they will need to come to terms with the dynamics of change.
This is not the time to talk of the end of history — more a time for some good history lessons.
Leading Article: Some backyards have to suffer
By LAWRENCE FREEDMAN
CHRIS PATTEN, the Secretary of State for the Environment, summed up the house-building dilemma when delivering his (provisionally negative) judgement on the proposed building of Foxley Wood, a ‘new settlement’ on the borders of Berkshire and Hampshire.
‘How,’ he asked, ‘do we provide the houses we need without destroying the places we love?’
In essence, his answer was: by adhering to the planning system and leaving land allocation decisions to local authorities.
The regional plan for the South-east proposes that some 57,000 new homes should be provided each year.
Each county is told how many it should contribute, and is expected to conform to its ‘structure plan’, proposing where such development should take place: within existing towns or villages, on their fringes, or on green-field sites.
The Foxley Wood project from Consortium Developments which Mr Patten's predecessor said he was ‘minded’ to allow was for 4,800 new houses in a large shallow quarry and conifer plantation.
This private proposal from a grouping of 10 of Britain's biggest house-builders did not form part of the structure plan for north-east Hampshire, and was opposed by the county council as well as local residents.
In giving his provisional ‘No’, Mr Patten said: ‘Only if Hampshire County Council and the districts address the issue of distribution (of new houses) together, and take account of opinion at the local level, are we likely to reach solutions which both meet the housing requirement and satisfy local environmental concerns.’
At first blush, that sentiment looks both unimpeachably democratic and commendably ‘green’.
In reality, it underestimates the not-in-my-backyard factor (who is going to say: ‘Yes, please build your new town here?’) and the temptation for county and district councils to avoid hard decisions which might benefit the county or region as a whole, at the certain cost of arousing fierce local opposition.
Had that principle ruled post-war planning, there would have been no new towns.
Some strategic direction is essential, as successive governments have recognised.
Equally, had county councils shown greater vision, more smaller settlements would have been built, and there would have been less urban sprawl, less despoliation of county towns, and fewer hideous spec-building estates on the fringes of attractive old villages.
Mr Patten partly concedes this point in recognising that new settlements can offer ‘exciting opportunities for imaginative, high-quality design’.
Ironically, they are unlikely to arise on sites zoned by local authorities for housing development: such zoning can raise the price of land to as much as 40 per cent of the cost of a house.
The developers' profit margin is thus squeezed to a point where they cannot (should they, uncharacteristically, be so minded) spend enough on quality and design.
It would be regrettable if Mr Patten's new advice blocked the development of well-planned, quality private settlements on affordable sites.
Local residents will almost always oppose such development.
Yet an estimated 600,000 homes will be needed in the South-east by the turn of the century.
To achieve that target without endless sprawl, local interests will have to be hurt from time to time.
Letter: The real cause of terror in Broadwater Farm
From COMMANDER DAVID STEVENS
Sir: Shaun Waterman and Millard Scott (letter, 5 October) claim that the police operation on Friday criminalised and terrorised the Broadwater Farm Estate.
It is the vicious downward spiral of drug abuse, drug dealing and violence that terrorises inner city estates, not the police action to free the vast majority of law-abiding residents from a menace caused by a tiny minority.
It is the action of that tiny minority, day in, day out, which terrifies residents and corrupts the lives of young children who learn to accept this behaviour as normal.
Halting that activity was the objective of the exercise, not the capture of an enormous haul of drugs.
We have made that clear from the start, and we have also made clear that we are more than happy with the results.
The Metropolitan Police will not hesitate to take firm action to free communities from this tiny minority.
It will act as it did last Friday, with determination and sensitivity.
It will do all it can to reassure residents, to accept and prove accountability, to demonstrate openness, and to return communities to a quality of life which others enjoy and which all deserve.
However, I should add, it is with regret that we have to take such drastic intervention, a course which could so easily be avoided through co-ordination and commitment by other agencies close at hand.
This operation was carried out as the only possible way of dealing with the menace of the drug dealers.
The timing was determined by the known peak level of their activity, and by nothing else.
To talk of dawn raids in the circumstances is palpable nonsense.
The methods of the operation were absolutely necessary to gather evidence necessary for the courts, and were decided after full consultation with the Crown Prosecution Service.
The needs of the course of justice prevent me from elaborating further now.
From their letter, Mr Scott and Mr Waterman would have people believe that they alone will ‘pick up the pieces’.
My officers have been bravely patrolling that estate, on behalf of the community which we serve, and will continue to do so.
They made it clear to all their colleagues who took part in that operation, and to the Press and observers at the briefing, that they will be supporting the community today, tomorrow and thereafter.
I am not aware of who elected Mr Scott and Mr Waterman.
What I do know is that it is disgraceful and defamatory to label as stooges the people from the Borough Community Relations Council who gave up a day's work to act as observers, and who have made it clear that they would have reported whatever they had seen, good or bad for police.
This is equally true for the Press.
If local agencies had chosen to co-operate with police in combating the drugs problem, we would have been delighted.
Without denying the great efforts made by the local council and others to improve the estate, it is they who chose not to co-operate with police, not the other way round.
For example, Haringey has still not taken its place within the Community Consultative Group set up after Lord Scarman's report on the disorders of 1981.
It is our wish, as ever, to build better relationships with these agencies, and develop levels of mutual confidence to a point where the flow of information would be much greater than it has been.
I note the allegations made by Mr Waterman and Mr Scott.
As I made clear to my officers at that briefing, I expected — and received — the very highest standards of policing, sensitivity and courtesy.
I stated that I would not hesitate to condemn and punish unacceptable behaviour; equally, I would issue praise.
We will investigate every complaint thoroughly.
However, I reject the disgraceful and unproven allegation of ‘weekly cases of harassment and malpractice’— it has no basis in fact.
Leading Article: Mugabe's lapse of judgement
From COMMANDER DAVID STEVENS
THE Vice-Chancellor of the University of Zimbabwe, Walter Kamba, has ordered the indefinite closure of the institution after discussions with President Mugabe and members of his cabinet.
The decision followed demonstrations on the university's main campus.
Arthur Mutambara, president of the student council, who is in hospital as a result of injuries allegedly gained by jumping from a window, is to be charged under the Orwellian-sounding Law and Order Maintenance Act as a result of a statement he issued blaming the government for acts of ‘state terrorism’.
Earlier, Mr Mutambara had accused the regime of ‘neo-fascism, comparable only to that of South Africa’, adding that the university was ‘the last island of democracy’ in the country.
This summer the government decided to make life difficult for Edgar Tekere and his newly-formed opposition Zimbabwe Unity Party (ZUP) which was contesting a by-election in Harare.
The seat had become vacant as a result of the suicide of a senior offical of the ruling Zanu (PF) party who had been condemned by a commission of inquiry for profiting from a racket involving the unlawful resale of officially purchased vehicles.
Mr Tekere's organisation was refused permission to hold rallies, his officers were detained and newspapers were forbidden to carry ZUP advertisements.
Finally, according to The Independent correspondent, writing in July, the vote was ‘rigged’ to ensure Mr Tekere's defeat.
Earlier in the year, emergency powers inherited from the Smith regime were employed to break a strike in the telecommunications industry, although the government claimed that the laws were maintained to deal with armed incursions from Mozambique and South Africa.
The thread which runs through these sorry tales is that they are all examples of irrational over-reaction by a government which is, by the standards of the region, honest, able and secure.
Unlike some of his neighbours, President Mugabe is in a position to take a relaxed attitude to dissent.
He has no reason to fear the imminent collapse either of his administration or his country.
The student demonstrations against corruption occurred because of illegalities exposed as a result of his high standards of probity.
They could have been contained.
Equally, an electoral victory by Mr Tekere would have presented no particular problems to an administration whose members dominate Parliament.
And success by striking civil servants, seeking an improvement in pay, would not have imposed an intolerable strain on the state.
President Mugabe took office in the aftermath of a civil war in which both sides had behaved with appalling brutality.
Even so, he accepted that the maintenance of large landholdings, run predominantly by whites who had supported Ian Smith, was crucial to the economic well-being of his nation.
Although he suppressed tribal dissent ruthlessly, he subsequently attempted -with some generosity — to incorporate representatives of minority tribes into the governance of the state.
He has abandoned much of his Marxist baggage and, so far, set his face against the creation of a formal one-party state.
It is precisely because Mr Mugabe's record is, in context, more than respectable, that the current repressive mood demonstrated by his government is disappointing.
Open season on the great and the good
By MILES KINGTON
HAVE you noticed the new fashion for psychoanalysing our leaders?
We're used to being told dark secrets about dead artists, but suddenly it's open season on twentieth century public figures.
In the last few days alone there have been probing books about Mrs Thatcher and Winston Churchill which told us a great deal about the murky depths of the authors.
Only the tip of the iceberg, I'm afraid, so here is a brief guide to books due out later this month.
Why Prince Charles Does It, by Reg Guttering.
Dr Guttering is consultant psychologist to the Royal Institute of British Architects, where he has studied Prince Charles's compulsion to attack contemporary architects.
Prince Charles, he says, hates being recognised in public and has transferred these emotions to buildings.
Consequently he cannot approve of any building that wants to draw attention to itself.
Absorbing.
Why Jeffrey Archer Does It, by Professor Norman Zeitung.
Professor Zeitung has delved into Jeffrey Archer's childhood to explain why he writes the way he does, and comes up with an extraordinary finding — Jeffrey Archer never had a childhood!
This explains, says the professor, why all Archer's characters seem never to have been through the growing-up process.
Gripping.
Why The Duchess of York Does It, by Flight Commander Rod Ordnung.
Ordnung, consultant psychologist to the Fleet Air Arm, sets out to understand why a perfectly normal red-blooded Sloane should suffer from the terrifying desire to write stories about helicopters that can speak.
His theory?
That she does it for the money, which symbolises affection, emotional security and personal achievement.
Spiffing.
Why the Prince of Wales is Sick, Sick, Sick, by Reg Guttering.
Another of Dr Guttering's reasoned analyses of Prince Charles's architectural tastes, in which the author suggests that after a childhood spent in some of the most vile Victorian mansions in the country, it is not surprising if the prince is minus the odd nut and bolt.
Adhesive.
Why I Do It, by Dr Anthony Clare.
What possesses a grown man to pretend he is sitting in a psychiatrist's chair on radio and ask celebrities questions in a lilting Irish accent about their mummies and daddies?
Why do they answer him?
And wouldn't it be easier to get their mummies and daddies on the programme to answer the questions?
Dr Clare does not address any of these problems directly, but tells us a lot about his childhood, which seems to have been quite nice, unless he is trying to hide something shameful.
Enchanting.
Why They Do It, by Jackboot Colophon.
Dr Colophon, consultant psychologist to the Press Council, examines why so many consultant psychologists seem impelled to spill the dirt on people like Prince Charles, Mrs Thatcher and Ian Botham.
He concludes that they are suffering from fame displacement reversal syndrome, and hints that he had a pretty bloody awful childhood himself.
Riveting.
Westland, The Little Helicopter, by Michael Heseltine.
A charming children's story in which a small helicopter takes on the biggest financial brains in Europe and the USA, and loses badly.
In an impressive dream sequence, Westland traces the source of this business inadequacy to his helicopter childhood and wakes up screaming.
Compulsive.
Oh God, Why Do I Keep Writing These Dreadful Attacks on the Prince of Wales?
What's Wrong With Me?
And Why Can't I Stop? by Reg Guttering.
A cool look at how Richard Rogers's ideas spring from the outside drainpipes of his youth.
Tedious beyond belief.
Daddy, We Hardly Knew You, by Rupert Murdoch, Clive James and Germaine Greer.
A serious inquiry into the theory that almost all Australians had no fathers and have been searching for a father figure ever since, only to find it in their own persons, with resultant confusion.
Fascinating.
Churchill and the Black Dog, by Dr Heinz Riba.
A delightful children's tale about Churchill and his grumpy black dog.
‘Come on, let's go and bomb Dresden!’ said Churchill.
‘That should be fun.’
‘That's what you said when we invaded Gallipoli,’ grumbled Black Dog.
‘That didn't turn out to be much fun.’
‘Oh come, you old spoilsport,’ cried Churchill.
‘Last over the coastline's a cissy!’
Letter: Media obsession with strikes
From MICHAEL MEACHER, MP
Sir: Your leading article (4 October) is without doubt the most vitriolic piece of anti-trade union bigotry I have read in a serious newspaper for some considerable time.
It takes as fact that employers, judges and Tory legislators can do no wrong, and so it is hardly surprising that it finds nothing to be said in favour of trade unions.
I do not recognise in your description of an employer ‘frivolously testing his rights to its limits’ the port employers or British Rail, which both this summer deliberately set out to overturn a majority strike ballot by manipulating the legal process.
Nor do I recognise the judges who can discriminate between frivolous and genuine employers in the Appeal Court ruling that dock strikes might have been illegal for the past 40 years.
Least of all do I recognise the fairness and balance of the current Tory legislation which you claim.
More to the point, however, the public does not recognise this either.
Opinion polls now show that employers are blamed for Britain's economic problems and union are more popular than at any time in their history.
Finally, it is not Labour and the trade unions who are obsessed with strikes but the media.
Speaker after speaker at the Conference voiced the reluctance of workers to take strike action and our commitment to finding other ways of resolving disputes.
You may choose not to report this, but you should have the honesty to report Labour's policy accurately.
Letter: Divided families
From MS JO TUNNARD
Sir: Sue Wells' poignant article about adoption (Living, 2 October) captures the heartbreak felt by so many other parents living in Britain today.
Each year we advise some 800 families with children in care.
One of their main concerns is that their children or grandchildren are to be placed for adoption with no continuing contact with family members, including brothers and sisters.
Adoption is pursued as an option for an increasing number of children in care.
Unlike Sue's daughter most of these children concerned are not adopted at birth.
Some local authorities still operate policy guidelines that recommend that children should stay in care for under two years; at that stage, they should either be back home or adopted.
Many of these children are prepared and placed for adoption with strangers, and part of the package is that they will no longer see or be in contact with relatives who have remained in touch during their stay in care.
The Government proposes to implement a major review of adoption law in the New Year.
We hope that part of its brief will be to research the views of children, relatives and adopters who have been involved in both open and more traditional adoptions.
We hope that the review will also invite individual submissions through your pages and other media avenues.
Letter: Cul-de-Thatcher
From MR MICHAEL HINTON
Sir: The residents of this once tranquil village have been bickering for years about the best way to deal with increasing traffic.
Thatchergate has given us an idea.
Letter: Cul-de-Thatcher
From MR DAVID W. HARVEY
Sir: Had today's date been 1 April many readers like myself would have nodded with quiet pleasure at your splendid little follow-up about Thatchergate (4 October).
Now, however, I wonder if the absurd story is true.
If so, it is a sad but illuminating irony.
Not so long ago this humble little eighteenth-century precinct provided an amiable short-cut between St James's Park and Whitehall.
Seemingly lesser residents of Number 10 found no difficulty in living with this arrangement.
While we have to accept that some people have had a good go at blowing up the present inhabitant, would it not be simpler for her to emulate a previous incumbent and move up the road to Admiralty House?
It allows the idle trappings of, albeit post-imperial, grandeur; would suit the French much better; ease the lot of the luckless sentinels and, who knows, even simplify the job of security.
Letter: TV sponsorship
From MR MELVYN BRAGG
Sir: Your report (Media, 27 September) was uncharacteristically inaccurate.
You say that 01 for London has approval from the IBA to look for sponsorship whereas The South Bank Show does not.
This is not the case.
Earlier this year the IBA suggested that arts programmes, local and national, could consider sponsorship and many are doing so.
David Glencross at the IBA and myself have been in full contact about this.
You speak about my ‘plea for sponsorship’.
There is no plea.
Greg Dyke and I decided to explore the possibility of sponsorship, which could well be of great value in London Weekend Television's long-term future.
There is no question that LWT can afford to, and wants to, continue its support for The South Bank Show.
Letter: Escalating problem
From MRS BARBARA TIDMAN
Sir: Can nothing be done to stop these wildcat strikes by escalators on the Underground?
I do not know how they communicate with each other, but their organisation is formidable.
No sooner does one learn to avoid one station than another goes on the blink.
No prior warning can be given to travellers as it is obvious that the public address system has been infiltrated and now issues an even worse form of gobbledygook than hitherto.
Some say the escalators are controlled by the cones which march up and down the M1, but I find this fanciful.
Letter: Questions of faith
From MS SUSAN MENDUS
Sir: I am sorry that John Torode (3 October) found the Salman Rushdie seminar ‘dispiriting’, and even more sorry that he perceives in it the birth of a ‘dangerously illiberal orthodoxy’.
The real danger lies in dividing the protagonists into ‘goodies’ and ‘baddies’and insisting that battle be joined between the forces of light (liberals like Mr Torode) and the forces of darkness (fundamentalists like Shabir Akhtar).
If the Rushdie affair teaches us anything, it is that liberals and fundamentalists alike should inspect their principles in a spirit of critical self-examination.
Certainly censorship should not be allowed to masquerade as virtuous compromise, but nor should commitment to free speech go unexamined.
As Mr Torode points out, our liberal forefathers insisted on the importance of testing faiths by submitting them to discussion.
Liberal commitment to free speech must also be tested in this way, lest it become an unthinking orthodoxy — a mere article of faith.
To submit the free speech principle to such a test is not an argument for book-banning.
It is a plea for consistency.
If we demand that the faiths of others be tested, how can we refuse to test our own?
Letter: Unborn children
From MRS JOAN M. CROUCH
Sir: It seems clear from Sarah Helm's report that members of SPUC and the Parliamentary Pro-Life Group, are determined to use the debates on the forthcoming Embryo Research Bill as though embryo experimentation and abortion can be considered together.
They might pause to reflect that there are those already born who have an equally strong right to life as an unborn child, and for whom embryo experimentation may give some hope of cure or relief.
The experience of watching my late husband's 16-year fight against the degenerative effects of Parkinson's disease (one of those conditions which might one day benefit from embryo research) causes me to write this letter in the hope that all who take part in the debates will recognise and confound these tactics of the anti-abortion pressure groups, quite rightly described by the British Pregnancy Advisory Service as ‘an attempt to hijack government legislation’.
Letter: Unborn children
From MS THERESA CROSHAW
Sir: Did Sarah Helm (3 October) attend the same Society for Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC) conference as I did?
I heard nothing from students about a baby with alleged dog's ears but plenty about biochemical investigations and possible treatments of Down's syndrome from Professor Jerome Lejeune.
I should have thought Professor Lejeune's research and clinical findings on prevention of deterioration in Down's children by administration of folic acid or thyroxine in appropriate cases to be particularly newsworthy.
Was it overlooked because it demonstrates that insights into genetic disorders can be gained without use of human embryos?
It is also curious that, in describing the conference folder, Ms Helm omitted to mention the documented evidence it contained on failure rates, perinatal mortality, incidence of spina bifida and heart defects associated with invitro-fertilisation.
These data came, not from what Dame Mary Donaldson (letter, 3 October) chose to call ‘emotional, uninformed and often inaccurate outbursts’ of the Pro-Life lobby, but from publications of IVF teams, the Director of Australia'a National Perinatal Statistics Unit and the Commonwealth Department of Community Services and Health.
Lest anyone object to non-British sources, I should add that Dame Mary, in her foreword to the Interim Licensing Authority's Fourth Report (1989), wrote of ‘known obstetric and paediatric hazards’ of multiple birth, saying ‘we are very worried over the 1987 figures’associated with IVF and GIFT.
Why should SPUC's concern for the conceptus be deemed any less legitimate?
Letter: Eye accuse
From MR DAVID CASH
Sir: Yesterday, to illustrate your news item on the Sonia Sutcliffe libel appeal, you published a photograph showing our proprietor Peter Cook, Editor Ian Hislop and myself — who you captioned as Private Eye's legal adviser.
I consider this a monstrous libel and gross slur on my reputation and it has caused grave distress and embarrassment to me and is of course highly defamatory.
I require a full and unqualified retraction and substantial damages, ie, £50 to Bananaballs.
Letter: In a glass darkly
From MR DAVID HAMILTON EDDY
Sir: Jonathan Glancey (Architecture; ‘Invisible buildings that reflect nothing’, 4 October) does well to remind us of the spreading disease of the mirrored glass building.
As Mr Glancey points out, there is much modern building that we may describe as passively mediocre, ‘half-hearted Post-Modern’.
Mirrored glass is actively, indeed aggressively, mediocre.
What you see is what you get — just an image of yourself.
As with those mirrored sunglasses, nothing conveys hostility so well.
Letter: King and country
From MR HENRY ROE
Sir: Apropos the return home of the body of old King Nicholas of Montenegro ('Communists allow burial of Montenegro's last king', 2 October): King Alexander of Yugoslavia was his grandson, not his son-in-law.
The son-in-law was King Peter of Serbia, an optimist who translated John Stuart Mill's On Liberty into Serbian.
Alexander assumed the throne of Montenegro in 1918 when the French government, in league with the Serbian, refused to allow the old man to go back to Montenegro after his wartime exile in France.