

Court Circular
By MARK URBAN, Defence Correspondent
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 5 October: The Princess Royal, President, Riding for the Disabled Association, this morning visited the Abingdon Group at Lower Lodge Riding Centre, Charley Bassett Road, Longworth, and was received on arrival by Colonel Robert Heywood-Lonsdale (Vice Lord-Lieutenant of Oxfordshire).
Her Royal Highness this afternoon attended the Annual General Meeting of the National Association of Victim Support Schemes at Central Hall, Westminster, and was received by the Lord Mayor of Westminster (Councillor Simon Mabey) and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Afterwards The Princess Royal, President, Royal Yachting Association, attended a Racing Rules Committee Meeting (Chairman, Mrs Mary Peral) at the Royal Thames Yacht Club, 60 Knightsbridge, London SW1.
Mrs Richard Carew Pole was in attendance.
Subsequently His Royal Highness, President, Scottish Business in the Community, visited the Dundee Enterprise Trust and the Whitfield Estate, and afterwards attended a ScotBic conference in the Angus Hotel, Dundee.
His Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
The Prince of Wales, Patron, The Renaissance Theatre Company, attended the Premiere of Henry V at the Odeon Cinema, Leicester Square, London WC2.
Mr Guy Salter was in attendance.
Mrs Max Pike was in attendance.
5 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, Patron of the Friends of St John's Smith Square, was present this evening at a Concert given by Dame Joan Sutherland and Mr Richard Bonynge in aid of St John's Organ Appeal.
The Lady Glenconner was in attendance.
YORK HOUSE 5 October: The Duchess of Kent, as Patron of the Norfolk and Norwich Triennial Festival, this morning visited the Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, University of East Anglia, and this evening attended the Opening Concert of the French Festival at St Andrew's Hall, Norwich.
Her Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Miss Sarah Partridge.
THATCHED HOUSE LODGE 5 October: Princess Alexandra, attended by Lady Mary Mumford, left Royal Air Force Benson this morning in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight to visit the Caribbean Dependent Territories of Montserrat and the British Virgin Islands in the wake of the destruction caused by Hurricane Hugo.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess of Wales visits the OUTSET employment scheme for disabled people at the Globe Town Neighbourhood Centre, 62 Roman Road, London E2.
Prince Edward, Chairman of The Duke of Edinburgh's Award Special Projects Group, visits Edinburgh, Stirling and Glasgow.
The Princess Royal visits Avon; as President, The Missions to Seamen, visits the Avonmouth International Seafarers’ Centre at Gloucester Road, Avonmouth, Bristol; as Patron, The Home Farm Trust, visits The Home Farm Trust's Registered Office at Merchants House, North Wapping Road, Bristol; as President, The Save the Children Fund, attends a reception with employees of Halifax Property Services, receives a cheque for the Fund and officially opens Halifax Property Services' Headquarters building at Great Weston Business Park, Yate, Bristol; as Patron, The Butler Trust, visits HM Prison Leyhill, Wotton under Edge, Avon; and, this evening, as President, The Save the Children Fund, attends a reception in celebration of the Fund's 70th Anniversary at Chavenage House, Tetbury, Gloucestershire.
Princess Margaret attends a Service at the Church of St Philip and St James, Up Hatherley, Cheltenham, during the Parish Preaching Mission.
The Duchess of Gloucester, Colonel-in-Chief, Royal Army Educational Corps, attends the Officers' Annual Dinner at Eltham Palace, London SE9.
Obituary: Graham Chapman
By JOHN CLEESE
GRAHAM CHAPMAN and I wrote together almost full time between 1966 and 1973, writes John Cleese, while producing sketches for The Frost Report, The 1948 Show and Monty Python, as well as several film scripts none of which made their way intact to the silver screen.
As a writing partner he had two rare gifts: the ability to get us unstuck with some inspired off-the-wall conceit when I was enmeshed in very on-the-wall musings; and in addition, the priceless talent of knowing whether something was funny or not.
I noticed this early and relied on it shamelessly.
In fact the Cheese Shot Skit — my all-time favourite — owes its life to him.
Every dozen or so cheeses I'd sigh and say ‘Gra, is this really funny?’ and he'd puff on his pipe calmly and say, ‘Yes, get on with it.’
I wished he'd had the same confidence in front of audiences because he was probably the most talented actor of us all.
But he found the Python TV recordings a terrible strain, and some of his drinking was an attempt to dampen that fear.
After he gave up the booze at Christmas 1977 — for good-he gave us his splendid Brian which is as clever and well-judged a piece of comic acting as you'll see.
Of course, he'd given up medicine to pursue comedy, but he was absolutely at his best when caring for others.
He looked after the entire film unit practically single-handed while we were filming in Tunisia and I was reminded of this again in recent months when we visited him in hospital.
I think he was just as keen to look after us then, and his optimism, cheerfulness and absolute lack of self-pity made me, for one, feel very very small.
We all bought his optimism, of course.
We wanted to.
But his elder brother John thinks that he knew better what the score was than he ever let on.
That his bravery was ended so abruptly and unexpectedly seems very cruel.
Obituary: Graham Chapman
By ALAN RAFFERTY
IF, in the Forties and Fifties, a traditional training course for British comedians would start with the period of apprenticeship in ENSA and be followed by a stint filling in the gaps between trippers at the Windmill Theatre, these days a university degree (from Cambridge, ideally) has increasingly become a requisite for any successful career in stage, films or television humour.
Graham Chapman, who died on the eve of the twentieth anniversary of his first appearance in the show which made his reputation, travelled along (and to a certain extent pioneered) that now orthodox route to celebrity.
Chapman studied medicine at Cambridge and, on graduating, even briefly practised it; of more significance, however, in the light of his subsequent career, was a meeting with John Cleese, with whom he was to write and perform numerous sketches, most notably for David Frost.
Eventually they joined forces with other graduates sharing the same skewed sense of humour, Michael Palin, Terry Jones, Eric Idle and an American-born cartoonist and graphic artist, Terry Gilliam; and on Sunday 5 October 1969 (incongruously enough, in a scheduling slot which had always been rigorously reserved for programmes of a religious cast) the very first episode of Monty Python's Flying Circus was broadcast.
With its demented self-referentiality, its abrupt and dreamlike transpositions of settings and the head-spinning ease with which each sketch would dovetail into its successor, Monty Python soon became a cult show, albeit achieving viewing figures to rival those of the cosiest and most conventional sitcom; and its peculiar brand of humour, which contrived to be both anarchically delirious and quintessentially British, transferred without strain to the cinema, as witness And Now for Something Completely Different (a portmanteau film of the best-known TV sketches), Monty Python and the Holy Grail, Jabberwocky, The Life of Brian, The Meaning of Life and, released only last week, Erik the Viking.
These, along with other, related ventures, made the members of the Python team all variously rich — with the sole exception of Chapman.
His alcoholism apparently alienated his former writing partner; his admirable disinclination to offer any public denial of his homosexuality may have compromised his potential as a solo performer; and he battled for several years with the throat cancer which finally killed him.
Nor can one omit, as an important contributing factor in his decline, the humiliating failure of his own attempts to write and direct a feature film, Yellowbeard, even after some drastic and, by Chapman's own account, disastrous re-editing by the studio.
It is equally possible, however, that Chapman's problem as a performer, within a collective context in which the success of each individual seemed virtually guaranteed, related to an inherent incompatibility between the innovation of the Monty Python group and his own comedic style.
The Pythons' inspiration (of the films in particular) can be traced back, via the immediate influence of the Goon Show, along a line leading directly to Lewis Carroll and the whole English tradition of nonsense, parody and the mock-epic.
But the distinguishing feature of those films (even if they cannot quite be credited with inventing the conceit) was what might be called their sense of the inverted anachronism.
The humour of anachronism has always existed, of course.
But, in a film like The Life of Brian, the characters were not played, as one might expect, as superficially representative figures of the period turned into figures of fun by the odd verbal or gestural modernism.
Instead, they constituted a set of twentieth-century British comedy stereotypes (the harassed working-class housewife and mother, the truculent, bloody-minded shop steward, the jovial pillar of the labour exchange) somehow transplanted into a biblical setting — as, respectively, Virgin Mary, militant Early Christian and willing good-humoured martyr.
Yet what such a comic ploy demands is, precisely, performers capable of representing stereotypes; and, whatever the evidence to the contrary, that is where the true talent of the Pythonites lay.
Throughout the show's history, for instance, Cleese was the very image of pompous, impatient rectitude.
Whatever the different roles assigned, Palin invariably personified a sweatily ingratiating Milquetoast; and so forth.
Only Chapman lacked any easily identifiable and stereotypical presence (his cantankerous military type, who would interrupt the more outrageous sketches with a testy ‘this is silly!’, might just as well, or even better, have been played by Cleese).
It was he who tended most to be swallowed up by the show's overall style and it was therefore he who became in a sense ultimately dispensable.
Obituary: Professor G. W. Keeton
By GEORG SCHWARZENBERGER
IN OUR TIME, abounding in specialists and experts in midget fields, George W. Keeton had some of the qualities of a rare survivor from a distant age.
His ebullient personality is a vivid reminder of the polymath of past times.
The scope of Keeton's knowledge encompassed Assyrian Law and the Comparative Law of Trusts, the Norman Conquest and Chinese marriage customs, as well as Development of Extraterritoriality in China.
This first major work of his (1928) came swiftly to be recognised as a masterpiece here and abroad and secured for Keeton an early Cambridge LLD.
Yet his venture on The Moscow Trial (1932) during the appeasement period met as much scornful disapproval as, conversely, his Passing of Parliament (1952) from Clement Attlee downwards.
That, in a later work of extensive and original research into little-known source material, carried out in partnership with his wife Marian, Keeton should have something to say in favour of Lord Chancellor Jeffreys, brought him little joy from quarters whose traditional schoolboy images he chose to query.
So it would be possible to go on: anybody who wishes to do so will find plenty of relevant material in the conscientious bibliography by Sultana Saeed in Law Justice and Equity: essays in tribute to GW Keeton (1967).
The closest comparison with another polymath in our time that, in spite of personal and other differences, comes to mind is with Arnold Toynbee.
The common denominator is less the substratum of overlapping spheres of knowledge than intuitive awareness and, even more so, shared condemnation from disdainful detractors.
To leave the presentation of Keeton on the polymath level would be as arbitrary as concentration on some of his disparate relaxations; boat-building, cookery or football.
What would be missing would be Keeton as a powerful and innovative planner and organiser.
More than once he was sadly mistaken and duly disappointed with the human material at hand; nonetheless, he succeeded in transforming an almost dormant pre-1939 Law School at University College, London, into a flourishing and internationally leading Law Faculty.
After his retirement, he similarly developed a Law Department in the technologically-orientated Brunel University.
He also helped to encourage, from 1938 onwards at University College, London, less than enthusiastically welcomed efforts to teach International Law and Relations on interdisciplinary levels.
Similarly, he used his connections with the promotion of adult education in the Workers' Educational Association (WEA) and the Extra-Mural Department of London University to establish a joint and full-time crash course for a Diploma in International Affairs in the London Institution of World Affairs, of which he was the president until his death.
The significance of this was to give a much-needed niche for future leaders of the Third World in the years after 1945 to prepare themselves for their daunting task.
Unpredictably it is Cambridge that may claim to have played a major part in his developments.
In admitting a highly promising but less than conformist Sheffield Grammar School boy to Gonville and Caius College, the university placed Keeton under the tutorship of one of the most astute and world-wise masters in the Law.
Arnold (later Lord) McNair recognised the potential of his pupil, but felt uneasy.
After graduating, Keeton felt that the available fellowship should fall to him.
McNair's response was uncompromising; that he should apply for, and prove himself in, a newly established Readership in Law and Politics at Hong Kong University.
Keeton spent three years there before returning to Cambridge, where he established himself as a private tutor to Law students, while he waited to be invited to fill a vacancy for a legal appointment in the Foreign Office.
Again, McNair's response was unequivocal.
He used his influence to favour a contemporary of Keeton's, of comparable mettle, but more predictable in terms of the expectations of a liberal-conservative establishment.
While McNair excluded Cambridge, he gave Keeton generous support elsewhere.
This turned out to be, first, Manchester's and, subsequently, London's gain.
Keeton's Case for an International University (1941) and unswerving interest in legal education and the future of the legal profession in England (University of Cincinatti Law Review, vol 25, 1956) deserve to be mentioned as facets of a wider concern.
This has been recognised for some time, perhaps most articulately in France, as one of the attainments to be expected from a top-class academic teacher and researcher, with an outstanding ability in accurate communication with the men (and women) in the street: haute popularisation.
Obituary: Norman Yardley
By DEREK HODGSON
NORMAN YARDLEY was an extraordinarily gifted games player who rose to become captain of Yorkshire and England, later becoming a regular BBC commentator and chairman of selectors.
He personified the pre-war amateur at his peak, a kindly engaging man who was well placed to have been a major influence in the game had he been of a more forceful character.
He captained St Peter's, York, at cricket, rugby and squash, won cricket (all four years) and hockey Blues at Cambridge and was six times the North of England squash champion.
His reputation as a right-hand batsman, a strong on-side player, and deceptive medium-pace bowler was such that he was early earmarked for advancement by both his county and country, being twelfth man twice for England in 1938, appearing as Hammond's vice-captain in the 1946-47 tour of Australia before succeeding to the England captaincy in 1947, then succeeding Brian Sellers as Yorkshire's captain the following year.
He was 32, at his peak as a cricketer, but life then brought him a series of disappointments.
For England he had to compete against Bradman and the mighty 1948 Australians while the West Indies, in 1950, stunned cricket by producing, from nowhere, two world-class spinners in Ramadhin and Valentine.
Yorkshire, too, despite having many talented players and one great one in Hutton, were unable to reclaim their pre-war supremacy and Yardley's best was to share the championship with Middlesex in 1949.
Yardley bore all these setbacks with great dignity, afflicted as he was from time to time by a form of lumbago that almost certainly hastened his retirement.
Wardle, Appleyard, Close, Lowson, Trueman and Illingworth entered cricket in Yardley's reign and all had great respect for his tactical ingenuity and his benevolent, Gower-style leadership although they were to be critical later.
Don Mosey, then with The Daily Mail, summed up Yardley's captaincy:(He) had been introduced to Yorkshire cricket in the mid-Thirties when the side, individually and collectively, would have died for the cause.
He had picked up the pieces after the war and it must have come as a total shock to someone with his background to find players in his side who rocked the boat.
JM Kilburn, a close observer as cricket correspondent of the Yorkshire Post, wrote: In his view the game should be played earnestly, sensibly and with unfailing goodwill.
He assumed the same outlook in those with whom he played.
If they fell below his standard he was disappointed, but not censorious.
Yardley's personal contribution was not small: he finished with 18,173 runs at an average of 31, scored 27 centuries, took 279 wickets and 320 catches, despite losing five summers to the war and being wounded, with the Green Howards, in the Western Desert.
He played in 20 Test matches and his post-war service to Yorkshire included three years as Club president, a position he vacated sadly when he found his calls for moderation went unheeded at the height of the Boycott controversy.
Yardley, a second- or third-change bowler throughout his career, was rightly proud to be one of the very few who could claim to have dismissed Bradman thrice in Test matches.
He was, wrote one of the hard-bitten professionals who served under him ‘too much of a gentleman’, which is not a common criticism nowadays.
Obituary: Ferdinand Marcos
By JAMES HAMILTON-PATERSON
IN THEIR respective obituary and report (29 September), Andrew Horvat and James Fenton produced a picture of the late President Marcos which was too simply one of a celebrated political monster who got his come-uppance, writes James Hamilton-Paterson.
The truth, as always, is more complex and uneasy.
It is unfashionable to point out that for most of his two decades in office Marcos enjoyed considerable grass-roots favour.
Whatever his increasingly evident misdeeds, he remains to many Filipinos a man of the people.
According to them, he was sassy, sharp, matalino; a fundamentally decent man undone by a scheming and treacherous woman.
It helped that they believed in his faked war record and legends such as that the religious leader Gregorio Aglipay inserted a slither of wood into Marcos's back before the Bataan campaign in 1942, allegedly giving him magic powers.
Other tyrants have astutely combined populism and magic: one thinks of Papa Doc and Idi Amin.
Nor is it fashionable to admit that even monsters have their uses.
In the village I have known for the last 10 years, they openly regret that things were better under Marcos.
They support Cory Aquino; but the barefoot health workers' small supply of free drugs has been curtailed by her administration.
Marcos had arranged the hand-out as a PR gesture he could easily afford, since he largely owned the pharmaceutical companies.
But, for all the wrong reasons, he did some good at barangay level.
Aquino's economic cutbacks, imposed on her for all the right reasons, have caused considerable suffering.
Unfortunately, countries deserve their rulers.
Marcos was thoroughly Filipino.
What his countrymen did not deserve was being prevented from ousting him after his second term of office.
What happened then, with the carefully engineered declaration of martial law in 1972, exposed the real power behind the dictator.
This was, of course, the United States.
Marcos was a prime beneficiary of Washington's egregious ‘hold-the-nose’ policy, the brand of realpolitik which, since the Second World War, has buoyed up so many of the world's most grotesque regimes.
The Americans wanted their Philippines bases; all that was needed was Marcos's ritual invoking of the Red Menace to make everything possible.
If there is shame in this story, it is less that the Marcoses finally stood revealed as nobodies and as thieves on the grandest scale, and far more in the wasted opportunities.
In 1965, Marcos had the Filipinos and the US State Department solidly behind him, while international aid agencies were beating a path to his door.
From that moment he could have transformed his country.
In the event, he beggared it.
Right from the first, the CIA and American diplomats knew all about the corruption, the misgovernment, the croneyism, the human rights violations, the ballot-rigging.
George Bush's infamous toast to Marcos ('We love your adherence to democratic principles') said it all.
If Marcos was cynical, he was no more so than the American foreign policy which kept him in power and in clover for 20 years.
Anniversaries
By JAMES HAMILTON-PATERSON
On this day: Captain Cook landed in New Zealand, 1769; the Polar Star and Boston Daily Advertiser newspaper was first issued, US 1796; the Rainhill trials of railway locomotives began, 1829; the Mormons in Utah renounced bigamy, 1890; Sir Henry Wood began Promenade Concerts at the Queen's Hall, London, 1895; Manchester University was opened, 1903; Austria annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina, 1908; 243 people died when the US freighter Ticonderoga was sunk by a German U-boat, 1918; the Jazz Singer, the first feature-length talking film, began showing in New York, 1927; Chiang Kai-shek became president of China, 1928; the first production of the musical show Nymph Errant was presented, London, 1933; the Berlin airlift ended, 1949.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 20
Wills
By JAMES HAMILTON-PATERSON
Mr William Henry Hunt, of Winestead, North Humberside, left estate valued at £101,443 net.
He left his entire estate (and the option to purchase a freehold property in Patrington) to the RNIB.