

Football: League facing chief failure
By JOE LOVEJOY
THE Football League's attempts to bring their 14-month search for a chief executive to an early conclusion by choosing between Gordon Taylor of the Professional Footballers' Association and Arthur Sandford, chief executive of Nottinghamshire county council, look destined to fail.
The League's management committee has decided to invite the two candidates it agreed upon on Monday for interview, but the head-hunting process which has caused so much vexation is threatening the ultimate embarrassment.
Both men are unhappy about the maladroit way the matter has been handled, and are in the mood to refuse to be interviewed.
Sandford, a lawyer before becoming the youngest chief executive in local government, was upset when his name was leaked to the press, and Taylor is incensed to find himself suddenly only a contender for a job to which he was appointed by the League's president, Bill Fox, in August.
‘I did not ask for the job — it was offered to me,’ Taylor said.
‘I am not willing to be interviewed only to be compared with the chief executive of some Midlands council.
In August I had a job, now I am on a shortlist.
Perhaps in another month or so I will find I am one among 50 runners for the job.’
Three First Division members of the management committee John Smith of Liverpool, Aston Villa's Doug Ellis and Robert Chase of Norwich City — are known to favour Sandford as a new broom from outside football.
The rest of the committee support Taylor, and are suspicious of the motives of the men they have dubbed ‘the gang of three’.
They believe an outsider, untouched by the game's traditions, would be more receptive to the blandishments of the Super Leaguers.
The management committee is also to beef up the criteria to be met by new members of the League.
The intention is to close the loophole which allowed Maidstone United to be admitted to the Fourth Division without a home of their own.
Their ground-sharing scheme with non-League Dartford would not be acceptable under the proposed changes.
Bill Fox and Michael Sinclair of York, who represent the associate members of the lower divisions on the management committee, are to meet officers of the GM Vauxhall Conference next Thursday to outline the League's new requirements.
Rugby League: Harmon is kept off list
By PAUL WILSON
(First Edition) WARRINGTON have turned down a transfer request from Neil Harmon, their 21-year-old prop forward.
Harmon asked for a move after losing his first-team place to Bob Jackson, an Australian in his second spell at Wilderspool, but Oldham and St Helens will be among teams disappointed to learn that Warrington do not intend to list him.
Eric Latham, the new chairman of St Helens, has promised money will be found to sign new players.
‘We have the nucleus of a good team, but money will be available to buy the right players,’ he said.
Latham, aged 57, succeeds Joe Pickavance, who stepped down from the Knowsley Road chair a week ago for health reasons.
Hull, who picked up their first win of the season against Leeds on Sunday, will take an unchanged side to unbeaten Warrington on Sunday, with the Australian Test forward, Noel Cleal, again appearing at centre.
Peter Williams, the Salford centre, has been told that the shoulder injury which has kept him out for much of this season will need at least another week to heal.
Tony Myler, the Widnes stand-off who was injured in the World Club Challenge against Canberra, is doubtful for Sunday's rather more prosaic fixture at Sheffield Eagles.
Dean Bell will captain his side, Wigan, against his country, New Zealand, on Sunday, knowing he is playing for a Test place.
Bell opted out of the tour, but declared himself available for internationals, and can expect extra attention on Sunday from the Kiwi centres.
‘I'm available for Test selection, but that doesn't mean I'll necessarily be picked,’ the former Kiwi World Cup captain said.
‘New Zealand will regard their match against Wigan as a ‘fourth Test’.
They are bound to put out their strongest side.’
Football: Edwards takes legal action against Knighton
By FRANK KANE and DEREK HODGSON
MICHAEL KNIGHTON'S faltering attempt to take over Manchester United looked in deep trouble last night after Martin Edwards, United's controlling shareholder, began legal procedings against 37-year-old Knighton for alleged breach of confidentiality.
Edwards agreed last month to sell his stake of 51 per cent of the company's shares to Knighton for £10m, but that deal would be scuppered if a court rules in favour of Edwards.
His lawyers yesterday applied to the Manchester High Court for an injunction to halt the use of confidential information.
The hearing has been adjourned until next week.
Edwards declined to comment after a lengthy board meeting at Old Trafford, but it is believed the information in question related to players' contracts and salaries, as well as other financial information about the club.
Last night, United announced that Edwards was taking leading counsels' advice as to the validity of his agreement with Knighton.
Knighton has been in contact with several businessmen from the Manchester area in attempts to get wider backing for his £20m bid, which has hit financial snags.
One of them, Eddy Shah, the former national newspaper owner, said he was no longer interested in a deal with Knighton, but another, Owen Oyston, a local radio-station owner and property entrepreneur, applied to the Football League for permission to obtain a financial interest in United.
That could mean another football club gets involved in the United wheeler-dealing.
Oyston is also chairman and owner of Blackpool Football Club, and is seeking the permission of the League to waive their rule that no one may hold more than 10 per cent of a club if he has a financial interest in another.
He said: ‘I have been involved in detailed talks with Michael Knighton for several days.
I have made it absolutely clear from the outset that I would not in any circumstances give up my family's present interest in Blackpool FC.
He fully understood my commitment, our discussions have taken place with that clearly understood.
‘I have also discussed the situation with the Football League and put the full facts to them and they have given me clear advice.
‘I have spoken to Mr Knighton this morning and we are discussing a formula which will enable me to give financial support to Manchester United.’
Friends of Oyston believe this would involve the transfer of his controlling stake in Blackpool to his wife Vicky.
Knighton is publicly sticking to the line that his offer will proceed, and that a package is being put together, but he admitted yesterday: ‘Time is getting short.’
Close friends said last night that he was worried about the apparent legal bust-up with Edwards.
Knighton was consulting his lawyers in Scotland.
The in-fighting on the United board has reached an intense pitch, with several incumbent directors jockeying for position as the Knighton deal looks increasingly likely to fail.
Amer Midani, the Lebanese-born businessman and United director who has a 15 per cent stake, seems to be in the strongest position to take over if Knighton's bid falls through.
In Manchester, there was open speculation that Bobby Charlton, probably the most famous player in United's history and also a director, was being lined up to take over the chairmanship after a Midani bid.
Midani has the support of another director, Nigel Burrows, who has been outspoken in his criticism of Knighton and the chaos at the club.
The Manchester Evening News published details of a document claimed to be the financial presentation made on behalf of Knighton to secure a loan from the Bank of Scotland.
It shows Knighton's worth as between £3.2m and £12.4m, with the main asset the St David's Preparatory School in Huddersfield, with a value of £2m to £5m.
There is also an art collection, currently being valued by art auctioneers Christie's, with a reported value of between £450,000 and £1.5m.
In Edinburgh, sources in the financial community said the reason Knighton is having trouble raising the cash for a bid is that the assets are ‘Illiquid’ -they could not be easily sold for cash.
‘It would take months to sell off all that lot, especially the way the market is now,’ a merchant banker said.
The offer of a loan of £20m to complete the United deal was also conditional on Knighton submitting a full statement of his assets and liabilities and full audited accounts from his companies.
His friends have also suggested that he would be willing to sell on a stake in MK Trafford Holdings, the Isle of Man-based company through which the bid is being made, in order to raise cash for the deal.
In London, the City Panel of Takeovers and Mergers said it was following the situation.
While the possibility of a court injunction did not in itself upset the takeover schedule, the panel would still expect a formal takeover document.
Football: Ajax thrown out of Europe
By PATRICK BARCLAY, Football Correspondent
AJAX have joined all English clubs in exile from European competition.
The Dutch club, who won the Champions' Cup three times in the early Seventies, were banned yesterday for at least two years as a result of crowd trouble that caused the abandonment of their UEFA Cup match against Austria Vienna in Amsterdam nine days ago.
The second leg was in extra time when the Austrians took a 2-1 lead on aggregate.
Within minutes, the Austrian goalkeeper, Franz Wohlfahrt, was being pelted with missiles, including 5ft iron bars torn from the perimeter fence, one of which appeared to hit him on the back.
The Swiss referee, Bruno Galler, had little choice but to call the teams off.
Five people were later arrested.
A UEFA disciplinary commission met yesterday to consider reports from Galler and the official match observer.
It was decided that Ajax should forfeit the tie and thereafter be excluded from European competition for the next two seasons for which they qualify.
The club's chairman, Michael Van Praag, who was not invited into the hearing, said that Ajax would accept the forfeit but appeal against the ban in Geneva next Friday.
He said: ‘We have very good arguments to prove that we cannot be held responsible for the actions of a few people who did not know what they were doing.
Security was more than 100 per cent.
There was a body check of every spectator.’
All of that may be so.
But once the principle is established that clubs, however innocent, can be punished to protect the public or players, it is no longer a matter of pure justice.
UEFA is unlikely to reduce a punishment apparently designed to make the Dutch authorities, civil as well as sporting, take hooliganism as seriously as the British have been obliged to.
Of course the Amsterdam incident was less grave than the Heysel disaster, which cost 39 lives and caused all English clubs to be suspended indefinitely.
But, as Galler said, the iron bars were ‘life-threatening’.
Hooliganism involving Dutch supporters has become so frequent as to suggest that another blanket ban of a nation's clubs might be necessary.
This is the first time UEFA has banned a Dutch club, but two years ago the national team were ordered to replay a European Championship qualifying match behind closed doors after Cyprus's goalkeeper had been struck by a firework.
Only last month the FA took Government advice to withdraw England from a planned friendly in Rotterdam in December.
Meanwhile riots continue to scar the Dutch League; one match was abandoned recently in Rotterdam.
The Ajax case emphasises the danger to players, especially goalkeepers.
Two years ago there was a similar, arguably worse, incident in Madrid when Real supporters threw sharp metal rods from behind a goal at the Bernabeu, narrowly missing Bayern Munich's keeper, Jean-Marie Pfaff.
He could have been killed.
Real's punishment was to play subsequent matches behind closed doors.
Perhaps the Austria Vienna spokesman, Peter Mueller, had this in mind when he said yesterday: ‘Compared with previous UEFA decisions in similar cases, Ajax's punishment is very harsh.’
It opens the possibility, if there are repetitions, of the further denuding of European competition; five former champions of the continent — Liverpool, Aston Villa, Nottingham Forest, Manchester United and Ajax — are now banned.
But who can blame UEFA, post-Heysel, for coming down on the side of life and limb before either is lost?
Ice Skating: Suzanne Otterson at the Skate Electric UK International at Richmond
By PATRICK BARCLAY, Football Correspondent
Suzanne Otterson, 15, shows her free style at the Skate Electric UK International at Richmond last night.
Otterson finished seventh behind the American Tonia Kwiatkowski 
Football: Barnes on hold
By HENRY WINTER
JOHN BARNES, the England winger struggling with a hamstring injury, stayed in Liverpool yesterday as Bobby Robson's squad met up in Buckinghamshire to fine-tune their final plans for next Wednesday's World Cup qualifying game in Poland.
Robson, who will contact Kenny Dalglish today for an update on Barnes, said: ‘Kenny has phoned me a couple of times and has told me that Barnes has done some training this week.
Kenny is non-committal, but I'm quite hopeful.’
Barnes is not the only worry for Robson.
Barnes's club-mate Steve McMahon has a problem with his ankle and the forceful midfielder joined the Tottenham pair of Gary Lineker (knee) and Paul Gascoigne (calf) in the trip to Fred Street's physio bench yesterday.
Like Robson, Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, has injury concerns, principally over his gifted midfielder, Paul McStay, who is troubled by groin and hamstring strains.
One Scotsman looking forward to Rome is David Will, who will take over from Harry Cavan as vice-president of FIFA when the Irishman retires during the World Cup next June.
Two strikers left Northampton Town yesterday, Tony Adcock joining Bradford City for £190,000 and Paul Culpin moving to Peterborough United for £40,000.
Brendan Ormsby's transfer from Leeds United to Cardiff City was called off yesterday after the defender decided he did not want to play in the Third Division.
Motor Racing: Verdict on Mansell ‘too harsh’
By MAURICE HAMILTON
NIGEL MANSELL last night emerged the moral victor in his battle with the International Automobile Federation (FIA) even though an appeal court in Paris had not rescinded the decision to ban the Englishman from last Sunday's Spanish Grand Prix.
But the three-man tribunal of legal experts from France, Greece and The Netherlands did admit that the punishment had been too harsh and that there were mitigating circumstances.
A brief statement by the FIA said that there would be no decision until an appeal filed by Ferrari in a Portuguese civil court against a $50,000 fine — but not the ban — had been heard.
The FIA tribunal wished to consider the matter further and a final decision is not expected until the end of the month at the earliest.
In the meantime, the ban and the fine remain.
Mansell said last night that he was relieved.
‘At least there is justice,’ he said after flying back to his home on the Isle of Man.
‘Obviously, I don't want to say any more until we have the final verdict.’
Mansell was penalised for failing to stop during the Portuguese Grand Prix and he threatened to quit if FISA, the sport's governing body, did not remove the ban.
Now that the Spanish race has been and gone, it is a matter of clearing Mansell's name and it would seem that the evidence offered gave the court food for thought.
The Englishman arrived at the FIA headquarters in Place de la Concorde yesterday morning accompanied by his manager, Mike Francis, the Ferrari team manager, Cesare Fiorio, the team's lawyer, Henry Peter, and a representative of the Italian Automobile Federation, Fabrizio Serena.
Ferrari also brought along Giacomo Modugno, an Italian Olympic Committee medical commission member who, as an eye specialist, was prepared to give evidence about Mansell's difficulty in seeing the flag signal ordering him to stop.
Modugno said it would have been almost impossible for Mansell to see the flag while following closely behind the McLaren-Honda of Ayrton Senna.
Mansell was shown the black flag three times after being disqualified for reversing his Ferrari after overshooting his pit during a scheduled stop to change tyres.
He and Senna then collided, putting both drivers out of the race.
Ferrari argued that proper procedures had not been followed in Portugal and that Mansell had been unable to hear the instructions on his radio as he travelled at 170 mph past the pits.
When the latest decision became known last night, Peter said that it was encouraging for Mansell, the Ferrari lawyer pointing out that this was the first time that the FIA had not confirmed a decision.
‘I have the impression that, for the FIA, the penalty is too heavy for the supposed offence,’ Peter said.
If the tribunal upholds the appeal, then last Sunday's race, won by Senna, would be annulled.
That would automatically rule Senna out of the championship, even if he wins the final two races in Japan and Australia and the title would go to his team-mate, Alain Prost.
For that reason, the result of the appeal may not be made known until after the last race on 5 November.
And if it meant that Senna were to lose the championship, then the legal ramifications would be far-reaching.
Equestrianism: Turi has a Vital victory
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY at Wembley
JOE TURI defied a difficult draw — first to go in an eight-horse jump-off -to win yesterday evening's Modern Alarms Cup at The Horse of the Year Show on Country Classics Vital.
John Whitaker came closest to him, just 0.8 of a second behind on Next Milton, with David Broome a whisker behind on Queensway Lannegan.
‘I thought I'd be beaten,’ Turi said, ‘but I began to realise I'd chosen the right route by not cutting inside fences.
It meant that we could keep moving forward and keep our rhythm.’
The former Hungarian trick-rider, who has had some nostalgic moments watching members of his old troupe performing here this week, was also helped by the cautious approach of some of his opponents.
John Whitaker was anxious to qualify for tonight's Next International Masters and the Dutch rider, Jos Lansink, had an even more obvious reason for abandoning speed in favour of accuracy when jumping a slow clear round to be be fourth on Optiebeurs Felix.
Lansink is the only rider who has jumped double clear rounds in the first four contests designated for the Everest Challenge.
If he wins tomorrow's Grand Prix, he will be rewarded with a Jaguar car.
Only nine horses contested last night's Puissance but, though the big red wall at 6ft 11in was short of record height, it reached a sporting climax.
Both Tim Stockdale, on Supermarket, and Michael Whitaker, on Next Didi, cleared the wall at that height at the second attempt and chose to divide the honours.
Rugby League: Halifax draw satisfaction
By PAUL WILSON
Halifax............ 16 Bradford Northern.. 16 HALIFAX have maintained an impressive following since their relegation, so a full house for their Yorkshire Cup semi-final last night was no surprise.
An air of anticipation was less familiar, but Halifax exceeded all expectations by mounting a thrilling recovery, coming back from 16-4 down to earn a replay.
Had John Dorahy not rashly attempted a dropped goal on the first tackle in the closing stages, the Second Division side might have found themselves in the final.
With three of last season's Halifax dissidents representing Bradford, and the famously short-fused Brendan Hill facing his former club, a small corner of Calderdale was positively incandescent.
The opening quarter contained several meaty exchanges between the forwards which only the referee, Gerry Kershaw, appeared unaware of but tempers remained mercifully in check.
Les Holliday, with some intelligent distribution and accurate touch finding, established a measure of early control for the home side, who took the lead through Wilf George, after David Holmes had worked diligently to set up the chance.
Northern's larger, faster pack made ever greater inroads.
David Hobbs kicked a penalty after Kelvin Skerrett was illegally halted, then when Skerrett was held on the line, Karl Fairbank and Hobbs kept the ball alive for Steve McGowan to give the visitors a 6-4 interval lead.
Hill was substituted in the 55th minute, too late to prevent Halifax going further behind.
Holmes lost a scrum on his own 25, and before the defence could regroup Paul Medley, another player returning to Thrum Hall, stepped out of three tackles to score by the posts.
With Skerrett and his impressive front-row partner John Hamer now breaking almost unopposed, Bradford looked safe when Ian Wilkinson scored a third try.
But Anderson, consistently Halifax's best attacker, pulled one back for the home side 10 minutes from time, and two minutes later put Steve Smith joyously into the right corner, Dorahy equalising from the touchline.
WIGAN, the trophy holders, lost 19-18 to Oldham, of the Second Division, in the semi-finals of the Lancashire Cup.
Oldham won with a 35-yard goal from Gary Hyde with four minutes remaining.
Rugby Union: Sunday must be special
By ALAN WATKINS
THIS MONTH Rugby Special returns to our screens.
The programme should have been broadcast for most of last month as well.
Rugby supporters, who are as much licence-payers as are aficionados of ballroom dancing, have, I think, been short-changed.
Up to last year it would have been justifiable not to show rugby until October.
Apart from some of the traditional Anglo-Welsh fixtures, such as Harlequins v Llanelli at Twickenham (played this year at Stradey Park), the calendar contained little that was required watching.
Other hallowed encounters which I enjoyed, such as London Irish v Bedford, were for diversion merely.
This year things have changed.
Two league Saturdays have already come and gone.
For myself, middle-aged and of a generally conservative disposition, I regret these changes, in particular the depreciation of the Anglo-Welsh occasions: not only because there are fewer of them but also because the clubs now tend to field their second XVs.
Nevertheless, I recognise this as sentimentality.
The rugby season proper now begins in September.
The BBC cameras should have been there, with the high priest Chris Rea and his acolyte Nigel Starmer-Smith in attendance.
We should have been shown excerpts from Wasps v Leicester and Gloucester v Bath, not to mention Neath v Bath; though the niggly Harlequins v Wasps match would have put the indulgent enthusiasm even of Starmer-Smith under some strain.
In fact we will be shown extracts from Gloucester v Bath once the programme gets going: but that is not quite the same thing.
The explanation for the delayed start is that the Rugby Union and the BBC agreed not to make Rugby Special overlap with Sunday Grandstand.
But why, in that case, could not some rugby have been shown on the Grandstand programme?
One sub-explanation is that there were not enough cameras and technicians to go round; though, as I say, the Gloucester v Bath match was recorded.
Next season the RU and the BBC must serve the fans better.
Having said this, I go on to welcome the show.
Last season it improved by, I should say, 50 per cent.
There is still no clarity about what sort of programme it is meant to be: but, to begin with, this is no bad thing.
Two or three seasons ago it concentrated on excerpts (including at least two showings a season of the dreaded encounter between Hawick v Gala).
These were followed or interspersed by a windswept Starmer-Smith standing on the touchline, microphone in hand, sporting a selection from his extensive wardrobe of scarves and neckties, and promising delights which were sure to come next week but which had unaccountably failed to materialise this week.
Last season the programme diversified.
There was a surrealist episode involved a gnarled coach, an attractive young woman who was trying to be a hooker (rugby variety) and a small boy who wanted to be a scrum-half.
There is certainly room for a programme on coaching and basic skills, but Rugby Special is not it.
There is room on the programme for a short weekly or monthly item on the laws and their interpretation.
Referees should be used more often.
TV commentators often assert confidently that a try has been awarded after a tackle just short of the line because the player's ‘momentum’ took him over.
Yet this is nowhere mentioned in the laws.
What the programme should do now, however, is concentrate more on the politics of rugby: both the internal politics of the game itself (which are omnipresent) and the politics of the game in relation to the outside world.
This demands a studio on a Sunday rather than a rainy, muddy field on a Saturday.
It also demands interviewers, of the calibre not perhaps of Brian Walden or Sir Robin Day but, say, of the Dimbleby brothers.
Ian Robertson and Rea are both of them knowledgeable and accomplished enough to make their living in political and current affairs television, if they wanted to.
Instead they devote their talents to sport, especially rugby.
They ought to be examining and cross-examining Dudley Wood, Clive Rowlands, Rhys Williams and Terry Vaux.
Their abilities are being not exactly wasted, but certainly under-used.
One thing I regret: the jettisoning of the original signature tune.
It was silly but it was catchy, and children loved it, which is always the sign of a good tune.
Bring it back.
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Table Tennis
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Squash
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Shooting
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Rugby League
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Motor Cycling
By ALAN WATKINS
THE Auto Cycle Council of Australia has threatened legal action over plans to move the Australian Grand Prix from Phillip Island to Sydney.
The ACCA refuses to sanction the event at any other location, and Sydney, despite claiming rights to stage the race for the next four years, has yet to build a Grand Prix circuit.
Sport in Short: Judo
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Ice Skating
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Golf
By ALAN WATKINS
SWEDEN is to prevent entries to its two European Tour events from players who play on this winter's Sunshine Tour in South Africa.
Sport in Short: Football
By ALAN WATKINS
MARCO VAN BASTEN, in his first appearance since a cartilage operation last month, scored a first-half hat trick as AC Milan beat Pro Patria 6-0 in a friendly last night.
ZENITH DATA SYSTEMS CUP First-round draw: Northern section: Sheffield United v Wolverhampton Wanderers; Leeds United v Blackburn Rovers; Sunderland v Port Vale.
Southern section: Coventry City v Wimbledon; Oxford United v Luton Town.
Ties to be played week beginning 6 November.
Second-round draw: Northern section: Sheffield Wednesday v Sheffield United or Wolverhampton Wanderers; Stoke City v Bradford City; Hull City v Aston Villa; Newcastle United v Oldham Athletic; Barnsley v Leeds United or Blackburn Rovers; West Bromwich Albion v Derby County; Middlesbrough v Sunderland or Port Vale; Nottingham Forest v Manchester City.
Southern section: Swindon Town v Millwall; West Ham United v Plymouth Argyle; Ipswich Town v Watford; Crystal Palace v Oxford United or Luton Town; Portsmouth v Coventry City or Wimbledon; Norwich City v Brighton and Hove Albion; AFC Bournemouth v Chelsea; Charlton Athletic v Leicester City.
Ties to be played week beginning 29 November.
Sport in Short: Equestrianism
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Cycling
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Cricket
By ALAN WATKINS
PETER SUCH, the 25-year-old off-spinner, has been released by Leicestershire and may join Essex.
TREVOR HOHNS, the Queensland leg-spinner and member of Australia's Ashes-winning side this summer, is to retire.
Hohns, aged 35, made his state debut in 1972, and played in seven Test matches.
Sport in Short: Boxing
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Basketball
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Baseball
Sport Page 31
Sport in Short: Badminton
Sport Page 31
Boxing: Mason's apprenticeship in yearning and learning: Lawless looks to future after his quick-witted student passes test: Ken Jones reports on the dreams and doubts that follow another successful step by an amiable giant
By KEN JONES
FROM the moment that Gary Mason announced his amiable presence at a gymnasium in London's East End yesterday it was pleasingly evident that few fighters have been less inclined to flinch from the truth.
The truth as observed at the Royal Albert Hall on Wednesday is that it would be exceedingly foolish for admirers to think of Mason as better than a developing apprentice in a punishing trade.
This has sensibly not escaped the British heavyweight champion; so for all the understandable excitement felt when knocking out Tyrell Biggs in the seventh round, by far the most important of 32 consecutive victories he has achieved since turning professional in 1984, he was not reluctant to focus on the flaws.
‘I'm still learning this business,’ he said.
Mason occupied two spaces on a tier of seats normally reserved for visitors to his manager's gymnasium above the Royal Oak, a grimy Victorian watering hole in Canning Town.
He wore a luridly decorated black tracksuit and a broad smile.
‘Did anyone speak to Biggs after the fight?’ he asked.
The question centred on whatever impressions the American had gained from a discouraging experience, another failed attempt to resurrect a career that was seriously undermined by the beating he took from Mike Tyson two years ago.
Biggs is of the opinion that Mason would be unlikely to survive more than a couple of rounds against the world heavyweight champion and at this stage it would be unwise to even think of him as a genuine contender.
‘I would like Gary to have another fight this year (there is a Wembley date available) and we are looking at people in a similar class to Biggs,’ Terry Lawless said.
In time Lawless may be confronted by an obvious dilemma, the possibility that his two heavyweights, Mason and Frank Bruno, will be tempted into profitable confrontation, the suggestion being that they could come together some time next summer.
Lawless prefers to concentrate on further shaping Mason's career, encouraged by his quick-witted responses to tuition and the enthusiasm that has developed from greater recognition.
Mason weighed in at 17st 103 4 lb for Biggs, heavier by 10lb than ever before, and attributes this to a groin injury sustained when turning out in a charity football match.
‘I wasn't able to train properly,’ he said.
Certainly by the middle of Wednesday's contest Mason appeared once again to have a stamina problem and unlike Biggs, who was also suffering, he did not have the experience to conceal his distress.
‘Americans know so much more about that,’ Lawless added.
‘They don't show it when they are hurt or tired and Gary couldn't believe how little Biggs had got left.’
If this explained Mason's reluctance to pressure Biggs in the middle rounds, thereby allowing the American to pepper him with jabs, it cannot obscure the possibility that the British heavyweight will always experience difficulty if required to take on a long contest.
But he withstood some solid blows and finally saw off Biggs with a right to the temple as the bell sounded to end the seventh round.
The memory of it revitalised a bonny smile but he was aware that there had been some anxiety in his corner.
Rugby Union: Lions run the new revolution: Steve Bale on the death of an inferiority complex
By STEVE BALE
WHATEVER the home unions committee may care to think, the team who performed with great distinction in Paris are Lions to a man — and if the powers-that-be will not grant them the honour with a large ‘L’ they can hardly begrudge it with a small one.
To the rebirth of British Isles forward play in Australia has now been added the regeneration of back play as well.
The Lions had squeezed in two light training sessions amounting to little more than two hours before beating France 29-27 on Wednesday night in a game as grand as its occasion.
Despite this minimal preparation, and regular changes of personnel over the past fortnight, they achieved a wholly implausible blend of skill, aggression and indomitable spirit.
As no rugby country has won at Parc des Princes since England did so in 1982 (remember Colin Smart and the after-shave?), this result was a revolution of sorts — which was fitting as the match and its prolonged preliminaries were designed to mark the bicentenary of the French Revolution.
‘It's a big psychological stepping stone,’ Ian McGeechan, the coach, said.
‘The players now need have no inferiority complex about playing here.’
Rob Andrew, his captain, added: ‘Not one player in that team had won in Paris, and now we know that France are vulnerable when you keep running at them.’
Gavin Hastings, whose 22 points included two tries, and Andrew, who scored the Lions' other points with a try and drop goal, were only the most obvious beneficiaries of this unlikely success.
Fluid running of a sort seldom seen Down Under was one pleasant surprise — but then every member of Wednesday's back division was on that tour.
More remarkable was the way a makeshift pack, with only one Lions Test player and three other tourists, shaped up.
That they had any cohesion at all was impressive and when they also succeeded in driving through the heart of the French forwards an improbable victory became at least possible.
None of the non-tourists looked out of place.
But it helped that the one Test forward was Paul Ackford who, still less than a year into his international career, is a phenomenon, consistently winning his own line-out ball, securing kick-offs and loose possession, and cover-tackling more in the manner of a flanker than a lock.
At 31 going on 32, he is a model of a modern tight forward.
Tight forwards have been Jacques Fouroux's obsession since France were shattered by New Zealand in the 1987 World Cup final.
With his emphasis on the scrum and close-quarter exchanges, the French coach wants even his loose forwards to be tight, and the new generation he introduced against the Lions looked inadequate.
This will probably mean the return of some of his old lags when Australia play Tests in Strasbourg and Lille next month.
This will not, however, guarantee beating the Wallabies, since few of Wednesday's more experienced players looked much better.
As ever, Serge Blanco was impossibly dynamic and Philippe Sella was an occasional threat.
But others wilted under the physical pressure: Laurent Rodriguez, ‘the Lion of Dax’, was one example, reduced to a harmless pussy cat by David Egerton and the rest.
For this and other achievements they deserved the recognition as Lions officially denied them — just as the whole Lions tour party had deserved to be invited to Paris.
There were something like 41 officials but only 21 players from the home unions at Parc des Princes.
If that suggests an odd set of priorities in what is still quaintly called a players' game, at least the 21 wore the familiar red jersey with the famous crest, white shorts and blue and green socks.
That makes them Lions as well as lions.
Rugby League: Canberra's capital gain
By PAUL WILSON
CANBERRA RAIDERS flew home via Honolulu last night with their pride dented but their bank balance improved by £60,000, the amount both they and Widnes cleared from the World Club Challenge match.
On financial grounds alone the event was a resounding success, and after two thrilling encounters in the last two years the public appetite here is established beyond doubt.
The future of the fixture depends on the commitment of the Australians, however, and after two consecutive defeats, the enthusiasm for the World Club Challenge Down Under is more difficult to gauge.
A sign which went up on the Raiders' dressing-room door after the match, advising that only Australian media personnel were welcome, bore witness to the visitors' touchiness about defeat, though at least they did not follow Manly's example and grumble about the referee.
Just as well, since they chose him.
Already there are suggestions from Australia that the Raiders' post-Grand Final party lasted all the way to Manchester, in other words that their preparation for the game was not as dedicated as it might have been.
This is almost certainly not the case and does Canberra a grave disservice, though it does illustrate one of the problems behind the fixture.
Wherever the game is played, and the possibility of alternate years in Manchester and Sydney will be discussed in the coming weeks, one team will always go into the match having just become champions, while the other will be at the start of their first defence.
Canberra arrived at Old Trafford at the end of a hard season, and their tiredness, inevitably compounded by travel fatigue, dictated their match plan.
‘We decided in advance to hit Widnes hard in the opening quarter to build up a platform,’ Tim Sheens, their coach, said.
‘We were all too aware that exhaustion would be a problem in the second half.’
Kevin Tamati has been appointed coach at Salford.
The former Warrington and New Zealand Test forward succeeds Kevin Ashcroft, who resigned two days ago.
He takes charge for the match against Leigh on Saturday when Tony Rampling, an Australian forward, will make his debut for the club, who have lost all five matches so far.
Rugby Union: WRU's strong lead
By ROBERT COLE
THE South African Rugby Board could lose one of its hitherto staunchest allies when the Welsh Rugby Union's 203 member clubs convene for tonight's special general meeting at the Port Talbot Civic Hall.
When they met under similar circumstances five years ago, to debate the same contentious issue, of whether or not to maintain playing links with South Africa, there was overwhelming support for the Springboks.
Then, as now, the vote was taken against a background of anti-apartheid pressure, especially from local councils, but without the intrigue which surrounded the recent centenary tour to the Republic.
Six Welsh officials and 10 players made the trip, many changing their mind at the last minute.
The post-tour inquest led to the WRU secretary, David East, and the president, Clive Rowlands, walking out of a general committee meeting.
East resigned, Rowlands returned, but not until the junior vice-president, Rhys Williams, had tendered his resignation.
Once the bickering and backbiting, which also led to Terry Vaux and Gwilym Treharne standing down from their posts as the Welsh representatives on the International Rugby Board, had died down, the general committee resolved to consult the clubs again over links with the Republic.
The main difference of tonight's meeting, compared to the one held in 1984, is that the Union lead is strong and definite.
The motion which has been put to the clubs, and backed by an emotive letter from the president, will be proposed by senior life member Ken Harris.
It reads: ‘For as long as any rugby player living in the Republic of South Africa is the victim of racial discrimination under the laws of that country neither the WRU, nor any of its member clubs, will become involved in any matches organised under the authority of the SARB.
Nor will the Union, nor any of its member clubs, permit teams under the jurisdiction of the SARB to play in Wales.’
Wang, the computer company, has stopped its sponsorship of the Leinster senior league competition in protest at the Irish RFU's links with the South African Rugby Board's centenary celebrations this summer.
Malachy Smith, managing director of Wang in Ireland and a former player, said: ‘We discontinued our South African operation more than than seven years ago and have no ties with that country.’
Jean Braendlin, the Toulon prop, was yesterday banned for a year by the French Rugby Federation for kicking a grounded opponent on Saturday.
Judo: Stewart in Belgrade campaign
By ROBERT COLE
(First Edition) THREE Olympic medal winners will head Britain's challenge for honours at the World Judo Championships in Belgrade from 10 to 15 October.
Dennis Stewart, the light-heavyweight bronze medallist in Seoul, leads the men's team, who also include the heavyweight silver medallist, Elvis Gordon, and the middleweight bronze medallist, Densign White.
Karen Briggs, a triple world champion before a broken leg interrupted her progress, also travels with the 14-strong team.
Sharon Rendle and Diane Bell, who struck gold in the demonstration judo event in South Korea, will defend their world titles.
The women also include the former world champion Ann Hughes, who is attempting to recapture the lightweight crown.
Baseball: Bay city strollers
By ROBERT COLE
THE CHANCES of a Bay Area World Series improved late on Wednesday night when the San Francisco Giants and Oakland Athletics notched up impressive play-off victories over the Chicago Cubs and Toronto Blue Jays.
Will Clark, the Giants first baseman who narrowly missed the 1989 batting championship with an average of .333, drove in six runs with two homers -one a grand slam — as San Francisco routed the Cubs 11-3 in the first game of the best-of-seven National League championship series at Wrigley Field.
Rickey Henderson's nerveless brilliance between the bases helped the Athletics beat the Blue Jays 6-3 in Oakland and earn a 2-0 lead in the American League play-off series.
Henderson, traded this season from the New York Yankees, stole a post-season record four bases (in one game) and scored two runs.
If the Californian clubs progress it would be the first World Series — which starts on 14 October — between the two cities facing each other across San Francisco Bay.
Screensport, the satellite television service, announced yesterday that it would be showing each of the World Series matches live.
Netball: Parkes hopeful
By LIZ ROUND
JESSLYN PARKES, the England goalkeeper, will be hoping to guide her new team, Middlesex, to a winning start when the new season of English county league matches opens tomorrow, writes Liz Round.
Parkes transferred from league champions Birmingham to newly promoted Middlesex during the summer, and she and former England captain Sue Keal should form a formidable partnership.
Middlesex, Second Division champions last year, take on Hertfordshire away from home.
Despite Parkes's defection, Birmingham are expected to win their opening match away to Hampshire North, who finished sixth in the league last year.
Essex Metropolitan versus Bedfordshire should be a very close match — Essex were runners-up to Birmingham last year and have a strong, experienced side.
Bedfordshire finished fifth last season but now boast a squad of talented young players, including the England vice-captain, Kendra Lowe, and Vicky Cox.
Surrey, who finished third last year, are expected to win their home match against Cheshire, the other promoted side.
Surrey are led by England's captain, Sheila Edwards, and also feature the England combination of Alison Keyte and Sandra Fairweather.
Viewers are victors in battle of the broadcasters: Michael Sheridan in Rome on sport's pre-eminent place on Italian screens
From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
THE deregulation of television in Italy has brought viewers more sport, more often than perhaps in any other European country but it has caused a tremendous row among the broadcasters and the political power groups who back their various causes.
The average Italian urban viewer, without satellite or cable, can receive up to 20 stations on his home set.
There are the three channels of the state network, RAI, funded by licence fee and advertising.
Then there are five major private networks, Canale 5, Capodistria, Rete 4, Italia 1 and Telemontecarlo.
Beyond these lies an archipelago of small regional or city broadcasters which range from dubious one-studio enterprises in the Sicilian hinterland to smartly presented local stations in the cities.
It all seems to offer a breathtaking array of choice yet in practice the schedules too often present the same glum menu of badly dubbed westerns, trivial game shows, long and justly forgotten Neapolitan comedies of the 1960s or windy discussion programmes.
But when it comes to sport, all bets are off.
Italians fully expect to watch skiing from Australia at 5 o'clock in the morning and would be surprised not to follow the Japanese Formula One Grand Prix live.
The range of sports programmes, live and packaged, is extraordinary, while the videotape market is booming.
No boxing match seems too trivial for live coverage, basketball and volleyball draw vast audiences, Formula One racing grips the nation and there is an inexhaustible appetite for football, to the extent that Saturday night English soccer is a major viewing habit.
Thus battle has been joined between RAI and the private channels for an audience which Italian advertisers regard as pre-eminently desirable.
According to Giulio Malgara, president of Auditel, which monitors viewing habits, ‘sport is the perfect medium for publicity.
It guarantees record viewing figures in Italy, more than films or variety shows.
Plus the fact that advertising at a sport event appears entirely natural’.
The result, of course, is that while RAI presents basketball or football with an advertising ratio not unlike British commercial television, the private networks are forever interrupting events to inform viewers that the penalty was brought to you by the Galbani Salami company or that Nigel Mansell's dash from pole position is nothing but a gift from the state oil conglomerate.
Although the sport and television market appears to be a free-for-all to delight the most Darwinist of entrepreneurs, a scrutiny of those top five private networks soon reveals that four of them are in the hands of a holding firm called Finvest, which is itself the broadcasting vehicle of the Socialist-leaning businessman Silvio Berlusconi.
For good measure, he also owns Milan football club.
Italians think of the state system much as Britons used to regard ‘Auntie’ and not for nothing is it known as ‘Mamma RAI’.
But Mamma, in television terms at least, is no longer a sacred institution.
Between Berlusconi and RAI it is now open warfare.
Italian league football matches are not televised live, although this does not prevent RAI radio and television from broadcasting a pyrotechnic package of live audio reports from the grounds on a Sunday.
(Next time you are on holiday in Italy, do not wonder why half the male population is out for its Sunday afternoon post-pasta stroll with a transistor clutched to one ear from which blares an urgent voice.
The Pope has not died.
It is merely the football programme.)
With no chance of live football league coverage the fight is on for European Cup matches and other internationals.
Finvest's men have been making the bidding against RAI harder and harder by the season and now they are fighting on a match-by-match basis.
RAI protests that this amounts to a colossal waste of money since it previously acquired Eurovision rights for nothing more than the duty of reciprocal access to material from Italy.
But the pickings could be huge: the audience for RAI's recorded Italian Sunday football in the United States and Canada may be as high as 50 million, while down in Latin America they hunger for footage of Maradona at almost any price.
Berlusconi, unabashed by his own creation of what amounts to a duopoly, bangs the drum of the free market against RAI, claiming that the licence payers' money is being squandered to break down unwanted competition.
The Director-General, Biagio Agnes (like all RAI executives a political party appointee), has angrily accused the Berlusconi camp of ‘dragging in even the authorities of the state and seizing every opportunity to attack the public broadcasting service with statements of such arrogance that they betray weakness and sheer lack of class despite (Berlusconi's) economic power and much-vaunted influential friendships’.
‘Empty words,’ barked back the entrepreneur.
‘I've denounced facts which are there for all to see in the RAI accounts, and the public prosecutors are looking into some of them.
We'll see who's in the right.’
While the outcome of the battle between public and private is far off, there is no doubt that during the phase of conflict the viewer is the winner.
According to Auditel's Malgara, everyone should be happy.
‘The battle between RAI and Finvest for the football?
It's great for everyone: the clubs, the sponsors and the spectators.
And as for ad spots during the games, they're there all right, but they're part of life, accepted, they don't annoy anyone.’
Football: ‘Jacki’ is proving to be a video nicety: Celtic's Polish import sounds the alarm bells for England as that crucial World Cup encounter in Chorzow beckons: David Livingstone reports on the Scottish liberation of a footballer who has enlivened the Parkhead terraces
By DAVID LIVINGSTONE
THERE are more glamorous places than Glasgow in which to be liberated, but Dariusz Dziekanowski has no complaints.
It is true that this outstanding product of Polish football might have chosen to celebrate his freedom in Italy or West Germany, but instead he left Legia Warsaw for Celtic.
In doing so, he achieved something of the economic uplift associated with a move to the West, with little of the attendant culture shock, a fact which Glasgow can take as a kick in the groin or a pat on the back.
That such a prolific goalscorer should choose a club renowned for their attacking play demonstrates the practical considerations which influenced his decision.
His development as a personality and player in his three months with Celtic were illustrated during last week's glorious exit from the European Cup Winners' Cup.
His four wonderful, but ultimately futile, goals against Partizan Belgrade must have had the World Cup alarm bells ringing in England.
‘Jacki’, as he is known affectionately in Scotland, will lead Poland's attack against England in Chorzow on Wednesday, and, having already given Terry Butcher an anxious time in the Old Firm match in August, he can approach next week's game without the pressure of having something to prove.
When ‘Jacki’ came to Glasgow, he grasped quickly what was expected.
He found himself in a city in turmoil, where traditional values had been overturned by Maurice Johnston's decision to dump Celtic for Rangers.
If being responsible for eradicating any sense of loss at Parkhead troubled ‘Jacki’, it did not show.
‘I never had any worries about him,’ Billy McNeill, the Celtic manager, said.
‘He's an intelligent lad with a nice personality.
The people around him have been very receptive, although I must confess to an anxious moment when he was first being introduced to the players.
The lads were having lunch at the time and when ‘Jacki’ leaned over to shake hands with Peter Grant, his tie fell into a bowl of soup.
‘Everyone started laughing and I was concerned that ‘Jacki’ might feel alienated but he immediately started laughing himself and I knew I'd signed a character who'd get on fine in Scotland.’
McNeill signed ‘Jacki’ for £650,000, largely on the strength of personal recommendation and video evidence, but it was hardly a shot in the dark.
At 27 years old, and having won 52 international caps, ‘Jacki’ had earned recognition around the world and, more importantly, the permission of the Polish authorities to move abroad.
His career started at 15 when he signed for, Polonia Warsaw.
A year later, he switched to Gwardia Warsaw where he made sufficient impact to attract the attention of Widzew Lodz.
Having lost their captain, Zbigniew Boniek, arguably the greatest of Polish footballers, to Juventus, Widzew saw Dziekanowski as a replacement and so, at 21, ‘Jacki’ was transferred in 1984 for 21m zlotys, a record between Polish clubs, amounting at that time to some £200,000.
He assumed the Boniek role with authority, a fact which perhaps explains his lack of concern at having eventually to replace Johnston.
At international level, his career also developed rapidly but, having been promoted heavily in advance of the 1986 World Cup, he was forced to face major disappointments.
‘Mexico was terrible for us,’ he said.
‘I prefer to forget about it completely, especially the defeat by England when Gary Lineker scored three goals.’
Having failed to shine in Mexico, ‘Jacki’ saw his plans evaporating.
His own form suffered at home, largely because of the poor standing of Widzew, and with Polish clubs finding success hard to come by in European competitions, the profile of individual players was dropping.
Salvation for Dziekanowski came with a transfer in 1987 to Legia Warsaw, a bigger club who, incidentally, enjoy sponsorship from the Polish Defence Department.
As a result, ‘Jacki’, who by this time was keen to move abroad, was delighted to hear in 1988 of serious interest from Pescara of Italy.
To his horror, Legia — obviously inspired by American television — decided to make him the $6m man, a fee which inevitably frightened off even the wealthy Italians.
‘The people who manage clubs in Poland are not very good businessmen,’ 'Jacki' said, with masterly understatement.
Eighteen months later, the player showed that this criticism could not be levelled against him.
The West German clubs, Eintracht Frankfurt and Bayer Leverkusen, both wanted him, but ‘Jacki’ had done his homework.
‘I discovered,’ he said, ‘that in Germany other Polish players were not always paid what their contracts stated and that is no good.
When I heard Celtic were interested, I decided Scotland would be much better for me.’
So far he has no regrets.
He lives, for the moment, in a city hotel, but with a three-year contract, he is planning to buy a house.
‘Perhaps in Bearsden or Newton Mearns,’ he said, struggling to pronounce the names of two expensive Glasgow suburbs and yet making a better job of it than BBC newsreaders.
In reciprocation, Glaswegians roll the name Dziekanowski off the end of their tongues with ease, happy to acknowledge his impact on the city and keen to extend the warmest of welcomes.
What happens to ‘Jacki’ at the end of his contract is unclear, but uncertainty has become an occupational hazard.
‘I don't know what I'll do eventually,’ he said.
‘I studied for five years at the Physical Education Academy, so I could go back to Poland and be a school teacher.
Maybe I could open clothes shops in Poland, who knows?
The problem in Poland is that life is very difficult for most people.
Ninety per cent are very poor and 10 per cent are very rich.’
Reminded that he would be going back as one of the 10 per cent, ‘Jacki’ let go one of the handsome smiles which have made him so popular, but he qualified that by underlining the discomfort he might feel in that situation.
With so many difficult decisions to be made, ‘Jacki’ is happier than most players to accept his manager's warning not to look further ahead than the next game.
That match, for ‘Jacki’, is, of course, against England, and he believes it is time for a reversal of recent results between the two countries.
Never one for extravagant predictions, however, ‘Jacki’ summed up Poland's chances in two words.
‘No bad,’ he said, with his new Glasgow twang.
No one should forget he said the same thing before Celtic played Partizan.
Football: Non-League Notebook: Kelly's eye for fist and chips
By ‘PARK AVENUE’
IT WAS once said of Peter Shilton, by a frustrated forward who had failed to beat him in a one-on-one situation, that ‘he just spreads his arms and fills up the whole bloody goal’.
Strikers in the Staffordshire Senior League are currently facing a weighty problem of similar proportions.
Sid Kelly, who minds the net for table-topping Eccleshall, is believed to tip the scales at around 20 stones.
The roly-poly goalie makes heads turn on away grounds when he runs out, and some of his diving stops have been measured on the Richter Scale, but his performances invariably win respect from opponents and spectators.
Eccleshall, from a scenic village north-west of the county town, are more accustomed to propping up the league than heading it.
Last Saturday, however, with Sid on-song between the sticks, they held Stafford Rangers' second string to a 0-0 draw and have yet to lose.
Kelly trains as hard as the rest of the squad at a sports centre in nearby Stone, but according to the team's joint manager, Ken Roberts, he has been known to polish off three Chinese take-aways afterwards.
‘We have now got him down,’ Roberts said triumphantly, ‘to 10 pints and a bucket of chips.’
For those who fancy an afternoon off the unbeaten track, Eccleshall visit Eastwood Hanley in the Potteries tomorrow.
Over in Nottinghamshire, Hucknall Town are marking their elevation to the Central Midlands League by producing a programme that would put many full-time clubs to shame.
Hucknall will not be at full strength, though, when they visit Pickering in Yorkshire in the FA Vase tomorrow — and closer scrutiny of their Talk of the Town explains why.
‘Mail from the Notts FA disciplinary gurus is blocking the letter-box at the moment,’ an over-candid editorial says.
‘Gary Shepherd, dismissed after only two minutes of our opening game at Stanton, has been suspended for 21 days…
Phil Towle (sic), early-bather against Boston FC, was also set to get 21 days…
Ian Hannah is likely to receive a much heavier punishment after his fifth sending-off in three years at Bradford.’
In the edition for the visit of Grimsby Borough, Towle is the featured player in what one fanzine has dubbed the ‘Dire Straits and lager guide’.
In it, the Hucknall left-back reveals himself to be a chip off the Sid Kelly block: ‘favourite food — 32oz steak-with-everything’.
Further food for thought: Cohen Griffith, the winger Kettering signed for £3,000 from Leicester United last season, has joined Cardiff for 20 times that amount; the GM Vauxhall Conference leaders Darlington will defend a 10-match unbeaten start, the best in the competition's 10 years, tomorrow at Enfield; and Dunstable have withdrawn from the FA Cup following the 38th-minute abandonment of the tie with Staines when what was left of their team walked off after the dismissal of three colleagues.
And they call Staines ‘unsightly’…
Ice Hockey: Devils in baptism of fire
By STEVE PINDER
WITH the season's curtain-raiser, the Norwich Union Cup, now only of interest to three teams (Cardiff Devils and Durham Wasps meet to decide who faces Murrayfield Racers in December's final), attention switches to the Heineken Premier and First Divisions which start tomorrow.
Devils, new to the Premier Division, look capable of beating anyone.
In their imports, Steve Moria and Doug McEwan, they have two of the country's finest forwards, and they also have Stephen and Ian Cooper on their books and have signed Chris Newton from Peterborough to back up Jeff Smith in goal.
The Devils face a baptism of fire in the Premier Division, with games at Ayr and Murrayfield.
Rocky Saganiuk, the Ayr coach, took his team to the Heineken Championship at Wembley in April, but they won only three of their six Norwich Union Cup games.
Racers, once the top team in Britain, will want a flying start to the season to reassert themselves.
They have three new imports, with Martin McKay to back up their veteran minder, Moray Hanson and Chris Kelland icing as a re-classified import.
The other Premier team in the reckoning are Solihull Barons, whose new import, Tim Krug, has strengthened a previously suspect defence, while Jere Gillis and Jeff Larmer form a formidable duo up front.
They too travel to Scotland, playing Fife Flyers who have had their worst start for years.
And watch Humberside, fresh to the First Division, who scored 134 goals in their eight Autumn Trophy games.
Tennis: Lendl is left in the clear by Becker's withdrawal
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
BORIS BECKER disappointed his West German supporters for the second consecutive year when a knee injury forced him to withdraw from the Stuttgart Classic here yesterday.
The Wimbledon and United States Open champion, who will also miss next week's grand prix tournament in Sydney and is unlikely to be fit for Tokyo the following week, has now lost any chance of overhauling Ivan Lendl as world No. 1 before the end of the year.
At least on this occasion, Becker had played his way through to the semi-finals of the eight-man exhibition event, organised by his manager, Ion Tiriac, before pulling out.
Last November he arrived on crutches on the opening day with his left foot in plaster, having chipped an ankle bone.
‘Probably I started too early after Flushing Meadow,’ Becker said yesterday, before visiting his doctor in Munich.
Tiriac reacted with typical eloquence: ‘It's my tournament.
In one chair I'm the promoter, in another chair I'm Boris's manager and in another chair I'm his friend.
From any of these positions I would be crazy to make him play with the left knee inflamed the way it is.’
Alberto Mancini, of Argentina, takes his place against Lendl in the semi-finals, which also features Miloslav Mecir against the local Carl-Uwe Steeb.
Last night Lendl had little difficulty in defeating John McEnroe 6-4, 6-4 at the conclusion of the round robin phase.
A degree of surprise was expressed when McEnroe showed up here after a knee injury had forced his withdrawal from last month's grand prix event in San Francisco.
‘It's tendinitis, basically; nothing real serious, it just hurts,’ he reassured us.
McEnroe's autumn slog through Europe, which will include a trip to Wembley for next month's Silk Cut Championships, is designed for one purpose: ‘I'm trying to get myself prepared for the Masters, hopefully to do well.
It would have extra meaning for me, being the last one in New York.’
Ah, yes.
While Europe in general, and West Germany in particular , rejoice at the removal of the grand prix finals from Madison Square Garden to Frankfurt's Festhalle next year under the banner of the Association of Tennis Professionals, others are already rummaging through fond memories.
In McEnroe's case, the Garden was the scene of his last triumph of major significance.
He ended 1984, acknowledged as his greatest year, as the world No. 1.
In January 1985, before he was supplanted at the top by Lendl, the New Yorker defeated the stern Czechoslovak in straight sets in the Masters final.
At 30, McEnroe is beginning to incline towards nostalgia, even though he leaves himself with little time to indulge in the luxury.
When he leaves here, he faces four tournaments — Antwerp, Toulouse, Paris and Wembley — in five weeks to tune up for the Masters on 27 November.
Tennis: Evert waives her goodbye
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
IF ONE was to pose the question, when is a retirement not a retirement, Chris Evert might have the answer.
Last month, the 34-year-old American waved a fond farewell to the big-time, at the US Open, in New York.
Yesterday, in Tokyo, she indicated that she may be around for a little while longer than expected.
Evert is not feeling comfortable with what she describes as the ‘finality’ of the decision, although she does agree with it in principle.
So, to that end, she intends to keep the door ajar.
‘What I said last month was that the US Open was my final Grand Slam tournament.
But if I want to play the odd tournament here and there, I will.
I am still playing well and still enjoying it, so why not?’ she said.
Evert added: ‘I'm not going to say that I stake my life on the fact that I'm never going to play another tournament.
But I would be surprised if I did after this year, although, at this stage, I am still playing well enough and I am enjoying it enough so that if I want to play another tournament, I can.’
Evert also revealed that she has added a week of exhibition matches against Martina Navratilova to her schedule, which will be played in Asia, in April.
Although Evert had the day off from the Federation Cup yesterday, her presence was still felt, particularly by the Australian team, who surprisingly defeated Bulgaria 2-1.
Prior to the match, Evert had told the Australian captain, Wendy Turnbull, to tell her No. 1 player, Anne Minter, ‘that if she can beat me as she did in Toronto (in August), then she can beat Manuela Maleeva’.
Evert's prediction was spot-on as Minter grabbed a thrilling 6-3, 2-6, 6-4 victory that saved Australia's bacon after Liz Smylie had lost the opening singles rubber 6-2, 6-1 to Katerina Maleeva.
Those two results left the outcome of the quarter-final tie hinging on the doubles, in which Smylie was joined by Janine Thompson against Team Maleeva.
Not suprisingly, it was a nerve-racking finale but eventually the more experienced Australians triumphed 5-7, 6-4, 6-0, to carry their country into the semi-finals for the first time in four years.
Their opponents tomorrow will be Spain, the second seeds, who overwhelmed the Soviet Union in the two singles matches to reach the last four.
Hockey: England aim for action replay
By BILL COLWILL
THREE years ago to the day, England last did battle with Argentina at Willesden in their second game in the World Cup.
The result was a 2-1 win for England, who went on to take the silver medal, losing in an exciting final to Australia.
Argentina finished in sixth place.
Today at Kenilworth Road, Luton, Argentina will again provide the opposition for England in the Four Nations Lada Classic.
Australia and The Netherlands complete the programme.
Although the Argentinians are noted for their defensive play, they have several attractive players, with the experienced Alejandro Siri likely to be the key performer.
But watch out for the one-handed play of the gifted Gabriel Minadeo and the goalkeeping feats of the high-kicking Emanuel Roggero.
The South Americans have come from a five-nation tournament in Hamburg, where they beat Spain 2-1 and lost to Australia 3-2.
Tomorrow, England play the Dutch and on Sunday, Australia.
England's women play the Soviet Union tomorrow and again on Sunday.
They have been forced to make two late changes.
Jill Atkin and Gill Brown have withdrawn, with Sutton Coldfield's Mandy Pickles and Slough's Sue Chandler coming in as replacements.
Their captain Sandy Lister, who was a doubtful starter at the beginning of the week, has recovered from a bout of tonsillitis and will play.
Squash: Call for fairer sex to play fair
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
JAHANGIR KHAN and Mark Maclean both criticised women officials after their quarter-final in the World Open Championships here yesterday in which the world champion from Pakistan beat the Scottish No. 1 15-11, 15-11, 15-12.
Maclean was docked a penalty point for dissent in the second game by the Australian referee, Chris Sinclair, the only woman officiating at this level of the men's game.
Afterwards, Maclean said: ‘I have a nightmare every time I see a woman up there in the chair.
‘There was one decision that showed a total lack of understanding of the game.
And she didn't give me a chance to explain my case at all.’
Jahangir agreed with Maclean.
‘I don't think women should be refereeing men's matches,’ he said.
‘They don't realise the speed of the men players or what they can do with the ball.
And all I can do when there is a woman referee is to accept her.
Men can still realise what women do, but it is difficult for women to understand how the men play.’
Jahangir's coach, Rahmat Khan, explained: ‘Pakistani players find it very difficult to tell a woman off.
They have too much respect for them.’
Sinclair, prevented by tournament rules from speaking to the press, was defended by the tournament referee, Christopher Foo.
‘She is a qualified international referee and although the players are entitled to their opinions, I think they might say something different in the morning,’ Foo said.
A further defence came from Tony Swift, chairman of the International Federation rules committee: ‘We don't think of it as a woman up there — as far as we are concerned it is a person,’ he said.
Racing: Cordoba founders on Cove
By JOHN KARTER in Newmarket
THE GREAT Cordoba bubble burst with the impact of an exploding bomb as Sheikh Mohammed's heavily hyped colt trailed in third behind the 20-1 outsider, Balla Cove, in yesterday's Middle Park Stakes at Newmarket.
By contrast, another tall reputation had looked fully justified at the start of the afternoon when Nashwan's half-brother Mukddaam, survived a stewards' inquiry after beating 18 rivals convincingly on his racecourse debut to become favourite for the Derby at 16-1 with William Hill.
Before the Middle Park, bookmakers had taken fortunes on Cordoba for next year's 2,000 Guineas.
Hills cut him from 10-1 to 6-1, prompting their representative, Don Payne, to comment: ‘You expect big market moves before races like this, but I've never seen anything on this scale.’
Asked how much his firm had laid Cordoba to lose, Payne replied tellingly ‘enough’.
Cordoba had clearly cried enough a good two furlongs from the finish as first Batzushka and then Balla Cove set a furious pace which resulted in a time that equalled the course record by a two-year-old over six furlongs.
Just when we expected to see Cordoba produce an extra gear as Walter Swinburn got to work with the whip, the son of El Gran Senor capitulated and it was Balla Cove who produced extra reserves to hold the late thrust of Rock City.
Ron Boss, Balla Cove's trainer, was saddling his second successive winner of the race, having sent out Mon Tresor last year.
However, Boss's joy was tempered by the fact that Balla Cove was sold to two Americans earlier this week and is to be sent to the United States to be trained by Ron MacAnally, who prepared the great John Henry.
The French colt, Machiavellian, now heads the market for the 2,000 Guineas at between 7-1 and 10-1, with Be My Chief, who has twice beaten Balla Cove, disputing second favouritism with Mukddaam at around 12-1.
Mukddaam marginally interfered with the favourite, Mazag, but drew away to win in the style of a horse with a big future.
Dick Hern would not be drawn into comparisons with Nashwan at the same stage of his career, but on yesterday's evidence Hamdan Al Maktoum could well have a natural successor to his great champion.
‘I'm relieved to have got a run into Mukddaam,’ Hern said.
‘But I'll have to see how he comes out of the race before deciding if he'll race again this season.’
Steve Cauthen, who rode Balla Cove, had earlier taken the other feature race on the card, the Godolphin Stakes, on Spritsail — a victory that should have been the subject of a stewards' inquiry.
Spritsail had started odds-on for a race at Ascot a week ago, but trailed in a well-beaten last of four behind Tralos.
Yesterday he was favourite again at 2-1 and won impressively.
The only reason that Henry Cecil, Spritsail's trainer, could give for that poor Ascot run was that the ground there was loose, but the official going was good to firm at Ascot, the same as yesterday's.
The stewards should at least have inquired into Spritsail's dramatic resurgence as a public-relations exercise.
Lord Howard de Walden, a former Senior Steward of the Jockey Club, whose wife owns Spritsail, joked afterwards: ‘The price was wrong at Ascot.’
It is a fair bet that a good many punters were not amused.
Racing: Nisky to pass revision test
By JOHN KARTER
THE MISSING link reappears at Goodwood this afternoon in the shape of Ile De Nisky (2.45), the horse who represents the prime piece of evidence in the argument over the comparative merits of Nashwan and Old Vic, writes John Karter.
The fact that the English and Irish Derby winners will never meet on the track does not stop the followers of the dynamic duo hammering home their cases.
And if the form book is to be believed, Nashwan is clearly No. 1 because Ile De Nisky finished seven and a half lengths behind him at Epsom, but got a length nearer to Old Vic at The Curragh.
What that also shows is that Ile De Nisky is a very useful performer in his own right and he should take today's Foundation Stakes in his stride before having another crack at Nashwan in Newmarket's Champion Stakes later this month.
Originally, Geoff Huffer, Ile De Nisky's trainer, felt his colt was immature and was going to give him just one more run before putting him away for an ambitious campaign next year.
However, after a discussion with Pat Eddery, it was felt that Ile De Nisky had not truly stayed the mile and a half, hence the revised programme.
Ile De Nisky should win, but neither Monastery nor Muhbubh will be pushovers.
Markofdistinction (3.50), who got even closer to Nashwan when fourth in the 2,000 Guineas, was beaten at Doncaster by what is probably an outstanding horse in Nashwan's stable companion Gold Seam and should find compensation in the Supreme Stakes.
Harry Thomson Jones, the trainer of Muhbubh, has struck a gold seam himself, saddling eight winners from 19 runners in the past fortnight.
He could surprise a few better-fancied candidates in Newmarket's Somerville Tattersall Stakes with ABS (nap 3.10), who was an impressive winner at Leicester.
Message Pad and Qui Danzig have the better form, but as a son of the supremely successful Nureyev, Abs may have more scope for improvement.
Clive Brittain, who is quietly confident of a major showing from Top Class in Sunday's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, should also maintain an excellent recent run by completing a double with Sloe Berry (2.05), who was inched out at Ascot last week, and Charmer (2.35), who looks better class than the opposition.
Finally, Superoo (next best 4.10), who was controversially withdrawn before the start at Ascot on Saturday, should find swift compensation.
Racing: Phoenix rising to challenge: Mark Popham on the excess of riches on offer to racegoers this weekend
By MARK POPHAM
IT USED to be an easy decision, and still is for many racing fans — the first weekend in October is the time to visit Paris.
Such is the pulling power of Europe's richest race, the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, that up to 10,000 Britons will make the journey this weekend, making a considerable impact in a total crowd of 35,000.
Until last year, Longchamp was the only place to be, but now Phoenix Park in Dublin, where the Cartier Million will be staged for the second time tomorrow, provides a tempting alternative.
The Million, with IR £1m in prize money, is the world's richest two-year-old race and challenges the Arc for offering the biggest prize in Europe.
Amazingly, the Million, which is restricted to the 250 yearlings sold at the Goffs Million sale the year before, will continue to clash with the Arc weekend because the sales it is tied to take place the week after.
So the prospect of a proper European Festival that would cover last Saturday's British Festival of Racing at Ascot and this weekend's races in France, Ireland and Newmarket, and which could rival America's Breeders' Cup day which has $10m in prize money, is likely to remain a dream even after 1992.
French racecourses, without bookmakers and with an undemonstrative crowd that tend to think of horses in terms of their number on the Pari-Mutuel rather than their name, can seem strange places to Britons.
Phoenix Park, at the top end of the biggest park in any European city, is altogether more atmospheric, with Tudor-style buildings, bookmakers who are just as happy to take and pay out in sterling as in punts, and bands and clowns to provide extra entertainment.
Racing and Ireland go together — it is said there are as many horses as people (three and a half million)— and racecourse crowds are extremely knowledgeable about the sport.
In an effort to create more atmosphere at Longchamp, Horse Racing Abroad, the chief transporter of Britons to French tracks, has its own grandstands, bars (stocking drinks the British are used to), restaurants and betting facilities at the course to make its clients feel at home.
And with the Arc such an established part of the racing scene, Paris will be bursting with Britons this weekend, with just a few hundred going on a punting pilgrimage to Dublin.