

Business and City Summary
By HUGO BARNACLE
Chevron surge: BP declined to comment on speculation it is buying Chevron shares, which analysts said were continuing a recent surge following rumours the oil company may restructure.
They said speculation focused on BP because it has expressed interest in refining and marketing in the western US.
Dollar firm: The dollar ended the week on a firm note.
Sterling closed little changed in moderate trading.
This page Business failures: Business failures soared by more than a third in the second half of this year.
This page and View from City Road, Page 21 Smith sale: WH Smith has sold its 86.5 per cent stake in WH Smith Canada for C$54m (£28.3m) to concentrate on expansion in the US.
Page 21 Eagle changes: Three directors of Eagle Trust have resigned and three more been appointed.
Page 21 Sea Containers deadline: Temple Holdings, the joint vehicle of Tiphook and Stena Holding, is extending the deadline for its $63 a share cash offer for Sea Containers until midnight New York City time on 3 November.
Improved ratings: Scottish Television reported pre-tax profits up 29 per cent to £3m.
The figures were better than expected.
Page 21 Latin debt: Venezuela has paid more than $900m in overdue interest on its public sector debt owed to commercial banks, according to Chase Manhattan.
The payment brings the country up to date on four months of overdue interest on the debt.
Jaguar talks: Jaguar and General Motors were thrashing out a deal to protect the luxury car maker from rival US motor giant Ford.
GM is expected to take a key stake in Jaguar in return for substantial investment.
The shares jumped 62p to 731p.
This page and View from City Road, Page 21 Dalgety stake: Como International, owned jointly by Elf Aquataine and Robert Holmes a Court, has reduced its holding below the 5 per cent level requiring disclosure.
Mortgage rate up: Business Mortgages Bank, part of Nykredit of Denmark, has increased its mortgage lending base rate by 1 point to 15.5 per cent from 5 October.
Higher credit: The Finance Houses Association has warned that instalment credit will cost more following the rise in base rates.
World Markets New York: Lower interest rate hopes helped the Dow Jones Average to reach new high ground.
By the close it was up 11.96 points at 2,785.52.
Tokyo: Investors catching European interest rate jitters drove the Nikkei average down 313.64 points to 35,209.35.
Hong Kong: Receding concern about the situation in China was reflected in the market's continuing strength, the Hang Seng index posting its fourth successive gain at 2,826.21, up 23.04.
Singapore: Shares closed firmer across the board in active trade, with the Straits Times index 8.17 points higher at 1,413.15.
Sydney: Directionless trading brought little change, the All Ordinaries index ending just 0.7 ahead at 1,773.2 — but 37.4 points better on the week.
Bombay: Heavy institutional buying signalled a rebound from the losses of the past three days.
Johannesburg: Pressure on gold shares due to a weaker bullion price sparked a broad market decline.
The general index fell 43 points to 2,668.
Zurich: The index rose 4.5 points to 1,194.3 on selective local and foreign buying.
Milan: Shares ended weaker but above their lows, with the MIB seven points off at 1,164.
Nicosia: The Cisco index closed at a new high of 185.6, a gain of 2.1 points on the week.
Jaguar and GM work on deal to thwart Ford
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
JAGUAR and General Motors were last night locked in crucial talks over a deal which would safeguard the luxury car maker from being taken over by the rival US motor giant Ford.
This would involve GM taking a key stake in Jaguar and making a substantial investment to help to ensure its independence.
GM, the world's largest car maker, is understood to be planning to take an initial 15 per cent shareholding in Jaguar, rising to 29.9 per cent immediately the Government's golden share in Jaguar expires in January 1991.
At the same time as building up the 15 per cent stake, GM would make a big cash injection into Jaguar — perhaps as much as £200m — to help the Coventry-based firm to fend off Ford, which has already announced it plans to take a 15 per cent holding as a prelude to a full takeover bid.
Jaguar's shares soared again on the stock market, closing 62p up at 731p — valuing the company at £1.323bn.
As an estimated 5.5 million Jaguar shares changed hands, Ford confirmed that it had been granted early approval by US regulatory authorities to begin building its stake, immediately prompting speculation that it had entered the market.
Under US anti-laws Ford was not due for clearance to buy more than $15m of Jaguar stock until 18 October.
The hike in Jaguar's share price since Ford announced its intentions will have a crucial bearing on whether it can put together a defensive deal with GM.
Since the beginning of this week Jaguar's shares have risen by 161p — increasing its stock market value by nearly £300m.
Last night's meeting, involving banking advisers for both GM and Jaguar, was to examine whether GM was prepared to bid at the inflated share price.
Reliable sources have confirmed that GM is ‘leading the pack’ of international car companies with which Jaguar is in discussions.
A deal is expected to be put together and announced within the next two weeks.
Two or three European car makers — possibly including Peugeot of France -are still understood to be discussing alternative rescue packages with Jaguar.
One option for GM would be for the American company to convert its cash investment into equity through an issue of new shares after the Government's veto on takeover expires.
Jaguar has the ability to issue up to 40 million new shares — more than enough to take GM's stake up to 29.9 per cent— though such a move would require the approval of Jaguar shareholders.
Jaguar, which was privatised in 1984 with a stock market value of £283m, is understood to have sounded ministers' views on the proposals being examined.
The Government has made it clear that it may not use its power of veto, which protects Jaguar from takeover until the end of next year by limiting individual investors to a 15 per cent holding.
However, it is thought unlikely that Jaguar would ask the Government for the limit to be raised early in order to allow its preferred partner to build a stake of more than 15 per cent before January, 1991.
It is felt that if the Government did lift the veto, it would be obliged to allow any company to bid for Jaguar.
Sterling fails to make progress
By PETER TORDAY and COLIN BROWN
STERLING failed to make further headway yesterday following Thursday's one point rise in base rates but the dollar strengthened despite expectations that US interest rates may soon ease.
The US currency appeared to shrug off the impact of Thursday's round of European interest rate increases led by the Bundesbank, and central bank intervention yesterday, chiefly because of expectations of strong demand for the dollar from the Far East.
Sterling was meanwhile little changed in moderate trading, but there was little sign that confidence in the currency had been fully restored.
In London, the pound gave up early gains to end unchanged at DM3.0335 and it closed at $1.6080, 0.22 cents weaker.
After opening firmer, the dollar lost ground on expectations of an imminent easing of monetary policy by the US Federal Reserve but strong demand pushed it 0.80 pfennigs higher at DM1.8925.
It was little changed at Y142.00.
London share prices closed slightly lower, recouping early losses which sent the FT-SE 100 Index of leading shares 31.7 points down on fears of recession.
By the close, the index was just 4.5 points down at 2,277.1.
The Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, insisted yesterday that the economy was unlikely to slip into recession because of higher base rates as long as UK companies controlled their costs.
Speaking to BBC Radio Mr Lawson said: ‘If they keep a firm grip on their costs and can maintain and indeed increase their share of world markets — both the British and overseas markets — there will certainly be no recession at all.’
Tory MPs said last night that the increase in interest rates would intensify the pressure on the Prime Minister to allow the Chancellor to go ahead with Britain's membership of the European Monetary System.
Sir Fred Catherwood, a senior Tory member of the European Parliament, said the Prime Minister's insistence that Britain should join when the time is right had become ‘a bit of a joke’.
He added: ‘It demonstrates we don't have any sovereignty over our money.
.. The Bundesbank puts up its rate by 1 per cent and the Chancellor is forced to put up his rate by 1 per cent straight ahead of the Tory Party conference.
He can't do anything else.
It's the last thing in the world he wants to do.
It's much better to join the European monetary union and do things through them.
It's worked for every other country.
It could work for us.’
The Bundesbank's monetary dominance in Europe was underscored yesterday in a speech by its president, Karl Otto Pohl.
He indicated that the central bank wanted to revalue the mark but the most important EMS countries ruled that out.
As a result, he said, ‘in all practical terms, they are behaving as though we already had a currency union, which is defined as a zone of fixed exchange rates and free movement of capital.’
The desire to hold their currencies unchanged against the mark led most West European countries to follow an increase in German rates on Thursday.
Mr Lawson denied he had acted as if sterling was a full member of the EMS, but his decision to hold the pound above DM3 with higher base rates was seen by several analysts as just that.
Concern continued yesterday that the Chancellor might not be able to guarantee that 15 per cent base rates were the peak if sterling came under pressure again.
Economists worry that even higher rates would make a prolonged recession much more likely than at present.
Commenting on the prospects, Jim O'Neill, international economist with Swiss Bank Corp, said: ‘They've got a stay of execution between now and the next set of trade figures.’
September figures are released on 24 October.
Meanwhile US figures indicated yesterday that the US economy may be weakening, lifting hopes of a Fed easing.
Excluding workers returning from a strike, the number of new jobs grew by 134,000 in September, well below expectations, while job growth in August was revised down sharply.
Warning on insolvencies
By JASON NISSE
BUSINESS failures are expected to rise by over a third this year according to figures produced by the credit insurer Trade Indemnity, and are now running at their highest rate since 1985, writes Jason Nisse.
The private group, which insures invoices and financing arrangements, recorded 1,220 falures in the first half of this year, but indications so far show that at least 2,000 more failures will be recorded by the end of the year.
This compares with just 2,146 in 1988.
The rate of failures has been declining through the 1980s and the last time it was running at these levels was 1984, when 3,924 businesses failed.
Italy's 1.5bn dollar Eurobond is largest issue to date
By JASON NISSE
ITALY yesterday announced a $1.5bn (£935m) issue of fixed-rate Eurobonds, the largest such deal to date.
The bonds carry a five-year maturity and will be priced on Tuesday to produce a yield of 0.42-0.44 per cent above the five-year US Treasury yield.
Morgan Stanley and Nomura International are arranging the deal and have assembled a group of 10 international banks to underwrite and sell the bonds in the Euromarkets.
One of the 10 said initial investor response was ‘fairly positive’.
The issue is using the increasingly popular ‘fixed price’ US-style system for underwriting and offering Eurobonds.
Banks participating in the deal agree to sell bonds only at, or above, the stated issue price until such time as Morgan Stanley considers appropriate.
Traditionally, such discipline has not been imposed on Eurobond issues.
Two weeks ago the World Bank launched a $1.5bn global bond issue which was partly sold in the Euromarket and partly in the US domestic market.
Ivory Coast crop dispute pushes up cocoa prices
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
THIS year's machinations over disposal of the Ivory Coast's cocoa crop indirectly pushed up prices on the London Futures & Options Exchange yesterday as dealers scrambled to obtain cocoa to deliver against a substantial long position controlled by Philipp Brothers, the big American commodity trading group.
Attention concentrated on the December London Fox contract, which rose by £21 a tonne to £753.
At one stage the contract traded up to £757.
The rise bucked the trend, caused by over-supply and stagnant demand, which has depressed cocoa prices to their lowest in real terms in half a century.
The net uncovered December position — the amount traders are committed to buy — is around 28,000 lots, roughly three times the normal monthly total.
A lot is 10 tonnes.
At present prices, the exposure is worth more than £210m.
The company most committed to deliver cocoa to the market is Sucres et Denrees, the French commodity trading house.
Sucden and Phibro contracted this year to buy 500,000 tonnes of cocoa from the Ivory Coast, the world's biggest producer.
But it is generally thought in the trade that the agreement has been abrogated by the Ivory Coast.
Earlier this week the London Fox sought to defuse the danger of companies being unable to meet their commitments by increasing margins — the amount necessary to preserve the value of collateral with a broker.
From 16 October, margins on the December London Fox contract will be £200 a tonne, rising to £350 on 30 October, £500 on 13 November, £600 on 27 November, and the full value of the contract on 5 December.
The exchange assumed that 150,000 tonnes of cocoa must be bought for delivery to the holders of long positions.
The biggest long, Phibro, is said by traders to need cocoa to meet commitments in the physical markets.
But traders thought that the full 280,000 tonnes might be delivered, squeezing prices acutely.
In that event, smaller operators stretched to meet margin calls might suffer.
Since the London Fox is anxious to preserve the integrity of the market, it may take other measures, such as extending delivery times, to relieve pressure on shorts.
Trusthouse sells Skyway Hotel for 35m pounds
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
TRUSTHOUSE Forte has sold the Skyway Hotel at Heathrow Airport to Edwardian Hotels, the privately owned London group, for £35m.
Trusthouse has three other hotels at the airport, the Post House, the Ariel and the Excelsior.
A 250-bedroom extension to the Excelsior will increase total capacity to 1,576 rooms not counting Skyway's 450 rooms.
Trusthouse said it was well represented at the airport.
‘The opportunity to sell occurred and the price was a good one,’ said a spokesman.
Edwardian plans to upgrade the 30-year-old Skyway from 3-star to 4-star deluxe, spending £15m on top of the purchase price.
It has seven other hotels in central London with 1,100 rooms.
AMP states Pearl offer is generous
By ALISON EADIE
AUSTRALIAN Mutual Provident, the Australian insurance company bidding £1.1bn for Pearl Group, yesterday reiterated that its 605p per share cash offer was generous and fully valued the company.
The shares, however, rose 6p to 648p, indicating that the market continues to expect either a higher offer or the intervention of a white knight, possibly from continental Europe.
The bid is being resisted by Pearl Group, whose chairman, Einion Holland, has described the offer as ‘derisory, unacceptable and totally inadequate’.
AMP's offer document published yesterday claims that the share price has been inflated by speculation and the offer should be judged against the price of 394p per share prevailing before AMP raised its stake in Pearl to 18 per cent last June.
Pearl's low dividend yield is cited as evidence.
If Pearl yielded the 5.39 per cent average for the life insurance sector, its shares would trade at 408p.
The document also asserts that Pearl's market position in new annual premiums for UK life and pensions business fell from third in 1978 to 15th by 1988.
It claims that in the five years to the end of 1988 Pearl's new annual premium business rose by an average of 3.7 per cent a year against a UK market average of 13 per cent a year.
‘Misleading’ MTS notice is criticised
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
THE Takeover Panel yesterday rapped Meat Trade Suppliers, the Smithfield sausage casings company, and its financial advisers Lloyds Merchant Bank, for sending a ‘seriously misleading’ circular to its shareholders, writes Alexandra Jackson.
Control of MTS is being contested by Twigrealm, a company backed by the South African meat trader Freddy Hirsch and the British property entrepreneur Stephen Wingate, and by Alpha Gamma, the property group.
Alpha Gamma's offer of 372p per share for 57 per cent of the group is backed by Meat Trade's board unlike Twigrealm's offer of 350p for the whole company.
A MTS family stake of 25 per cent has been pledged to Twigrealm.
The Panel's ruling refers to a document sent to shareholders on October 5 in which the Twigrealm offer was incorrectly valued at 314p a share.
The panel has asked MTS to send a correction to its shareholders.
The board of MTS does not accept every detail of the Panel's criticism and will be writing to shareholders with further information.
The extraordinary general meeting which was due to take place on 10 October has been rescheduled to 17 October.
Market Report: Interest rate blues meet some resistance
By DEREK PAIN
THE unlikely combination of Jaguar, Saatchi & Saatchi and Scottish & Newcastle Breweries helped the stock market resist the worst excesses of bank rate blues yesterday.
In early trading the broadly based FT-SE share index was down 31.7 points and seemed intent on reaching 2,200 points in double quick time.
Then at least two programme trades, one a buy and sell mix and the other a buy exercise, steadied the market.
With stories swirling and strengthening about a clutch of leading shares and Wall Street striding to new peaks, the index was down only 4.1 points at the close.
Jaguar, with not a black flag in sight, roared 62p higher to 731p in hectic turnover.
Saatchi, another busily traded share, jumped 40p to 340p.
A variety of stories flowed.
They included Swiss and US bids, managment buyouts and the sale of part of the group.
S&N, not for the first time, enjoyed a heady ferment as, once again, the market was gripped by the story that the Elders' 23.7 per cent shareholding had found a new home.
Elders, the Australian group, has been ordered to cut its stake to at least 9.9 per cent by June.
It is expected to sell its entire shareholding.
BSN, the sprawling French group with interests spreading from food and beer to packaging, has emerged as the new favourite for the Scottish stake.
It was rumoured to have paid 450p a share.
The excitement was enough to push Scottish 19p higher at one time.
The shares closed 14p stronger at 375p.
Considering the interest rate blows, the market turned in a resilient performance.
Trading, never heavy, was at least well up to the post-crash average although there was little sign of institutional support.
BTR was another stock to attract attention.
The shares jumped 15p to 662p.
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts has declared its intention of buying up to 15 per cent and is thought to be quietly picking up stock.
Some were convinced it was in the market again yesterday.
There are suggestions it has at least a 2.5 per cent shareholding.
Boots, after its strong run on Thursday, ran into the inevitable profit taking, falling 6p to 288p.
The group, following the Ward White Group acquisition, has borrowings of nearly £600m which makes it particularly sensitive to the interest rate increase.
There are also suggestions that the sale of WWG's US Whitlock car accessories group will take longer than expected and will not realise the price Boots had hoped.
Asda, the stores group, suffered the fate of a fading bid stock, falling 5p to 174p.
The discomfort was compounded by a profits downgrading by County NatWest WoodMac.
It now expects profits of £225m against earlier hopes of £243m.
The following year's prediction has been slashed from £314m to £270m.
Ferranti, helped by option influences, rose 1.5p to 59p.
ADT, benefiting from a US investment road show, gained 6p to 206p.
Guinness, reflecting its strong profits performance, jumped 25p to 597p.
But cider maker HP Bulmer, perceived as an interest rate casualty, fell 10p to 172p.
BAT Industries improved 17.5p to 850.5p on Hoylake's expression of continuing interest.
James Neill, the garden tools firm that suffered a sharp trading downturn, rose 12p to 197p.
Ross Consumer soared 131p to 177p as Roger Shute of the BM construction group and friends moved in.
Doctus rose 11p to 127p, making a two day 17p gain.
ANZ McCaughan's Alastair Irvine expects dramatic profit progress from £1.8m to £8.4m in the year just ended and then to £12m this year.
The company is involved in management consultancy, marketing and promotion.
It acquired the Prospective Group, the old Pineapple business, earlier this year.
European Leisure, the fast growing discotheque group, held at 100p as Irish sources indicated Nazmu Virani's Control Securities had sold 1.5 million shares to institutions.
Control has almost doubled its money.
It acquired the shares when it sold a London property to EL last year.
Rechem, the waste dispoal group, had another difficult session, falling 45p to 560p.
The shares have come down from 795p since the toxic waste issue blew up.
Equities recovered from a sharp early setback yesterday.
The FT-SE share index was down 31.7 points before setting out on a steady recovery, closing 4.1 points down at 2,277.5.
The FT 30 share index finished 8.4 points lower at 1,857.8.
Government stocks improved by up to £⅜.
AMI Healthcare, at 395p, has a potential takeover price of up to 550p, Smith New Court believes.
The company is controlled by a US group that is up for sale and has said it wants to sell AMI.
Bupa and Sun Alliance are regarded as likely buyers.
Smith New Court expects AMI's profits to have reached £20.5m in the year just ended with £24.5m likely this year.
Cupid's sights are being realigned from the Third Market to the USM and the company is aiming to add more strings to its bow through a placing of 660,000 shares at 125p each, raising £825,000.
Shares in the manufacturer of bridal wear and nursery products, which only made its debut on the Third Market a year ago via a placing at 100p, stand at 136p.
Column Eight: The RBS tailors its image
By SIMON PINCOMBE
The Royal Bank of Scotland has probably guaranteed itself a future recruitment crisis with the introduction of a range of designer wear for staff.
Bob Maiden, the managing director, said the range was a response to ‘the many requests from staff for something to wear which can be identified with the bank’.
Three top designers were approached at an undisclosed cost.
The result is a range by Paul Costelloe which RBS hopes will lead to a ‘harmonious look’ among the staff.
So if you are in a hurry to cash your cheque you can always ask: ‘Is that a Paul Costelloe number you are wearing?’
You might get served quickly.
You might get a clip round the ear.
For an autobiography which purports to tell us the real story behind the sacking of George Davies from the Next empire which he founded, What Next is on the naive side.
But the book, published next Thursday by Century Hutchinson, does contain some intriguing insights into the career of ‘the retail revolution’.
Not least among them is a picture of young Davies in football kit, posing for a picture with the England Schoolboys Under 18 team.
The caption alongside notes that George Davies, aged 19, is in the front row on the far right.
Indignant over suggestions that the Prime Minister has replaced his Jaguar with a Rover, Nigel Lawson can at least draw comfort from the fact that he is a wanted man in the City.
The Abbey National is the latest company to target the Chancellor as the man it most wants to replace Sir Campbell Adamson when he eventually retires as chairman.
Whether Mr Lawson will accept remains to be seen.
Incidentally, the Treasury said that the Chancellor had not lost his Jag as well as Dorneywood, his country home.
It was merely in for repairs, said a spokesman.
However, he added, like all ministers, the Chancellor would be moving to a more environment-friendly machine in the fullness of time.
Those who follow this sort of thing will tell you that yesterday's recapitalisation of Ross Consumer Electronics was only a matter of time.
Financial problems aside, the company had already received the kiss of death in that, two years ago, the Department of Trade and Industry chose to feature it as a prime example of the Enterprise Initiative.
Ross duly appeared in a multi-million pound advertising campaign and the rest, as they say, is history.
View from City Road: Jaguar stretched to its limit
By SIMON PINCOMBE
ONCE again Jaguar shares defied the laws of gravity yesterday with a 62p gain to 731p.
The shares started the week at 570p and turnover has been considerable.
However, there is still a lingering doubt about the justification for such a rise.
Although both General Motors and Ford would like to forge a liason with Jaguar, that interest does not translate automatically into a 28 per cent increase in the share price in a week.
In some ways the share price performance has made a deal with one of the US car giants less likely since the numbers have changed quite dramatically.
It would make some sense for friends of the Ford camp to push the Jaguar shares upwards simply to make a link with GM more difficult.
However, there is a danger for shareholders that they will become trapped in the power play between the two US giants.
Jaguar has attractions for both.
But there are also attractions for them in ensuring that neither company links with Jaguar.
A stalemate would make sure that neither Ford nor GM could benefit from Jaguar's expertise in the luxury car market but it will not be particularly attractive for investors.
That stalemate might provide a private sector equivalent of the Government's golden share.
However, it would also deprive the company of a welcome capital injection and would leave Jaguar shareholders facing a much lower share price than they currently enjoy.
The picture is further clouded by the stance the Government will take.
It may not be inclined to withdraw its golden share so the earliest shareholders would be able to capitalise on US interest in Jaguar is 1991.
And shareholders should not underestimate the determination of the Jaguar management to preserve its independence.
With the golden share intact, the company is under no immediate pressure to negotiate with the likes of GM and Ford and is likely to press for the most advantageous terms available.
That is why talks with GM are rumoured to have been more extensive than those with Ford, which appears to have adopted a more aggressive stance.
The picture may become clearer next week but with the Jaguar share price at this level, shareholders should now take some profits.
They may lose out on some limited upside but will also avoid exposure to the considerable risk of the US negotiations breaking down.
View from City Road: Rumours blur Saatchi picture
By SIMON PINCOMBE
THE market appears to have lost its patience with Saatchi & Saatchi's proposed disposal of its management consultancy business.
Little hard news has come out of the world's biggest advertising group since it put the division on the block.
Fed up with the snail-like pace, the market yesterday began to entertain the possibility that the group itself may now be on the block.
Yesterday's sharp rise in Saatchi's shares, up 40p to 340p in a falling market, was spurred by a flood of rumours.
The day began with talk that South Eastern Asset Management, a Tennessee-based fund manager, had been adding to its 10.3 per cent shareholding.
This was quickly followed by a spate of bid rumours, the most sensational of which was that Adia, the big Swiss-based recruitment consultant, was about to launch a takeover bid.
By lunchtime the tongues were really wagging and talk of LBOs, MBOs, an imminent sale of the management consultancy business as well as a bid featuring Bob Jacobi, formerly head of Ted Bates (the US advertising agency Saatchi took over after a bitter battle three years ago) were all fuelling the share price.
The obvious temptation is to dismiss yesterday's events as an old fashioned share ramp, but there is a niggling feeling that something more substantial is going on behind the scenes.
Trading in the company's shares was hectic and the 3.5 million Saatchi shares that changed hands by closing time is too high for a simple ramp.
Ironically, the message of all this activity is that the market is intensely worried about Saatchi's prospects.
And with good reason: the signs are that Saatchi is finding it difficult to sell the management consultancy division alone.
Moreover, the absence of any firm information about the progress it is making with the disposal has added to the belief that the £300m estimated price tag for the management division was too optimistic.
In some quarters the combined value is now put at about £225m.
If this scenario is correct, Saatchi could be heading for problems next year.
Saddled with a high level of cash outflow and a policy of high dividend payouts, the company may be forced to either sell other non-management consultancy businesses or make redundancies.
Although the uncertainty helped Saatchi shares yesterday, it is just as likely to cause movements in the other direction until the picture becomes clearer.
View from City Road: Receivership a growth industry
By SIMON PINCOMBE
COMPANY failures are a classic lagged indicator of the health of the British economy.
From the point when the Government's high interest rate policies start taking effect to the point when companies start calling in the receiver, there tends to be quite a delay — liquidity problems do not suddenly emerge unless something dramatically goes wrong.
That is why figures produced by credit insurer Trade Indemnity, showing the rate of business failures soaring by more than a third in the second half of this year, are so worrying.
The declining trend from the troubled days of the early 1980s has been reversed, and if the rate of increase continues into 1990 the next decade will look rather bleak.
Back in 1984 Trade Indemnity, which reckons it records around a fifth of all the business failures in the UK, noted 3,924 failures.
This declined until it was only 2,146 last year.
In the first half of 1989 the total was 1,220 and indications are that more than 2,000 companies will suffer liquidity problems in the second half.
Worst hit, no one will be suprised to hear, are the textile and building trades.
In the first half 170 textile companies recorded problems compared with 112 in the whole of 1988.
Corresponding figures in building and construction are 320, up from 315 last year.
The other worrying trend is that the companies getting into difficulty are tending to be larger.
The increase noted is too significant to be attributable to inflation.
This all adds up to a bleak picture for corporate UK.
The fastest growing industry seems to be receivership and, alas, you cannot buy shares in Cork Gulley.
Company News in Brief 
By SIMON PINCOMBE
ARCOLECTRIC'S shares tumbled 20p to 113p on a fall in half year pre-tax profits from £320,000 to £128,000.
Sales for the period to 30 June were slightly higher at £5.2m against £5.08m in the comparable period.
Delays in delivery of machinery hit production.
Earnings per share dipped to 1.92p from 4.79p, but the interim dividend was increased from 0.44p to 0.48p.
TULLOW Oil, which joined the Unlisted Securities Market on Thursday, yesterday announced pre-tax profits of Ir £41,000 for the six months to 30 June, against £18,000 last time.
Earnings per share were 0.05p (0.03p).
The company said proven reserves were worth Ir20p per share.
SINGAPORE Para Rubber reported lower profits before tax of £148,000 for the six months to 30 June, compared with £212,000 previously.
Earnings per share were down at 0.81p against 1.05p.
The profits fall was blamed on wet weather in the early part of year.
BOOKER has merged Kingswood Chemists, its chain of retail pharmacies, with GK Chemists, a retail pharmacy business owned by Gus Kiamtia and his family.
The merged business, Kingswood-GK, will be 60 per cent owned by Booker and 40 per cent by the Kiamtia family.
It will be the fourth largest pharmacy chain in the UK with 153 outlets.
New Eagle Trust chief shakes up boardroom
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
DAVID James, who took over as chairman of Eagle Trust less than two weeks ago, yesterday stamped his mark on the troubled Midlands mini-conglomerate, appointing three new directors and securing the resignations of three others, two of whom were supporters of deposed chairman Malcolm Stockdale.
The new directors are Peter Churchill, 59, a barrister who specialises in corporate law, Peter Ryan, the chairman of Elga Group and a former director of conglomerate Thomas Tilling, now owned by BTR, and Brian Smith, who was group managing director of Rank Organisation until 1983.
Mr Churchill will have an executive role as director of legal affairs, a particularly useful role considering the Serious Fraud Squad and the West Midlands Police are investigating Eagle, and will temporarily assume the role of company secretary.
The other two will be non-executives.
The three resignations were signalled when Mr James took control.
Norman Ricketts, who was only appointed to the Eagle board by Mr Stockdale last month, is relinquishing his non-executive role, as is Hamish Jansen, who has been with the group since formation and was a strong supporter of Mr Stockdale.
Sidney Samuelson, the chairman of lighting hire group Samuelson which was taken over by Eagle in 1987, is also resigning though he will retain his position at Samuelson.
However, it is understood that Mr Smith, despite his non-executive position on the Eagle board, will take an active role in the running of Samuelson.
With the appointments the board retains a quorum, and Mr James is looking for two more members for the team.
Eagle currently has no finance director, and a person to fill this position is being actively sought.
In the meantime Mr James will be asking accountants Coopers & Lybrand to provide the necessary support in this area.
Mr James will also be inviting a representative of the shareholders onto the board.
He hopes the person will be nominated in conjunction with the Investors Protection Committee.
WH Smith sells its Canadian interests
By TERENCE WILKINSON, Assistant City Editor
WH SMITH, the retail and distribution group, is pulling out of Canada after 40 years to concentrate on expanding its US operations.
The UK group has sold its 86.5 per cent stake in WH Smith Canada to Federal Industries Consumer Group for C$54m (£28.3m).
Apart from WH Smith bookshops, the disposal includes 61 Celebration card and stationery shops and 12 Paperchase outlets.
Unlike other UK retailers in the Canadian market — Boots came out last year and Marks & Spencer has been struggling to break even — WH Smith has shown profits growth.
In the year to 3 June pre-tax profits were C$6.5m (£3.2m), which implies that WH Smith is selling out on a premium multiple of 18 times Canadian earnings.
One reason for the sale is that when WH Smith bought the Canadian Classic bookshops chain in 1985, doubling its outlets, it made an agreement with the Canadian government to reduce its holding in WH Smith Canada to 51 per cent by 1990.
Although this seemed a good idea at the time, current strategy at WH Smith is to have full control, as in the buying up of 100 per cent of Molinaire, the TV services company, in July.
While the Canadian business has been profitable, WH Smith believes the returns being obtained on £75m of sales from 200 outlets are not comparable with the returns that can be obtained in other markets and did not justify the future investment necessary to develop the chain.
Profit fall hits Hi-Tec shares
By ROBERT COLE
SHARES in Hi-Tec, the sports shoe maker, dropped 7p yesterday to 105p on the announcement of a pre-tax profits fall from £4.1m to £3.1m for the interim period to 31 July.
Hi-Tec Sports is the UK market leader in sports shoes but trading profit margins were reduced by nearly four percentage points to 10 per cent on turnover of £36.84m, up from £32.93m.
Mario Aresti, finance director, said the erosion in margins was due equally to increased production costs and attempts to maintain volume sales.
Strong local currencies in the Taiwan and Korea production centres pushed up costs and attempts to take advantage of a cheaper environment in China were dashed by events following the Tiananmen Square demonstrations in Peking.
The company said that it did not see an improvement for the second half.
Increased sales in North America and Europe reduced the proportion of sales in the UK from three quarters to two thirds of the total.
Hi-Tec hopes North America, which lifted sales and profits by 20 per cent, and Europe will account for half of group turnover by early 1991.
In August Hi-Tec bought a Dutch sports clothing company Beheermaatschappij Copex in a profit-related deal worth up to £7.7m.
The company said it was the first step towards a broadening of its geographic and product base which would reduce dependency on the UK and on shoes.
Earnings per share for the first half were reduced to 5.47p, against 7.83p last time, but the interim dividend has been held at 1.5p.
Ross Electronics sees value soar
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
THE market value of Ross Consumer Electronics, the troubled hi-fi and audio manufacturer, quadrupled yesterday when a new management team led by Roger Shute, the chairman of construction machinery company BM Group, moved in.
Tied in with the management charges, the company launched a four-for-five deep discount rights issue to raise £1.2m and recapitalise Ross.
The group's shares opened at 46p, valuing the company at just over £2m, and soared through the day to close at 177p.
The rise, with the rights issue priced at 23p, pushed Ross' market value above £8m.
It currently has assets of less than £2m and in the year to last March made a pre-tax loss of £716,000.
Mr Shute is assuming the chairmanship of Ross from Ross Marks, the company's 37-year-old founder, who will remain as chairman of the consumer electronics operations and a director of the group.
Noel Hayes, a stockbroker who in his time has been a building analyst and up until the beginnig of this year was head of sales at Citicorp-Scrimgeour Vickers, becomes chief executive and Sam Oxford, the former chairman of Magnet & Southerns, joins as a non-executive director.
Paul Owens, the recently appointed finance director, is retained, though two other directors, Laura Marks and Alfred Davis, are resigning.
The plan is to turn Ross, which is being renamed Ross Group, into a mini-conglomerate.
The consumer electronics side, which grew on the back of making headphones and more recently expanded into hi-fis, radios and televisions, is to be retained, and the new management has plans to move into warehousing and distribution.
The new team is also changing the year end from March to December.
In the nine months period it is hoped Ross will break even and the market is predicting the company will move into profit in 1990.
Mr Shute has had an impressive track record with BM, which he was appointed to when it was controlled by Beazer and which has thrived while Beazer's fortunes wained until Beazer severed the connections earlier this year.
Laird Group offloads its bus business
By TERENCE WILKINSON
LAIRD Group's MCW Metrobus range of double-decker buses has been acquired in a joint venture between Optare, the Leeds-based bus bodybuilder, and Daf of Holland, writes Terence Wilkinson.
The sale, for a sum not thought to be material, marks the final dismemberment of Metro-Cammell Weymann, the vehicles business which unbeknown to Laird lost £50m over several years.
MCW cabs and coaches have already been sold.
A redesigned version of the Metrobus will be supplied to both UK and international markets with chassis being built by Daf in Eindhoven and bodies by Optare in Leeds.
During its six-year life the Metrobus has established a significant position in the UK double-decker market, capturing about 30 per cent of all sales in each year between 1983 and 1986 and earning the reputation of a mobile road block among motorists in the congested capital since a driver-only policy was introduced by London Transport.
Bett Brothers, the property, housing and leisure group, has ceased operations at Bett Trucks having failed to find a main distributor for Leyland Daf, its franchiser.
Scottish TV results beat predictions
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
SCOTTISH Television reported better than expected figures in the half year to end June despite a £2.3m charge to cover the cost of voluntary redundancies and early retirement.
The shares bucked the market trend, rising one penny to 491p.
Pre-tax profits increased 29 per cent to £3m on turnover up from £39.8m to £49.3m.
The interim dividend was raised from 3.75p to 5p.
Sir Campbell Fraser, Scottish Television's chairman, warned that higher interest rates were already making themselves felt with advertising revenues being squeezed.
Although Sir Campbell did not expect the strong sales growth of the first half to continue, he anticipated satisfactory results for the full year.
The uncertain outlook for consumer spending has encouraged City analysts to trim their profit forecasts from around £11m to nearer £10m.
The results also included an extraordinary credit of £4m net of tax from Scottish Television's disposal of its investment in Independent Television Publications.
The Week in Review: Business and City
By ALISON EADIE
THE week's news was dominated by Chancellor Nigel Lawson's failed attempt to stave off a rise in bank base rates.
The fight was finally lost on Thursday after the Bundesbank lifted its key interest rates by a full point to clamp down on West German inflation.
The rise to 15 per cent— the highest for eight years — will inevitably force mortgage rates higher.
The Abbey National, now a bank, and the Leeds Permanent and the Halifax building societies were quick to break the bad news to already hard-pressed homeowners by stating that mortgage rates will probably have to rise by around 1.25 points to 14.75 per cent.
Mr Lawson admitted that the interest rate rise was extremely ‘embarrassing, awkward and uncomfortable’, coming as it did on the eve of the Conservative Party Conference.
However, the worst may not be over for the embattled Chancellor.
He admitted that a further increase could be necessary.
Shares and sterling went down as interest rates went up.
The FT-SE 100 index fell to its nadir yesterday morning at 2,254.0, down 45.4 from its opening level on Monday.
Sterling, which came under intense selling pressure on continued reaction to August's dire trade figures, fell to a low against the German mark at DM3.0081 on Wednesday.
It regained some bounce to end the week nudging DM3.0400.
Life will get even tougher for those whom everyone loves to hate — estate agents.
The big chains admitted that house sales could dry up between now and Christmas, as vendors refuse to accept drastic price cuts.
The end of the housing boom was reflected in news of more losses and branch closures among estate agents.
The Halifax estate agency revealed a £14.5m loss in the six months to the end of July.
The Leeds Permanent admitted it would be indulging in some ‘selective pruning’ of its agency branches.
Someone who most certainly will not be having trouble keeping up with his mortgage repayments is Lord Hanson, chairman of the industrial conglomerate Hanson.
A league table published by Charterhouse, the merchant bank, showed Lord Hanson was Britain's highest-paid director of a public company, earning £1.239m last year.
Sir Ralph Halpern of Burton Group and John Gunn of British and Commonwealth were not so fortunate.
They suffered 25 per cent performance-related pay cuts, dropping to £996,000 and £740,700 respectively.
Also suffering was Sir Derek Alun-Jones, chairman of Ferranti International Signal, the troubled electronics company.
Trustees representing substantial Ferranti family interests wrote to Sir Derek asking for the board to be replaced or supplemented by new directors.
Sir Derek, however, sat tight, believing that he should not be blamed for the £215m fraud perpetrated against the company.
The fraud by International Signal and Control, the American defence company which Ferranti bought two years ago, was not revealed in the audit carried out when Ferranti made the acquisition.
Ferranti this week received the report it commissioned from accountants Coopers & Lybrand on the alleged fraud.
Depending on the contents, the report could provide Ferranti with ammunition for legal action against those who advised it during the ISC purchase.
The report will also be handed to the Serious Fraud Office.
Despite the gaping hole in the company's accounts, Ferranti shares returned from their suspension at 73½p to trade at higher than expected levels between 55p and 59p.
On Tuesday, the day of their return, some 115 million shares traded, representing 15 per cent of the company's stock.
Bid hopes buoyed the price with British Aerospace and Daimler Benz the market's frontrunners.
BAe refused to confirm or deny any interest.
The normally grey and staid world of accountancy was enlivened this week by a certain skittishness on the part of Deloitte Haskins & Sells.
After jilting Touche Ross, with which it had planned a worldwide merger, it married its UK practice with the UK practice of Coopers & Lybrand.
The new firm will be the largest in the UK with a fee income of more than £143m.
Eurotunnel shares fell sharply following revelations of spiralling costs.
Admission of a £2bn cost overrun has sent Eurotunnel back to the banks to plead for fresh financing.
The banks have given Eurotunnel until the end of the year to come up with an agreed costing for completion of the Channel Tunnel.
As the Transport Secretary, Cecil Parkinson, ruled out any Government help, Eurotunnel shares fell to a low of 550p, down 145p on the week.
There was no respite for the beleaguered retail sector.
Even before the hike in base rates, Sears, the Selfridges, British Shoe Corporation and Olympus retailing group, was bemoaning the effect of high interest rates on consumer expenditure.
Its pre-tax profits slumped 10 per cent to £91.7m in the half year to the end of July.
Next also produced a much worse than expected slump in interim profits to £16.2m from £30.9m previously.
Its problems are compounded by the legacy of expansion under former chairman George Davies and the Davies empire is now being dismantled.
European Markets: Equities lose the earnings edge to cash
By EDI COHEN
MOST MARKETS, but especially Paris, weakened initially with the news of the widely expected interest rate rises but rebounded later.
There was relief that the rise was out of the way and substantial enough to keep further advance at bay.
Analysts believe that Thursday's increases have opened the way for more gains in most markets, particularly Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
Although earnings prospects all over Europe are still excellent the balance has now been slightly tipped away from the equity markets.
Rates at the current 7.5 to 8 per cent make cash a much better alternative than it was before.
Higher European interest rates were hardly the main concern of investors in Oslo, home of Europe's second-best performing market this year.
Norwegian investors were surprised on Thursday by the suspension of the shares of Den norske Creditbank (DnC) and Bergen Bank on the news of a proposed merger between the two to form Norway's largest bank.
The other interesting news was Norsk Hydro's announcement that it planned to buy DnC's 9 per cent stake in Saga Petroleum.
Reactions to the merger have been decidedly mixed in Oslo.
On the negative side it is difficult to see the advantage for Bergen Bank, which is getting mixed up with one of the most troublesome members of the already unfortunate Norwegian banking sector, where 1989 loss estimates of NKr1.6bn have been announced.
A more positive view of the merger is that consolidation in the fragmented Norwegian banking sector is a necessity and balance sheets need to be strengthened.
DnC's worse-than-expected results are indicators that the Norwegian banking sector, if perhaps on the road to recovery, is not all well yet.
Norwegian banks were severely hit by the 1986 oil price fall.
On top of that the 1987 stock market crash and a steep domestic increase in interest rates nearly nearly put paid to some of them — including DnC.
The fact that the loan losses of the banks remain heavy will force the Norwegian government to agree to the merger which otherwise might not square with its normally tough monopoly considerations.
Next year's outlook for the banks is expected to be less cloudy.
Interest rates have come down again and loan losses are expected to improve.
Although the Oslo Bourse has paused for a moment to digest the DnC/Bergen news the market has been hugely active and is currently one of the best performers in the world.
The index has risen by over 60 per cent while turnover is much higher than the Swedish market, with its much larger market capitalisation.
Foreigners have been piling in.
According to some surveys among clients, UK investors are heavily overweighted in the market.
Although a similar performance next year would be difficult, the valuation of the market is modest and analysts believe that Oslo will keep outperforming other European markets for the time being.
Norway's brilliant market has been based on a clear cut recovery situation after the trough of 1986.
Then, a successful austerity package was introduced.
Presently, growth forecasts are strong and inflation falling.
Also, the pressure on interest rates has been down and the balance of trade has shifted into surplus.
The major sectors witnessing recovery have been the shipping and the natural resources sectors.
Another boost to the market has been the removal of turnover tax at the beginning of this year, which tripled volumes.
The political situation, if by no means settled has at least become clearer.
A relaxing thought for investors is the fact that no matter which government will be in power no major economic changes are likely.
Washington Comment: Time to end the fiscal follies: Bailey Morris examines the United States' deficit reduction law
By BAILEY MORRIS
GRAMM-Rudman-Hollings, the US deficit reduction law, is arguably the worst piece of legislation passed by Congress in the past decade.
This heretical view is beginning to gain support.
Even one of the authors, Senator Ernest Hollings of South Carolina, says now that he ‘wants a divorce’.
At its best, Gramm-Rudman-Hollings is a game of how to master a moving target.
At its worst, it represents a total breakdown of the US budget process.
The implications of this are chilling in an era marked by growing, destabilising imbalances among the world's largest industrial economies.
Politics not fiscal discipline clearly rules the US roost and in no month is this more obvious than in October, the start of the new 1990 fiscal year.
The US deficit is rising dramatically, not falling, as the law dictated, to zero by fiscal 1991.
Even now, as Congress struggles with the legislation to meet this year's deadline, it is clear that another target will not be met.
The original legislation passed in 1985 stipulated that the deficit must be reduced to $36bn in the 1990 fiscal year which began on 1 October.
This was amended to $100bn in a 1987 revision of the law, and now the Congressional Budget Office, which keeps track of such things, tells us that this too will be overshot, resulting in a deficit estimated at $117.8bn.
It is the same old story.
The 1989 deficit is estimated at $161.4bn, well above the $136bn target required under the 1987 revision and the $72bn target contained in the original legislation.
The 1988 experience was no different.
The actual deficit was $155.1bn, a sharp contrast to the revised target of $144bn and the original target of $108bn.
Suffice it to say, without getting into the tortured complexities of the US budget process, that everyone is fiddling with the numbers.
The administration is an adept player and so is Congress.
Richard Darman, the numbers whizz who directs the White House Budget Office, may be the all-time grand master.
It was his decision, for example, to shift a military pay day to 29 September, one of the last days of fiscal 1989, from 1 October, the beginning of fiscal 1990.
A similar accounting device was used to shift the cost of US farm support.
The exercise shaved off $4bn from the 1990 target, but it raised the 1989 deficit by an equal amount.
The point is that past deficits do not matter to serious players of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings game.
The trick is to meet the target projected for the current fiscal year and to do this by 15 October.
This is the date that by law the government must review the budget process to determine whether enough progress has been made in reducing the deficit to avoid automatic spending cuts.
It has become an art to both beat the target projections and the cuts without offending important political constituencies.
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings is a classic shell game or, in the words of a veteran congressional official, ‘one of the greatest evasion schemes ever invented’.
It is significant that the much-dreaded automatic spending cuts have never occurred.
If a problem becomes too complex, or too costly in this context, it is simply declared ‘off budget’, much as the Bush administration declared the $100bn bailout of the savings and loan industry ‘off budget’.
But the huge surpluses in the US Social Security system are counted to finance the deficit.
Never mind that even Mr Darman warns that future generations will find only IOUs.
The serious business of taking the tough decisions necessary to agree on a budget that both puts the deficit on a downward path and meets the government's priorities has virtually disappeared.
Some of the best government programmes fall by the way for lack of a strong political constituency.
This is the primary reason that US foreign aid programmes have died since the passage of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings.
The hard choices are simply not being made.
Indeed, the law has become a convenient shield for politicians.
‘We cannot do it because Gramm-Rudman-Hollings will not let us’ has become a familiar refrain.
It is only now, almost five years after the fact, that the US press corps and America's allies are beginning to see Gramm-Rudman-Hollings for the hoax that it is.
Last year, at the annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, it was generally agreed that the US deficit was less of a threat because it was on a downward path.
But the Group of Seven is beginning to worry.
There are similar internal domestic rumblings.
The debate is likely to boil over later this month when the US Congress must again pass legislation to raise the debt ceiling.
This has become an annual embarrassing exercise.
There is a movement afoot to draft legislation that would repeal the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law.
But this is not likely to occur.
The best that can be hoped is that the Senate and the House will agree on amendments to the law which will remove the gimmicks and inject more discipline into the process.
The deficit is rising and it is time, to use a phrase coined by the Wall Street Journal, to end these ‘fiscal follies’.
New steel mandate
By BAILEY MORRIS
THE European Commission was yesterday given a mandate to negotiate with the United States over renewing access to its steel market, French diplomats said.
Under a 1985 accord between the United States and other steel-producing countries that lapsed on 30 September, EC firms are limited to 6.74 per cent of the US market.
According to Commission sources, the US negotiators have recently offered the EC 7 per cent of the market in a new agreement to run for two and a half years.