

Fashion: Fable, cable and fishermen's yarns: Vinny Lee on warm and woolly traditional chunky sweaters
By VINNY LEE
SAILING around the coast of England searching for shoals of fish, Gerorge Trowark, a Cornish fisherman born in 1877, must have visited dozens of ports and harbours.
At each stop he noted down the shapes and stitch work of other traditional working men's jumpers.
From the Morecambe Cockler's Pullover to the Romney Marsh Smock and Norfolk Fenman's Weskit to Thames Docker's Jacket, each intricate knit and pearl motif was documented.
Trowark himself would most likely have been found under the thick cable-knit cover of his Cornish Knit Frock.
Trowark joined his father Jelbert and brother Jago on the fishing boats of Newlyn and in time learnt to knit — a craft popular among fishermen of the day as a way of passing time on long voyages.
Although a skilled fisherman, George Trowark became renowned as a knitter and over many years and many voyages he accumulated detailed notes of designs and patterns.
These notes have provided knitwear designer Martin Storey with much of the information and inspiration for his new George Trowark range, a new collection of chunky man-sized jumpers.
The 12 sweater designs in the new Trowark collection are hand-knitted or quality machine-knitted and hand finished in cotton, linen or wool yarns.
Colours are muted — black, blue or natural — the dyed colours mature and look softer with wear.
Indigo-dyed blue jumpers are stonewashed to give a worn look, but the stonewashing also creates an interesting highlight effect on the raised knitted details.
The dye tends to stay darker around the patterns and creates an outline on the stitch-work, including the discreet GT initials worked into the hems of the jumpers.
Trowark style is large, enveloping and extremely cosy with an almost indestructible quality — one five-year-old jumper seen by The Independent is only just beginning to look ‘broken in’ after years of frequent machine washing and hard wear.
Only medium and large sizes are made in these real men's jumpers, but the large linen shirt makes a wonderful tunic for a woman of average size and will probably keep her knees nice and warm.
The designer, Martin Storey, of Artwork, the man credited with the discovery of Trowark's manuscripts, may be spinning a good yarn about their origins, but the jumpers are genuinely a fine mix of fable and cable.
Trowark knitwear is sold in sensible big brown cardboard boxes with a ‘handwritten’ manuscript copy of the legend of the Cornishman.
Hand-knitted jumpers cost from £160, machine-knitted from £70.
Chunky woollen gilet waistcoat with velvet buttons and shawl collar, £95, available in mulberry, olive or brown.
Cream cropped wide-necked Aran cable sweater, £205.
Black and white thick chenille cropped sweater, £293.
Black chenille thick sweater with colourful tulip motif, £396.
Chunky Aran turtleneck sweater, £90, both available in navy, light blue, brown, red, tobacco, green or lime.
Chunky short cropped sweater, £112.
Ribbed roll neck sweater, £99.
Long chunky cardigan, £125, all available in beige, black or grey.
Chunky flecked roll neck sweater, £99, in black or grey with white flecks.
Marks & Spencer, Marble Arch, London W1 and selected branches.
Black and white patterned handknitted chunky sweater, £19.99.
Aran cable woollen cardigan with ethnic embroidery, £42.99.
Cotton Aran chunky knit sweater with embroidered flowers, £32.99.
Navy woollen bolero cardigan with large paisley wool embroidery, £42.99.
Russian floral woollen sweater, available in black or cream, £325.
Chunky long length bobble sweater, £269, in a variety of colours.
Russian bolero woollen sweater, £115, in assorted colours.
Thick Fairisle long woollen sweater, £312, available in black, red or cream.
Chunky navy woollen sweater with zip-up front, £147.
Cream cropped thick woollen sweater with black flowers, £133.
Black thick sweater with cream flowers, £156.
Gold, black and brown patterned chunky knit cardigan, £135.
Jigsaw, 14 James Street, London W1 and branches nationwide.
All over cabled sweater, £49, available in cream, mustard, navy or dark green.
Crew neck Aran cardigan, £49, in orange, navy, rose or cream.
Cabled zip cardigan, £54, in leaf green, mustard, dark green or navy.
Design: Crossed lines over the toytown tram: City transport could soon be back on the right track, says Jonathan Glancey
By JONATHAN GLANCEY
MODERN trams, as most continental Europeans know, neither shake nor rattle, nor do they roll.
Sleek, solidly built, gentle on the environment, they are often an ideal form of city transport.
They also exert a fascination very much of their own as they slither round circuses and brush through old city gates, flashing arcs of lightning as they switch tracks on winter nights.
Single-car, articulated or double-decker, trams are one of the most reliable and enduring forms of public transport invented.
The orange-liveried ‘1500’ series trams in Milan, for example, date from 1927.
Eventually they will be replaced, but more than 60 years on they run with the rhythmic reliability of a Swiss watch.
They are as much a part of Milan as La Scala or the Galleria Vittore Emmanuele.
Last month it was announced that Britain will get its first new-wave trams in 1991.
Destined to run in Manchester, they will relieve traffic congestion and help to reduce the levels of carbon monoxide in the city centre, outlying suburbs and satellite towns of Bury, Altrincham, Salford, Oldham and Rochdale.
In Britain, with the main exception of Blackpool (not forgetting the single-deckers of the Isle of Man and Llandudno), trams had been largely relegated to the history books.
Otherwise, the best place to see working trams has been the tram museum at Crich in Derbyshire or else in old British Transport Commission films and Ealing comedies.
Trams disappeared from most British cities in the 1950s.
London's venerable red and cream double-deckers rumbled along the Thames embankment for the last time in 1952.
Somehow the image of the tall, thin, mournful double-deck tram with its wooden body, slatted wooden seats and growling electric motor has stuck in the British mind.
Trams, it was believed until surprisingly recently, are old-fashioned.
They had something to do with fish and chips wrapped in newspaper, men in hats, National Health specs, smog and powdered egg.
They held up the bright new diesel buses and, even worse, blocked the progress of private motorists in bulbous Austins and lumpen Humbers in canyon-like city thoroughfares.
They picked up power from a spider's web of unsightly overhead wires.
They were inflexible in operation, draughty, and mobile reminders of TB epidemics with the enamelled ‘Do Not Spit’ signs screwed to their bulkheads.
But the modern tram could hardly be more different.
It plays a key role in keeping city streets on the move and is even the object of the best modern designers' desire.
In Milan, for example, the commission to design the new generation of ‘Jumbo’ trams, which went into service in 1979, was one that leading Italian architects and designers fought over.
After all, the Jumbo, a handsome and imposing articulated unit designed by architect, engineer and critic Klaus Giovanni Koenig, will be seen on the streets of Milan for the next half-century.
Spotlessly clean and popular, the Jumbo is a long-term advertisement for Koenig's design skills.
The modern tram is a green machine.
Assuming the power station at the end of the line burns cleanly, the tram is virtually pollution free.
Standing at traffic lights a Koenig-designed Jumbo is, save for the chatter inside, completely silent.
The overhead wires are so slight that you have to look hard to see them.
Powers of acceleration and braking are remarkable, the latter far greater than any car.
But sadly, there is no indication that the GMA consortium which will design, operate and maintain the first of the new generation British trams in Manchester will share the looks of their Milanese counterparts.
Artists' impressions show a tram that has more in common with the flat-faced, characterless light trains of the toy-like Docklands Light Railway.
There is still time for GMA (GEC, Mowlem, Amec and Greater Manchester Buses) to consider employing an inspired architect or industrial designer.
After all, Mancunians and visitors to the Manchester conurbation are going to have to look at these mechanical millipedes for well into the twenty-first century.
Now that buses are no longer designed to enhance the streets they serve, Manchester has a chance to make a fresh start with its trams.
Manchester is not alone.
Other British towns, Croydon and Southampton among them, are also considering modern tramways.
These are all referred to as ‘supertram’ networks, the implication being that the new-generation tram is an altogether more dynamic form of transport than its pre-war predecessors.
What it really means is that the new trams are a hybrid between street car and lightweight suburban train.
Although they will slip through the city centre serving the essential parts — shopping malls, leisure centres, theme parks, amusement arcades and museums — the Manchester supertrams will also head out of town on a mix of reserved track and existing railway lines.
The supertram is, in effect, a low-cost replacement for British Rail's ageing fleet of suburban diesel multiple-unit trains, those rasping diesels which change gear to the accompaniment of voluminous clouds of acrid black exhaust fumes and the blessing of train spotters.
They will perform some of the same functions, but they will not be an exact replacement for traditional trams.
And although the supertram concept will spread through major cities during the next decade, Blackpool will still be alone in its use of traditional double-deckers.
Keeping the fabric of history: Taking care of old clothes requires more than just mothballs, writes Jo Levin
By JO LEVIN
HOARDING clothes has long been a British vice.
The current exhibition of Indian dress at Liberty (Regent Street, London W1, until October 21) shows many a garment bought by an Empire wife and stored in a trunk, along with christening dress, lace collars and evening gowns.
These surviving pieces of history need care if they are not to deteriorate.
So will the new wedding dress.
The craft of caring for clothes vanished with the ladies' maid and the most common modern method of storage — hanging them, shrouded in plastic, on a wire coathanger — is less than ideal.
Items of value, real or sentimental, are worth the trouble of proper storage.
Lynda Hillyer, head of textile conservation at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, is concerned with the care of fragile and valuable textiles from the time of Tutankhamun.
But the basic rules she recommends apply to all.
Keep textiles out of light, which both fades dyes and supplies the energy to begin the process of breaking the fibres down, as with the shredded silk curtains of many a National Trust mansion.
Pack, swathe and support garments with acid-free tissue paper.
Normal tissue paper, like most paper, contains acid which encourages fading and decay, including the gradual yellowing of white fabrics, a process which may be seen after only a few years.
Acidic conditions are particularly bad for cellulose, so cotton and linen fabrics are especially at risk.
Wood — in a drawer, wardrobe or chest — may also be acidic: line all drawers and storage compartments with acid-free tissue.
Fragile and heavy garments are best stored flat on a dust-free shelf or, ideally, in an acid-free cardboard box.
Insert sausage-shaped rolls of acid-free tissue paper in folds, so that they do not become permanent — caused, as a microscope would show, by fibres cracking.
Use pads of acid-free tissue paper to bulk out shoes.
If using hangers, pad them to about three times the usual extent with acid-free tissue or with polyester wadding covered with white cotton (which can also be used to pad out the shoulders and shapes of packed costumes).
Foam padding, often used on coat hangers, is not ideal.
Make sure the whole shoulder area is supported — the hanger should fit its breadth.
If a dress is heavy, support the skirt separately with tapes.
Use cotton dust-covers — white — and wash them every few months.
Dust is abrasive and may contain metallic particles.
Of course everything to be stored must first be clean.
Do not store clothes in plastic, which will attract dust and, if there is any moisture in the air, encourage the growth of mould.
Check the clothes every few months, or moths and mould may flourish unhindered.
Wrap mothballs in muslin and do not let them touch the textiles.
Specialist private dry cleaning of antique textiles: Bernard Dore works for the National Trust and national museums as well as dealers.
Write or telephone before visiting: 0304 373684, 271 Sandown Road, Deal, Kent.
Conservation cleaning is an expensive process and prices vary wildly, though it is worthwhile for a valuable or fragile article: Mr Dore will give an estimate in advance.
The conservation unit of the Museums and Galleries Commission has a register of private conservators including specialists in textiles.
The unit checks references on all conservators, and has a leaflet on how to choose the right restorer: write to 7 St James's Square, London SW1Y 4JU.
Compare and date your own textiles with those at the Victoria and Albert Museum's Textile Galleries, from room 96 to 101, which include samples from ancient Egyptian times to the present century, and with the museum's Dress Collection.
Style Update: Reams recycled
By VINNY LEE
PAPERSAVE is the first commercial stationer and paper merchant in Scotland to deal exclusively in recycled paper products.
Dismissing the myth that recycled paper is sub-standard, Papersave is offering finishes as fine as watermarked business papers, and in many cases prices are cheaper than for ‘virgin' paper.
Papersave sells recycled paper for everything from quality stationery, to paper for printing, duplicators, computers, note-pads, kitchen and toilet rolls.
Coloured, textured as well as plain, the paper comes primarily from British sources, quite a lot is Scottish and smaller amounts are imported from Germany and America.
Toilet rolls 84p for pack of two, basic writing papers from £9 for 500 sheets, quality watermarked paper from £10 for 500 sheets, envelopes, standard £26 for box of 1,000 (can be split) and quality from £27 for 500.
Style Update: Plate class
By VINNY LEE
MARYSE BOXER designs simple but beautiful tableware and has just added ‘Dorado’, with simple gold leaf decoration to her collection.
Ms Boxer's philosophy is that china should be flexible, ‘getting away from the 50-piece matching bridal set’.
She advocates building up place settings ‘with separate yet related pieces that can be combined according to mood, time of day and style of meal’.
The popular ‘Form and Colour’ range comes in eight colours and four shapes -round, square, oblong and Lotus (six scalloped-edged petals).
But the new ‘Dorado’ in cream, black and orange with single gold line edge or concentric gold circles, offers scope for a richer, more formal look.
The range is available from Joseph, Sloane Street, London SW1 and One, Princes Street, Glasgow.
Pin-stripes and inter-city stitches
By VINNY LEE
THE twentieth-century equivalent of the fishing knitter George Trowark (see left) could well be management consultant Jeremy Young who also knits as he travels, writes Vinny Lee.
‘I knitted my way across the Atlantic,’ he reveals.
‘On a flight to New York I sat in my Club Class seat and knitted almost continuously for the seven-hour flight.
The air hostesses inquired what I was making and a man passing in the aisle quite genuinely complimented me on my work.’
Mr Young started knitting 10 years ago.
‘A girlfriend made me a wonderful big, bright red jumper which I liked so much that I asked her to knit me another.
Her reply was ‘knit it yourself’— so I did.
She taught me the basics: casting-on, how to knit and pearl, and I set to work.
‘Travelling on the train to and from Folkestone and London over a period of months I knitted a bright pink jumper.
Sitting in the compartment in my dark city suit, working away at the bright knitting caused a lot of second glances from passers-by, but usually ensured I kept the compartment to myself.
‘In the beginning knitting was a challenge; now it is therapeutic and satisfying.
I have reached a stage where I can watch television, as long as the programme doesn't require too much attention, and knit at the same time.’
Mr Young does not have much time for fancy patterns with three dimensional ‘fiddly’ bits.
He likes to knit quickly.
‘I use chunky wool and big needles so that results are achieved rapidly.
I love bright colours and knit most of the jumpers as presents.
Friends like to be given something you've taken time and trouble to make for them.’
Apart from jumpers he has knitted a jacket, scarves, a three-foot banana (which became a cushion) and numerous ties.
‘Moss stitch is best for ties otherwise they tend to curl up at the edges and look like a drain pipe.’
Has knitting been detrimental to his career?
Mr Young thinks not.
When working for Reuters, a colleague revealed that their boss had been impressed by his hobby.
‘Apparently he liked his staff to have character,’ says Mr Young.
And is there anywhere he has not knitted?
‘Yes, in the pub.’