

The party's just begun for Democrats in New Jersey: New Jersey used to be the butt of TV comics.
Now, in an election year, Leonard Doyle writes, it is finding new respect
By LEONARD DOYLE
THE MAN with the bulbous nose and large gold pinky ring was determined to have his photograph taken with Congressman Jim Florio.
Elbowing his way through the crowd at the ‘colonial streetfair’ inside the Loews Glenpointe Hotel, he said that having paid $500 to get in, he wasn't about to leave without being photographed with the next governor of New Jersey.
Candidate Florio and his blonde wife, Lucinda, had no choice but to pose with the property developer from the Jersey waterfront before moving on past three mediocre belly-dancers, a man (on stilts) dressed up as Abraham Lincoln and an actor dressed up as Rip Van Winkle.
The Florios worked the room with ease and self-confidence and by the time they had reached the podium an aide to the candidate was saying that almost a million dollars had already been raised for the Democratic campaign.
On the platform, Mr Florio asked the party faithful not to become too complacent.
‘To quote the famous American philosopher Yogi Berra (of baseball fame),’ he said, ‘It ain't over till it's over.’
With less than a month left before the 7 November election and opinion polls showing that he leads his Republican opponent, Congressman Jim Courter, by between 14 and 23 points, the race for governor of New Jersey is attracting intense national interest.
Traditionally a Democratic state, New Jersey has been under broad Republican control since Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter in 1980 and Governor Thomas Kean narrowly defeated Mr Florio in 1981.
Thanks to an economic boom which started in the Reagan era, New Jersey has started to shed its hackneyed image as the home of toxic dumps and second-class citizens.
Once looked upon as a valley of humility between two mountains of conceit — New York City and Philadelphia — the Garden State now has a much sharper image to present to the world.
This year, with the Democrats poised to win the state, the national leadership is looking to see whether the same tactics can be used to turn back the tide on the Republicans nationwide.
Mr Florio's formula has been to embrace those Republican policies which brought economic growth to the state during the Reagan years, while sharply attacking the Republicans' conservative stand on social and environmental issues.
He contends that economic prosperity has given the voters the opportunity to choose on issues like abortion and the environment.
To a large extent, the election has been fought on the airwaves, with both candidates delivering television advertisements attacking each other.
Because New Jersey does not have its own television station, or even a state newspaper, the candidates have bought expensive air time on the New York City-based stations and in Mr Florio's case, they seem to be working.
The Republicans placed an advertisement making a link between Mr Florio and the Mafia, which the Democrats have countered with ads referring to Mr Courter as a liar and showing his nose getting longer — Pinocchio-style -as he speaks.
The Republican advertisement shows Angelo Errichett, the Mayor of Camden — which is in Mr Florio's district — being dragged off to jail after his conviction for corruption.
‘Joisey’ is still the butt of jokes made by New York sophisticates, but its political leaders, like the outgoing Governor Kean, now have national stature and have taken the lead in forming social policy for the rest of America on welfare reform, school financing, public housing and care of the environment.
Almost a million new jobs have come to the state since 1990, many in pharmaceuticals and electronics, making up for the 1,000 jobs a month which have been lost in mature heavy industries.
The state has a population of 7.6 million, making it the most densely populated in the union.
Bush gave approval for a plan to hold Noriega
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
AS THE post-mortem into the failed coup in Panama continued yesterday, it emerged that President Bush had approved an order to the US commander in the Canal Zone to remove General Manuel Noriega using covert forces, but the coup fizzled out before the order could be executed.
The debate is now focused on what the United States will do next time, if anything, to fulfil its declared policy of getting rid of General Noriega and avoid an image of timidity and indecisiveness when the chance comes.
In a television interview, James Baker, the Secretary of State, said the Panama commander, General Maxwell Thurman, had been sent an order last Tuesday morning, the day of the coup, requiring him to seize General Noriega if there were an opportunity to do so ‘without risking American life and without open military involvement, then he was free to go ahead’.
The order was, in effect, an authorisation to plan a seizure, not to carry it out.
General Thurman still had to receive a final green light from the president once he had worked out a plan.
By early Tuesday afternoon, however, pro-Noriega forces had arrived at the military command headquarters, where General Noriega was apparently being held, and the rebels surrendered.
The ‘fog of war’— a phrase used by several administration officials to explain the confusion in the Panamanian command post — had prevented any clear view that an attempt to seize General Noreiga would succeed.
As the details of the US involvement are revealed, the administration is coming under fire from normally dovish Democrats on Capitol Hill for not acting swiftly and decisively enough to take advantage of the opportunity to end General Noriega's rule.
In their defence, administration officials reply that if they had used more force — for example, to block a third road used by Noriega's reinforcements -there would have been an unacceptable risk to American troops and Panamanian civilians.
‘You do not commit American lives on somebody else's time frame, somebody else's plan and somebody else's schedule,’ said Mr Baker.
But he said that does not mean the administration has ruled out the use of force in future efforts to oust the general.
As far as the administration is concerned, the debate over what to do next is governed to a large extent by what the American people say they are prepared to sacrifice to force General Noriega to retire or return to the United States to answer drug trafficking charges.
The polls show that about 70 per cent of American troops do not want to risk the lives of American troops to achieve such goals.
On the other hand, the administration is also fighting the return of the president's ‘wimp’ image, which is being revived by the criticism from Capitol Hill.
Argentina: Menem attacked on amnesty decision
By COLIN HARDING
PRESIDENT Carlos Menem's decision to pardon more than 200 military officers accused of human rights abuses, together with the members of the junta responsible for the conduct of the Falklands war in 1982, has been attacked by human rights campaigners and political opponents.
Rene de Epelbaum, a leader of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, said the pardon ‘mocks justice…
It is a real moral aberration that leaves at liberty those who violated human dignity and those who rose up against the constitutional order.’
Facundo Suarez Lastra of the opposition Radical party said: ‘Menem has betrayed the people and his own mandate.’
More than 100,000 human rights supporters staged a rally last month to urge President Menem not to issue a pardon.
But he insisted it was the best way to banish the bitterness of the recent past.
‘I know there will be those who are unhappy…but I am also convinced that millions of Argentines are applauding this measure,’ he said at the weekend.
Included in the pardon were General Leopoldo Galtieri, the former army commander and president, and 38 other officers who faced trial over the disappearance and presumed execution of almost 9,000 people during the 1976-83 military regime.
General Galtieri was also pardoned for misconduct of the Falklands war, along with his fellow junta members, Admiral Jorge Anaya and the air force chief, Brigadier Basilio Lami Dozo.
More than 160 officers who rebelled against President Menem's predecessor, Raul Alfonsin, were also pardoned, notably Lieutenant-Colonel Aldo Rico and Colonel Mohamed Ali Seineldin, who led revolts in 1987 and 1988.
Pardons went also to 64 left-wing guerrillas, but not to Mario Firmenich, founder of the Peronist guerrilla group, Montoneros, who is serving 30 years for murder.
FMLN guerillas in San Salvador
By COLIN HARDING
Wounded FMLN guerrillas in San Salvador board a plane, believed to be bound for Chile, after they were evacuated from the Mexican Embassy, which they occupied to demand safe passage 
Drug lords' offer
By COLIN HARDING
BOGOTA (Reuter)— The Colombian government said it had rejected an offer last year from drug traffickers to give up the drug trade in exchange for not being extradited to the US, and firmly ruled out any dialogue with the traffickers.
Supplies stopped
By COLIN HARDING
MOSCOW (AP)— Azerbaijani rail workers defied a ban on transport strikes and again stemmed the flow of supplies into Armenia.
Reports conflicted on how much of the desperately needed food, fuel and building supplies were reaching Armenia.
‘Our drivers are striking and demanding guarantees of their safety,’ after gunfire and stone attacks on several trains in Armenia, an Azerbaijani activist said.
Nuns still there
By COLIN HARDING
WARSAW (Reuter)— Carmelite nuns denied a report that they had moved out of a convent at the former Nazi death camp of Auschwitz which has caused a row between Roman Catholics and Jews.
‘All 14 of us are still here.
We are waiting just as you are, as the whole world is waiting,’ a spokeswoman at the convent said.
Pope's Korea trip
By COLIN HARDING
SEOUL (AFP)— Pope John Paul II urged South Korea to work for the reunification of the Korean Peninsula peacefully and told the President, Roh Tae Woo, that the division symbolised suffering.
He told some 600,000 people at a mass that he wanted to visit China, where millions of Catholics are believed to belong to an underground Church.
Greek elections appear imminent
By PETER THOMPSON
ATHENS — Greece's interim government, headed by the conservative New Democracy backbencher, Tzannis Tzannetakis, resigned after three months in office, writes Peter Thompson.
Mr Tzannetakis was asked to stay on until the appointment of a caretaker administration under a senior law officer later this week, to hold new elections on 5 November.
The President must offer the three main party leaders in turn a three-day mandate to try to form another government based on the present parliament.
This is a formality, however, since two parties — New Democracy and the Communist-dominated Coalition of the Left — have refused to use their mandate.
Andreas Papandreou, leader of the socialists (Pasok) and former prime minister, is unlikely to win the support he would need — ruling out any course other than immediate elections.
Latvians vote for statehood
By PETER THOMPSON
RIGA (Reuter)— Latvia's mass Popular Front movement yesterday approved an ambitious plan for independent statehood in the biggest challenge so far to Moscow from the restive Baltic republics.
The 1,152 voting delegates to the Front's second congress approved a carefully worded programme for transition to a free, multi-party state.
‘We now have the backbone of the programme,’ said a Front spokesman.
‘We are still speaking about a transition period, and our most important tasks is to shorten that transition’.
Other delegates said they would take economic and political measures to achieve their final aim, including forming independent economic ties with other Soviet republics.
Out of Angola: Market socialism on the edge of a rubbish dump
By KARL MAIER
LUANDA — A small crowd rocks with laughter as a uniformed soldier, his eyes nearly closed in a drunken Saturday afternoon stupor, writhes body to body in a snake-like dance with a plump young woman in a tight blue dress.
Smoke from a row of barbecues mixes with the dust of perhaps 15,000 people shuffling along the wooden stalls to shop for meat, antibiotics, the latest fashions, even, it is said, used cars.
There is plenty of ice-cold beer, soft drinks and grilled chicken sandwiches.
There would be nothing particularly remarkable about this scene in most African countries, where open air markets are an age-old tradition.
But Rock Santeiro, which takes its name from a steamy Brazilian TV soap opera that delighted viewers throughout Portugal's former African colonies, sits on a rubbish dump on the northern edge of Luanda, the capital of Angola.
And in Angola, ruled since independence in 1975 by the Marxist Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), such free markets are illegal, officially anyway.
Many visitors to Luanda leave with the image of a dead city, where large glass windows in state-run shops reveal mostly empty shelves, where sewage too often runs through the streets — there's a cholera epidemic now — where the state has had to hire a private firm which imported Filipino lorry drivers to clean up a decade's worth of rubbish.
(They have not yet succeeded.)
The 14-year-old civil war between the government and Jonas Savimbi's Unita rebels has brought about the collapse of the oil-rich Angolan economy, the story goes, and turned Luanda, once called the Rio de Janeiro of Africa, into one of the continent's dirtiest capitals.
The ‘programmes’ put together for visits organised by President Jose Eduardo dos Santos' government rarely include stops at the ‘Candonga’, or parallel market, whose high prices have fostered such names as Tira Bikini (take off your underwear) or Cala Boca (shut up).
But ask state workers where they buy their new outfits, be it of traditional African cloth or stylish jeans, and the answer is likely to be Rock Santeiro.
Nice clothes can also be had at the dollar stores run by the Cubans and the Bulgarians, whose recent low price sales have angered Angolan higher-ups.
There is an invisible frontier just a mile or so on the road north out of Luanda, but it is more of a feeling than anything else.
The run-down villas and cement footpaths give way to dusty tracks and wooden shacks.
Portuguese, spoken officially, fades into Kikongo, Kibundu and other African languages which finally all mix together into Angolan slang.
A young girl selling sugar doughnuts on a street corner is symbolic of the threshold, where one of Angola's economies, the official, meets the other, the parallel.
Her freshly baked treat goes for 100 Kwanzas, about £2 at the legal exchange rate but just two pence on the open market.
The Angolan government, increasingly looking to free market policies to revive the economy, last month joined the International Monetary Fund in Washington, and says, as it has for the past three years, that a devaluation of the Kwanza and the lifting of controls on many goods is imminent.
Markets like Rock Santeiro did it long ago.
The huge difference between the official and parallel market prices makes a nightmare out of the monthly shopping budget.
A modest pile of six or seven tomatoes costs about £10 or ten pence depending on your calculation, while a pound of meat easily wipes out a month's salary.
But salaries are largely irrelevant in Angola, because there is so much money and so few things to buy.
Most families rely on income earned outside their job.
For many, the scramble for enough cash to afford the free market prices inevitably leads back to the state shops, and specifically to beer.
The government ration card system allows an urban family to buy a case of imported beer for about 400 Kwanza.
They can be sold immediately on the open market for 24,000 Kwanza, the equivalent of a month's salary for a middle level civil servant.
One engineer uses his truck as an illegal taxi, known as a ‘proceso 500,’ and earns 80,000 Kwanza, To stem the flow of MPLA party workers, state employees, and professionals to the private sector and foreign aid groups, the government introduced a system of cards, lettered A, B or C, which provide bearers with privileged access to imported goods.
The special cards are expected to be phased out once the long-anticipated economic reforms begin.
But until they do, for state and party functionaries, the cards remain the ABC of Angolan socialism.
Curbs sought on laundering: World experts meet today to find ways to hit drug traffickers where it hurts — in their pockets, writes John Eisenhammer.
By JOHN EISENHAMMER
FAR FROM the drama of special agents in helicopters swooping over remote Colombian mountainsides, experts from the world's richest countries meet in Paris today to improve what many consider to be the most effective means of combating the drugs trade — hitting the traffickers' pockets.
The illicit drugs industry has a turnover of some £200bn annually.
The economies of the poor producing countries, such as Colombia or Pakistan, are too small to absorb such sums.
So they have to find their way into the international financial system, where they can be given a veneer of legality.
The business of turning ‘hot’ money into legitimate tender is as old as crime itself, but it is only in recent years, largely because of the explosion of the drugs trade, that money laundering has become such a huge business.
‘A few years ago few officials spoke about it,’ says Professor Lutz Krauskopf, the president of the Swiss committee on special legislation on money laundering.
‘It has become the number one crime in Europe.’
Professor Krauskopf will be Switzerland's legal expert at the Paris conference, called by the seven richest industrial nations at their summit in June.
They decided that, in addition to the traditional, and largely vain, efforts to curb drug production, there is an urgent need to step up the offensive from the other end of the drugs trail.
‘Fighting the money launderers is the most effective means we have,’ says a senior British specialist.
‘The confiscation of proceeds from drugs crimes makes it difficult for traffickers to salt away their funds, do time and come out to the high life.’
Once a sizeable sum has been accumulated from street deals, this illegal cash has somehow to be ‘made legal’ by slipping it into the banking system.
In countries where deposits above a certain amount have to be authorised, such as those over $10,000 (£6,250) in the United States, this entails a team of flunkeys making numerous lower deposits which are then switched around at will.
Alternatively, a courier will smuggle often millions of pounds at a time to a country where banking secrecy offers greater protection.
With their teams of lawyers, accountants and company agents, and able to transfer money at the push of a computer button, the launderers dodge through the maze of the different countries' jurisdictions creating a trail so complex that investigators, never mind the banks, find it almost impossible to spot what is going on.
The British government led the way in Europe with its tough Drug Trafficking Offences Act in 1986.
This gave wide investigative powers, and made possible the seizing, freezing and confiscation of assets.
On conviction, the court has to set a value on the drug assets earned during the previous six years, and a confiscation order.
In a reversal of normal legal practice, this money is assumed to have been illegally earned, unless the trafficker can prove otherwise.
‘But the nature of the drugs trade, and financial markets, is such that one country alone can do little,’ says Detective Chief Inspector Gus Jones of Scotland Yard's National Drugs Intelligence Unit.
‘The only agreement that is really working is the one with the Americans, and that was signed 18 months ago.
The whole process takes so long.
But until the international co-operation is there, with similar powers, and sufficient resources, it's very difficult.’
This will be one of the main tasks facing the Paris meeting.
EC split on how to collect VAT
From DAVID USBORNE in Brussels
IT IS about as impenetrable as any dispute in the European Community can get, but it threatens either to seriously weaken the edifice of ‘Project 1992’ or at least to bury businessmen under a landslide of new paperwork.
At issue is one small, but key part of the European Commission's plan for an alignment of Value Added Tax (VAT) and Excise rates in the 12 member states, which it considers essential if frontier checks on traders are to be abolished after 1992.
The area of dispute, which promises to occupy all of a meeting of EC finance ministers in Luxembourg today, is over the Commission's proposal that the current system of exporting goods free of VAT be abandoned and that after 1992 the tax should be levied in the country of origin before export.
Such a change would entail the creation of a clearing house, presumably in Brussels, whose job would be to reapportion VAT receipts to ensure that revenue is accrued as now in the country of consumption rather than production.
The member states have, however, come out in almost unanimous opposition to such a change, arguing, in a paper prepared for today's meeting by national treasury officials, that it is too cumbersome and bureaucratic (although an unwillingness to cede fiscal control to Brussels is probably more relevant).
The counter-proposal is that zero-rating of exports should remain, but that traders would be obliged to list every item exported for spot-inspection by customs officers.
This, it argues, would minimise the risk of fraud that open borders would generate.
Without border checks, traders may be tempted to claim exemption from VAT on goods ostensibly destined for export but which, in fact, never leave the country or are reimported.
At a meeting of the European Commission last week, the Commissioner for tax, France's Christiane Scrivener, shocked her colleagues by suggesting that the member states' case may prove overwhelming or at least that the system as first proposed should be put back until 1995.
Thus the sacrosanct date of 1992 would be effectively abandoned.
Mrs Scrivener was sharply rebuked, not least by the Commission President, Jacques Delors, and she has been instructed to stand firm against the governments' proposal today and tell ministers to think again.
In the view of most Brussels officials, the alternative of making traders list every item bought and sold across borders would be intolerable and undermine the purpose of 1992, which is to make trading between EC countries as simple as possible.
The Commission calculates, moreover, that the job of cross-checking between the customs departments of each member state into the validity of traders' declarations would mean an exchange in electronic mail between them of about 20,000 million characters a year.
Even with that level of scrutiny, there could be little hope of containing fraud, which is already a serious drain on the EC's coffers and on its reputation.
Babangida blocks new political groups
By CAMERON DUODU
PRESIDENT Ibrahim Babangida of Nigeria has blocked the creation of 13 new political parties.
He surprised the nation with the announcement, made in a radio and television broadcast on Saturday night, that his government has refused registration to any of the 13 political associations that applied for it.
The president said that the military government itself would organise and finance two parties under a new ‘grass roots democratic two-party system’.
The two parties created by the government will be called the Social Democratic Party and the National Republican Convention.
They would give equal rights and opportunities to all qualified Nigerians to participate in the political process in the run-up to when the military hands over to civilian rule in 1992, the President said.
His move appeared certain to inflame passions in a country noted for the frequently intemperate attitude of its people towards party politics.
A great deal of money and time had been spent by the 13 political associations in their efforts to win approval from the government-appointed National Electoral Commission (NEC).
The Commission had in fact drawn up a short list of six associations, from which the government was expected to select two groups.
But the NEC said that all the associations had performed poorly in relation to the criteria it had set for them.
They had made exaggerated claims about their membership size, among other shortcomings, the NEC said.
Yet it was able to produce a score sheet which showed that out of a possible score of 100, the Peoples Solidarity Party came first with 43.90, followed by the Nigerian National Congress (42.62), the Peoples Front of Nigeria (41.20) and the Liberal Convention (34.08).
The Nigerian Labour Party and the Republican Party of Nigeria came bottom with 17 points apiece.
Publication of these results had raised an expectation that the two associations which showed the most promise would be accepted for registration.
After that it was supposed that the others would merge with them.
It came as a shock when President Babangida said the associations were rooted in ‘ethnic and religious bigotry’ and that all of them would be dissolved forthwith.
The government would refund registration fees to the associations, the President said.
He warned that authorities would not hesitate to take decisive action against any groups or individuals that contemplated a disturbance of the peace.
Hussein hints at more freedom
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Amman
KING HUSSEIN of Jordan has promised a parliament with real powers after elections on 8 November, the first for 22 years.
But he warned against the exploitation of religion for extremist political ends.
‘The next parliament will not serve merely as a forum for making political statements but rather as a national institute in which we will all take part in formulating the country's policies,’ he said on television before leaving on a three-nation tour as part of Middle East peace efforts.
‘In the coming stage, we will not suffice ourselves with mere slogans but we will embark on objective and responsible dialogue.’
He gave no specific indication of what powers the parliament would have, and he sounded a cautionary note on the abuse of power.
‘Both voters and candidates in the coming parliamentary elections in Jordan shoulder a grave responsibility and should therefore seek a true democratic rule based on the tenets of the constitution, avoiding rashness and extremism.’
Using religion for political ends, as in Lebanon, had no place in Jordan, he said.
It was a stiff, headmasterly performance, appropriate to the handing down from the palace of the kingly rules by which the democratic experiment was to be played.
But then, as he pointed out, national experience was limited.
No one under the age of 41 has any experience of voting in elections.
He explained that elections and the resumption of parliamentary life, suspended after Israel's seizure of the West Bank from Jordanian rule in 1967, were the logical outcome of his decision on 31 July 1988 to sever legal and administrative ties with the West Bank.
He made no direct reference to the disturbances in April against the government's economic policies.
Instead he summoned up the perennial fears on the East Bank of Israeli destabilisation and denounced what he said were Zionist plots to make Jordan a substitute homeland for the Palestinians.
Yesterday, King Hussein arrived in Italy at the start of his foreign trip, during which he will discuss Middle East problems and economic assistance to Jordan.
Apart from Italy and Canada, he will also visit Britain.
Prisoners of Conscience: Leftists jailed as Pope arrives -Bambang Subono and Isti Nugroho
By CAROLINE MOOREHEAD
AS THE Pope begins his visit to Indonesia, two young men from Gajah Mada University in Yogyakarta on Java are beginning long prison sentences for subversion.
Bambang Subono, a student of political science, and Isti Nugroho, who works in the physics and chemistry laboratory, are charged with spreading leftist ideas and feelings of hostility and dissension in society, and with distributing communist literature and discussing communism at meetings.
The announcement of their sentences — seven and eight years respectively -has precipitated a series of clashes between students and members of the security forces, who were said to have used bayonets.
Curbs on free speech — the banning of books, revocation of newspaper licences and persecution of writers who criticise the government — is a normal feature of Indonesian political life.
Since 1965, when the Communist party of Indonesia was blamed for an attempted coup and banned, and hundreds of thousands of communists were killed or sent to prison, the legal instrument most often used to curb political offences has been the Anti-Subversion Law.
The trial of Mr Subono and Mr Nugroho was the first time in many years that the law was used to try ‘leftists’ rather than Muslim activists.
The two men were arrested at a time of increasing student political activism, and a renewed government offensive against the supposed communist threat.
The two men were held in military custody, incommunicado, for some time and are believed to have been ill-treated.
Visitors report seeing Mr Nugroho covered in bruises and unable to speak.
Accounts of their trial suggest that it took the form of a political witch-hunt, with the intention of intimidating other critics of the government.
Spanish bishops call for anti-ETA vote
From TIM MCGIRK in Madrid
CATHOLIC BISHOPS stepped into the Spanish political arena at the weekend by warning Basques not to vote in this month's elections for Herri Batasuna, the legal arm of ETA, the Basque terrorist group.
The bishops' caution came after 2,500 Basques marched through San Sebastian on Saturday protesting against ETA's killing of a police officer, Jose Angel Alvarez, father of six.
The bishops claimed that a vote for Herri Batasuna in the 29 October general election was ‘incompatible with one's moral and Christian conscience’.
Opinion polls taken before the bishops' caution show Herri Batasuna — some of whose candidates are serving long prison sentences for terrorism -winning up to five seats in Cortes, the Spanish parliament.
The bishops'intrusion into bloody Basque politics has maddened many priests, according to Inaki Esnaola, a radical lawyer who is Herri Batasuna's candidate for Guipuzcoa province.
Mr Esnaola claimed that 200 Basque clergymen publicly support Herri Batasuna's call for greater independence from Madrid and an amnesty for nearly 500 ETA terrorists in jail or exile.
But the bishops' warning may harm Herri Batasuna and sober up the many Basques who have persuaded themselves that ETA terrorists are a kind of latter day Knights Templar, wielding car bombs and Uzzis for greater Basque liberty.
During the Franco days, the Basque church was the only bastion of dissent against a regime which denied the Basques their ancient language, self-expression, and even prohibited parents from giving their children traditional names like Inaki and Arantxa.
A number of ETA's early leaders were once Jesuit seminary students.
The terrorist band they formed has, over the past 15 years, claimed more than 550 lives.
The Basque troubles are seen by most Spaniards as so tangled that they do not blame the current Socialist government of Felipe Gonzalez for failing to end the strife.
A recent poll by El Pais predicts the Socialists will be swept into a third term of office on 29 October by an absolute majority.
Mr Gonzalez's party is expected to win 41 percent of the vote, with the conservative Popular Party a distant second at 23 per cent.
The poll also shows that the communist-led Leftist Unity party — capitalising on the high jobless rate and union unrest — is expected to nearly double its vote from 4.6 percent to 8.7 percent, replacing Adolfo Suarez's centrist party as the third most powerful force in Spanish politics.
Ambition spoils French right aim of ‘one big party’
From PATRICK MARNHAM in Paris
MICHEL ROCARD'S Socialist government faces a vote of no confidence today which it is bound to win.
The motion has been tabled by the Gaullist Rassemblement pour la Republique (RPR), but neither the liberal Union pour la Democratie Francaise (UDF) nor the centrist Union Democratique du Centre (UDC) will support them.
This further sign of disunity among the opposition comes just as the former president, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, who is also the leader of the UDF, has called for a fusion of the seven parties of the centre-right into ‘one big party of the centre-right by the beginning of 1992’.
Last week the first practical steps towards such a union were taken when leaders of the RPR, UDF and UDC met and agreed to form a tactical group to work out the most effective means of opposing the government.
The first decision of this tactical group was not to table a motion of no confidence during the debate on the bill which sets this year's level of defence spending.
But within two days the RPR had broken the initial agreement.
The agreement had been drawn up by Bernard Pons, the head of the RPR's parliamentary group, but it was opposed by the former prime minister, Jacques Chirac, who is the founder and president of the RPR.
Mr Chirac explained that by tradition defence bills are based on a cross-party consensus.
Since the socialist government has said that it intends to pass this year's defence bill anyway, it was the duty of the opposition to move a vote of no confidence.
Mr Giscard d'Estaing said last week: ‘France already has its left-wing governing party.
We are still waiting for its opponent on the centre-right.
To be effective, a political message should be very simple.
Yet the opposition's message is exactly the reverse.’
But the real obstacle to any formal union of the centre and right opposition parties is that each of them is formed around the personality and ambitions of an individual politician who considers himself to be papabile or presidentiable.
At the moment Mr Chirac, Mr Giscard d'Estaing, Pierre Mehaignerie of the Centre des Democrates Sociaux (CDS) and Giscard's former heir apparent in the UDF, Francois Leotard of the Partie Republicain (PR) all have hopes of the presidency of the republic; hopes which are entirely based on their positions as party or faction leaders.
Turin court refuses to try Fiat chiefs
From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
A COURT in Turin, the home of Italy's Fiat group, declined at the weekend to try Fiat's chief executive and three senior managers on charges of violating workers' safety statutes, citing fears of an unspecified ‘threat to public order’.
The decision was greeted by a chorus of outrage from trade unionists, Green party activists and Communist party leaders.
The Fiat group is viewed by business as the pre-eminent example of the Italian industrial renaissance.
But it is regarded by the Left as a paramount case of arrogant power and political influence above the law.
Fiat's defence lawyers hailed the court's move as a sensible conclusion which would leave it to the court of appeal to determine whether the four defendants should be tried in another city.
They said the case was prejudiced by a campaign by the Communist party to mount a political attack on Fiat.
The decision is likely to postpone a hearing on the charges for many months and it is now thought that the case could eventually be heard in Milan instead of Turin.
Armed paramilitary police placed central Turin under a virtual state of siege for the hearing on Saturday morning.
It was a show of force which appeared somewhat out of proportion to the 200 or so trade unionists who turned up outside the court.
Mr Romiti, the ruthlessly effective chief executive who was their main target, did not present himself in court.
After consultations in chambers, the court determined that on a technicality, it was not competent to hear the case.
It said that fears for public order would make a hearing undesirable.
However, both the Turin police headquarters and the anti-terrorist squad said they knew of no particular cause for alarm and that only normal security measures had been taken.
A leading Turin Communist, Diego Novelli, who was mayor of the city for a decade, said: ‘We've carried out trials here of the Red Brigades, of (the terrorist group) Prima Linea and of the most dangerous Mafia clans.
It seems incredible that we are not able to carry out this one.’
Winter arrives in Germany
From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
Winter arrived in some parts of West Germany just 15 days after autumn officially began and some areas in the Black Forest and the Alps recorded freezing temperatures and snowfalls
The World This Week
By COLIN HARDING
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY finance ministers meet in Brussels today to seek a way out of the impasse over harmonisation of VAT and excise duty rates which, if unresolved, could make the 1992 single market unworkable.
The Commission's proposals have met with virtually unanimous opposition from the 12 member countries, and the commissioner in charge, Christiane Scrivener, has the unenviable task of persuading them to change their minds.
On Saturday EC foreign ministers assemble in a chateau near Chartres for an informal weekend during which they will discuss, among other things, the co-ordination of Community policy towards eastern Europe.
The 1959 Antarctic Treaty's 15th consultative conference opens in Paris today, to review the accord, which expires in 1991.
The 39 signatories will be discussing what to do about growing pressures for development of the continent's resources.
They will also be examining the Antarctic Minerals Convention, signed in May 1988, which would have permitted controlled mining and oil exploration.
Australia has changed its mind and vetoed the agreement, to the annoyance of the US, the Soviet Union and Japan.
Pope John Paul continues his eastern tour this week, arriving in Indonesia today from South Korea.
President Suharto has urged his country's five million Catholics to give the Pope a restrained welcome, as befits a tiny minority in the world's most populous Muslim country.
The papal itinerary is expected to include the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, annexed by Indonesia in 1976, which has a predominantly Catholic population.
The Pope goes on to Mauritius on Saturday.
The seventh conference of the 102-nation Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, which opens in Lausanne today, promises some lively debates, particularly on orchids and ivory.
The secretary-general of Cites, Eugene Lapointe, expects the conference to reach a compromise on the ivory trade, stopping short of the total ban opposed by some African countries.
As for the flowers, the Dutch delegation will be calling for a total ban on trade in some rare slipper orchids, which they say face extinction in 10 years unless something drastic is done.
The presidents of seven Latin American contries (Peru, Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Venezuela, Colombia and Mexico) gather on Wednesday in Ica, an oasis in the desert south of Lima, for two days of talks focusing on the foreign debt and drug trafficking.
Panama's President Francisco Rodriguez should have been there, too (it is a Group of Eight meeting, after all), but his country is in the doghouse because of the controversial behaviour of his boss, General Manuel Noriega.
President Alan Garcia will take the opportunity to host a mini-summit on drug policy with the leaders of the other two big cocaine-producing countries, Virgilio Barco of Colombia and Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia.
Security will be tight: Peru's Maoist guerrillas, Sendero Luminoso, expressed their disapproval of the whole business by setting off a number of bombs in Ica last week and murdering the wife of the rector of the local university.
The Norwegian parliament reassembles on Wednesday, and on Friday the Prime Minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, and her cabinet will present their resignations, to forestall a vote of no confidence.
Jan P. Syse, the Conservative Party leader, will then put together a centre-right coalition government.
Space shuttle Atlantis is due to be launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Thursday.
The main job for its five-man crew will be to send the nuclear-powered Galileo space probe on its way to Jupiter, where it should arrive in 1995.
The Chinese Vice-Premier, Wu Xueqian, arrives in India on Thursday for talks with the Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, and Indian ministers.
Mr Wu is the most senior Chinese official to visit India since June 1981.
The main item on the agenda will be reduction of troop numbers along the two countries' common border.
The Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, arrives in Washington on Saturday for a week-long visit, to meet members of the administration and congressional leaders.
The problem of what to do with the 55,000 Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong detention centres will figure prominently in the talks.
Sir David feels there is no alternative to some form of forced repatriation, while the US is resolutely opposed to such a solution.
There is a big batch of Nobel prize announcements coming up this week: medicine today, economics on Wednesday and physics and chemistry on Thursday, all in Stockholm.
The Queen begins a state visit to Malaysia on Saturday, and will open the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting on the following Tuesday.
Her visit sets the seal on the improved relations between Britain and Malaysia, following a period of extreme coolness.
East Germany's protesters face violence of state
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in East Berlin
THE HARDLINE leadership in East Germany is today under greater pressure than ever following the weekend demonstrations in East Berlin — the biggest show of social unrest in the East German capital since the doomed workers' uprising of June 1953.
The protests, which were overwhelmingly peaceful except for persistent violence by uniformed and plainclothes police, began late on Saturday afternoon, and the ironies were plentiful.
Even as they began, the chief Soviet spokesman, Gennady Gerasimov, was insisting that change was necessary: ‘Those who delay will be punished by life itself.’
Mikhail Gorbachev avoided touching sensitive nerves during his Berlin visit, though he, too, hinted at the need for change.
The crowds who gathered on Alexanderplatz and then moved off on a winding trail through East Berlin were in any case convinced he was their man.
‘Gorby!
Gorby!’ was a persistent cry of the demonstrators, who at one stage numbered more than 5,000.
Police sealed off central East Berlin and tried to disperse the crowds.
The crowds in turn shouted ‘no violence!’ and put their hands above their heads, as if daring the Volkspolizei, the people's police, and the plainclothes men, the Stasis, to beat them.
‘Who do you want to protect?’ they asked, and: ‘We are the people.’
The plainclothed Stasis — mostly dull-faced youths in windcheaters — formed snatch squads and, with uniformed colleagues, kicked and beat demonstrators.
On at least one occasion, demonstrators were pinned against the wall to make it easier to assault them.
Busloads of Stasis were disgorged into the crowd.
Many arrests were made.
The timing of the demonstration, on the very day of the 40th anniversary of the founding of the East German state, gained an inescapable symbolism.
At one point, the official, irrelevant, birthday fireworks lit up the marching protesters, to the accompaniment of deafening explosions.
Some sang a mocking version of Happy Birthday.
One old man hauled into a police van declared: ‘They've invited us to the birthday celebrations, don't you see!’
The marchers chanted to those watching from balconies: ‘Come down into the streets!’
Some on the balconies waved, some came down, to cheers.
People at ground floor windows offered soft drinks.
When the marchers passed the city's overhead railway, two trains hooted in solidarity, to the crowd's delight.
There were calls for political detainees to be freed and chants in support of the new opposition group, New Forum.
Another call — sometimes from those who had just sung the Internationale — was: ‘Freedom — the West!’
Eric Honecker, the country's ageing and inflexible leader, must know that Saturday night's demonstrations seem certain to be but a foretaste of what is to come.
For the moment, the ever more active opposition remains dominated by intellectuals; it has hardly succeeded in joining hands with the workers.
If that happens — as it did in Poland after 1976, paving the way for Solidarity's triumph in 1980 — then the regime's days will seem numbered.
Bonn speaks of ‘deep dismay’ over clashes
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
THE WEST GERMAN government yesterday expressed ‘great concern and deep dismay’ at police violence against East Germans demonstrating for reform at the weekend.
It urged the East German leadership to respond to demands for freedom ‘not with the police but with understanding and open-mindedness’.
The ‘oppressive’ police violence, arrests and the jamming of a West Berlin radio station had thrown ‘further heavy shadows’over East Germany's 40th anniversary, the deputy government spokesman, Dieter Vogel, said.
At the same time West German leaders renewed their pressure on the East German regime to follow Mikhail Gorbachev's advice and bring in glasnost and perestroika.
They again offered strong economic backing for reforms.
Dorothea Wilms, minister for intra-German affairs, and Oscar Lafontaine, Social Democrat prime minister of the Saarland ventured to hope that there would soon be changes in East Germany despite the fact that its leader, had not shown the slightest inclination to budge during the 40th anniversary celebrations and talks with the Soviet president.
Hundreds of Western tourists were again turned away at crossing points in the Berlin Wall yesterday as East Berlin remained sealed off to all but those with regular visas for the fourth day running.
The authorities evidently feared that Westerners would reinforce protest demonstrators in the city.
A large and angry group of people hurled beer bottles and cans at East German border guards at the Checkpoint Charlie crossing point on Saturday and tore down parts of a newly metal fence in protest.
No-one was hurt but one man was detained by West German police for identification.
The flow of East German refugees swelled during the 24 hours to Sunday morning from the normal 500-600 to 1,184, bringing the number who have taken that route since Hungary opened its borders on 11 September to 35,000.
A further 300 have taken refuge with the West German embassy in Warsaw and, although the East German-Czechoslovak border is virtually sealed off and the West German embassy in Prague is surrounded by police who turn would-be refugees away, 30 more have managed to get inside the building.
Rudolf Seiters, head of the West German chancellery, who played a big role in the deals to ship more than 14,000 from Warsaw and Prague to the West in special trains, said he was confident a solution will be found for them too.
Earlier, Mr Vogel said Mr Honecker's speech on Saturday must have disappointed reformists in East Germany.
‘One could discern no forward-looking political thinking, nor any willingness even to contemplate reform.’
President Gorbachev, he said, had ‘spoken clear words very cautiously.
Whether the (East German Communist) leadership will draw the consequences remains to be seen.’
Mr Seiters said Mr Honecker's speech was an ‘oppressive contrast’ to the challenge posed him by the recent exodus and the upsurge of demands in East Germany for reform.
East Germany must change course it if it is to stop the haemorrhage of its own people, he said, and renewed Bonn's offer of financial assistance for reforms.
Volker Ruhe, secretary-general of the ruling Christian Democrat party, said West German aid should include projects to improve East Germany's consumer goods industries and to develop its environment technology.
West Germany's opposition Social Democrats yesterday cautiously welcomed the formation of an East German Social Democrat party, the first actual political party to emerge from the present ferment for reform.
The caution was prompted by a desire not to seem anxious to dominate the fledgeling party.
‘It is not for us to steer these people or act on their behalf’, said the SPD spokesman Eduard Heussen.
‘But we declare our solidarity with them.’
The Social Democrat party, banned by the Nazis in 1933, returned to life for only one year after the war in what was then the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany.
In 1946 it was forcibly merged with the Communist Party into what was, and is, called the Socialist Unity Party (SED).
The Social Democrats found themselves without influence inside a hard-line Stalinist party.
East Berlin prays for deliverance from evil
From EDWARD STEEN in East Berlin
AROUND the dire brick pile which is Gethsemane Church lurk malevolent-looking plainclothes policemen dressed in uniform windcheaters.
By the door, in the middle of the working class district of Prenzlauer Berg, a mess of candles flutter.
This is the church which has been the centre of opposition in East Berlin for the past few weeks.
There is a vast hand-painted banner strung across the aisle demanding freedom for those arrested.
The sermon yesterday was truly politically charged.
But this remains a deeply spiritual place, in the crisp, sober Lutheran mode.
Pastor Berndt Albani began his sermon: ‘How will it continue, today and in the next days?
The sun has chased away the shadows of the night, but what, when it is night again?’
His theme was Christ's defiance of the Pharisees and his view that the sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.
The Pharisees, said the young, prematurely grey-haired pastor, had been ‘prisoners of their own system, they walled themselves in’.
They had come to expect nothing from a disenfranchised people except violence and anarchy.
Christ, he said, had openly defied ‘the unholy alliance of the keepers of tradition and the power apparat’.
His teaching was a challenge to Christians, more radical than it seemed: ‘The state is there for man, not the other way round, the socialist order is there for man, not the other way round.’
For the first and only time, the audience applauded.
Pastor Albani urged his congregation to follow Christ's way of non-violence: ‘We must try not to be another lot of historical victors…hold to God's word and love your neighbour as yourself.’
The congregation — perhaps 400 people, from outrageous punks to young women with babies — prayed with him ‘to free us from the temptation of power, the temptation of violence — remove us from the barriers of ideology.’
He finished the service by announcing tersely that some of the large number of people jailed during the night had been released.
There were no figures.
Later in the day security forces stormed a candlelight protest march, beating young people who called for peaceful change.
Security police snatched away members of the 1,000-strong march and beat them about the head with truncheons as the crowd chanted ‘No violence’ and ‘We're staying here’.
When the police and security forces ordered the protesters to leave a wide street near the Gethsemane Church they drowned out the order by chanting ‘We are the people!
We are the people!’
Security forces surrounded the area and ordered the 3,000 people gathered at the church to leave.
Many but not all did.
Fundamentalists and reformers haggle in Budapest
From IMRE KARACS in Budapest
SUFFERING from hangovers after their intoxicating victory on Saturday night, Hungarian reformers and their temporary allies were split last night on the question of where the new Socialist Party should pick up the pieces, as a marginal hardline faction announced the foundation of the Hungarian Communist Party.
Members of the Reform Alliance and the Peoples Democracy Platform emerged from separate caucus meetings unable to decide what should be changed in the manifesto drafted by Imre Pozsgay.
Many reformers also complained that the new party's founding document, adopted on Saturday by an 80 per cent majority, did not go far enough.
They had wanted an outright victory leading to the expulsion of all ‘fundamentalists’, whereas the document allows everyone to join the new party.
‘Everyone appears to be a reformist,’ Peter Medgyessy, the deputy prime minister, said bitterly.
Because of the ‘unconvincing nature’ of the compromise, he could not make up his mind whether he should apply for membership.
Having failed to sanction expulsions, reformers were trying to drive out their opponents by personal insults, directed mostly at Karoly Grosz, the General Secretary, and Janos Berecz, the former conservative ideology chief.
Mr Grosz said that he would remain ‘active in the movement’ but would not be standing for any elected post.
He was one of the 159 delegates out of 1,202 who voted on Saturday against the name change.
Mr Berecz, on the other hand, has still not given up his seemingly futile struggle, and has been plaguing the congress with constant interruptions.
He even managed to delay the founding declarations on Saturday, despite being whistled and booed from the hall.
Last night, he told Hungarian television, that he would go with the majority of party members, and leave the party if the majority so decided.
The Peoples Democracy Platform, the reformers' ally, wants to avoid a major split at all costs and are trying desperately to prevent a purge.
They are also accusing Mr Pozsgay's supporters of trying to go too far too fast, and of constantly raising the stakes.
The Reform Alliance announced that on top of the agreed agenda, they wanted congress to make a decision on four issues.
These are the establishment of an ethical committee which would weed out corrupt party officials, the disbanding of the notorious workers guard, a declaration that the new party would hand back to the nation a substantial chunk of the old party loot, and a resolution calling on all parties, including their own, to withdraw from workplaces.
If they succeed, they will give up the last vestiges of the party state and refute the criticisms that they are only interested in the power and money accumulated by the Communists over the past 40 years, without accepting any blame for their actions.
This, however, will not be tolerated even by those who call themselves the centre, and a major split will become unavoidable.
So far, only a lunatic fringe, led by Roland Antoniewicz, a Polish-born admirer of the North Korean dictator, Kim Il-Sung, have joined the new Communist Party.
As delegates continued their debate over the new manifesto and statutes late into the night, the arithmetic in the hall began to show a slight drop in the reformist support, while numbers of the popular democracy platform doubled to more than 200.
That leaves about 500 delegates who are still undecided, and whose views have so far been ignored.
At the leadership elections expected today, it is their votes that will determine the outcome.
Hungary drops the ‘workers’: Imre Karacs in Budapest looks at what a change of name and newspaper means for the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party
By IMRE KARACS
DESIGNER SOCIALISM arrived in Hungary at 17 minutes past eight on Saturday night, when delegates to the ruling Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party congress voted overwhelmingly to drop ‘Workers’ from their title.
As the strains of the national anthem filled the hall, the editors of the party's daily, Nepszabadsag, pulled out of the drawer a new, redesigned front page.
The masthead still carried the same title, meaning ‘People's Freedom’ but the phrase ‘Workers of the world unite’had been dropped.
Naturally, the words ‘Central daily of the Hungarian Social Workers’ Party' also had to give way to a much simpler phrase: ‘Socialist Daily’.
At a news conference on Saturday night, the party's spokesmen indicated that many other symbols would also have to be replaced before the coming presidential and parliamentary elections.
The red star would probably be replaced by a red rose, the huge portrait of Lenin at headquarters might be taken down.
But the declaration issued by the congress left no doubt that the decision was intended to be more than a mere facelift: ‘The present concept of socialism, the Stalinist system, has exhausted all its social, economic, political and moral reserves, and has proved unsuitable for keeping pace with global developments.
Thus the history of the HSWP as a state party has come to an end.’
To sidestep any arguments about who should inherit the party's vast fortunes if a split occurs, the delegates declared themselves to be the legal heirs of the HSWP, whilst dissociating themselves from the old party's ‘crimes, false and mistaken principles and methods’.
The founding document states that members of the old party will not automatically receive their new cards.
They will all have to apply and sign the HSP's statutes and programme.
Local cells of the new party will be formed by 10 November, but what happens to the rest of the apparat is at the moment anybody's guess.
Hungarian radio, always trying to be even-handed in the new climate of pluralism, introduced the HSP as the ‘old-new party’ in yesterday's bulletin.
Ordinary Hungarians were also sceptical of events at Budapest's Novotel Hotel where the congress is being held.
Saturday's name change was the sixth this century, and the previous alterations did not necessarily lead to a radical renewal.
The name discarded at the weekend was invented during the 1956 uprising as a gesture of total break with the Stalinist past.
The HSWP's leadership then proceeded to liquidate, with the help of Soviet tanks, the ‘opportunists and revisionists’ within its ranks, including Imre Nagy, the Prime Minister.
But as workers were busily removing the offending logo from the congress hall yesterday, there were many signs that the change this time would be more than superficial.
As a panicked organiser confided on the first day: ‘There is complete chaos here, everyone is allowed to speak.’
The delegates have also been allowed, for the first time in a communist party's history since Stalin, to set up factions.
The substantive work has consequently shifted from the party headquarters, where all decisions used to be made, to the conference hall and the corridors.
Deals between the two biggest factions, the Reform Alliance and the People's Democracy Platform, are struck in the open, in the congress hall buffets.
Coups are plotted in small groups huddled around a faction leader and strategies decided at fringe meetings.
It is rather like a Labour Party conference, without the block vote.
Here every delegate vote counts equally, and they are increasingly waking up to the power of the voting card.
On Saturday, a deal struck by the leaders of the reformers and the People's Democracy Platform was thrown out by the Reform Alliance's nearly 500 members.
‘Now it is they who are trying to manipulate us,’ one reformist said in disgust as he was leaving a caucus meeting.
The fact that manipulation was possible even in the almost unadulterated democracy of the congress came as a great surprise to most delegates.
But the leaderships of the main factions consist almost entirely of sociologists and political scientists, all of whom have had to read Macchiavelli at one stage of their careers.
The compromise founding declaration which was approved on Saturday contains a line many Western socialist parties would be proud of: ‘The party wishes to contribute to the building of a social market economy based on mixed ownership.’
True to form, the argument has already begun on what ‘social market economy’ means.
Britain is blamed by China for HK fears
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
CONDEMNING Britain for its ‘irresponsible actions’ and ‘erroneous stand’on Hong Kong, China yesterday blamed London for the crisis of confidence that has gripped the colony since the military assault on Tiananmen Square four months ago.
Emigration, perhaps the best gauge of public unease, has increased sharply since the 4 June massacre, an event that shocked millions of ordinary Hong Kong residents usually uninterested in politics.
In sharp contrast to Britain's refusal to publicly apportion blame for waning faith in the colony's future, China's representative to the Joint Liason Group on Hong Kong, Ke Zaishuo, suggested that Britain, not China's trigger-happy army, was alone responsible.
‘The British side has unshirkable responsiblity for the present problem of confidence in Hong Kong,’ said Ambassador Ke in an interview with the official New China News Agency.
The unusually strong words follow a meeting of the Joint Liason Group in London late last month.
The session, postponed at Britain's request after the Peking bloodshed, was the first since hardline leaders triumphed in Peking in June.
‘Because of the British side's sticking to its erroneous stand, the two sides were divided on some major issues of principle,’ said Ambassador Ke.
He admitted that some people in Hong Kong had been alarmed by reports of carnage in Peking but said this was only because they ‘misunderstood’ or had been misled by the ‘false reporting and even rumour of some news media’.