

Law Report: Case Summaries (CORRECTED)
By DAVID SHIPMAN
Correction (published 11 October 1989) incorporated into this article.
The following notes of judgments were prepared by the reporters of the All England Law Reports.
Immigration R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex parte Khalid Hussain; CA (Lloyd, Glidewell, Stuart-Smith LJJ); 5 Oct 1989 Under r 18 of the Immigration Appeals Procedure Rules 1972, the decision of an immigration appeal tribunal considering whether or not to hear oral evidence to determine whether there were compassionate reasons for a person convicted of murder to be given entry clearance was a matter of discretion and could only be attacked on Wednesbury principles or other recognised rules.
S Kadri QC and Harjit Grewal (Penmans, Coventry) for the applicant; John Laws (Treasury Solicitor) for the tribunal.
R v Secretary of State for Home Department, Ex parte Kuku; CA (Woolf, Nicholls and Staughton LJJ); 28 Sept 1989 It is highly desirable that foreign nationals to whom r 10 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 169 applies should not only by warned by the Home Office of the necessity under s 3(4) of the Immigration Act 1971 of obtaining a visa if seeking re-entry to the UK after a short visit abroad, but that that warning should take the form of a document attached to the foreign national's passport, so there is no question of any misapprehension.
Ismael Kumi (Iqbal & Co) for the applicant; David Pannick (Treasury Solicitor) for the Home Secretary.
Magistrates' court R v Holyhead Justices, Ex parte Rowlands; QBD (Mann LJ, Waterhouse J); 31 Aug 1989 An objection to witness statements tendered by the prosecution being admitted in evidence should be made according to the procedure in s 102 of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.
A request that prosecution witnesses be tendered for examination was not tantamount to an objection under s 102.
Objection should not be objection by implication or common usage.
Objection within section 102(2) (d) was unqualified, and need not be buttressed by a promise to make a submission of ‘no case to answer’.
Paul Bogan (R Gordon Roberts & Laurie, Llangefni) for the applicant; Rowena Goode (CPS, North Wales) for the prosecution.
Planning Ward v Secretary of State for the Environment; CA (Woolf, Nicholls, Staughton LJJ); 25 Sept 1989 A private garden was capable of being an ‘open space’ and something that should be taken into account when deciding whether a development proposed to be carried out in a conservation area would preserve or enhance the area within s 277 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971, as substituted, and of Circular No 8 of 1987 issued by the Secretary of State.
Anthony Smith QC and Nadia Sharif (Marron Dodds & Waite) for the appellant; Robert Jay (Treasury Solicitor) for the Secretary of State; Michael Rich QC and Timothy Mould (Shoosmith & Harrison) for the developer.
Practice Richard Ashworth and ors v Berkeley-Walbrook Ltd; CA (Russell, Stuart-Smith LJJ); 27 Sept 1989 As a general rule, where a counterclaim could properly be relied on as a set-off and where it arose out of the same subject matter as the claim, the counterclaiming defendant ought not to be required to give security for costs of that counterclaim unless there were exceptional circumstances.
Robert Leonard (Bischoff & Co) for the defendant; Jonathan Marks (Collins Stone & Co) for the plaintiff.
Sentencing R v Barney; CA (Crim Div)(Bingham LJ, Ognall, McKinnon JJ); 3 Oct 1989 A judge was in error in implying that, had a defendant been in a position to pay compensation to his victim, he might have received a shorter sentence than that in fact imposed.
It must never be thought that a convicted criminal can buy his way out of imprisonment.
The significance of an offer of compensation is that it may be taken as a token of the defendant's remorse, and that it redresses the private loss of the victim, and to that extent and no other it plays a part in the sentencing exercise.
It must be clearly recognised that compensation orders are otherwise wholly independent of that exercise.
Timothy Coombes (Registrar of Criminal Appeals) for the appellant.
R v Stanley; CA (Crim Div)(Bingham LJ, Ognall, McKinnon JJ); 2 Oct 1989 Where a judge has it in mind to make a compensation order but the possibility has not been raised by counsel, it is the judge's duty to raise the matter of his own motion so that it may be properly and fairly ventilated.
Such an order should be made only where there is evidence of the defendant's ability to pay.
JV Machin (Registrar of Criminal Appeals) for the appellant.
Service of documents Lex Service plc v Johns; CA (Glidewell, Balcombe LJJ); 22 Aug 1989 The evidence of the defendant that he had not received documents sent by a recorded delivery service and apparently received by some other person was not contrary evidence for the purpose of contradicting the statutory provision for deemed service under s 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978.
To prove contrary evidence it was necessary to have either positive proof that the document was returned to the sender or, if sent by recorded delivery, that there was no acknowledgement of receipt, or if there was evidence of the document having been received by some person, there was proof that the person was not the intended recipient and that he had not brought the document to the notice of the person required to be served.
In the absence of such proof service must be deemed to have been properly effected.
Contemporary Art Market: East and West meet in magical interiors
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
MOST OF Setsuko's paintings were sold by Friday lunchtime — and the show at the Lefevre Gallery only opened on Thursday.
Her gouache paintings on paper depict unpeopled interiors and flowers with a Japanese sense of colour and design, but their intriguing magic derives from the marriage of East and West.
The chairs and tables, shopping baskets, watering cans and tablecloths are Western, as are the flowers.
They have been arranged in a Western home by the Japanese wife of Balthus, the great French painter.
Balthus, who is 81, married Setsuko, now 47, in 1967.
She began to paint after the birth of her first child in 1973.
The Lefevre show, which moves on to Tokyo in November, is Setsuko's fourth exhibition.
While her husband's work is seen as one of the landmarks in Western painting of the twentieth century, she has retained her own identity, working with the exquisite finesse of the best, traditional Japanese painters.
There are just hints of Balthus's influence in her interiors; enough to add a piquancy to a supremely-decorative style.
Her work would be a pleasure to live with at any price and the £9,000 to £13,000 range seems modest compared with much of the contemporary art on offer in London.
Anthony Caro's prices are 10 times higher — but then he is the founding father of British avant-garde sculpture and does much of his work in the US where prices are higher.
A major exhibition of his 1980s sculpture is split between Annely Juda Fine Art and the Knoedler Gallery.
The Knoedler pieces are evocations in welded metal of the balance of forms in some of the most famous Western paintings, Manet's Dejeuner sur l'herbe and the Descent from the Cross as interpreted by Rubens and Rembrandt.
The powerful balance of these figure compositions is highlighted when they are transposed into tubes and sheets of metal.
They are priced between $150,000 (Manet) and $180,000 (Rembrandt).
Annely Juda has used the gallery's three floors to divide the exhibits into three distinct groups.
The ground floor has big architectural metal sculptures, dominated by the Elephant Palace whose abstract form in shiny brass echoes the monumental mass of an elephant and scores the top price at $250,000.
The first floor contains paper sculptures — he has used torn, cut, folded and painted paper to form provocative jumbles contained in plexiglass cases; these abstract explorations of texture and form, which closely parallel his metal pieces, are attractively priced at $10,000.
It is clearly harder work to produce smaller images in metal; the contorted metal forms in the third-floor gallery, mostly two to three foot high, cost between $40,000 and $60,000.
Fischer Fine Art is showing Elisabeth Frink, the grande dame of British sculpture.
She represents a wholly different tradition in twentieth-century sculpture to Caro.
Where he is abstract and geometric, she is figurative and expressionist.
The show is dominated by more than life-size naked bronze men inspired by the majestic Hellenistic bronze warriors rescued from the sea off southern Italy in the 1970s.
Their heavy, menacing bodies, roughly finished and coloured with acid cost £50,000.
Other works start at £2,500 and include drawings, small animal bronzes, paper cut-outs and massive plaster heads.
Teachers urged to boycott appraisal schemes in schools
By PETER WILBY, Education Editor
TEACHERS' UNIONS are advising their members to boycott appraisal schemes set up by schools and local authorities.
They fear that such schemes could lead to disciplinary action against sub-standard teachers and to the beginnings of a merit pay system.
Their advice follows a decision by John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education, to delay proposals for a national appraisal scheme, run by local authorities under strict guidelines.
The scheme, drawn up after pilot projects by a steering group under Duncan Graham, chairman of the National Curriculum Council, had the support of all the teachers' and heads' unions as well as the local authority employers.
It was designed to focus appraisal on teachers' needs for in-service training and other forms of support.
The steering group strongly opposed ‘standard checklists of performance’.
Mr MacGregor said that he would delay introducing the scheme because of the demands made on teachers by other educational reforms.
But, he added, appraisal had great potential to improve standards, and regulations requiring local authorities to introduce it would be brought forward eventually.
In the meantime, he suggested local authorities and individual schools might introduce their own schemes.
The unions suspect that Mr MacGregor is trying to introduce appraisal on the cheap.
Mr Graham's recommendations would involve the employment of the equivalent of an extra 1,828 full-time teachers and a total cost of £36m-£40m or 0.5 per cent of the annual teacher salary bill.
The unions also fear that Mr MacGregor wants to link appraisal more closely to teachers' salary levels, thus creating a merit pay system.
In a speech announcing his decisions, he said he wanted ‘a wider debate’ on some points.
He also suggested that school governors with commercial or industrial experience might be particularly interested in introducing appraisal schemes.
In a letter to members, the Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association warns against schemes ‘with no guarantee of adequate resources; which may blur the process of professional development with the identification of alleged weaknesses for disciplinary purposes; and which may be used as a crude and inequitable process for relating salary rates to arbitrarily judged levels of performance’.
The National Union of Teachers says that all school appraisal schemes -including existing ones — should be boycotted and local authority schemes supported only if they follow all the recommendations of the steering group.
Making all children learn a foreign language will do nothing to help Britain commercially, Sir Alfred Sherman, a former adviser to the Prime Minister, says today.
Writing in Language Matters, a newsletter issued by the Associated Examining Board, Sir Alfred argues: ‘English is now the world language.
Anyone born with English as his or her native language does not need other languages...’
Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and Japanese are the most useful languages, Sir Alfred says, because they ‘have a wide catchment area containing many decision-makers who may not have a command of English’.
Radioactive risks from Sellafield ‘not fully shown’
By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor
RADIOACTIVE contamination from the Sellafield reprocessing plant extends much further than official surveys suggest, according to a report published by Friends of the Earth today.
Patrick Green, the environment group's radiation consultant, says: ‘There is extensive contamination along 6 kilometres of the River Esk in Cumbria, which is not discussed in official reports published by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
They do not monitor in the area — which suggests that they don't think it is a major exposure route.
Our evidence suggests the contrary.’
If there is undetected contamination in the Esk, then it seems likely that other areas of the west coast are also contaminated without showing up in official statistics, Mr Green says.
He believes that the ministry and British Nuclear Fuels have not sampled the area extensively because the contamination was not predicted by the official models of how radioactive material moves in the environment.
The levels detected upstream in the Friends of the Earth study are broadly comparable to those measured by the ministry in samples nearer the coast -where official models would predict a higher amount of radioactivity.
According to the study, some of the readings exceed levels set by the National Radiological Protection Board for environmental contamination.
This does not mean that anyone has necessarily suffered a dose of radiation exceeding safety limits.
Doses received by local people would depend on the amount of time they spent near areas of higher radioactivity, and on whether any of the radioactivity passed through the food chain.
Nonetheless, the National Radiological Protection Board recommends that when radiation levels approach its ‘generalised derived limits’, the authorities should investigate both the sources of radiation and the way of life of people in the locality to check that they are not being exposed to excessive amounts.
Friends of the Earth claim one particular radioactive chemical, ruthenium, is present to an extent that is 50 times higher than the generalised derived limits.
However, the Ministry of Agriculture reported a similar level of ruthenium in a soil sample taken in 1987, apparently without any comment being raised at the time.
A spokeswoman for the ministry said that it had seen a draft of the report earlier in the year and had felt that it had made ‘inappropriate use’ of the generalised derived limits.
‘We have monitored in the area and there is no hazard to health,’ she said.
‘We shall look forward to seeing the report and if there is new data that warrants investigation.’
‘Telegraph’ to cut jobs and move to 7-day rotas
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH is due to announce today plans to integrate staff into a seven-days-a-week publishing operation.
The plan is expected to involve about 40 redundancies — mainly sub-editors -as management believes the company is overstaffed when compared with new newspapers.
The aim is to put all employees on standard five-day-week contracts, compared with the mixture of four-day weeks, nine-day fortnights and five-day weeks which staff currently work.
Almost everyone will work for the group, rather than a specific title.
‘We have to confront vast, very powerful baronies, one at a time.
It is very painful,’ one manager said.
Sales of The Sunday Telegraph are trailing The Sunday Times, and Observer and facing new competition from The Sunday Correspondent.
‘You can't treble your staff to compete, so we have to throw the resources of The Daily Telegraph behind it,’ an executive said.
The new editor of The Sunday Telegraph, Trevor Grove, was appointed because he is one of Max Hastings's closest colleagues, and can mobilise these resources.
The company's plans indicate the way in which newspapers, having modernised printing methods, are looking closely at editorial costs.
The Telegraph's management believes that when it moved to Docklands, more than two years ago, it failed to modernise fully journalistic work practices, and did not realise how new technology could be used to reduce the number of editing jobs.
Safety drive launched by nuclear inspectors
By TOM WILKIE
NUCLEAR SAFETY inspectors have formed an international ‘trade association’ in an effort to raise standards of nuclear safety regulation throughout the world, writes Tom Wilkie.
The idea is the personal initiative of Eddy Ryder, HM Chief Inspector of Nuclear Installations, who has now persuaded the Vienna-based UN organisation, the International Atomic Energy Agency, to co-ordinate the arrangements.
The first formal meeting of top nuclear safety regulators is expected to take place in December.
Although he is little known in Britain, Mr Ryder appears to be developing into an influential international figure in the regulation of nuclear safety.
He is chairman of the IAEA's Nuclear Safety Advisory Group, which gives him a pivotal role in co-ordinating the safety policies of all countries that have nuclear installations.
The new project, which has been launched quietly and without fuss, mirrors a much more highly-publicised initiative — the World Association of Nuclear Operators — promoted some months ago by Lord Marshall, chairman of the Central Electricity Generating Board.
WANO brings together the owners and operators of nuclear power stations and reprocessing plants.
According to Mr Ryder, the nuclear inspectors decided to get together to swap information and to identify ‘good practice’ that might be codified into formal guidance notes.
He does not see formal codes of practice as the real outcome of the new project, however.
The key outcome will be to bring ‘peer pressure’ to bear to improve the general level of nuclear safety.
Boy's Own adventurer keeps faith with the past: Wilfred Thesiger, explorer, talks to Richard North about his lifelong search for diversity
By RICHARD NORTH
WILFRED THESIGER is exactly the kind of person television companies like to make films about.
After all, he is one of the last survivors of a disappearing people; he belongs to a tribe whose main characteristic is that its members do not own a television set.
So it is that tomorrow, ITV will screen a profile of the man who spent the first eight years of his life in Abyssinia (now Ethiopia) and graduated to serious eccentricity via an English prep school (where he was beaten), Eton (where he learned to box) and finally Oxford (where he was a boxing blue and acquired the dramatically-bent nose which for six decades has lent drama to what would in any case have been a distinguished face).
Mr Thesiger, who will be eighty next summer, arrived in London last week.
In his London flat there is only an old Roberts radio his mother owned until she died in 1973, aged more than ninety.
He now spends most of his time in Northern Kenya, where the Moran (tribesmen) still cling to tradition, just.
As a very young child he witnessed scenes which equalled anything from the imagination of Rider Haggard.
He saw Ras Tafari — later Haile Selassie -return from a great battle which was the beginning of a long road to Emperorship.
This was an Africa of gold and robes, and a bloodiness which reminded the boy Thesiger of The Iliad.
Mr Thesiger hates machines and modernity.
He says he knew from the start that they would spread conformity.
Camels, mules, tribesmen he can master.
Briefly with the SAS in the Second World War, he distinguished himself by being wholly ignorant of whether a wheel nut was to be undone clockwise or not.
Diversity is what he has sought all his life.
But seeing it was never enough.
‘I had to be a part of it’, he says.
Thus he was a supernumerary stoker on a tramp steamer (how Thesiger hated appearing before the ambassador in Constantinople in his flannels when His Excellency cabled the boat with an invitation).
He also gutted fish on a trawler in the north Atlantic.
His explorations took him into deserts and marshes.
He never went alone.
Everything depended on a group of people, loyal to him in harsh places.
‘We starved,’ he says simply, of a camel ride across the Empty Quarter of Saudi Arabia.
‘We had to draw straws for the food we had.’
He claims a simple quality for his companions in these crazy adventures, and in the Bedu whom he admires most of all.
‘They had nobility.’
Asked if any tribes he admires would allow the kind of eccentricity the English tribe had allowed him, he said ‘I had never thought of that’.
He now lives in three homes in Kenya: they belong to people who think of themselves, he says, as his sons.
His dog-leg patrimony (his uncle was Lord Chelmsford) has enabled him to support himself and to help some others.
His books must sell, but he does not think of himself as an author.
Walking briskly towards Sloane Square to get some lunch at his club, he said: ‘In Kenya, I like to sit in a car and watch the world go by.
I don't want to do that in the King's Road.’
He is a man in thrall to the gaudy, tattered pageant of Africa.
He was wearing a dark suit and tie when we met.
He looked like a very good old headmaster, or a decently obscure peer of the realm.
He knows that he wandered in places which had never seen a plane, a car, or a radio.
And he did nothing in his life of exploration to introduce any of them to the places he saw.
To that extent, he can claim to have been an innocent traveller.
‘Imagine being able to radio to base.
I should have hated that.’
Whitehall Watch: Social security plans hold key to wider success: Peter Hennessy examines Next Steps' showpiece
By PETER HENNESSY
AS SENIOR Civil Servants go, Nick Montagu, 45 and an Under-Secretary and principal establishments officer at the Department of Social Security, has one of the biggest burdens in the business on his shoulders.
Managing a staff of 80,000-plus is tough enough.
But, added to that, the success of the most substantial Civil Service reform this century largely depends on Mr Montagu and his colleagues.
If the great social security businesses can be turned into successful, free-standing executive agencies, the problem will have been cracked — the Next Steps reforms will have worked where so many attempts at change faltered.
Mr Montagu is quite open about it: ‘We're the showpiece.
It mustn't fail.
.. Next Steps almost stands or falls by us.
If we succeed in the biggest executive operation, we can succeed with almost any operation.’
‘The biggest executive operation,’ as Mr Montagu puts it, is the benefits system, the largest single employer in the Civil Service (70,000 staff) and distributor of the largest single chunk of public expenditure (about £50bn).
But for Mr Montagu, his colleague, Bob Brown, and his team in the department's Agency, Systems and Planning Division, it is one of a series of new creations.
The first and smallest, the 600-strong Resettlement Agency, got off the ground last June.
Next April, the Information Technology Services Agency, headquartered in Lytham St Anne's, Lancashire, will be launched with its staff of 3,000 and its job of keeping the whole benefits system electronically live.
At the same time, a new Contributions Unit, which may or may not develop into a full-blown agency, will be spun out of the existing DSS central capacity in Longbenton, Newcastle (with people stationed in every benefit office in the land and a total staff of 7,000).
A year later, the hoped-for jewel in the Next Steps crown, the Benefits Agency, will be up and away with its headquarters in a place still to be determined.
In the next few weeks advertisements will appear for a chief executive who, if all goes to plan, will have a year to run themselves in and have a real say in building the new institution.
The headship of the Benefits Agency will rank with the chief executive's post on the National Health Service as the most demanding management job in Britain.
It is a place where a great reputation can be won or an existing one extinguished.
Few appointments made by the Civil Service Commission in recent years will be so crucial, not just to the efficient running of the welfare state, but to the progress of the most significant Civil Service reform this century.
If I were on the pay side in the Treasury, I would be prepared to permit maximum flexibility on the salary and conditions offered to the successful applicant.
Pay flexibility is a main preoccupation of Mr Montagu and Mr Brown in the planning stage.
It is relatively easy to operate such a system where trading is involved and many are in specialist grades as in Her Majesty's Stationery Office, the up-and-running agency with the most sophisticated pay arrangements so far.
Offering it to armies of administrative assistants doing non-commercial jobs in the great clerical factories underpinning the benefits system and in a nation-wide network of local offices, is another matter.
They are looking at job-weighting, concepts of ‘stewardship’ and performance measurement in the knowledge that greater flexibility in pay (and recruitment) will be crucial factors in escaping from what Mr Montagu calls ‘the rigidities that have bedevilled us in the past’.
The feasibility study prepared by Stephen Hickey, an assistant secretary, which provided the agency blueprint for the DSS, was unequivocal about the key asset in the operation —‘people will represent the prime resource of any social security agency’— and blunt in saying ‘morale in some areas is low…virtually no local office staff were happy to admit working for social security’.
Mr Montagu and Mr Brown believe getting staff not to fear the agency process as a bringer of cuts or worse conditions, but as a way of improving both and service to the customer, is the crucial task facing ministers and senior officials between now and spring 1991.
Much was happening to disrupt life before the agency idea — the £2bn rolling programme to make social security operations fully computerised; plans to move work out of London.
‘Time is so short’, Mr Montagu said.
‘We have got to get around the local offices and listen to what they're saying.’
A great deal is riding on those words and what they produce.
Arts events ‘the domain of Britain's privileged’
By DAVID LISTER, Arts Correspondent
GOING to the theatre, concerts and art galleries remains largely the privilege of the well-off and well-educated, and of more women than men, research shows.
A year-long survey of the habits of 24,000 adults in England, Wales and Scotland has found that people with an annual household income of £20,000 or more have considerably higher levels of attendance than those in lower income groups.
It was very high for people who took their full-time education beyond the age of 18, and higher among women than men for all art forms except jazz and art galleries.
The information, collected for the Arts Council by the British Market Research Bureau, shows that in an average period of four weeks during 1988-89, 6 per cent of the adult population went to the theatre, 4 per cent to an art gallery, 2 per cent to classical music and 1 per cent to jazz.
Over a three-month period, opera attracted 1 per cent of the population but ballet and contemporary dance fewer than 1 per cent.
Of the 24,058 people interviewed, 37.7 per cent of women attended arts events and 33.1 per cent of men.
Above the £20,000 income threshold, more than half of those interviewed go to arts events.
Fewer than 30 per cent of those earning up to £8,000 go, and fewer than 40 per cent of those earning up to £15,000.
Nearly 55 per cent of people who have been in higher education had been to the theatre in the survey period, but fewer than 19 per cent of those who left school at 16.
For art galleries the figures are 50 per cent and 16 per cent, for classical music 32 per cent and 8 per cent .
Arts Council officers are understood to be considering changing the practice of handing out separate information about the arts to the different political party conferences.
As reported in some editions of The Independent last week, the Arts Council leaflet aimed at this week's Conservative Party conference differs starkly from the one handed out to Labour delegates in Brighton last week.
The leaflet earmarked for the Tories will stress the earning potential of the arts, its management and marketing skills, and the usefulness of sponsorship.
The leaflet given to Labour activists mentions none of these things, concentrating on how many ordinary people go to arts events.
In a memorable set of class assumptions, the Labour leaflet looks at how many people go to opera, jazz and West End theatres, while in the message to Tories only opera remains.
Neil Kinnock appears to have failed to convince the Arts Council that his party now has a wide constituency covering large sections of the middle classes, and might have business contacts.
The Labour leaflet compared the numbers going to the Royal Shakespeare Company with attendances at Wembley Stadium, Aida with the Ideal Home Exhibition, and ballet, somewhat incongruously, with Rugby Union.
And, without a hint of irony, under the heading ‘All kinds of people enjoy the arts’, it says that 3.1 million News of the World readers go to the theatre, and 1,157,000 Sun readers attend art galleries or exhibitions.
Study shows big fall in number of people entitled to legal aid
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
THE NUMBER of people entitled to civil legal aid has fallen by more than 14 million since 1979, according to research published today.
The findings confirm earlier estimates of a large drop in eligibility and will fuel renewed calls for the legal aid means test to be thoroughly reviewed.
Compared with 10 years ago, when it was estimated that at least 70 per cent of two-parent households with two children came within the scheme, less than half of two-parent families now qualify, according to the author of the study, Michael Murphy, a statistician at the London School of Economics.
Claimants under the scheme receive advice or representation free or subject to a contribution linked to disposable income.
But legal aid experts argue that low income and capital limits are denying access to justice to increasing numbers of people who cannot afford to pay privately.
Mr Murphy's analysis of available earnings and spending data, including the Department of Employment's most recent Family Expenditure Survey, is revealed in today's Legal Action.
The analysis concludes that 1 million households and more than 2½ million people have dropped out of the legal aid net in the two years since Lord Mackay of Clashfern became Lord Chancellor.
Over the last decade, the upper disposable income limit rose by about 50 per cent, but earnings rose by 135 per cent and prices by 93 per cent .
Mr Murphy's findings are borne out by new evidence of a decline in the use of legal aid.
Figures for the year ended 31 March 1989, due to be published at the end of the year, show an overall 8 per cent drop in the use of the ‘green form’ initial advice and assistance scheme, as compared with an overall increase the previous year of 10 per cent.
‘Green form’ advice for consumer problems was 16 per cent down on the previous year.
Help with employment disputes fell by 14 per cent, with debt, immigration and housing matters showing falls of 13, 9 and 8 per cent respectively.
Like previous studies, Mr Murphy's analysis uses conservative assumptions and legal aid experts say the problem could be much more serious.
Mr Murphy says eligibility levels which took account of variations between households and actual, rather than assumed, figures for tax and housing, could be definitively assessed by further analysis of detailed Family Expenditure Survey statistics at the cost of only a few thousand pounds.
Lord Mackay has treated claims that eligibility has substantially fallen as speculative.
But there is now tacit acceptance at the Lord Chancellor's department that the subject must be investigated.
‘Over the last couple of months we have begun a preliminary look at the statistics with a view to doing our own calculations.
The Family Expenditure Surveys will be a part of the exercise,’ a spokeswoman said.
But she added: ‘Numbers are one thing, effects are another.
The scheme was intended for people of poor or moderate means.
We will need to discover who is really being stopped from going ahead with legal action, or whether people are making choices between legal action or re-mortgaging their house, a holiday, a car or otherwise freeing money which is tied up.’
Viewpoint: Clear approach to policy on trade union law: Michael Meacher, Labour's employment spokesman, replies to a Viewpoint article by Barrie Clement, Labour Editor, which considered the party's position on trade union law
By MICHAEL MEACHER
READING Barrie Clement's diatribe (6 October) under the heading ‘Union law policy remains unclear’, I wondered if he had attended the same Labour Party Conference as I did.
The party now has a clearer, more comprehensive and more explicit statement covering the whole range of industrial relations policy than in the past.
It is a firm and robust statement which we believe will command a very high degree of public support as being balanced, fair and even-handed.
In addition, the unions unanimously support it.
That gives us a far stronger base from which to campaign on trade union law than we have had before.
While blithely ignoring this fact, all Mr Clement will say is that ‘bluntly, the Shadow Cabinet and unions need to get their fingers out — with some expedition — to set the limits of the proposed legal framework’.
It seems to have escaped him that we already have.
He claims there has been ‘a confusing flurry of paper involved in the evolution of policy’— first the policy review document, then the TUC composite resolution, then the Meacher-Haigh clarifying statement 10 days ago on legal protections for unions, and then the conference debate, including my speech.
He then draws the breathtaking conclusion that ‘there has been nothing resembling intellectual coherence’.
One has to ask, has he read them?
Can he point to one iota of inconsistency or lack of intellectual coherence between the policy review, the clarifying statement, and my speech?
It simply doesn't exist, and significantly he produces no evidence.
Mr Clement then says, presumably as a joke, that the clarification needs clarification.
And what reason does he give for thinking that?
That ‘the party and unions should set the level of fines that recalcitrant unions would incur’.
So it all comes down, two years before the election, to stating the level of fines.
He seems to have missed my statement three weeks ago that fines would be ‘deterrent, sufficient to secure compliance with the law’.
He then argues that ‘it is not sufficient (for me) to tell the conference that there will be no return to mass picketing’.
Actually, I never mentioned picketing, mass picketing or otherwise, in my speech, but let that pass.
In fact, we have repeatedly said that we would retain the current Code of Practice on peaceful picketing which limits the number of pickets.
Next Mr Clement asks some questions about sympathy action, as though the answers were uncertain.
In fact, they are obvious.
‘Would it be lawful for workers to refuse to handle imports from South Africa?’
Answer, no.
‘Would meat porters be allowed to take action in support of nurses?’
Answer, no.
He queries our criterion of ‘having a genuine interest in the outcome of a dispute’ as a measure of connectedness in sympathy action.
He asked me that same question at the conference but, like Pontius Pilate, has not stayed to report my answer.
I told him we were simply adapting the phrase from the social security regulations, where for years it has worked perfectly satisfactorily in deciding whether or not a worker should get benefit if he is laid off at another workplace from the one where a dispute is taking place.
He does not, under section 19 of the 1975 Act, ‘unless he proves that he is not directly interested in the dispute’.
Rather than asking generalised questions about applicability in a vacuum, this criterion, once the exact local circumstances are known, has proved readily workable, as I told Mr Clement.
Finally he argues the need ‘to bang the heads of union leaders together’ to resolve these issues.
Is he really blind to the fact that we have already done precisely that, and that is why an unprecedented consensus now exists on every aspect of the policy?
Building society plan for ‘school-term’ jobs
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
A MAJOR BUILDING society is introducing a ‘school-term’ employment scheme for parents who wish to take school holidays off work to look after their children.
The Alliance and Leicester initiative is among measures to stem staff turnover now being explored by finance sector companies as the labour market tightens.
It is being piloted in Hove, Sussex, and Oadby, Leicestershire, where the society has its administrative offices, and is open to employees with children aged between five and 14.
A company spokesman said last night the programme was part of a company-wide strategy to broaden its recruitment net.
‘It is intended to enable parents to dovetail their career and family commitments and thereby to ease recruitment problems which are already being felt in all areas of commerce as a result of the steadily falling number of school leavers and graduates.’
Jobs under the new scheme will command a salary in proportion to time worked.
Successful applicants will be able to build up entitlement to normal benefits such as concessionary mortgages.
Employees who opt for the scheme will be expected to revert to their former employment contract once their children reach 14.
The shortage of women solicitors and the difficulty in persuading many to return after having children is prompting the Law Society to consider setting up a creche for employees of firms in central London.
A meeting will be held tomorrow to assess demand.
Video workshop held at National Museum of Photography, Film and Television
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
A video image of Dale Kunzler, 10, from Todmorden, West Yorkshire, is projected upside down on a screen behind him during a video workshop at the ‘Let's Make A Film’ Festival held at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford at the weekend.
About 1,500 young people attended the event.
Anxiety grows over integrity of statistics
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
CALLS FOR an independent body to monitor the Government's use of statistics followed two recent cases which attracted widespread criticism, but some academics have long been concerned about the independence of British official statistics.
The Prime Minister's decision to refuse funding for a survey of sexual behaviour to further research about the spread of Aids, and a new way of counting people in the poorest category of the population which reduced the number by one million, caused controversy.
However, Sir Claus Moser, former head of the Government Statistical Service (GSS), and Sir David Cox, a former president of the Royal Statistical Society (RSS), identify the turning point in the history of British official statistics as a White Paper in 1981 entitled Government Statistical Services.
In two and a half pages there were seven references to efficiency, five to value for money, four to economies and two each to savings and cost effectiveness.
Integrity, validity and reliability merited one mention each and objectivity got two.
Based on the Rayner Review, by Sir Derek (now Lord) Rayner, chairman of Marks and Spencer, the White Paper signalled a 25 per cent cut in the GSS and the Central Statistical Office (CSO) which then employed 540 professional statisticians and about 8,500 other staff at a cost of £100m.
It also resulted in fundamental changes to the principles on which they operated.
The CSO, which passed from the control of the Cabinet Office to the Treasury earlier this year, prepares the National Accounts and many other economic statistics.
Its director is also head of the GSS and as such has considerable influence over statistics throughout Whitehall.
According to Sir Claus, who ran the services from 1967 to 1978: ‘Before the Rayner Review the purpose of the government statistical services was to serve several masters, first and foremost — and this was never in doubt -the Government; but also industry, academics the public, indeed the whole nation…
‘What worries me most is the effect of the cuts following Rayner on the overall accuracy of government statistics.’
The Rayner Review stated: ‘Particular attention needs to be paid to all information collected or costs incurred primarily to meet demands outside central government…in general there is no more reason for govermment to act as universal provider in the statistical field than in any other.
Information should not be collected primarily for publication.
It should be collected primarily because government needs it for its own businesses.’
Sir David, who is a widely respected, moderate voice, has become increasingly concerned about the reputation and integrity of British official statistics.
‘It is not just statistics that are involved, it is also research and information generally,’ he said.
‘Informed public discussion of potentially controversial issues is being inhibited.’
The fact that the RSS is even considering a proposal for an independent watchdog is interpreted by academics and scientists as highly significant, as the organisation typically projects a reserved and conservative image.
Until now, at least publicly, the society has played down the level of anxiety; it has resisted taking any action that could be seen as anti-government.
Privately, a number of distinguished members have decided that measures are needed because of a growing perception, nationally and internationally, that the integrity of official statistics was being eroded.
‘The fact that there is concern, is itself cause for concern,’ Sir Claus said.
Recent causes for concern had related both to frequent revisions of figures as well as to integrity issues.
‘Revisions of the National Accounts and balance of payments figures have caused worry.
One cause of this many be the cuts in basic information collected following the Rayner reforms.’
Sir Claus pointed out that allegations of political interference in statistics are not new, and revealed that he twice threatened to resign over attempts to change or suppress reports under Labour governments.
He said: ‘I don't know of any government that has actually falsified figures.
But there are different grades of interference.
There is non-publication or limited circulation of figures.
Then there is changing definitions or the method of collection of statistics in such a way that something misleading is produced.
‘At present I worry most about the unemployment statistics, the poverty data and any suggestions of tampering with the Retail Price Index.’
He said he had wanted to see a national statistics council to act as a protective agency 10 years ago.
Such an organisation should be chaired by the RSS with representatives from government, industry and other sectors of the community.
Researchers allege figures ‘politically manipulated’
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
The Independent has interviewed pressure groups and independent researchers who do work commissioned by various government departments.
Their allegations include political manipulation of statistics, selective and misleading use of figures, failure to collect information which reflects badly on the Government's record, and constraints on research.
Here are some examples: Unemployment The 29th change affecting unemployment figures since 1979 was quietly introduced last July when 26,000 redundant miners were ‘relieved of the requirement’ to sign on, according to documents leaked from the Department of Employment.
Because they are now paid by the Department of Energy, they have been removed from the jobless totals.
The Unemployment Unit, a pressure group which calculates the unemployment figure as if the changes had not been made, claims it is 2,325,100 compared with the Government's figure of 1,751,000.
A recent Bank of England report for analysts concluded: ‘The sharper fall in unemployment than rise in employment has been due to the introduction of the Restart interviews and stricter availability-for-work tests.
Thus the Restart variable has, since 1986, contributed about 750,000 to the fall in unemployment.’
Restart is aimed at the long-term unemployed and involves interviews with the employment department.
Those may or may not lead to training or jobs but once a person registers for an interview they are taken off the jobless total.
According to the Unemployment Unit's calculations including them takes the jobless total to more than three million.
Economy Nigel Lawson, Chancellor of the Exchequer, sparked a political dispute by proposing mortgage interest payments should no longer be included in the Retail Price Index (RPI), a move that would lower the apparent inflation rate.
No decision has been taken but he argues few countries include them, that they obscure the underlying trend and mean tightened monetary policy produces an illusory rise in monetary inflation.
Neil Kinnock, the Labour Party leader, told the Commons that any RPI not including mortgage interest payments would be ‘fraudulent’.
NHS At the Conservative Party Conference in 1986, Norman Fowler, then Secretary of State for Health, was loudly cheered on producing a long computer printout of 380 new ‘large hospital schemes’ costing £3bn, which he unrolled over the rostrum for the benefit of photographers from newspapers which had criticised the Tories' record on the NHS.
The list was so long because he counted every programme over £1m — the previous definition was over £5m — and included such projects as a car park at Medway Hospital in Kent.
Poverty Research by the Institute of Fiscal Studies (IFS) published last week showed the Department of Social Security has removed more than one million people from the poorest category of the population — having an income less than half the average wage, by changing the way figures are calculated.
Now it is assumed all in a household have an equal share of the total income.
Under the old method a pensioner, for example, or unemployed teenager, sharing a house with the family was assumed to have a separate, and often lower, income.
The Commons Social Services committee asked unsuccessfully for both sets of figures to be produced.
The IFS report Counting People With Low Incomes said that refusal ‘does nothing to allay fears that the changes were for political rather than bona fide methodological reasons’.
Margaret Thatcher caused an uproar when she claimed 88 per cent of claimants would be better off after changes to social security benefits introduced in April 1988.
The Government's Social Security Advisory Committee chairman said 38 per cent would gain, 19 per cent would be unaffected and 43 per cent would lose out in real terms, taking inflation into account.
Ministers claimed ‘in cash terms’ 88 per cent would gain — but took no account of inflation.
Soon after Mrs Thatcher came to power in 1979 she disbanded the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth, set up as a permanent body by the Labour government in 1974 to report periodically on changes in distribution trends.
Hostels Researchers at The Policy Studies Institute were commissioned by the then Department of Health and Social Security to study the extent to which hostels for the needy provided care as well as accommodation and food, to enable the department to decide if, how, and by whom they should be funded.
Its report published in July last year, The Cost of Care in Hostels, concluded: ‘Even hostels offering relatively low care were still offering some care, and had to spend more than could be explained simply in terms of the costs of accommodation.’
On the same day the DHSS published a consultation paper proposing changes which would deprive many of income.
The report called Help with Hostel Charges, Proposals for Change cited the PSI study and stated: ‘Many hostels provided little or no care to their residents.
Where care is provided, it is far more often in the form of advice than of assistance with physical care.
This is because the primary aim of most hostels is to meet a housing need.’
Surveys into Aids fail to survive government veto
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
THE LATEST controversy over political interference in research surfaced when a Sunday newspaper reported that the Prime Minister had personally pulled the plug on Department of Health funding for a survey of sexual habits to help scientists to predict the spread of Aids.
A pilot scheme involving 2,000 people had been successful and £500,000 for a further survey of 20,000 people had been promised by the Health Education Authority and the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC).
The Department of Health had been expected to approve another £250,000 when the story that it would refuse was leaked, apparently from Downing Street.
Researchers from the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine in London, and an independent company, Social and Community Planning Research, which were to have carried out the survey, had not been informed officially.
But worse news came last week when the authority and the ESRC unexpectedly withdrew promises of funds.
The department had written to the ESRC: ‘In all the circumstances it is not appropriate for the Government to support it…and, more generally, it would not be appropriate for the Government to sponsor the survey.’
The research council was forced to conclude it was being told not to help.
It was constrained by a clause in financial arrangements agreed two years ago between all five research councils and the Government whereby in exchange for more flexibility in approving most research grants, they relinquished independence in sponsoring some key research.
The councils had effectively agreed to a ministerial veto in sensitive areas including ‘matters liable significantly to involve ministers including highly contentious and politically sensitive matters of moment’.
The Independent has discovered that another important survey of sexual behaviour connected with Aids research, commissioned by the health department, was prevented from being published.
The British Market Research Bureau had examined how the sexual habits of homosexuals had changed between 1986 and 1989.
Its paper was to be presented to a Market Research Society seminar last March when, with three days' notice, the health department instructed the authors to withdraw it.
It was cut out of conference papers and replaced with a notice slipped into the file saying: ‘The proposed paper on the Aids monitor has unfortunately had to be withdrawn, since it has not been possible to synchronise the publication with the Health Education Authority's own report on the 1988 data, expected in the near future.’
The paper has still not been published.
Fears that the Government was putting constraints on research it commissions were fuelled when, last year, the then DHSS inserted a new clause in its contract with outside researchers.
It said: ‘Any publication of research material, or of the results of research, or of matters arising from such material or results, is subject to the prior consent of the Secretary of State, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.’
Linked rail network ‘can bring Euro-megalopolis’
By RICHARD NORTH
‘ONLY A few small seas and rather larger mountain ranges stand in the way of the completion of a Euro-megalopolis which spreads from Glasgow to Milan’, according to Terence Bendixson, a transport researcher.
A network of high-speed pan-European rail services could help to reduce road traffic jams within the Continent and ease pollution, he says in a report, Transport in the Nineties, the Shaping of Europe, for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which meets in Paris this Thursday and Friday.
He wants a high speed railway with national companies owning the track but undertakings such as a privatised British Rail bidding for track-time to run services across Europe.
It would be likely to cost £60bn.
‘Unless the costs of traffic congestion can be reduced there is a danger that Europe's competitiveness in international markets will suffer,’ he says.
Other schemes for reducing congestion were ‘pay-as-you-drive’ road tolls, electronic signs on motorways warning of delays and in-car programmes plotting quickest routes.
The report points out that 70 million people live in the banana-shaped industrial complex which stretches from Britain to Italy.
Mr Bendixson quotes the work of Roger Brunet, a French geographer, who says a new ‘boulevard of the sun’ will open up on an east-west axis, from Barcelona to the Adriatic, hugging the north Mediterranean coast.
Mr Brunet notes that countries in the sun see migration northward towards, say Catalonia or the Po valley, while the countries of drizzle see migration towards their southern sectors.
This is the pull of incomes for poor people, and of sea, sun and snow for the rich.
Cars spread pollution, and scatter development along roads.
Aircraft are more polluting, probably, than is generally realised — therefore, enter the train.
Mr Bendixson quotes Professor Alain Bonnafous: ‘…the TGV should be seen as a low-flying Airbus.
It has little influence on places along the route, but a powerful one on those at the ends of it.’
Mr Bendixson hopes that tunnelling under the Channel, the Oresund (between Sweden and Denmark), and under the Alps and Pyrenees, will bring new life to old cities, while preserving good countryside.
Drugs counsellor beaten to death
By RICHARD NORTH
POLICE are hunting the killer of a drugs centre counsellor who was found battered to death at her office in Worcester.
The body of Elizabeth Page-Alucard, 41, was found on Saturday by her boyfriend, Peter Hook, 25, after he had reported her missing to the police.
The couple lived together in the village of Bramsford, about five miles from Worcester.
A post-mortem examination showed Mrs Page-Alucard died from a fracture of the thyroid bone in her neck and head injuries.
Chief Supt David Foster said there was no indication of a sexual attack and police were still searching for a murder weapon.
There were signs of a struggle in the office, run by the charity Turning Point, but he added: ‘The motive for this killing is unclear.’
He said there did not appear to have been a break-in.
There was no formal appointments system at the centre and people with drugs problems could just ‘drop in’ to talk to counsellors.
A spokesman for Turning Point said that Mrs Page-Alucard had worked for the the charity for three years and was a very experienced and valuable worker.
Les Rudd, chief executive, said: ‘Turning Point, like any other organisation that deals with the general public, has a range of policies to ensure staff safety and minimise risks at work.
‘It is routine procedure that there needs to be more than one staff member on the premises when a project is open to the public.
This procedure obviously was not followed in this case and Turning Point is looking into what happened.’
Compromise sought over move to ban ivory trade
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
EFFORTS TO reach a compromise over a move to ban all trade in ivory were under way last night as delegates gathered for the conference of the world's wildlife monitoring organisation.
Representatives from 103 countries which are parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (Cites) are still deeply split, but alternative proposals are being canvassed to prevent a confrontation.
A Tanzanian proposal for an ivory trade ban is officially the only formal resolution tabled so far, Jean-Patrick Le Duc, a Cites spokesman, said.
The resolution would move the African elephant and its ‘products’ from a listing on the Cites appendix II — which allows regulated trade and a quota system for African nations — to Appendix I, where all trade is banned.
The proposal comes after a decade in which the number of elephants in Africa has declined from 1.3 million to barely 600,000.
Tanzania, Kenya and other east and central African nations have been particularly affected.
Southern African countries, particularly Zimbabwe, whose elephant herd numbers are rising, allowing them to make valuable foreign exchange from culling the animals, have already announced that they will not accept a Cites ban.
If Tanzania's ban fails to secure the required two-thirds majority, the Cites secretariat is ready to propose a range of measures to tighten control on the trade.
This could include providing for zero quotas on all African nations — or selectively reducing quotas to help stop poached ivory slipping into legal trade.
Cites officials maintain that a complete ban will not work and suggest strengthening the present control system through a variety of measures: controls on worked ivory; regulation of domestic manufacturing and retail industries; the registration of dealers; and greater trade analysis and monitoring.
This would require far greater funding by the parties to Cites for an investigations and ivory unit.
Acid roadblock
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Police turned back hundreds of cars heading into Kent for a suspected acid house party in the Chatham area.
It was the second time in 24 hours that they had acted to stop a party in the county.
Marine reunion
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Hundreds of graduates of the Royal Marines School of Music at Deal gathered for their annual reunion service two weeks after 10 bandsmen were killed by an IRA bomb.
Gas caused blast
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
British Gas has confirmed that a gas escape from a fractured main was the likely cause of an explosion which demolished an Edinburgh tenement, killing two people.
The gas probably reached the Guthrie Street building along a sewer.
Wall reselected
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Pat Wall, the left-wing Labour MP for Bradford North, was reselected as candidate for the next general election after challenges from Mohammed Riaz, a city councillor, and a union official, Gerry Sutcliffe.
Police in accident
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Robert Heslop, 70, of Tanfield Lea, Stanley, Co Durham, died from head injuries after being in an accident with a police car on Saturday night while crossing a road.
Liver setback
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Aisling Barnett, who had a liver transplant after a television appeal for a donor, was on a ventilator machine at King's College Hospital, London, after developing an infection.
Students face jail
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
A group of 14 Irish student leaders face jail sentences for contempt today after ignoring a Dublin High Court injunction obtained by the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children barring publication of information on abortion services in Britain.
It is seeking to have the order made permanent.
70 rescued from North Sea rig
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Seventy people working for Penrod Drilling Company were rescued by helicopter from a gas drilling rig in the North Sea yesterday after a leak on a platform near by.
Last night experts were trying to find the cause of the leak, in an out-of-service well at Conoco's Vulcan field, 40 miles north-east of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.
No relief on poll tax for MPs
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
Sir Geoffrey Howe, leader of the House of Commons, last night denied MPs would be exempt from paying poll tax on second homes — but agreed they would be able to reclaim the full cost from allowances.
MPs are allowed to claim all costs of living away from home, whether hotel accommodation or the full charge of running a private flat in the capital.
70 rescued from
Labour lead over Tories confirmed by latest poll
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Correspondent
THE LATEST opinion poll, a comprehensive survey of 10,000 voters carried out for the Press Association news agency, last night gave Labour an eight-point lead over the Conservatives.
The poll, by ICM Research in 341 British constituencies between 26 September and last Monday, put Labour at 45 per cent; Conservatives, 37; Greens, 8; Social and Liberal Democrats, 4; Social Democrats, 3; Scottish Nationalists, 2; and Plaid Cymru, 1.
Although suggestions of a Labour government are premature with an election possibly two years off, Kenneth Baker, Conservative Party chairman, yesterday accepted his party was in some difficulties.
It was his job to turn difficulties into opportunities, he said.
In interviews throughout the day, he and cabinet colleagues made statements which suggested the softening-up process had begun — with representatives at this week's party conference in their sights.
Replying to common criticism that Margaret Thatcher tended to be a one-woman band, Mr Baker said on BBC television's On the Record: ‘I think there will be a growing amount of Cabinet discussion.
But I start that by saying there was already a considerable amount of Cabinet discussion.’
Nevertheless, he appeared to suggest Mrs Thatcher ‘may well have been’ open to the charge of stifling dissent in the past.
Mr Baker also conceded ‘there will be in the 1990s inescapable areas of expenditure where there has got to be increases, for example, in caring for the elderly’.
As for government mistakes, he said: ‘I think that as a consequence of the Stock Exchange crash in 1987, when the richest countries in the world all decided collectively to avoid a 1930s-type recession, and collectively there was an expansionist policy followed across the world and the tap marked ‘money’ was turned on, perhaps that tap was left on too long; not only in our country but in other countries as well.’
Such concessions will be seen by many critics as timely.
John Biffen, former Leader of the Commons, said in yesterday's Observer: ‘The conference theme is ‘the Right Team’.
It is a welcome emphasis upon collective leadership…
If there is a changing mood in British politics favouring moderation I suspect the Conservative Party…is about to react to it.’
But Mrs Thatcher has shown her ability to temper her style in the past, meeting public criticism, only to reassert herself when interest rates and taxes fall, and popularity rises once more.
The Press Association poll puts Mrs Thatcher top of the league among main party leaders for toughness (82 per cent), competence (53), and arrogance (55).
Neil Kinnock scored most for being down-to-earth (41 per cent) and was also considered more trustworthy than Mrs Thatcher — scoring 26 per cent to the Prime Minister's 21 per cent .
Mr Kinnock would be in Downing Street with an overall majority of 28 seats if there were a general election tomorrow, according to a Mori aggregate poll in The Times, which surveyed more than 7,500 people over three months.
The figures are: Labour, 45 per cent; Conservatives, 38; Greens, 7; SLD, 5; SDP, 4; others, 1
New rules ‘will remove 50,000 from jobless total’
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
CONTROVERSIAL regulations come into force today requiring people out of work for more than 13 weeks to accept low-paid jobs or risk losing their benefit.
The Government expects the new ‘actively seeking work’ provisions of the Social Security Act to remove up to 50,000 people from the unemployment register, saving £100m a year.
However, a draft report by a secret ministerial advisory group reviewing ‘persistent unemployment’ suggests further measures to bring down the jobless tally could be in the pipeline.
The Department of Employment document, prepared in March for the Secretary's Strategy Group (SSG) maps out ‘possible future strategies’ for dealing with the problem of long-term unemployment.
The politically-sensitive option of ‘increased pressure to join Employment Training’— the Government's scheme for the long-term unemployed — is canvassed.
By designating the programme an approved training scheme, claimant advisers could ‘use it selectively to apply sanctions to unco-operative claimants in areas where training might be useful’.
But it says this could lead to ‘presentational difficulties’ given ministerial assurances that the ‘actively seeking work’condition would not affect ET because it was voluntary.
However, though this ‘looks unlikely to be politically feasible in the short-term it may be an issue for next year when ET is fully established’.
The document, leaked to the Unemployment Unit, also suggests that making Restart courses for the unemployed ‘compulsory for certain groups could help the service deal with more poorly-motivated clients’.
It could also ‘justify a bid for some limited additional resources’ from central government.
The paper admits that employment is the destination of ‘only a minority’ of those who leave the unemployment register after two years.
‘The main cause of the projected reduction of the group over the PES (Public Expenditure Survey) period will be reduced inflows to long-term unemployment rather than the (slightly) reduced outflows.’
Michael Meacher, Labour's employment spokesman, last night said: ‘The formula is not just another in the long line of bureaucratic barriers which prevent the unemployed claiming benefit.
It is a return to the 1930s idea that people out of work had to humble themselves to be given benefit they were entitled to.
Now a rise in unemployment looks certain to follow the latest rise in interest rates, we can expect to see ‘actively seeking work’ enforced with even greater severity and bias.’
RUC officer dies in car bomb incident
By HELEN HAGUE, Labour Correspondent
The damaged car in which a senior RUC officer, Supt Alwyn Harris,(right) died yesterday when a bomb exploded under it.
Mr Harris, 51, and his wife were setting out for church in Lisburn, Co Antrim.
She escaped serious injury.
He was the third high-ranking RUC officer to be murdered in Northern Ireland this year 
Kurd refused asylum dies after fire
By MIKE PRESTAGE
A KURDISH refugee who set fire to himself after being told his application for political asylum in Britain had failed has died, intensifying criticism of the Home Office's handling of the Kurds' plight, writes Mike Prestage.
The death of Shio Tyiven, 26, in Mount Vernon Hospital, Hillingdon, west London, yesterday will further focus attention on efforts by more than 3,000 Alevi Kurds to avoid being returned to Turkey, where they fear persecution.
Mr Tyiven and Dogan Arslan started a fire inside their locked room at Harmondsworth detention centre, near Heathrow airport, last Thursday.
Mr Arslan is in Stoke Mandeville Hospital, Buckinghamshire, with 30 per cent burns.
Sherif Xemgin, for the Kurdish Workers' Association — a group to which Mr Tyiven belonged — said the death showed the fear that gripped refugees.
‘The Home Office takes the attitude these people are here for economic reasons; you don't go this far for £25 a week income support payments.
People are determined not to return to Turkey.’
The association hoped the death would bring a softening of Home Office attitudes towards Kurds seeking asylum.
But Mr Xemgin said: ‘I would like to think his death would bring changes, but somehow I doubt it.’
The Home Office said 100 applications for political asylum from Kurds were handled each week in accordance with United Nations guidelines.
Dutch ‘salmonella eggs’ allowed on the market
By LIZ HUNT
DUTCH eggs known to be infected with salmonella were allowed to go on sale in Britain without a public health warning being issued, it was confirmed yesterday.
The Ministry of Agriculture said eggs taken from consignments imported last month, showed evidence of salmonella contamination.
Salmonella has been found in four other consignments — mainly from Holland — since April.
No warnings were issued to consumers because earlier advice from the Department of Health about the dangers of salmonella and the importance of cooking eggs thoroughly, was felt to be sufficient, the ministry said.
About 3 per cent of eggs sold in the UK are imported, the majority from France and Holland.
Sixty eggs are removed from each consignment — about 300,000 eggs — and tested for salmonella.
Results are not known for at least four days, and to prevent the eggs going off the consignments are allowed through.
It is impossible to recall contaminated eggs as they are distributed to packing stations around the country, where they are packed under British brand names.
A ministry spokeswoman said the testing was ‘not intended to stop the eggs going onto the market’.
It was to help discover which EC states had a salmonella problem and to improve controls throughout the EC.
She emphasised that only a small proportion of the 30 million eggs eaten daily in the UK would be affected.
The ministry would be writing to its Dutch counterpart.
Under EC regulations contaminated eggs cannot be banned from the UK nor can eggs be labelled as ‘imported’.
The United Kingdom Egg Producers and Retailers Association said the ministry's testing was ‘purely cosmetic’.
British egg production had decreased because of constraints imposed on it by the ministry.
The shortfall was being met by imported eggs from countries where there was no testing or compulsory slaughter of infected flocks.
Nuns fight to save flock of hens
By LIZ HUNT
THE Northamptonshire nuns who are trying to save 5,000 chickens are to take legal action against the Ministry of Agriculture's decision to slaughter their flock.
Lawyers acting for the 14 nuns are due to see a judge in chambers today to ask for a judicial review which would effectively prevent ministry officials carrying out the slaughter at Our Lady of the Passion Monastery near Daventry.
. Earlier this month traces of Salmonella typhimurium were found in swabs taken from the hen house.
Under the Zoonoses Order 1989, the ministry can slaughter any infected flock.
The Mother Superior, Mother Catherine, 82, said there had never been a case of food poisoning associated with eggs from the monastery.
Sale of the eggs is their only source of income, and they are confident they can prove there is no risk to public health.
The nuns say they are ‘battle weary’ but determined to continue their fight.
‘Someone had to make a stand for the egg producers,’ Mother Catherine said.
‘They were being steam-rollered.
Evil is done because the good, too often, stay quiet.’
They are being backed by the United Kingdom Egg Producers and Retailers Association which says their plight has highlighted the problems being faced by thousands of small egg producers after publicity over salmonella infection.
The association has launched a fighting fund and hopes to raise £50,000 to help the nuns establish another business, making Belgian chocolates.
The ministry yesterday confirmed that it intended to slaughter the birds.
‘We will exercise our duty in the interests of public health,’ a spokesman said.
Health officials to meet Acas for ambulance talks
By HELEN HAGUE
FRESH ATTEMPTS to break the ambulance pay dispute deadlock are expected to coincide tomorrow with a health service union lobby of the Conservative Party conference as it opens in Blackpool, writes Helen Hague.
Department of Health officials have agreed to meet the conciliation service, Acas.
But they are resisting pressure to refer the disputed 6.5 per cent pay rise to independent binding arbitration.
The department emphasised last night that it had agreed to meet Acas in its advisory capacity.
Both sides are under mounting public pressure to settle the three-week dispute.
About 3,500 ambulance officers and control room staff joined the crews' ban on overtime last week.
The unions hope to embarrass Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, with tomorrow's lobby and believe that many Tories at the conference back their call for an increased offer.
The war of words intensified last week when Mr Clarke accused the unions of using patients as ‘fodder for pay claims’.
Roger Poole, union chief negotiatior, described Mr Clarke's letter as ‘totally and utterly appalling’.
Over the weekend only a third of ambulance crews were working in London, where the dispute is taking the biggest toll because of staff shortages.
Heart attack risk ‘greater in short men’
By LIZ HUNT
SHORT men are twice as likely as tall men to have heart attacks in middle age, according to a new study by the British Heart Foundation, writes Liz Hunt.
More than 7,000 men from all over Britain took part in the eight-year study.
Of the 1,533 men under 5ft 6ins, 118 of them suffered a heart attack compared with only 62 of the 1,533 men who were over 5ft 10ins.
The shorter men were more at risk because they had less efficient lung function compared with the taller men, according to the researchers at The Royal Free Hospital, north London.
They tended to have smaller lungs, but other causes may be involved.
Writing in the International Journal of Epidemiology, the researchers said: ‘It is possible that lung function like height is a marker of the effects of growth and development of childhood environmental factors such as nutrition and infection.’
The shorter men also had slightly higher blood pressure and higher blood cholesterol levels than the taller men.
They also tended to be heavier smokers, the study found.
The researchers said that their findings should be an ‘added incentive’ to short men to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Late counter-attack saves day for Karpov
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
AFTER the weekend's play in the Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals, Anatoly Karpov and Jan Timman have maintained their leads, despite some unconvincing play from all four contestants.
No one could quite understand what Karpov was trying to do in Saturday's game against Artur Yusupov.
With the white pieces, he seemed intent on avoiding any continuation that might give him an advantage, playing into total equality, then drifting into an inferior position and time-trouble.
With one minute for five moves, however, he seemed to wake up, launching a counter-attack which forced a draw.
On Sunday, Yusupov claimed a time-out (each player is allowed one such postponement), so the score remains at Karpov 2½ Yusupov 1½.
While Karpov was taking the difficult road to a draw, Speelman and Timman were trying hard to beat each other.
Jon Speelman, unusually for him, opened 1.
e4 and equally unusually achieved what looked like a considerable advantage from the opening.
Timman unleashed some tactics and the watching grandmasters switched their allegiance.
In a difficult endgame, however, inaccuracies by the Dutch grandmaster let Speelman seize the initiative again.
The game was adjourned after 63 moves, with Speelman trying to win with rook and bishop against rook and pawn.
This is a theoretical draw, but Timman may have to suffer several hours of torture before he can claim the half-point.
The game resumes today.
Despite being one game behind, Speelman seems to have recovered from his hesitant start to the match.
After the encouragement of emerging with the advantage after a complex struggle in the fourth game, he began Sunday's game in uncompromising style, playing the reputedly risky Dutch defence.
Timman advanced, creating problems for Speelman with a pawn thrust deep into his opponent's position, splitting Black's forces.
Speelman, however, defended patiently, before surrounding and taking the pawn.
After 43 moves, he was a pawn up, but Timman's pressure provided ample compensation and the players, somewhat surprisingly, agreed a draw.
Timman leads 21 2 — 11 2 with one game unfinished.
70 rescued after North Sea gas leak
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
(First Edition) SEVENTY people were rescued from a gas drilling rig in the North Sea yesterday after a leak on a platform near by.
Last night experts were trying to find the cause of the leak, in an out-of-service well at Conoco's Vulcan field, 40 miles north-east of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk.
The 70 men, employees of the Penrod Drilling Company, were safely transferred from the Penrod 92 rig to the nearby Britoil Loggs platform by helicopter, Conoco said.
The rig was working in the ‘V’ Field complex of gas fields opened in September 1988.
Conoca said: ‘A leak has developed inside one well of the unmanned platform and gas is leaking up to the surface.
The crew of a drilling rig have been evacuated.’
The company added that a standby boat was keeping an eye on the situation.
Conoco was trying to find out the cause of the leak, before it could decide how to stop it.
It added: ‘We are very pleased that the procedures have worked and people have come out of this safely with no casualties.’
The ‘V’ Field complex Vulcan, North Valiant, South Valiant and Vanguard comprises nine manned and robot platforms, linked by bridges.