

Football: Muir inspires Tranmere
By DEREK WALLIS
Tranmere Rovers.... 3 Leyton Orient...... 0 TRANMERE ROVERS, who in recent years have survived a threat of extinction as well as only just preserving League membership, reinforced their position as Third Division leaders by overcoming Leyton Orient, thereby stretching the margin to four points.
The customary gallery of managers and scouts assembled to watch on a night when a chill, blustery wind made the measurement of passes difficult with the result that the match and Rovers in particular took time to warm up -until the 20th minute.
A cute backheeled pass by Ian Muir set John Morrissey free on Rovers' right.
Despite the wind, the cross that followed was so accurate and inviting that Chris Malkin was able to rise to the ball and head it out of the reach of the sprawling Paul Heald to register his 10th goal of the season.
Orient, like Rovers promoted from the Fourth Division last May, made few telling incursions into the penalty area where they lacked the pace of the home team's Malkin and Morrissey, though their approach work was neat enough.
Muir's nimble footwork merited a second Rovers goal at the start of the second half but Heald's save prevented it.
Not for long, however, because in the 53rd minute Muir was able to swivel in reaching a cross by Tony Thomas before driving in his 10th goal of the season.
As the match progressed Rovers became more assured largely due to the midfield influence of Jimmy Harvey who played passes unhurriedly but with increasing effect.
Eight minutes from time Muir sealed the points by scoring from Malkin's cross.
Rugby Union: Shelford aims to talk money on NZ tour
By ROBERT COLE and BARRIE FAIRALL
BRITISH officials and players will be keeping a close eye on developments when New Zealand arrive for their 13-match tour of Wales and Ireland tomorrow after hearing that Wayne Shelford, the All Blacks captain, is charging £500 for each personal appearance during the visit.
‘There will be a few candidates for doing the same thing in this part of the world if he gets away with it,’ one Welsh international said, ‘and I for one will be very interested to see how it develops.
Things like this shouldn't really surprise people because we have been telling them about what has been going on Down Under for years.’
Shelford's services are being sold to rugby clubs in England and Wales by marketing agents and, according to the Cardiff link in the sponsorship chain, he is available for almost any kind of promotional activity.
Shelford, part of Mark McCormack's International Management Group which handles the interests of many of the world's top sporting celebrities, has bypassed the laws on amateurism by working for a company whose main activity is the promotion of the All Blacks captain.
As his personal agent points out: ‘The promotion of Wayne Shelford is now Wayne Shelford's full-time employment.’
The game's amateur principles, increasingly under threat, received another jolt with allegations that Brian Moore had been offered over £25,000 to play in South Africa.
The England hooker, who has already said that he would have accepted only the usual expenses had he undertaken this summer's tour of the Republic marking the South African Rugby Board's centenary, has now been quoted as saying that ‘remuneration was mentioned.’
Dudley Wood, the Rugby Football Union's secretary, said yesterday: ‘I spoke to Brian Moore a little while ago because there was a story that he had been offered money, although the amount wasn't specified.
Moore refused to confirm or deny whether it was true.
‘I think what we do know is this.
At the time when there were doubts about whether or not the tour would go ahead, after the first invitations were largely turned down, numerous stories started to circulate that there would be money available and that sponsors were in the country looking for players.
In the end, they did get some players and I have said I am pretty satisfied that the England players who went didn't go for money.
But I am in no doubt that if players had not been forthcoming the next chapter in the SA book — not the SARB's — would have been to offer money.
That is the situation.
Whether Moore was actually offered money or not I have no idea.’
Wood and the RFU are adamant that the game should remain amateur, while in South Africa it appears that contingency plans are already afoot to buy the Springboks out of isolation.
Now Ronnie Dawson, Ireland's representative on the International Rugby Board, is pushing for a full investigation over claims that players were paid to undertake the trip to the Republic.
David Young, the Lions prop, has recovered from his hamstring strain in time to be included in the Cardiff side to tackle the All Blacks on Saturday.
The news concerning Ieuan Evans, another Welsh international, is much grimmer though.
He has no chance of facing the tourists after suffering his fourth shoulder dislocation in Llanelli's narrow home win over Neath and has been warned by doctors that unless he has a second operation he may never play again.
Another troublesome shoulder, that belonging to Dean Richards, will be X-rayed within the next 10 days to determine whether the Leicester No. 8 has any chance of playing for England against Fiji on 4 November.
Racing: House masters the Arc
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
MICHAEL KINANE, the champion jockey of Ireland, completed the most sensational 24 hours of his career when he took the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe on the British-trained 19-1 outsider, Carroll House, at Longchamp yesterday, but he had to endure the longest 20 minutes of his life before he could be sure the victory was his.
Kinane, aged 30, rode the Irish filly The Caretaker to win Europe's most valuable prize for two-year-olds, the Cartier Million, in Dublin on Saturday, but almost as soon as he had passed the post to complete his lucrative double on Carroll House, who is trained by Michael Jarvis at Newmarket, the klaxon sounded ominously to indicate a stewards' inquiry.
This was followed swiftly by the news that Alain Lequeux, the rider of the runner-up, Behera, had lodged an objection against the winner for interference a furlong and a half from the finish of an exceptionally rough race.
There were long faces among the British contingent as study of the replay showed Carroll House deviating from a straight line.
With the tension reaching boiling point, it was finally announced that the French officials had allowed the result to stand and they had to be applauded for a sporting decision.
The head-on film showed Carroll House had rolled to his right, inhibiting the French-trained Behera, though not actually making contact, and the verdict could have gone either way.
Behera's owner, the Aga Khan, whose other filly, Aliysa, finished 10th, left it to Lequeux to object.
‘I did not see any interference,’ he said.
Kinane, who was having his first Arc ride, said: ‘I had quickened past Behera when Carroll House hung across and it didn't affect the result.
It would have been an injustice if they had taken it away from me.’
There was an almost equally dramatic sequel to the race when Carroll House, who is known to be a highly strung individual, lashed out several times as he was returning and almost caught well-wishers patting his quarters.
In so doing, Carroll House sustained a 10-inch gash to a hind leg as he caught a rail.
As for the race itself, Kinane added that he knew he would win some way from home and had enjoyed a trouble-free run throughout.
However, many of the jockeys described it as one of the roughest races they had ridden in.
Steve Cauthen, who finished 16th of the 19 runners on one of the leading English hopes, Cacoethes, said: ‘I was hampered continually and had no sort of run.’
Lanfranco Dettori, the talented 18-year-old who was eighth on another English runner, Legal Case, confirmed Cauthen's view.
‘I was bumped on to the rail six or seven times and I think I would have been in the first four but for that,’ he said.
Although Carroll House started at long odds, he was well supported by the 15,000-strong British contingent, who also profited from the victories of two other English runners, Salsabil and Silver Fling, during the afternoon.
The reason for the increased confidence behind the mud-loving Carroll House was the overnight deluge that had softened the ground.
Jarvis, 51, who is the son of a jump jockey, has been training for 21 years and Carroll House's victory was by far his most important.
He has enjoyed notable success abroad, and this year won the Derby Italiano for Carroll House's Italian owner, Antonio Balzarini, with Prorutori.
Carroll House was the second Italian-owned winner of the Arc in the two years it has been sponsored by the Italian hotel chain Ciga.
Furthermore, last year's winner, Tony Bin, was also ridden by an Irishman, John Reid.
Football: England's desire to settle debt
By JOE LOVEJOY
ENGLAND fly out to Poland today confident of securing the draw that will be sufficient to take them to the World Cup finals, stirred but not shaken by a warning from Bobby Moore.
On a similar mission to Chor- zow in 1973, Alf Ramsey sought security with five defenders, but Moore, put through his own goal, presented Lubanski with a second and the Poles won 2-0.
The old debt has been nagging away these last 16 years, and Moore made a point last week of reminding Bobby Robson of the hostile reception England can expect on Wednesday.
Robson said yesterday: ‘Bobby told me the atmosphere got to certain players last time.
It built to a crescendo and unnerved them.
It must have been something out of the ordinary because even a player of his vast experience was affected by it.
‘The record shows that not too many teams win in Poland.
We are anticipating a hard match, and that is one of the reasons why I am so pleased to have Bryan (Robson) back.
We are going to need our toughness.’
The Swedes' 3-1 victory over Albania yesterday left Robson mildly disappointed but England still had control of Group Two, he said.
‘I was hoping the Swedes would draw and drop a point, but we are still in a strong position.
Like us, they have eight points with one game to play, but our goal difference is plus 10 to their four.
Their final match is also in Poland.’
The loss of Steve Hodge with hamstring trouble 24 hours after the withdrawal of John Barnes, has left England short of cover on the flanks, but Robson again decided against summoning a replacement.
Tony Dorigo, the Chelsea full-back, will now understudy all positions along the team's left side, with Paul Gascoigne covering for David Rocastle on the right.
England's Under-21 squad for tomorrow's match against Poland contains six changes from the original 16.
The latest casualties are the Bristol Rovers goalkeeper, Nigel Martyn, plus strikers Stuart Slater (West Ham) and Jason Dozzell (Ipswich).
The latter pair have been replaced by Sheffield United's Brian Deane and Gary Owers of Sunderland.
Rangers' Richard Gough and Maurice Johnston will fill vital roles in Scotland's World Cup qualifying match against France in Paris on Wednesday.
Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, said their consistency during the campaign made their return to the side essential after both missed last month's defeat by Yugoslavia because of injury.
Football: Knighton bid stands
By FRANK KANE
AFTER a weekend of hard talking between Michael Knighton and Martin Edwards, the Manchester United chairman, the 37-year-old property developer's advisers were publicly sticking to the line last night that his £20m take-over bid for the club was ready to proceed.
Meetings were still going on in Manchester in a last-minute attempt to avoid today's scheduled hearing in the High Court.
The weekend talks stalled on United's inability to agree the price for Knighton's withdrawal from the take-over.
Edwards has alleged that Knighton breached the terms of a confidentiality clause in his agreement to sell his controlling stake in United for £10m.
Eddy Shah, the former national newspaper owner, has submitted a sworn affidavit that Knighton showed him confidential financial details of the club when he offered to sell the Edwards's shares on for a £6m profit.
In London, a spokesman for Knighton said the offer document for the take-over was ready to be sent to shareholders on Wednesday.
‘The cash is in place, and the bankers are supporting him.’
He added that the document would name only one backer for the bid — Knighton himself.
Rugby Union: Kiwis in Lowe's shadow
By PAUL WILSON
Wigan….. 24 New Zealand.
. 14 Life must be very agreeable for Graham Lowe at the moment.
Comfortably installed at Manly, with five months to wait until the new Australian season, the coach's reputation is enhanced with every sight of his former charges.
Both Wigan and New Zealand are living in Lowe's shadow and, on the evidence of this scrappy affair at Central Park yesterday, struggling to find the light.
John Monie, Wigan's new Australian replacement, received the first raised eyebrows since his arrival this week when his side tumbled out of the Lancashire Cup, a trophy practically screwed to the Central Park sideboard during Lowe's three-year reign.
Further quizzical glances were invited when he left out Mark Preston yesterday, preferring half-fit wings in Joe Lydon and Henderson Gill, but Wigan muddled through, their job made easier by the tourists lacklustre performance.
Charitable observers put the Kiwis' opening defeat at St Helens last week down to nerves or initial rustiness.
Now, with just one win in three matches, a close-run thing against Castleford reserves, opinions are hardening.
The 1989 Kiwis do not look a patch on their predecessors.
If they are to give Great Britain a game at Old Trafford on Saturday week, Tony Gordon, Lowe's successor as New Zealand coach, may have to swallow his pride and call up the likes of Emosi Koloto, Joe Grima and Tony Iro, who appear to have blighted their international chances by making their reputations in England.
The Widnes forwards especially would give the Kiwis some punch; the present pack is simply unable to dominate.
Defence must be Gordon's main worry, however, as at times yesterday, notably when Shaun Edwards found an ocean of space to lay on a try for Andy Platt, the tourists fell short of decent club standards.
Joe Lydon, Ged Byrne and Les Davidson scored Wigan's other tries, isolated moments of meaning in a game of little pattern.
New Zealand had their moments, too, but the tourists were never in the game.
Gordon and Monie shared a smile and a drink after the game, but only Lowe, 12,000 miles away, was laughing.
Snooker: Rulers under attack
By JANICE HALE
CIRCULATION of documents apparently intended for board members and senior executives of the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association has fuelled speculation that the professional game's governing body has ‘wasted the golden years of snooker and not planned properly for the future.’
The charge, made by Ian Doyle, who manages seven players including Stephen Hendry, is fully supported by Barry Hearn, whose eight management clients include Steve Davis.
Doyle and Hearn, former directors of the WPBSA, were in possession of the documents in Glasgow three weeks ago when they met John Virgo, the WPBSA's chairman, at an informal meeting.
Subsequently, Hearn has been threatened with an injunction, while a letter from the WPBSA's solicitors awaits Doyle on his return from holiday.
Doyle voiced his criticisms at a board meeting in Stoke 10 days ago.
Among his concerns was the level of admitted losses sustained on the WPBSA's overseas ranking tournaments.
These amounted to £120,000 in last November's Canadian Masters and, under its partnership arrangement for overseas events with Mark McCormack's International Management Group, £100,000 from last February's European Open in Deauville and what seems certain to be a substantial sum from August's Hong Kong Open.
Non-tournament expenditure is also felt to be excessive in some areas.
The WPBSA's constitution does not permit player-directors to be paid, but the board voted itself a 50 pence per mile travelling allowance in 1984 and doubled it to £1 per mile this year.
Some consider the level of their entertaining to be over-lavish.
Hearn and Doyle, whose players won over 70 per cent of the prize money on the WPBSA circuit last year, would rather see greater efficiency and cost effectiveness.
Golf: Langer delivers the goods
From NORMAN DABELL in Stuttgart
BERNHARD LANGER, the co-organiser of the German Masters, had the enviable task of presenting himself with the £55,000 winner's cheque here yesterday.
Langer, with a final round of 68, pipped Joe Maria Olazabal and one of the Americans in Stuttgart for the week, Payne Stewart, who finished joint second, one stroke adrift.
That important stroke was the result of Olazabal and Stewart narrowly missing birdie putts on the 18th which would have resulted in a play-off.
Stewart closed with a 71, Olazabal a 69.
After starting the day a stroke behind Stewart, the USPGA champion, Langer overhauled him over the seventh, eighth and ninth holes.
Stewart bogeyed the seventh and eighth, the downhill par-three which had dumped Seve Ballesteros out of the tournament, while Langer birdied the ninth.
Stewart and Olazabal came back at him over the back nine but, unlike in the Lancome Trophy when Eduardo Romero chipped in to deny him his second tour victory this year, this time the West German was not to be disappointed.
Even a nervous pull into the greenside bunker with his third shot at the par-five 18th, which was to open the door for Stewart and Olazabal, could not prevent it being Langer's day.
There was a good return for another American.
Fred Couples eagled the last to share fourth place with Brett Ogle.
Derrick Cooper went past a Nick Faldo who found his new swing was not as successful over the last two rounds.
Faldo tied at six under with Stephen Bennett and veteran Bernard Gallacher.
Olazabal's finish hauled him to the top of the European order of merit.
Squash: Jansher faces loss of prize
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
JANSHER KHAN, who won back the world title here on Saturday, is in danger of losing some or all of his $15,000 (£9,500) prize money this week, for failing to make more than a brief appearance at the official dinner afterwards.
One of those who wants the young Pakistani punished is none other than the man he so narrowly beat 10-15, 6-15, 15-4, 15-11, 15-10 in the final, Chris Dittmar.
The world No. 3 from Australia also happens to be the president of the International Squash Players Association and he said: ‘Jansher was only at the dinner 15 minutes and this is a poor showing.
We lose a lot of credibility when this happens.
We have to do something about it.’
Those actions could hit Jansher hard if, as seems possible, the Malaysian Squash Rackets Association decides to send the world champion's prize money to the ISPA to do with as it thinks fit.
It is part of the players' contracts that all the semi-finalists must turn up to the function after the World Open title.
Much may depend on how Jansher defends himself.
‘I was sick after the final,’ he said.
‘I had a headache and also an injured back after falling on court.
So I came to the dinner for 20 minutes and sat with the sponsors.
But I slept almost all the next day.’
Dittmar's remarks cannot in any way be attributed to sour grapes.
He cannot possibly have played better despite tiring in the second half of a patchy but exciting final.
On Friday he played the match of his life to beat the defending champion, Jahangir Khan, in five games, and at 6-0 up in the final game on Saturday he was not far from becoming the first player to beat both Khans in the same tournament.
Dittmar is now likely to face either Jansher or Jahangir again in the world team championships which start in Singapore today.
Rugby Union: Stephens adds Scarlet colour: Welshmen waiting for tourists find hope in rehearsals as Llanelli and Swansea prosper, but others offer cannon-fodder
By STEVE BALE
First the good news — with the All Blacks almost on our doorstep, there are parts of Welsh rugby which live on even after the mass suicide, on and off the field, of the past seven weeks.
Llanelli and Neath, to name but two, are in such vibrant health that they may present the tourists with a respectable challenge.
Wales, meaning the suffering Welsh public, desperately needed the comfort of Saturday's epic encounter before a Stradey Park gathering fit for the occasion to remind themselves of the level of attainment of which their game is still capable.
Llanelli's 14-12 win was also a reminder of what used to be.
Stradey was the ground where New Zealand last lost in Wales, on 31 October 1972, the day the pubs ran dry.
Since then defeat by New Zealand of Wales, which was bearable because it tended to be close and hard-fought, has become despair, which is unbearable.
Three All Black thrashings have been a cross Welsh rugby has had to bear alone, as in the same period, since June 1987, this is three times more than any other home country has had to bear.
Wales would once have relished the opportunity; in present, straitened circumstances, it is desperately unfair.
Lucky England and Scotland: there is, as Wales know and Ireland are about to find out, simply no chance to rebuild when New Zealand are your regular opposition.
Unlucky Wales: they are widely thought to have a worse chance against the tourists than either Neath or Llanelli.
This may, however, turn out to be hokum and Saturday's Stradey celebration probably provided an imperfect guide to the two clubs' chances, other than to reveal that here at least there is no chance of capitulation.
Given the way things have gone lately, that in itself is cause for mild celebration.
A Wag, that ubiquitous turner of phrases, said: ‘At least Welsh club rugby is in a healthy state.’
The only thing was that he said it after Bridgend had beaten Wales a week earlier.
But at Stradey, at the rematch of last season's Cup finalists, Mr Wag's dictum was borne out again.
This was cold comfort for the Welsh coach, John Ryan, who by a neat irony was at Twickenham (watching Harlequins v Swansea).
Ieuan Evans's shoulder let him down on his comeback, possibly ruling the Lions wing out for this season, and Neath's lock prospect Gareth Llewelyn also limped out of contention for a Test place with a knee injury.
As they had in losing to Bath on the day Wales lost to Bridgend, Neath conceded a first-half deficit which proved too much for them to turn over.
For this they could blame their own indiscipline as much as Llanelli's eagerness to take advantage of it.
There was Scarlet inspiration, too.
Colin Stephens's sprint for his try again showed a Wales stand-off in the making — although his coach, Gareth Jenkins, for the umpteenth time, counselled caution: ‘We are all expecting too much of Colin.
People should start looking at him in another year or 18 months.’
Llanelli's second try, a disarmingly easy one by Steve Bowling on the blind side of a scrum-five, was of more modest proportions and if Jeff Bird had kicked more than one of the six chances he had the conclusion would by half-time have been foregone.
In a sense Neath would have deserved it.
There is a steady current of physicality in their play which sometimes spills over into outright violence.
This can intimidate lesser opposition but, as they perhaps now realise, Llanelli's mettle is made of stronger stuff than others'.
Neath conceded some asinine penalties and, on a broader point of policy, their obsession with keeping the game moving by taking tap penalties instead of letting Paul Thorburn accumulate points is laudable but liable to cost them such a tight game as this.
In the end Kevin Phillips, their captain, called on Thorburn and he landed a penalty in first-half injury time.
After the interval a clever try by Chris Bridges, whose dummy to Mark Jones sent the whole defence the wrong way, followed by Thorburn's conversion and second penalty put Neath ahead.
Two minutes later Bird was forsaken and Stephens given the onerous task of kicking the winning penalty for Llanelli, a task achieved with ludicrous ease by a 20-year-old who this time last year was understudying Jonathan Davies (remember him?).
It was an unworthily prosaic culmination of a momentous occasion in which, for once, the good in Welsh rugby was exposed for public consumption.
But it may soon be forgotten, because now comes the bad news: the All Blacks arrive tomorrow.
Llanelli: Tries Stephens, Bowling; Penalties Bird, Stephens.
Neath: Try Bridges; Conversion Thorburn; Penalties Thorburn 2.
Rugby Union: Johnston wraps up recovery
By BILL LEITH
Selkirk…. 16 Boroughmuir.. 9 EVEN with three replacements permissible it is not always possible to cover the loss of a key player, as Boroughmuir discovered when suffering their third defeat in four years at the hands of Selkirk, this time by a 16-9 margin.
The game was barely 10 minutes old when Peter Wright, an immensely strong Sport Page 31 prop, limped off with knee-ligament damage.
Kenny Wilson moved up and Henry Edwards came on to the flank and the disruptions partially explained why Boroughmuir were unable to generate forward momentum.
Sometimes, too, the return of even a class player such as Sean Lineen can actually have an inhibiting effect for there was an unmistakable tendency either to channel everything through the Scotland centre or else turn the ball back inside.
The tackling of Selkirk's back row/midfield triangle was a revelation and Graham Marshall took the opportunity to issue a reminder with Scotland's team to face Fiji being named in midweek.
Turning round 3-9 behind, Selkirk suddenly recognised that again they had the beating of the title favourites, their match winner, Ian Ballantyne, having come into the side at short notice.
Ballantyne scored a try which cancelled out a strike by Mike Debusk then sent in Keith Johnston for a second.
Still bankrupt in rugby terms are champions Kelso — denied clearance for Steve Autogavaeia, one of two recruits from New Zealand — and Hawick.
Three successive defeats, the latest at Stirling, mean Hawick's worst League start.
Amid talk of rebuilding and reorganising resources it appears suitable material is in short supply.
Significantly, Melrose and Jed-Forest, border rivals who began developing local youth talent years ago, are today among four unbeaten teams setting the title pace.
Selkirk: Tries Ballantyne, Johnston; Conversion Nichol; Penalties Ballantyne, Nichol.
Boroughmuir: Try Debusk; Conversion Walker; Penalty: Walker.
Rugby Union: Clement and Jones rise above ugliness
By HUGH BATESON
Harlequins... 14 Swansea….. 21 DO NOT believe everything that has been written about the parlous state of Anglo-Welsh matches now that the English clubs are diverted by the league.
The confrontations are alive — and most definitely kicking — and are as combative, irritable and downright ugly as ever.
Time will tell whether Swansea's grim win at an echoing Twickenham was an omen that the international in February will be fought out in the Cardiff fashion of last year or whether it was just these 80 minutes which had the mark of the beast upon them.
Swansea deserved to win because, hard though they tried to disguise it, they actually were the better side, and in Robert Jones and the accomplished Tony Clement, they had half-backs capable of rising above the long grass slicked by rain and the inevitable slippery ball.
But Jones is a snappy player in every sense, and set the tone for an afternoon of petulant silliness with a Gatting-like finger-wagging retort to one of Keith Griffiths's decisions.
The dominant theme of a whistle-stop second half was of Swansea driving towards Harlequins' line, a shrill blast for a penalty, followed immediately by an even shriller one and Griffiths pacing out a generous 10 metres to silence the Welsh invective.
Craig Luxton, a New Zealand-born scrum-half on the England periphery, rubbed salt into the self-inflicted wounds with a series of tap-penalties and darting thrusts, one of which led to a 90-metre break-out and a second try for Gavin Thompson — one of the game's few high points.
Another was the sight of Stuart Parfitt lancing through Harlequins's midfield for Swansea's lone try.
The lowest point — and there were many vying for the honour — came when Richard Langhorn, Quins' lanky No. 8, went off, head bloodied, after just 14 minutes, the victim of — at best— a misguided boot.
Slicker though Swansea were, Harlequins gained more than enough possession through their dominance at the line-out and the innumerable penalties to have expected more from the game — certainly New Zealand's All Blacks will drive a far harder bargain when they play Swansea on 21 October.
But, even allowing for the conditions, Luxton and David Pears were never much better than a lumbering link.
It does not help your cause much, either, if you give the ball away close to the opposition's line four times in as many minutes.
At least one memory of class will abide, though.
The ‘whump’ of Clement's boot as it strikes the ball is as different a noise from an ordinary punter as Domingo is from Kylie.
His prodigious distance can turn defence into instant attack, and his drop goal at the end was a perfect sighter for February.
Rugby Union: Black clouds on Cardiff's horizon
By JIM HILL
Newport.
. 16 Cardiff.
. 29 IN the modest setting of Rodney Parade, Cardiff's final rehearsal before taking on New Zealand could be judged a comfortable domestic success.
But, in the broader terms of next Saturday's tour opener at the Arms Park, it surely failed to convince a single soul that Cardiff will be anything other than cannon-fodder for the All Blacks.
And what that implies for Newport's chances against the world champions in a month's time, when the tourists will be properly attuned, hardly bears thinking about.
Cardiff, whose rucking and mauling remains sub-standard, at least possess a pair of half-backs with the wit and ability to make best use of the ball they do get.
David Evans, the stand-off who plays centre for Wales, and Andrew Booth, his scrum-half partner, virtually sealed the result in the second half simply by appreciating what the Newport pair, David Phillips and Nigel Callard, had failed to grasp in the first — that kicking downwind is as good a way as any of gaining huge chunks of ground to keep the pressure on.
The simple difference in rugby intellect plus a glaring weakness in Newport's defensive cover allowed Cardiff to improve a 12-9 interval deficit with four second-half tries.
The best Newport had to offer was a solid front row, the line-out jumping of their veteran lock, David Waters, and a passion which, in the case of 19-year-old No. 8 Ian McKim, needs restraining.
McKim, a Wales youth player last season and new to some of the more unwelcome machinations of senior rugby, lost his temper so totally after a brush with the Cardiff prop Jeff Whitefoot that he even lashed out at Newport's skipper, Glen George, who was trying to cool him down.
McKim, however, claimed severe provocation.
He alleged that Whitefoot had literally spat in his eye.
McKim said: ‘I can take a punch or a kick but to be spat at for no reason is disgusting.
People like Jeff Whitefoot who is so experienced should be trying to encourage young players like myself but this makes me feel like packing it in.’
Rugby Union: Liley's remake of a chart-topping record
By BARRIE FAIRALL
Leicester.
. 35 Coventry…6 SO far as the ratings are concerned, Leicester's Lethal Weapon 2 is in the process of becoming a smash hit.
For Trusty Dusty Hare read Long John Liley, a rapidly emerging full-back who has let his boots do the talking whilst notching up the season's fastest century.
No one can deny that Hare's act is a hard one to follow, which is why judgment should perhaps be reserved until the newcomer faces up to some of the winter's more demanding tasks.
Liley, though, is making his points — 107 of them so far — and leaving all senior players in his wake.
Hare, the world's greatest accumulator who retired after the Pilkington Cup Final in April, signed off with a club record total of 438 points last season.
Liley, with a try, five penalties and two conversions at Welford Road on Saturday, is already ahead of Hare at an equivalent stage in the Leicester programme.
It would be a marvellous feat if the 22-year-old swimming pool attendant from Wakefield was to supercede Hare at the first attempt.
‘I'm a different player,’ he said, illustrated by the fact that he kicks goals with either foot.
But the thinning thatch and predatory excursions into the line bear the Hare hallmarks.
Against a Coventry side in no fit state to make much of a fist of it, Liley was away like the wind midway through the second half on a 45-yard run for the second of Leicester's four tries.
It was well taken, like the rest of his scoring chances on a wet, grey afternoon.
For Coventry, the issues had become clouded even before setting foot in the Tigers lair.
Their coach broke down and they arrived after begging a lift from a passing Transit van and car.
Simon Wright, their No. 8, was lost along the way which meant that Andy Roda, normally a prop, played on the flank.
The sorry plight of an ailing club continued with the news that a supporters' coach had been involved in a crash and that only 12 youngsters could be rounded up to take on Leicester in a youth match.
Sorry times, indeed, for Coventry, whose Midland rivals are streets ahead in strength in depth.
Simon Povoas, for example, proved himself an excellent deputy to the injured Dean Richards at No. 8 and the Tigers ticked along despite the absence also of Les Cusworth, Paul Dodge and John Wells.
Rugby Union: Irish amble after scramble
By STUART ALEXANDER
London Irish.
. 13 Bristol.
... 21 AT London Scottish the role of providing rugby opportunities to Scots in London is still important, but in times of league realism, racial purity has had to give way to the expediency of also running a successful 1st XV.
A couple of miles down the road at London Irish they still want to hold on to the Irish connection, even if that leads to qualification by reading The Irish Times.
So there is a constant return to the roots, and with it an entirely local focus on winning places in the Inter-Provincial sides back home, including Ulster.
That is laudable, but Scottish can field Lions, internationals and ‘B’ internationals and yet are in the Third Division.
They have chosen no-frills rugby as the way back up.
Irish need to think along the same lines.
Against a Bristol side content to cruise through experimenting with back-row moves and threequarter combinations, Irish too often fumbled and scrambled.
Had they stung Bristol into raising a game dampened by unremitting drizzle they might have suffered more.
Even so, at the end, Irish were a enjoying a romp to hearten supporters who love nothing more than spirit and graft.
They had also caused Bristol much discomfort and penalties in the line but Ian Aitcheson, the recruit from Waterloo, barely made amends with a drop goal and a conversion for not only three penalties missed in four minutes, but a couple of passes which made everybody wince and defence pulse rates surge.
There were some highlights from Bristol, some back-row charges, a 50-yard passing movement which saw Doug Woodman scoring the first of his two tries, and Paul Collings making a solo break for the third.
Football: Rostron repays the loan: Phil Shaw reports on a surprising afternoon of Bull and void at Molineux
By PHIL SHAW
THERE have been few moments, if any, in the century-long history of Sheffield football rivalry when a goal by a Wednesday player has set United followers dancing with delight.
Wilf Rostron, a left-back on loan from Hillsborough, carved a niche in Bramall Lane folklore by nullifying another event no one could recall having happened before — Steve Bull disowning a goal.
But after Dave Bassett's side had clung to the 2-1 lead provided by John Gannon's opening strike of the season, the only first that actually mattered was United's position in the Second Division.
The Sheffield 2,000 bellowed ‘The Red Flag’ with Skinneresque gusto, though whether their team can keep flying high must be doubtful.
The quality, apart from the pace and shooting of Tony Agana and Ian Bryson's crosses and trickery, is not apparent.
The same was said about Bassett's Wimbledon, of course, and for a promoted team to take an unbeaten record and three-point lead into the season's eighth week is an achievement in itself.
United's game plan, with few refinements, is that which took them up behind Wolves in May: long balls from the back, incessant hustling in midfield, nine men behind the ball when the opposition have it.
Pretty it isn't.
Wolves play a similar style, and at times one yearned for someone to set the ball rolling…literally.
Nigel Vaughan did a passable impersonation of Liam Brady and Peter Reid for 35 minutes, but once he tired the home attacks lost any semblance of variety.
Bassett felt his centre-backs had struggled against the power and industry of Bull and Andy Mutch, yet it was superior defensive organisation which gave United victory against the run of play.
They had fallen behind when Simon Tracey, not for the last time, missed a corner and right-back Colin Hill poked Shane Westley's header into his own net.
From our (disad) vantage point 50 yards from the touchline, it looked like Bull's goal (well he was within two yards).
His muted celebrations told the real story.
Westley's arrival from Southend means Wolves have a bull in defence too.
He was booked for a wild foul on Carl Bradshaw, so there was an element of justice when his clearance found Rostron and the Owl-in-exile advanced to equalise with a cross-shot that may have been more cross than shot.
Out of the blue, you could say.
The same failure to push out of defence quickly and as a unit when clearing their lines, which gives the goalkeeper a clearer view and often wins an offside decision, helped Gannon score a well-taken winner, also from outside the penalty area.
Wolves huffed and puffed, but they could not blow Tracey's house down again.
Four strikers on the pitch had amassed 161 goals between them since the start of last season.
Not one scored.
Both Bassett's full-backs managed to without necessarily meaning it.
United to go up again?
Clearly, stranger things have happened.
Wolverhampton Wanderers: Kendall; Bellamy, Venus, Streete, Westley, Vaughan, Chard, Gooding, Bull, Mutch, Dennison.
Substitutes not used: Downing, Paskin.
Football: Hard times at Hartlepool: Jonathan Foster on a club struggling to escape from pervasive depression
By JONATHAN FOSTER
THEY take the lead with a fine goal, concede two sloppy ones, and then the captain gets sent off for throwing a punch not even redeemed by the infliction of injury.
So what do they do next?
Play smart football and win, 3-2 against Scunthorpe, one of the favourites for promotion.
All this, and Hartlepool United are still at the bottom of the Fourth Division.
A period of ‘decline interrupted only by slump’ has settled on the town from the incorporation in 1877 of West Hartlepool, an economic historian's analysis which could have doubled on Saturday as programme notes at the Victoria Ground.
One of the few genuinely dockland clubs, they won the 1905 FA Amateur Cup as West Hartlepool, then achieved nothing more until they won promotion to the Third.
They came straight back down in 1969, and on a record 14 occasions have owed continued League status to the old block vote system of re-election.
It cannot save them now, as Roland Boyes, the vice-chairman and a local Labour MP, knows.
Boyes claims there has been a policy review at Pool under the chairmanship of John Smart.
‘Our debts are now manageable,’ Boyes said.
‘But I am a bit disappointed that while we've been appealing for new directors nobody from the town has come forward.’
Perhaps they cannot see potential at a ground shorn of its wooden stands and surrounded by deprivation.
Even Ralph Ward Jackson, the autocratic railway boss who built West Hartlepool as a pile of self-aggrandisement, stares from his statue straight back toward Darlington, the town that lost its League team last season.
But Darlington have flourished since; they paid Hartlepool £40,000 for Andy Toman and on Saturday broke the Conference record for an unbeaten start to the season.
By contrast, Smart and his Hartlepool directors have endured verbal and physical intimidation, plus the destruction of a takeover offer Boyes described as ‘mischievous’.
Meanwhile, the team were turning decline into a slump.
They ran out on Saturday to a cautious welcome from a crowd of 1,823 (the best this season and lowest of the day) a week after losing to Doncaster: it was not so much that Doncaster had scored their first away goals of the season, rather that they got six without reply.
Ironically, it was Doncaster's defeat at Torquay that kept Hartlepool at the bottom.
Rob McKinnon had been the only Hartlepool player not pilloried in that game, and the 23-year-old left-back was the most impressive player again.
Bob Moncur, the Hartlepool manager, has also encouraged others of less talent to play the game on the ground, and stiffened the midfield by giving John Trewick, the former Birmingham City player, a debut.
It helped to give Hartlepool the lead, with the move begun in their own area and completed by Paul Baker's firm header on Paul Dalton's cross.
They were guilty of lax marking as Scunthorpe took the lead from two crosses aimed without challenge, and weakened by Baker's sending off in the 36th minute, a pathetic flourish of petulance.
McKinnon, though, kept attacking, predictably winning a penalty.
It inspired Dalton to some excellent dribbling amid some expansive moves, one run and loop back of his providing the winner.
Moncur conceded that his team could be better organised when they do not have the ball, but he should be congratulated for encouraging their skills.
‘Healthful Hartlepool’ the town used to advertise, ‘The Most Bracing Sea Air In The Kingdom’.
Maybe the wind has changed at the Victoria Ground.
Football: Milan caned by Abel
By PATRICK BARCLAY
SUDDENLY, the course of history seemed to change: penalties, a subject that had always clouded Barcelona's relationship with Real Madrid, now fell upon the Catalans like gentle rain.
The Nou Camp support had begun Saturday evening waving white handkerchiefs at the Basque in black, expressing the customary suspicion that referees feel indebted to Madrid.
At the end they were celebrating his manifestly even-handed eccentricities, and a 3-1 victory that halted, at least temporarily, speculation about the future of Johan Cruyff.
The Dutchman had needed to win.
Three early-season defeats away from home had started a buzz that he was on his way, even prepared for a terminal handshake; under the somewhat defensive provisions of his contract as manager, which might have been designed by the American alimony lawyer Marvin Mitchelson, it would have cost Barcelona more than £1m.
Indeed, if one did not know Cruyff better, one might have mistaken for gloom the mood in which he unsmilingly accepted his reprieve.
‘The problems,’ he told the assembled media, ‘were all down to you.
It was not us who talked of crisis.
Perhaps now we will hear no more of that and the other waffle.’
John Toshack, a little surprised by Real's vulnerability towards the end, spoke of questionable decisions and a tendency towards ‘strange results’ at this stage of the season.
Barcelona are only two points behind Real and, as long as they stay in contention for the Spanish championship, an obsession last satisfied under Terry Venables in 1985, the club will have no need to calculate the cost of a pay-off.
Even Barcelona would be pushed to meet it at present.
Since guiding his team to the European Cup-Winners' Cup five months ago, Cruyff has taken his spending to £15m in a year.
His tactics have been ridiculed, principally on grounds of inflexibility.
For the greatest player of the total-football era to face such an accusation may seem strange, but the long-serving Carrasco said upon leaving Barcelona for France: ‘he wants static players in fixed positions…players who do exactly what he tells them and nothing else.
As a manager Cruyff demands something he would never have accepted as a player.
He's a dictator.’
It is also said that he leaves the defence undermanned, but neither charge was proved on Saturday as Barcelona rode adversity in an absorbing match that emphasised, as one knew it would, how hurried and imprecise so much of the British game has become and how necessary it is that we cherish such exceptions as Liverpool, Norwich and Nottingham Forest if the art is not essentially to be driven out.
The notion that British spectators would be bored by a regular diet of ‘continental’ football (whatever that means: ‘patient’, I suppose) once again appeared fatuous as play flowed from end to end without too much of the cynical tackling that used to ruin the Spanish game.
Bernd Schuster, the German whom Toshack uses as sweeper, committed the one foul that made the heart sink as Michael Laudrup, in glittering form, was brought down.
If a yellow card scantily punished that, Schuster was to make full payment in the last minute when he earned another caution by childishly wasting time and was sent off: an unusual, but justifiable decision.
All in all, Toshack said, it had been a ‘negative’ night for Real.
Emilio Butragueno, who twisted an ankle in earning the first of three penalties, may not be fit for the European Cup first leg in Milan next week.
Barcelona had already been refused a penalty, but they soon drew level through Julio Salinas, the deceptively inelegant striker who has taken Gary Lineker's reluctant ill-fitted role on the right wing and, on Saturday, made such a good job of it that he might have had a hat-trick but for Francisco Buyo's reflexes.
Real, less cavalier than under Leo Beenhakker, tried to consolidate and break; but the offside flag abused them and the initiative remained with Barcelona, who went ahead after Eusebio was judged to have been tripped inside the area.
Ronald Koeman converted that penalty, then another gloriously won by Julio Salinas when, tiring of the professional duty to let seconds tick away near the corner flag, he burst clear of his attendant, evaded one challenge along the byline, and fell under a second.
Game, set and match.
But the tournament?
Can Toshack yet emerge triumphant?
‘I sometimes wonder’ he said, ‘how some of the team will react after winning four successive championships.’
His changes, designed to tighten the defence for another tilt at the European Cup, has not pleased all critics and he knows his twin requirement is about as tough as football can provide.
‘Of course it was always going to be difficult,’ he said.
‘You know that when you sign a two-year agreement here you might not be able to see it out.
But this is the most famous club in the world.
What are we in the job for if not for challenges like this?
Whatever it brings, one day my son can turn round and say ‘My dad managed Real Madrid’.
Basically that sort of thing is what it's all about.’
Football: Koeman raises a buzz in Barcelona
By PATRICK BARCLAY
ONLY Genoa scored more than one goal in Italy yesterday, but no one was carping in Cremona, writes Phil Shaw.
The local club, Cremonese, won for the first time since gaining promotion -and their victims were the European Cup holders, Milan.
Marco van Basten returned after injury for Milan, but the less-celebrated Abel Dezotti won the match (10 min).
Diego Maradona, who has twice missed penalties this season, scored from the spot (55) to earn leaders Napoli a draw at Roma, who led through Antonio Comi (11).
Internazionale had to come from behind to draw with Bari, while Sampdoria beat Verona with a goal by GianLuca Vialli (16).
Genoa, 2-0 up at Udinese, were pegged to 2-2 before Carlos Aguilera netted twice in the last 10 minutes.
‘Football’ hooliganism is becoming increasingly commonplace in Eastern Europe.
Nine Yugoslav policemen were injured when Dynamo Zagreb fans rioted at Borac Banja Luka.
Sparta Prague have been banned by UEFA from playing their next European Cup match at home because of attacks on Turkish fans during a game against Fenerbahce.
The Czechs must stage their home leg against CFKA Sofia on 18 October 200 miles from the capital.
Gregori Martin, of Malta's Sliema Wanderers, was suspended from UEFA competitions until 1995 for assaulting the referee in a tie against Nentori Tirana.
The acceptable face of striking was seen in the League of Ireland yesterday, when Galway ('We're going to Derry to attack') kept their word — and lost 9-1.
Football: Mehew blazes own trail: Guy Hodgson finds the blase blending with the blatant at Twerton Park
By GUY HODGSON
THE WHIFF of intrigue was in the air at Twerton Park.
Trevor Francis, the Queen's Park Rangers manager, sat a few feet away from Malmo's Bobby Houghton, other shadier characters scouting for the wealth blended happily into the background.
More conspicuous, and producing a pungent pong of his own, was Jimmy Hill.
The Fulham chairman ignored the no-smoking signs around him in the predominantly wooden stand and puffed at his pipe throughout.
Comments from the crowd went unheeded.
Even a quiet word in the boardroom at half-time —‘I thought someone was playing a joke,’ Hill pleaded — failed to douse his passion for lighting up, and the BBC's voice of football reason contravened the ground regulations for 90 minutes.
As for the match, Rovers conspired to throw a smokescreen of their own around their abilities until they emerged starkly with two clever goals inside three minutes early in the second half to scuttle their scoreless fellow Third Division promotion hopefuls.
First Paul Nixon showed intelligence when he ignored an opportunity to shoot and pulled the ball back instead for the better-placed David Mehew to score and then, two minutes later, Mehew combined with Devon White before sending over a cross that Gary Penrice, a yard out, accepted with relish.
Mehew's contribution probably surprised the scouts, who were almost certainly in Bath to watch Penrice and Nigel Martyn, but it is a fair reflection of his part in pushing Rovers into second place.
A prodigious runner, Mehew's pace and fitness give Rovers the appearance of playing 4-4-2 and 4-3-3 at the same time and his willingness to get into the penalty area has brought him four goals already this season.
It has also produced satisfaction for his manager, Gerry Francis, who rescued Mehew from Bath City's reserves two years ago.
Francis also plucked Penrice and Martyn from non-League football and is getting almost blase by the attention his players attract from the bigger clubs.
Football: Advertisement for small beer: Joe Lovejoy reports on a game which failed to quench the purists' thirsts
By JOE LOVEJOY
AS AN advertisement for Second Division football, it was pure Jim Dunk.
On television, the lugubrious Jim advises us that the Canadian lager he is paid to promote is horrible stuff, and should be avoided.
This spiteful scrap warranted a similar warning.
Trevor Brooking, that most mild-mannered of radio reporters was heard to utter the word ‘awful’ on air.
When he says something is awful, rest assured it is.
Howard Wilkinson is rebuilding Leeds in the image of the kick-and-rush monster he created at Sheffield Wednesday.
Worse still, the new Leeds are as sly and provocative as Don Revie's sides, with none of the skills which made them the Liverpool of the Seventies.
It must be added that they were the better team, had the outstanding individual in Gordon Strachan and deserved the victory procured by a touch of finesse which could have Vinny Jones drummed out of the cloggers' union.
What does all this tell us about West Ham?
That they are going from bad to worse.
Successive home defeats, this one by a single goal, have seen them plummet from second to 10th, and their next two games are away to the leaders, Sheffield United, and at home to second-placed Sunderland.
Not much comfort there.
Lou Macari's attempts to wed a club steeped in sophistication to the long-ball game have brought him unpopularity in the dressing-room which will soon spread to the terraces if results do not improve.
Brooking, Devonshire or Dickens would have rendered useless Leeds's tedious offside trap by the simple expedient of running through from deep with the ball.
Now, West Ham have no one with the wit to surmount such obstacles.
Leeds broke out of their defensive cocoon midway through the first half for Jones to win the match by meeting Mike Whitlow's centre from the left at the near post and flicking it across Phil Parkes into the opposite corner.
Why, we enquired of Wilkinson, had his team found it necessary to pass the ball back so often — even from the half-way line?
‘Maybe they can't pass it forward,’ he said.
‘Maybe it's like diving, and the degree of difficulty is too great for them to pass it forward.’
Had Wilkinson enjoyed the match?
‘I don't enjoy watching my own team.
I never have done.’
He is not alone.
Football: Scottish Round-Up: Killie lifted by Watters
By DON LINDSAY
AN extraordinary annual general meeting of the shareholders of Kilmarnock Football Club will tonight be asked to choose between two rival bids for control of one of Scottish football's giants in decline.
At least those present will have the comforting knowledge that they will be voting on the future of a team which has just ascended the summit of the Scottish Second Division, although that must be considered more of a Ben Nevis than an Everest of the football world.
For that step up Killie must thank their most prolific scorer Willie Watters, whose goal disposed of Montrose at Links Park.
Tonight's AGM will weigh up the relative merits of two businessmen, John Kerr and Robert Fleeting, to assume control at Rugby Park.
Fleeting has twice already suffered rejections from the present board of directors amid allegations of sectarianism.
Fleeting is a Roman Catholic.
On the other side, it is widely believed that Kerr's ambitions are backed by money belonging to Jack Gillespie, a director of Rangers.
The plot, should there be such a thing, thickens as Fleeting has consistently put more cash on the table than his opponent.
On the other side of Ayrshire, Ally MacLeod discovered how painfully short his Ayr United side are of becoming genuine challengers for promotion out of the First Division.
Airdrie, managed by that most travelled of forwards, Jimmy Bone, showed far too much physical prowess for MacLeod's men at Somerset Park, and a 3-1 win maintains the Broomfield challenge at the head of the division.
The top two, St Johnstone and Partick Thistle, maintained their unbeaten records although Saints dropped their first home point this season to Morton at McDiarmid Park.
A late equaliser by Rowan Alexander gave the Greenock side the point after Grant Jenkins's goal had put the Perth team ahead at half-time.
Thistle made sure they kept up the pressure on Alex Totten's men by defeating Falkirk at Fir Hill, with Alan Dinnie scoring the winner.
Racing: Braiswick brings era to a close: Richard Edmondson on the last victory for a racing dynasty before it becomes absorbed by the Maktoum empire
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
A DYNASTY disappeared the moment Braiswick crossed the line a glorious winner of the Sun Chariot Stakes on Saturday.
The filly provided a fitting final parading of the chocolate and gold colours of the White Lodge Stud as she waltzed seven lengths clear of eight tired rivals.
The White Lodge officially becomes another part of the eastern block of property around Newmarket this week, when the Maktoum family takes control of the stud administered by the Moller brothers since the war until the death of Eric last July.
Animals that have carried their distinctive braided silks in the past include Most Welcome, Red Glow and Teenoso, the 1983 Derby winner.
Geoff Wragg, the trainer of those colts, said: ‘It's the end of an era and it's nice to go out on a high.
The colours won't be seen again and they may end up in a museum.’
Braiswick herself will be on view in the future, most immediately a week on Sunday at Woodbine, Toronto, on the same card as Old Vic, and, like the dual Derby winner, she seems certain to be sporting the maroon and white colours of Sheikh Mohammed.
The beaten favourite in Braiswick's race was Mamaluna, whose jockey, Greville Starkey, later announced he would be retiring at the end of the season to take up a post with the Newmarket trainer Michael Stoute.
‘Greville will be joining our team, but we have yet to discuss his role,’ Stoute said.
If the Sun Chariot emphasised the spreading cloak of Arab domination, then the Cambridgeshire proved there is still a place for the smaller owner when Jeremy Glover sent out Rambo's Hall, the only horse to have won for him this season, to gain an equally facile success.
The Worksop trainer was one of the few who missed seeing the gelding, bought with another yearling for £3,250, pull six lengths clear.
Glover was making his way back from the start, where he had coaxed the temperamental Rambo's Hall into his stall, and his swelling excitement as he listened to a radio commentary was confined in a swaying Land Rover.
‘I was jumping up and down in my seat as I heard the end of the race,’ he said.
The winner may now become Glover's first runner in a Group race.
His mission had been planned two years ago when he worked well with stablemate Balthus, the 1987 Cambridgeshire winner, and Glover promises he has something else in the yard to continue the trend in two years.
For the successful jockey, Dean McKeown, it was some compensation for the dismal performance of 2,000 Guineas hope Message Pad on Friday.
McKeown has not given up on the north's hope for next year's Classic, who was found to have a temperature after finishing last in the Somerville Tattersall Stakes.
‘He's got a real motor, but that day the engine fell out,’ said the jockey.
‘But he's still the best horse I've ever ridden.’
Another of the better northern horses, Jimmy FitzGerald's Sapience, got a taste of future assignments when he had to plough through two miles of softening ground in the Jockey Club Cup.
FitzGerald aims to make his St Leger runner-up one of the classier recruits to the jumping game next winter.
Sapience's conqueror on Saturday, Weld, should see a little more of the sun, as he will be have a Cup campaign next season.
Racing: For the Notebook
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
A weekly list of horses to follow BATZUSHKA: Set a blistering pace before capitulating on the final climb in Newmarket's Middle Park Stakes won by Balla Cove.
A return to five furlongs should see him back on the winning path.
(Mrs L Piggott).
DAME ELUSIVE: Did not have the best of runs in the race won by Valville at Newmarket.
By the time she got through the winner had flown, but she finished full of running.
(H Collingridge).
LASSIA: Finished fast on her debut over six furlongs in the Newmarket maiden won by Roman Walk.
Will go closein similar company, especially if she is stepped up in distance.
(H Cecil).
MAZAG: Became the meat in a sandwich between Mukddaam and Soy Roberto at Newmarket and lost all chance of winning.
Heavily backed in what was probably a hot race, he should soon recoup the losses.
(M Stoute).
Racing: Silver jubilee for Balding
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
SILVER FLING reserved the finest moment of a 19-race career for her last race when she won the Prix De l'Abbaye de Longchamp yesterday, writes Richard Edmondson.
John Matthias brought the filly with a customary late surge to get up on the line to beat Zadracarta, the Canadian challenger, a head.
Nabeel Dancer, trained by Alex Scott and ridden by Pat Eddery, was a further head back in third.
The victory maintained the monopoly of British and Irish-trained horses, who have now exported this prize for the last 11 years.
George Strawbridge, the American owner, will now retire Silver Fling, who paid 3-1 on the Pari-mutuel, to the paddocks in England.
Ian Balding, the winning trainer who sent out Mill Reef to win the Arc in 1971, said: ‘If ever a horse deserves to win a Group One race it is Silver Fling.
She is such a marvellous filly.
‘I was very pleased when it rained, as Silver Fling is best really at five and a half furlongs, and the easier ground made it more of a test’.
A British filly at the other end of her career earlier captured another prize for the visitors.
Salsabil, a 13-2 shot, took command of the Prix Marcel Boussac a furlong from home before being driven clear by Wille Carson.
For John Dunlop, the successful trainer, it was a second win in the juvenile event in three years following the victory of Ashayer in 1987.
‘Salsabil has the ideal temperament and is very easy to train,’ he said.
‘She is very much like Ashayer, but might have a little more speed.’
The bookmakers clearly believe Salsabil has the speed to win the 1,000 Guineas, William Hill putting her in at 16-1 for the Newmarket Classic.
Carroll House apart, there was little else to cheer the British challengers, with the failure of Luca Cumani's Kefaah in the Prix du Rond-Point providing perhaps the biggest disappointment.
That race went to Golden Opinion, the middle leg of a treble for Cash Asmussen, the American who completed a five-timer the previous day.
Asmussen had clearly removed the memory of Polish Precedent's humiliation at the hands of Zilzal last Saturday from his mind, and is looking forward to tackling Michael Stoute's colt again in the Breeders' Cup Mile at Gulfstream Park next month.
‘Golden Opinion is pretty sensational, and Zilzal had better put his tennis shoes on in Florida — he'll need them,’ was the volley from the French champion jockey.
Cycling: Kelly's sore point
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
(First Edition) IRELAND's Sean Kelly, who finished seventh in the Paris-Tours race on Saturday to win the inaugural World Cup, has criticised the system by which points are allocated in the series.
Kelly said: ‘It's not right that the end of year events are worth more than the early season classics just because the interest has got to be maintained to the finish.’
The winner of the famous Paris-Roubaix event in April, Jean-Marie Wampers of Belgium, collected only 12 points to Dutchman Jelle Nijdam's 16 for victory in the modest Paris-Tours race.
The 12-race World Cup ends with the Tour of Lombardy in Italy next Saturday but, with a 17-point lead over Denmark's Rolf Sorensen, Kelly is assured of the title as victory in Lombardy is worth 16 points.
Sport in Short: Volleyball
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Tennis
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Rugby League
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Rallying
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Orienteering
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Netball
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Motor Racing
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
DAVID BRABHAM took his Ralt Spiess VW to victory in the penultimate round of the British Formula Three championship at Silverstone yesterday in a race shortened by four laps after a four-car pile up on the first lap.
With the championship leader, Scotland's Allan McNish, only six seconds behind in second place, the Australian must finish either first, or second plus the fastest lap, in the final round at Thruxton next week to have any hope of the championship.
Sport in Short: Lacrosse
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Ice Hockey
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Golf
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Football
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Cycling
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
IRELAND's Sean Kelly, who finished seventh in the Paris-Tours race on Saturday to win the inaugural World Cup, has criticised the system by which points are allocated in the series.
Sport in Short: Boxing
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
JUAN MOLINA, of Puerto Rico, won the IBF junior lightweight title by stopping Tony Lopez, the American holder fighting in his home town, Sacramento, in the 10th round of a scheduled 12-round bout.
The referee stopped the contest when Molina was hitting a badly battered Lopez at will, prompting supporters to pelt the ring with beer cups.
Sport in Short: Baseball
By RICHARD EDMONDSON
JOSE CANSECO'S 484ft third-inning home run in the fourth game of the American League Championship play-off series helped Oakland Athletics to a 6-5 victory against Toronto Blue Jays.
Oakland now lead 3-1 in the best-of-seven series.
In the National League play-offs, Robby Thompson hit a two-run home run in the seventh inning to give the San Francisco Giants a 5-4 victory over the Chicago Cubs, leaving put them 2-1 ahead.
Sport in Short: Badminton
Sport Page 28
Sport in : Athletics
Sport Page 28
Tennis: Lendl debates call to the net
From JOHN ROBERTS in Stuttgart
IVAN LENDL stresses that he has no intention of becoming ‘a kamikaze’, even though the world No. 1 proposed to take sleeping tablets while travelling to Sydney to rejoin the grand prix circuit this week.
The other flights Lendl has in mind are the erratic ones which transport him on their excursions to the net in his long quest to win the Wimbledon title.
His dilemma continues to be one of deciding whether to attack or to stay back, and to discover how to execute a charge successfully.
After announcing a determination to play serve-and-volley, whatever the event, the ultimate professional then proceeded to work chiefly from the baseline for five sets to defeat that whimsical artist Miloslav Mecir in the final of the Stuttgart Classic exhibition tournament here on Saturday.
The raiding of Wimbledon, Lendl explained, was not going to be a suicide mission: ‘Against some players you feel more confident moving to the net than against others.
Mecir is one of those whose shots you can't read.’
This is not surprising, as the Olympic champion is almost dyslexic about his own strokes, frequently following deceptive approaches or cunningly angled winners with elementary blunders.
Mecir does not need reminding about this inconsistency.
‘I sometimes play half of a match good and half of a match bad, or not so good, and I have a feeling it gives opponents the chance to come back,’ he said.
‘When you are always trying to make your best shots you sometimes miss.
In a long match like this it is really difficult to play your best for three and a half hours.’
Lendl's concern that Mecir's shrewder shots would pass him in mid-court made for a characteristic back-court performance and a 6-4, 4-6, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 victory for a $100,000 (£62,500) prize.
While it would be a mistake to regard such matches too seriously when they lack the edge of grand prix conditions, Lendl's tactical reticence was interesting.
Mecir could not envisage his fellow Czechoslovak changing a successful routine.
‘I have seen him play a little bit more to the net than normally, but I would say that he has much more confidence staying back and playing long rallies.
He's got a very good serve, but the percentage of points he makes from the baseline is better than with the volley.
You have to play what it is most effective.
A lot depends on your opponent and the surface, but his volley is not one of the best.’
Two factors preoccupy Lendl in this respect.
He knows that he must improve his footwork for the grass courts, and he is also concerned that the head of his racket, which is smaller than most manufactured nowadays, may put his volleying at a disadvantage.
New prototypes have so far failed to satisfy him.
How much of this is psychological is difficult to judge.
Mecir, a ‘touch’ player, and one of the last tour professionals to forsake a wooden racket in the name of technology, advocates caution: ‘It depends on your confidence.
Some rackets are better for some shots, some are better for others.
It is best just to find a racket that suits your game.
It is no use having a racket for volleying if it doesn't help other parts of your game.’
Mecir, whose world ranking has dropped to 26 chiefly as a result of back injuries, ought to add a good deal of craft to the Silk Cut Championships at Wembley next month.
His moments of inspiration did much to elevate the Stuttgart event, a relaxed affair apart from the odd obligatory outburst.
During the final, Lendl ordered the removal of a wandering cameraman who was distracting him: a novel instance of someone chasing television away from tennis faster than the BBC.
Hockey: Ealing steal up to top
By BILL COLWILL
EALING went to the top of the Women's Typhoo National League with a comfortable 3-0 win away to Exmouth at Ottery St Mary, writes Bill Colwill.
Mandy Langridge, the England Under-21 striker, scored twice with Jane Jagger getting the third as Ealing took advantage of the idleness enforced on Slough and Sutton Coldfield because of the international matches..
Val Robinson, who first played for England back in 1966, was named player of the match in Great Harwood's 1-1 draw at Orpington.
The Lancashire side took the lead in the ninth minute through Kath Jackson with Orpington's Helen Morgan equalizing 10 minutes into the second half.
Pat Mawdsley gave Hightown an early lead in their game against Chelmsford with Lyn Bollington putting the visitors on terms.
Jackie Crook put Hightown back in front and Tina Cullen put them further ahead in the 46th minute.
But Brenda Howe and Bollington scored in the closing minutes to give Chemsford their first league point.
The Pizza Express London league got off to an early start this year with a shortened programme.
Surbiton, last year's runners-up to St Albans, who achieved National League status, had a 3-0 victory against Maidenhead with goals from David Francis, Ian Jolly and Gareth Notton.
England have been drawn in the same pool as Pakistan, the host nation, for next February's World Cup in Lahore.
They have avoided their tormentors of late, The Netherlands, but will have to play West Germany, the Olympic silver medallists.
Hockey: Taylor a pillar between posts
By BILL COLWILL
England………0 Australia…….. 0 STEVE TAYLOR probably established himself as the rightful successor to his more famous namesake, Ian, when he gave an outstanding performance of goalkeeping in England's final game in the Lada Classic at Luton yesterday -a goalless draw with the world champions.
The result was enough, however, to give Australia the trophy.
Following their disappointing performance against the Dutch on Saturday when they lost 5-1, England made a number of changes, including dropping captain Richard Leman and introducing a young right-wing triangle of Chris Mayer, Russell Garcia and Rob Hill.
It was Mayer who gave the experienced Michael York a torrid afternoon and created a string of opportunities with penetrating crosses.
Only sound keeping by Lachlan Dreher in the Australian goal and poor finishing denied England a victory they fully deserved.
With both sides lacking penetration at 10 penalty corners, the deadlock remained unbroken in spite of the presence of two of the game's outstanding centre-halves, Australia's Warren Birmingham and England's Jon Potter.
In the other men's game yesterday, a goal for each side within a minute, seven minutes from the end, concluded a highly entertaining 3-3 draw between The Netherlands and Argentina.
England's women gave a disappointing display in their second match against the Soviets at Luton, losing 2-1.
They won Saturday's game 1-0, Vickey Dixon scoring from a penalty stroke.
A similar strike from Dixon yesterday brought England's consolation goal (61min).
Tennis: Evert plays the lead
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
IT SEEMS that these days Martina Navratilova needs all the inspiration she can get.
Normally it comes from what she likes to call her coterie of friends and advisers.
Yesterday it was Chris Evert, normally her rival, who provided the impetus.
Navratilova had watched in awe as Evert opened up the rain-delayed Federation Cup semi-final between the United States and Czechoslovakia to set her team on the way to a 2-0 victory.
Evert was supposed to struggle against the hard-hitting Jana Novotna, who has risen to 12th in the world rankings.
The 34-year-old American was obviously not troubled by the predictions, however, as she confidently dispatched Novotna 6-2, 6-3 in little more than an hour.
Evert's victory left Navratilova knowing that victory over Helena Sukova, the Czech No. 1, would secure the United States a place in the final for the 18th time in 27 years.
But the eight-time Wimbledon champion lost the first set as the Czechoslovak brought her down with her huge serve and she looked a bag of nerves.
Sukova made her work extremely hard before she was able to celebrate a 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 victory.
‘I was very relieved to dig myself out of it,’ Navratilova added.
‘I was nervous and Chris's performance definitely helped me.’
Rugby League Round-Up: Eagles end Widnes' run
By PHIL SHAW
SHEFFIELD EAGLES were doubtless declaring themselves unofficial world club champions last night — and it was not the Stones Bitter talking.
Widnes, who had won the official version in thrilling style against Canberra Raiders before more than 30,000 fans at Old Trafford four days earlier, went down 31-6 to the Eagles, a team formed only five years ago and without a permanent home.
It was the champions' first defeat since losing to Hull in the First Division at the start of April — a run of 13 successive victories.
Jeff Hardy led the Sheffield spree with two tries; the others came from Bruce McGuire, Warren Smiles and Sonny Nickle, with Mark Aston kicking five goals.
The Eagles' manager, Gary Hetherington, said afterwards: ‘It was a tremendous performance and a great day for us.
What made it more significant was that over 7,000 Sheffield fans were following us.’
A year ago, the Eagles were drawing three-figure crowds to Owlerton greyhound stadium.
The only sad note for the newly promoted club was the injury to their 17-year-old full-back David Mycoe, who was carried off 10 minutes from time with a suspected broken leg.
The match, staged at Sheffield United's ground, drew the day's best League attendance of 8,000.
Remarkably, three of the top five gates were in the Second Division — at Halifax, Hull KR and Ryedale York, where 5,000 watched the inaugural game at the club's swish new stadium in the suburbs.
Warrington, the First Division leaders, lost their 100 per cent record with a 12-12 home draw against Hull, who pulled level with 75th-minute penalty by winger Paul Eastwood.
Bottom-placed Barrow came from 14-0 down after 10 minutes to level 24-24 at Bradford but finished as badly as they had started, leaking a further 12 points in the final 14 minutes.
Barrow are the only club still without a point.
Chris Burton, a Featherstone substitute, was sent off after 32 minutes for a high tackle on Craig Izzard, and visitors Leeds went on to win 22-20.
Leeds were again without their six-figure signing from Hull, Lee Crooks, and the Great Britain forward's mysterious absences are likely to lead shortly to a parting of the ways.
Sailing: Smith ups his crew
By STUART ALEXANDER
WITH just the smallest of the 23 starters in the Whitbread Round the World Race, the 51-foot La Poste, due last into Punta del Este, Uruguay, at midnight tonight, crews are preparing for the second leg, writes Stuart Alexander.
There are also some changes afoot.
Lawrie Smith, skipper of the leading British maxi, Rothmans, is to increase the size of the crew from 13 to 16 for the voyage to Fremantle in Australia.
The 13 on the first leg stay with the boat, Smith said, and they will be joined by David Powys, who has been with the project from the beginning.
The two others will be named this weekend after the boat has undergone repairs.
Tracy Edwards, the British skipper of the Jordanian-sponsored all-women crew on Maiden, was delighted to finish 20th (18th on handicap) at midday on Saturday.
Equestrianism: Compensation for Sloothaak
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
FRANKE SLOOTHAAK'S fortunes changed abruptly when he won the Everest Grand Prix, the closing contest of The Horse of the Year Show at Wembley, for the second year in succession.
The German had intended to ride his Olympic gold medal partner, Walzerkoenig, on Saturday night until a few hours earlier when it was discovered that the horse's off-foreleg was inexplicably swollen.
‘I was having a bad week then,’ Sloothaak said.
Two days earlier his puissance horse, Leonardo, had cracked a bone in his off-fore fetlock which had to be put in plaster.
On Friday night Walzerkoenig had dislodged the lowest rail on the triple bar in the final round of the Next International Masters, which cost Sloothaak £28,000.
But Argonaut, brought in as a substitute for Walzerkoenig, ended the German's week on a happier note with some powerful jumping and nimble turning.
He beat Liz Edgar on Everest Rapier, who had the only other clear round of the jump-off.
Sloothaak had some fraught viewing before his prize was safe.
Emma-Jane Mac, in marvellous form throughout the week, looked as though she might beat his time until Everest Oyster stopped at the penultimate fence.
It was there, too, that John Whitaker's challenge ended when Next Milton made his first mistake of the show.
The Dutchman Jos Lansink, the only rider left with a chance of meeting the conditions for the first Everest Challenge (which had required him to jump double clear rounds in four specified contests), would have collected a Jaguar car if he had won the Grand Prix.
His do-or-die bid failed when Optiebeurs Felix refused after a desperately close turn into the second fence.
Mac, who gained her fourth win of the week with Everest Gringo on Saturday afternoon, was chosen earlier that day for the British team that will compete on the American Fall Circuit which begins later this month.
Basketball: Boyd on the boil
By DUNCAN HOOPER
CHARLES BOYD took his points haul to 131 in four games as he led Brixton Topcats, the pacesetters in the National League First Division, to a 115-86 win over Corby Fliers.
Boyd, a 6ft 5in American in his first English season, has been top-scorer for Brixton in every game — although on Saturday he shared the honour with his team-mate, Jody John, each scoring 33 points.
Brixton, who have won all four of their matches, are followed by two more unbeaten teams, Kodak Hemel Royals and Worthing Bears, who have three wins each.
Hemel recovered from their woeful midweek performance against Reykjavik in the European Korac Cup to win 89-75 at Stevenage Falcons, for whom Renaldo Lawrence was top scorer with 36 points.
Hemel's Daron Hoges, so ineffective in midweek, also scored 36 points and was supported by Darin Schubring, his fellow 6ft 10in American, with 21.
Worthing, the league champions two seasons ago, had a 110-101 victory over the Birmingham Bullets, who are severely under strength after losing Stuart Ruckledge to glandular fever and the American Kevin Brown, who arrived at Heathrow last week without a valid work permit.
Judo: IJF's president problem
By PHILIP NICKSAN
ALLEGATIONS of gross misappropriation of funds belonging to the sport by the former president of the International Judo Federation were made at the biannual congress yesterday while the man himself lay in a nearby hospital apparently suffering from a heart attack, writes Philip Nicksan from Belgrade.
The problems arose over the two-year presidency of the Argentinian, Sarkis Kaloghlian, who was dismissed from his position in July after financial irregularities in the IJF's Miami bank account.
Kaloghlian surprisingly appeared at the congress this weekend in an attempt to regain his seat.
After his own area, the Pan-American Union, had failed to support him, he claimed to suffer a heart attack in the middle of the meeting and was taken to a local hospital.
Yesterday, having recovered sufficiently to return to his hotel, he attempted to withdraw from international judo by offering his resignation.
He added that this was on condition that he would withdraw claims for defamation of character made against the IJF if the IJF would agree not to take any legal action against him in the future.
This was rejected by the full IJF congress.
‘We did not accept his resignation because we felt he had already been dismissed in the summer,’ Lawrie Hargrave said.
‘In any case we want to continue the investigation and if necessary will take the matter up with the appropriate authorities.’