

Knock profit
By SIMON DENISON
A multi-million pound airport built in a remote part of Ireland has trebled profits to £138,000.
Passenger numbers at Knock Airport, built near a Marian shrine four years ago, are expected to double by the end of 1989.
Jail challenge
By SIMON DENISON
Jens Soering, the West German awaiting extradition from the UK to face a murder trial in the US, is to challenge his continuing detention in a British prison at a High Court hearing this month.
In July the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg ruled that Britain could not extradite Mr Soering to answer a capital charge of murder because he might face ‘death row’.
Hearing delayed
By SIMON DENISON
The High Court in Dublin adjourned until today an application by the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child for a permanent ban on Irish student union leaders distributing information on abortion facilities in Britain and a related contempt hearing.
Gas leak sealed
By SIMON DENISON
A gas leak on an unmanned North Sea platform which led to the evacuation of 70 workers from a nearby drilling rig was successfully sealed.
Workers will not be allowed back on the out-of-service Vulcan II well in Conoco's Vulcan field until the area is completely clear of gas.
Moves to improve safety on North Sea rigs were announced by Peter Morrison, the Energy Minister.
Discussion documents have been issued, aimed at better protection against fire and explosion.
Whitehall ‘brain drain' warning
By SIMON DENISON
Whitehall faces the prospect of a new ‘brain drain' following a 6.5 per cent pay increase for senior civil servants, union leaders said.
Representatives said the rise left 22,000 professionals with salaries between 11 per cent and 24 per cent behind colleagues in the private sector.
‘Good talent is being lost, particularly in the science and engineering areas,’ said a spokesman for the Institution of Professionals, Managers and Specialists.
Engineers warned of lay-offs
By SIMON DENISON
Engineering union leaders believe employers could respond to selective strike action by using mass lay-offs.
The unions are balloting 24,000 members in four companies next week on an indefinite strike.
The unions' joint strategy committee agreed to raise strike pay from £100 to £125 a week plus top-ups from individual unions but confirmed that those laid off or locked out will not qualify for payments.
Alex Ferry, general secreatry of the Conferderation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, said there was a distinct possibilty companies would use mass lay-offs.
Release of Kurds ‘not connected to suicide’
By ANDY GLINIECKI and NICHOLAS SCHOON
THE HOME OFFICE yesterday released 25 more Kurds seeking political asylum in Britain from detention centres but denied it was bowing to pressure after the death of a detainee who set fire to himself last week.
A spokesman said the seven Kurds released from Haslar detention centre, near Gosport, Hampshire, and all 18 from Gloucester Prison were given temporary admission ‘for as long as it takes to assess their cases’.
The death at the weekend of Siho Iyiguven, who threw himself on a burning mattress at Harmondsworth detention centre, near Heathrow, was followed yesterday with further suicide threats by detainees who barricaded themselves into their dormitory.
There was also a mass picket by supporters outside the Home Office.
But the Home Office said last night that the latest releases, after interviews carried out as part of a review of each case, were unconnected with recent events.
Kurdish detainees at Harmondsworth were released after last week's fire, which also left one man seriously injured.
There are still at least 20 Kurds detained at Haslar.
Immigration officials will be conducting interviews over the next few days.
Several hundred Kurds picketed the Home Office in protest at the continuing detentions and the deportations back to Turkey where they are said to face oppression and torture.
Meanwhile, a High Court judge warned of a serious problem because of a log-jam of refugee cases as he gave leave for two of them to seek judicial review of Home Office decisions to refuse them asylum.
‘Clearly the Kurds, one way or another, are going to present an enormous problem to the courts very shortly, as they are at the moment to the Home Office,’ Mr Justice Schiemann said.
He said some of the cases should be dealt with soon so that the principles for deciding who should be granted asylum ‘can emerge and be tested on appeal’.
The Home Office is deciding who is a genuine refugee and who should be deported out of 3,500 Kurds who arrived in May and June, before a visa requirement was introduced.
Most are living in north London, on income support and with help from Kurdish groups.
But about 200 have spent some time in detention, some for more than four months.
The Home Office says it has assessed only 560 of the total influx.
Seventy have been given refugee status and 240 have been allowed to stay for a year after which their cases will be reviewed.
Asylum has been refused for 150, and 35 of these have already been deported.
A further 45 cases are likely to go to judicial review.
At this rate, it will be about six months before all the Kurds know their fate.
In today's preliminary hearings at the High Court a 36-year-old farmer and 25-year-old X-ray technician both claim a right to asylum under the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to Refugee Status on the ground that they have a well-founded fear of persecution if they are deported.
Their cases will be heard early next month.
The Home Office believes many are economic refugees.
Officials point out that more than 230 have decided to return to Turkey voluntarily.
Alf Dubs, the former Labour MP who is director of the British Refugee Council, said: ‘I'm sure they're not all genuine refugees.
But what we argue is that all should have the right to put their case for asylum fairly and properly, and reasonably quickly.’
Yesterday The Independent spoke to three Kurdish men picketing the Home Office who all said they had suffered torture and imprisonment in Turkey and were frightened to return.
All were known sympathisers of the Kurdish independence movement or communist groups.
They said they had come to Britain because they did not need a visa and because they thought it was a free country.
They had all left wives and children behind.
They said they had to pay heavy bribes to get passports to leave Turkey.
Speaking through an interpreter, Ahmed, 31, said: ‘I'm very worried about my wife and children.
I can't bring them here although I'd like to, and I can't be with them safely.
I'm here for some time, not forever.
I don't know what will happen.’
Heseltine joins NHS critics
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
MICHAEL HESELTINE, the public's favourite to succeed Margaret Thatcher, has issued a direct challenge to the pace and style of government policy.
In an interview with The Independent, he aligns himself with critics of the proposed timetable of change in the National Health Service, and he questions the Prime Minister's ‘sceptical’ approach to the European Community.
With representatives arriving in Blackpool for today's opening session of the most critical of Conservative conferences for many years, the former Cabinet minister finds himself the focal point for public and party disaffection with Mrs Thatcher.
The opinion polls identify Mr Heseltine as the favoured successor to the Tory leadership, and he said in television and radio interviews yesterday that he would accept the ‘huge honour’ if it came his way.
But he emphasised that he would not put himself up as a challenger to Mrs Thatcher.
‘Let us be frank about it,’ he said.
‘There is no contest.
There is no vacancy.
In my view, Mrs Thatcher will lead the Conservatives into the next election and win it.
‘One must recognise that these polls take place, but also carefully remember that a decision about any vacancy that takes place is taken by my colleagues in the House of Commons, and not the general public.’
Mr Heseltine also defended Nigel Lawson's decision to put interest rates up to 15 per cent, and hoped the Chancellor would be given a courteous reception when he addressed conference on Thursday.
But in his interview with The Independent, Mr Heseltine staked out the areas of difference between himself and his front-bench colleagues.
On the NHS changes, he said he would support the legislation because it was designed to make the service more effective and efficient.
But he then sided with many professional and political critics of the Government's plans, saying: ‘Having got the legislation, it would be wise to proceed by…demonstration of success rather than trying a root-and-branch revolutionary approach.
‘It is such a complicated thing to try and do, you do need the support of the medical profession and of the managers of the Health Service, and of the public, and you'll get it more effectively if they can see by example what you're trying to do comprehensively.’
As for the Government's style, Mr Heseltine suggested that much of its tough ‘rhetoric’ was empty, because the hostile words did not match the actions.
Citing the EC example, he said: ‘It was Mrs Thatcher who signed the Single European Act, which is the biggest transfer of sovereignty which this government has ever undertaken in any period of our history.’
Health plans ‘may cost Tories 1.5m votes’
By ANTHONY BEVINS, Political Editor
THE GOVERNMENT'S plans for the NHS could cost the Tories 1.5 million votes at the next general election, Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, claimed yesterday.
An opinion poll conducted by MORI for the Labour Party shows that 12 per cent of Conservative voters would be fairly or very likely to switch parties if the Government goes ahead with its plans, Mr Cook said.
‘That would mean the Conservatives losing over 1.5 million voters at the next election and many marginal seats would go with them.’
Almost 80 per cent of Tory voters say they are unlikely to change parties if the NHS plans go ahead, but 70 per cent believe the proposals are likely to lead to privatisation of the NHS, with 62 per cent seeing the changes leading to worse standards of care and treatment.
Labour is to split the front-bench job of shadowing health and social security, mirroring the Government's division of the DHSS portfolio last year.
Mr Cook said he hoped to retain responsibility for health matters.
Wide support for impartial check on official statistics
By ROSIE WATERHOUSE
CALLS for an independent body to monitor political interference in government statistics, reported in The Independent yesterday, have received widespread backing.
Economists, the statistics profession, trade unions and Opposition politicians all pledged support for the idea of a national council which is being promoted by eminent statisticians and considered by the Royal Statistical Society.
‘Anything that improves the accuracy and quality of government statistics would be welcomed by the economic profession,’ Kevin Darlington, a UK economist with City analysists Phillips and Drew, said.
‘The figures the Government's Central Statistical Office (CSO) produce are neither timely nor accurate.
Statistics are the life blood of both the Government and economists, as chief end-users.
‘The amount of confidence end-users have in the figures has been seriously dented after last year's performance.
In December they had three different interpretations of the Gross Domestic Product, which is one of the most important figures for macro-economists.
The press notice showed different things — that output was growing, that it was standing still and that it was falling.
‘It is an alarming position when the CSO are the monopoly producers of the macro-economic statistics which are used to formulate policy and steer the economy.
Their performance has been very poor.
‘Bill Martin, chief UK economist at Phillips and Drew, has already spoken of the need for an independent watchdog to ‘protect the interests of non-Treasury use of economic data’.
Barry Quirke, chairman of the Institute of Statisticians, said: ‘We would be very keen to support any initiative to set up an independent committee, so long as it has teeth.
We are concerned about the profession's reputation.’
John Ellis, general secretary of the Civil and Public Services Association, which has members employed by the Government's statistical services, said: ‘Anything that improves the quality of statistics, which this country is very good at getting wrong, particularly on transport and the economy, would be to the benefit of the whole country.’
Yesterday, it emerged that members of his union and the National Union of Civil and Public Servants who work in the government's Business Statistics Office in Newport, Gwent, expressed worries that their work could be ‘prostituted’ and ‘manipulated’by politicians after the CSO was moved from the control of the Cabinet Office to the Treasury.
But Margaret Thatcher wrote to Paul Flynn, their MP, in July saying: ‘The concerns you express are without foundation.
The Government regards the integrity, quality and relevance of official statistics as vital for the conduct of the economy.’
Last night Michael Meacher, Labour employment spokesman, called for the all-party Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee to examine the accuracy of government statistics and political use of them.
A spokesman for the CSO said: ‘The Government Statistical Service has a high reputation for integrity, objectivity and honesty.
It is our business to collect, compile and publish figures.
We are not responsible for what politicians and others do with them.’
‘IRA photos’ security tightened last year
By DAVID MCKITTRICK
A CLAMPDOWN on the circulation of photographs of IRA suspects among members of the security forces was brought into operation secretly last year, official sources in Belfast said yesterday, writes David McKittrick.
Before the change, they were given photographs of republicans to take with them on patrols.
Since then, however, standard procedure has been for patrols to study photographs, names and addresses of suspects before leaving security force bases.
Official sources were yesterday unable to explain why the restrictions had been brought in, including whether they had been designed to reduce the risk of leaks to loyalists of the type recently coming to light.
The sources said almost all the documents which had turned up appeared to have gone missing before the 1988 change.
RUC documents sent to The Independent last month were dated June 1988.
The information from official sources serves to confirm what loyalist paramilitaries said in August — that a partial clampdown had taken place about a year ago.
Loyalists said this had reduced the flow of photographs to them.
The IRA yesterday shot dead a Protestant, claiming he had links with the illegal Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF).
Thomas Gibson, 28, died in his car at Kilrea, Co Londonderry.
The UVF denied he had any connection with it.
Four members of the Ulster Defence Regiment — among 28 arrested on Sunday -appeared in court in Belfast charged with possessing ammunition under suspicious circumstances.
All were remanded on bail.
Timman and Speelman agree fourth game draw
By DAVID MCKITTRICK
YESTERDAY'S play in the Pilkington Glass World Chess Championship semi-finals at Sadler's Wells in London yesterday, was restricted to completing the adjourned fourth game of the Timman-Speelman match.
This ended in a draw after 116 moves.
Timman now leads 3-2 overall.
When Jan Timman and Jonathan Speelman shook hands on a draw in the fifth game of their match on Sunday night, it was perhaps the most surprising move of the event so far.
Speelman had won a pawn at move 29, so his position looked far superior.
But then Timman attacked and by move 40, the question was whether Speelman could survive.
Timman's 42nd move looked like a winning combination (42…
Qxb6 loses to 43.
Qxe5+).
but after Speelman's reply the position was unclear again.
Shop celebrates 75th anniversary
By DAVID MCKITTRICK
Phillip Whittemore, manager of Grouts — the drapery shop in Palmers Green, north London — taking money from the ‘railway’ cashtill which moves cash around along wires.
Above him is a clock which stopped 50 years ago and has not been wound since.
The shop, celebrating its 75th anniversary, specialises in traditional underwear 
Nuns claim ministry changed eggs story
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
THE NUNS in Northamptonshire who are battling to save their 5,000 chickens from slaughter said yesterday that the Ministry of Agriculture had changed its story over the type of salmonella responsible for the outbreak of food poisoning which led to the flock being tested.
The nuns, from the Our Lady of the Passion Monastery in Daventry, had been told that the food poisoning in nearby Bedworth had been caused by Salmonella enteriditis.
Tests on one of the two flocks at the monastery were positive for Salmonella typhimurium.
Later Ministry of Agriculture officials told the nuns that this was a mistake and that the food poisoning was due to Salmonella typhimurium.
A spokesman for the ministry confirmed that an outbreak of food poisoning in Bedworth in July had been traced back to the monastery.
It affected four people — three from one family — and was caused by Salmonella typhimurium in eggs purchased from a stall at Bedworth Market.
The eggs are reported to have come from the monastery.
Sister Jane Anne, one of the monastery's 14 nuns, said that they found the ministry's statement ‘very strange’.
‘They say that it was a mistake that we had been told that the outbreak was due to Salmonella enteriditis,’ she said.
The nuns have acted to prevent the slaughter of the flock because they believed that their eggs have never been associated with an outbreak of food poisoning, she added.
Sister Jane Anne said that they would continue their fight: ‘We don't want to give up until there has been a fair hearing.’
Lawyers acting on their behalf are seeking a judicial review.
This would stop the slaughter of the flock until there had been a full hearing in the High Court, according to Mr Richard North, an environmental health officer and technical adviser to the United Kingdom Egg Producers' Association, which is backing the nuns.
The ministry said that it intended to go ahead with the slaughter of the flock ‘as soon as possible’.
John Gummer, Secretary of State for Agriculture, said: ‘We cannot have a situation in which the consumer does not have absolute confidence in British eggs.
This action is to protect the consumer and the producer.’
His officials were talking last night to the nuns' lawyers.
Last week six of the nuns locked themselves in a hen house and refused access to a ministry vet who was to supervise the slaughter of the hens by 10 ex-aminers.
Andy Oatley, chairman of the association, said that a court hearing would be a ‘watershed’ for small egg producers.
The British egg industry had been made a scapegoat for food poisoning by the Government.
Between 60 and 70 per cent of eggs came from the ‘independents’ such as the nuns who kept up to 10,000 birds.
They had been hardest hit by new legislation which required regular testing of the flocks and their compulsory slaughter if salmonella was found.
It cost about £14,000 to restock; compensation was inadequate and hundreds had gone out of business, Mr Oatley said.
Evidence of salmonella in chickens or in the hen house did not mean that the eggs were infected to levels that could cause food poisoning, he said.
‘We suggested to the ministry a long time ago that they should find a flock with salmonella and test the eggs for salmonella.
They refuse to do this.
There have been no scientific studies to determine whether the eggs themselves are infected.’
He added that in Sweden salmonella had been eradicated from poultry by vaccination but cases of food poisoning were still increasing.
Mr Oatley pointed out that because small producers were going out of business, up to 10 per cent of eggs consumed in Britain were being imported.
Earlier this week the Ministry of Agriculture confirmed that Dutch eggs known to be infected with salmonella had been allowed on sale in the UK.
Aldington denies ‘subterfuge’ over war repatriation
By STEPHEN WARD
LORD ALDINGTON was asked to explain yesterday why he had removed the word ‘subterfuge’ from a speech at his old school explaining his part in the repatriation and subsequent death of tens of thousands of Yugoslavs at the end of the Second World War.
The former brigadier Toby Low was continuing his evidence in his action for damages over accusations that he repatriated 70,000 Yugoslavs and Cossacks from Allied-occupied Austria in 1945, knowing they faced almost certain death.
He was accused in a pamphlet, written by the historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy and circulated by Nigel Watts, a property developer, of deceiving the Yugoslavs by letting them believe they were going to Italy.
Richard Rampton QC, read out a draft of a speech which Lord Aldington gave in March 1985 to the pupils of Winchester College where he was Warden.
It said: ‘I'm much criticised for part of a written order under my signature which includes a sentence that the Yugoslavian nationals were not to be told their destination.
The purpose of it, I guess, was to reduce to the minimum the need for our British soldiers to use force with the Yugoslavians.
Subterfuge was thought to be better than violence.’
Mr Rampton said the text showed that ‘subterfuge’ had been crossed out and the word ‘silence’substituted.
Lord Aldington, 75, said: ‘I think I dictated ‘silence’ and my secretary might have typed ‘subterfuge’.'
Mr Rampton protested that the two words were very different.
He asked Lord Aldington: ‘Subterfuge was your first thought was is not?’
It was important because subterfuge meant deception, and he had denied deceiving the Yugoslavs.
Lord Aldington denied it had been his first thought: ‘Silence is the right word.’
He had been ordered not to tell the Yugoslavs where they were going.
Lord Aldington was asked what he knew about the Yugoslavs who had been repatriated by the British Eight Army's V Corps while he was chief of staff to its commander, General Sir Charles Keightley.
He said he had thought they had all been fighting on the German side because they had all been under a German commander when surrendering.
‘These people had been fighting against their own country, against Marshal Tito who had been recognised as an ally by the British Government,’ Lord Aldington said.
He was asked if he had known about the attrocities committed under Stalin in the 1930s, and whether he would have liked to be returned to the Soviet Union labelled traitor at the end of the war.
‘I wouldn't have liked to be returned to Britain at the end of the war labelled ‘traitor’,'he said.
Conservancy council in buy-out fight with farmer
By MIKE PRESTAGE
A PUBLIC inquiry today could make legal history as the Nature Conservancy Council attempts for the first time to purchase compulsorily a farmer's land to protect a rich wildlife habitat.
Eighteen acres of meadowland, part of the Somerset Levels, is at stake.
For five years — and at a cost of at least £150,000 — the council has tried unsuccessfully to reach agreement with Mervyn Sweet, of Chapel Farm, to protect the meadows.
The Levels form one of England's last cultivated wetlands, flooding every winter.
Modern drainage and farming techniques make cultivation possible, but with the agreement of local farmers this has not been done and the water level is artificially maintained to protect the wildlife that has developed.
Other farmers have signed management agreements and accepted annual payments of between £30 and £70 per acre not to use modern farming techniques on the land.
Mr Sweet does not want to farm the site, but dig it up for the valuable peat underneath.
To leave it alone he wants £300 an acre compensation -even though there is no planning permission for peat extraction and little chance of getting it.
The land, part of Westhay Moor, near Wedmore, a 100-acre Site of Special Scientific Interest, has not been managed, and all attempts to reach agreement or use legal powers have so far failed.
Mr Sweet has already lost planning applications, High Court hearings and a Crown Court prosecution, yet still fights on.
He said: ‘Everything will come out in evidence.
I am only trying to mind my own business and I don't know whether I can prevent the compulsory purchase order.’
Win or lose at Glastonbury Town Hall, the inquiry will not be the end of the council's dealings with Mr Sweet.
He has put in an application to build a restaurant and car park on some of his remaining land.
Police in hunt for athletes who hurdled closed level-crossing
By PHIL REEVES
POLICE are aiming to track down 30 athletes who hurdled over closed barriers at a railway level-crossing moments before a train hurtled through.
It happened shortly after 500 athletes set off on the Rowntree Athletic Club's 10-mile road race at the weekend.
When the runners, who included several international competitors, arrived at the crossing at Strensall, near York, they found a single policeman calling them to a halt.
His orders were obeyed by more than 450 competitors but about 30 — they were apparently reluctant to lose their position at the head of the race -steeplechased over the two closed barriers and carried on running.
Shortly afterwards a Liverpool to Scarborough train thundered through.
Sergeant Terry Lawton, of British Transport Police, said yesterday: ‘The train was approaching and if all 450 runners had hurdled the barriers and any had fallen, there could have been a mass slaughter on the line.’
The policeman on crossing duty had taken the 30 runners' numbers: ‘We are checking numbers with race officials who were also near the crossing and the runners involved will be interviewed with a view to prosecution,’ Sergeant Lawton said.
Race officials claim the start of the run had been delayed 20 minutes to avoid the train but the race was running 10 minutes ahead of schedule.
Dr Peter McDaid, from Tyneside, won the race.
John Lenihan, an Eire international, came second.
Afterwards Dr McDaid said: ‘I couldn't see any train.
I was 20 yards ahead and I could not afford to let Lenihan catch up.’
The Crown Prosecution Service will decide whether or not the 30 runners should be prosecuted for trespassing on the railway.
‘Telegraph’ staff strike over new hours plan
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
DAILY TELEGRAPH journalists yesterday began an immediate 36-hour strike, in protest at a package of compulsory redundancies and the introduction of contracts featuring a flexible five-day week requiring staff to work Saturdays and Sundays.
They were able to respond swiftly because they already have a secret ballot strike mandate over an ongoing pay dispute.
The union also voted for a further strike ballot on the new contracts.
Last night a management spokeswoman said a skeleton staff was working and would produce a newspaper.
One journalist said: ‘Staff are foaming at the mouth.
They believe there will be an awful lot of weekend working.’
The journalists' reaction appeared to take management by surprise.
They were last night handing back their new contracts and refusing to sign them.
The newspaper group plans to shed 33 jobs, about 25 of them through compulsory redundancy, leaving it with 400 staff to service the Daily and Sunday Telegraph.
Journalists were told they would receive pay rises of between £1,500 and £6,000 to adopt the terms, backed-dated to September if signed quickly.
Average pay for journalists on the paper, excluding the editor, is £29,000.
But it is the wording of the new contracts which appears to have prompted the strike.
They say the nature and demands of the job ‘may necessitate you working at times other than your normal hours of the week’.
Andrew Knight, chief executive and editor-in-chief of the group, said the word ‘may’ was used to denote the flexibility required.
The seven-day strategy was designed to throw the resources of The Daily Telegraph behind the weaker Sunday Telegraph.
Minister grants new poll tax exemptions
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
WEALTHY property owners may escape paying poll tax on their second homes under plans announced by the Government yesterday.
And about 50,000 young people in further education or who are still at school would also be exempt from the community charge, David Hunt, Minister of State at the Department of the Environment, said.
For second home owners, it will be up to local authorities to use their discretion in setting a lower rate of charge for certain properties.
At present, a council has to set the same standard charge for all unoccupied second homes.
The new rule allows them to either reduce it or to make no charge.
The proposed change will be written into the Local Government Housing Bill.
Mr Hunt said of the changes in the poll tax rules for teenagers: ‘A new wider exemption will apply to all young adults under the age of 20 for so long as they are still at school or in full-time further — though not higher -education.’
Special community charge rules already apply to students in higher education at universities and polytechnics.
Tory unease over the poll tax will surface at the party conference tomorrow when delegates will call for government cash to fund the ‘safety net’.
That net is aimed at forcing people in low-spending Conservative boroughs to subsidise voters in mainly high-spending Labour areas.
Senior Conservative MPs have already protested about the move and called on the Government to foot the £650m bill or risk losing key marginal seats at the next general election.
Government legal service seeks bright new image
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, Sir Patrick Mayhew QC, embarked on a campaign yesterday to rid the government legal service of its dull image with the launch of a recruitment brochure and training scheme aimed at attracting the best graduates.
Adopting techniques long employed by the solicitors' profession, the brochure sets out personal accounts of government legal work by serving lawyers.
Sir Patrick said the brochure had a dual aim: to show potential recruits that government legal work was responsible and worthwhile; and to dispel the notion that the service was for lawyers who had not made it in other parts of the profession.
The brochure will be used in a forthcoming drive to fill 40 vacancies across a number of government departments, and as a recruitment aid on planned ‘milk round’ sessions at universities and polytechnics.
The new training scheme will be targeted at a limited number of high-calibre graduates.
Twenty intending solicitors or barristers are being sought immediately for articles or pupillage, at starting salaries of £12,672.
Sponsorship through professional exams will also be available.
The Crown Prosecution Service will ‘continue the fight’ to get at least limited rights of audience in the Crown Court for its lawyers once the new advisory committee for legal education and conduct is set up under the Government's White Paper plans for the legal profession, Fiona King, a recruitment specialist at the service said yesterday.
The service is short of 369 lawyers, but it has received 517 inquiries about its own articled clerk and pupillage scheme launched in May.
Twenty-three trainee lawyers are already in post, with 175 about to be interviewed.
Primary schools ‘must devote more time to science’
By PETER WILBY, Education Editor
PRIMARY SCHOOL science has improved over the past decade but still suffers from poorly-trained teachers, inadequate space and equipment and bad organisation, a report from Her Majesty's Inspectors said yesterday.
Schools will have to give ‘substantially more time’ to science to meet the requirements of the national curriculum, the inspectors added.
John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education, yesterday said ‘the report shows we are better placed for a major advance than some have suggested’.
The report draws mainly on visits to 300 primary schools from 1982-86; since then shorter visits to 80 schools have shown ‘further improvements at an increasing pace’.
There was a big improvement on the late 1970s when science had barely a toe-hold in most schools and standards were generally poor.
But time spent on science was still inadequate.
Some classes gave as little as half an hour a week to science and, on average, it took only 5 per cent of the timetable.
There was little improvement in the teaching of scientific skills such as making and testing hypotheses and designing experiments.
Work was good or better in only a third of classes; in a fifth, it was poor.
In about half, much of the work was insufficiently demanding, particularly for older and more able children.
For example, conditions necessary for seeds to germinate were often studied in much the same way by successive age groups.
Fewer than a fifth of the schools kept records of pupils' achievements in science.
In a quarter of the schools, ‘work was constrained by limited space and by a lack of other facilities such as a water supply’.
Two-thirds of schools had apparatus ranging from adequate to generous.
But in a minority ‘access to resources was unsatisfactory: apparatus was hidden in cupboards, stored haphazardly, scattered, or kept in rooms used for other purposes for much of the day’.
Most primary teachers had had little or no science in their initial training.
Though more schools had appointed teachers with responsibility for science, only one in seven classes received specialist teaching.
And the specialists' impact on other classes was limited ‘because they rarely have sufficient time to work alongside their colleagues’.
Countries split over ivory ban
From NICK CATER in Lausanne
LOBBYING over a proposal to ban all trade in ivory divided the conference of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) when it opened yesterday.
Arguments over the Tanzanian resolution could lead to the resignation of the secretary-general of CITES, Eugene Lapointe.
Mr Lapointe and his secretariat are facing a mounting barrage of accusations, most of them linking the secretariat's allegedly biased lobbying against the ban with the money being given by Far East wildlife traders to the organisation's ivory monitoring unit.
The British-based Environmental Investigation Agency says in a brochure, A system of extention, that ‘the scale of abuse of the responsibilities entrusted to the secretariat of the parties (CITES 103 member nations) has become so widespread, and the extensive manipulations to prevent a ban on the ivory trade so obvious and desperate, that there is no longer any doubt about the ivory trade's grip on major decisions being taken by the secretariat’.
The agency adds: ‘Determined to reduce the influence of conservationist non-governmental organisations on CITES and its partners, Lapointe has delivered CITES on a silver platter to the poachers and smugglers.’
The agency's allegations have not been supported by other major conservation groups, although Buff Bohlen, a World Wide Fund for Nature official, said he was concerned over what he believed was money from business trading in illegally poached ivory going to support the secretariat's work.
The fund had acted as a conduit for the money from ivory trade associations in Japan for one year, but this was stopped by Mr Lapointe, Mr Bohlen said, because he wanted the money to go directly to the secretariat.
Over four years, $600,000 has gone into the ivory unit, of which about $200,000 was from Japanese and Hong Kong ivory trade associations, with the rest coming from governments and conservation groups.
Mr Lapointe defends the use of ivory money saying that he has managed to bring in funds from such sources at the direction of government members of CITES.
He adds that it is not in the traders' interests for the elephants to die out.
He also denies that his staff overstepped the mark in lobbying, saying he has a responsibility to explain all the options for the trade in addition to a full ban.
CITES, which is run on a budget of less than $3m a year, is facing a financial crisis.
Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands, the founder president of the World Wide Fund for Nature, told the conference: ‘CITES will retain credibility in my view, by making decisions based on scientific evidence, not political or commercial expedience nor emotion, and by its secretariat at all times maintaining objectivity and impartiality.
Parties to CITES must give the secretariat the finances with which to do its job and not oblige it to raise its own funds in ways which lead to question and criticism.’
Tanzania, backed by Kenya, Somalia and the Gambia, is urging a ban on the ivory trade because elephant numbers in east and central Africa are falling as a result of poaching.
In the past 10 years, elephant numbers in Africa have fallen from more than 1.2 million to about 600,000.
Southern African states, such as Zimbabwe, Botswana and South Africa, have already declared their opposition to a ban, as their stocks of elephants are rising, allowing profitable culling for ivory, meat and leather.
A compromise with far tighter controls over the CITES-monitored quota system is likely to be agreed before the end of the conference in two weeks' time.
British breakthrough in speech-wise computers
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
BRITAIN has broken a vital barrier in developing computers that recognise continuous speech rather than needing a keyboard to type in information.
The computers can recognise thousands of words and, unlike older systems, do not have to be trained laboriously for each word.
The technology has brought Britain to the forefront of speech recognition in nine months — thanks to a team of three researchers, Dr Roger Moore, of the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment, says.
The advance has proved highly accurate in recognising continuously spoken airborne reconnaissance reports for the Royal Air Force.
Until now reconnaisance pilots, because their hands and eyes are fully occupied, have had to remember what they see and compile reports later.
The computer has to recognise not only words, but when speech begins and ends.
It must differentiate between background noise, words, and breathing.
According to Dr Moore, speech recognition could be an important feature of future aircraft and it is believed to be under consideration for the European Fighter Aircraft.
The same technology will allow machines to be controlled by voice command in the dark or where the operator's hands are full.
Similar work in the United States, he says, has taken a multi-million dollar, five-year programme to achieve.
Now establishment scientists are looking for someone interested in using the achievement in the civil sector.
Early speech recognition systems relied on converting words in a given vocabulary into a pattern stored in the computer and comparing each spoken word to see if it matched.
It was crude, slow, and could not cope with variations in speech.
Some later work focused on modelling variations in speech patterns, but the computers still could be used by only one person who ‘trained’ by saying each word five or 10 times.
According to Dr Moore, that is unrealistic if computers are to be able to recognise thousands of words.
The establishment's scientists use models based on sub-units of words — about 40 sounds which are the building blocks of the English language.
The result is a system that has the potential to recognise every word in the language.
To date, each system uses models of sounds uttered by one person, but could be developed to cope with anyone speaking in one language or accent.
Coroner links 14 deaths to psychiatric unit
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
FORTY-THREE per cent of the suicides and probable suicides in south Devon this year were people recently released from the controversial Edith Morgan psychiatric unit at Torbay Hospital, a coroner has disclosed.
Hamish Turner gave the figure in an unprecedented statement when opening an inquest into the death of Debra Tosio, 30, a Shaldon shop assistant found at the bottom of 70ft cliffs at Berry Head, Brixham, last week.
She was found dead hours after walking out of the unit in a suicidal state after her family had been told it was secure.
She apparently left through an unlocked door.
Yesterday the Torbay coroner said 14 out of 32 suicides this year had recently been released from the unit, which he has criticised on several occasions since it replaced more secure psychiatric hospitals that have been closed by the area health authority.
He has called a seminar in nine days to discuss ‘The Urge For Self Destruction’.
It will be attended by leading doctors.
Clamping proves to be parking deterrent
By ANDY GLINIECKI
WHEELCLAMPING of cars is deterring drivers from parking on yellow lines and illegally parking in residents' bays, according to a new report.
Published by the research arm of the Department of Transport, the report comes shortly after the London borough of Hammersmith and Fulham announced it would be introducing the scheme later this month.
So far no local authorities outside London have approached the department about the implementation of wheelclamping.
Surveys of parking habits by the deparment's Transport and Road Research Laboratory carried out before and after wheelclamping was extended to the areas of St John's Wood and Pimlico in London in spring 1987, show that parking on yellow lines declined by 31 and 17 per cent respectively.
Both areas experienced a 50 per cent reduction in illegal parking in residents' bays.
In St John's Wood illegal parking-time in each bay fell per day from 77 minutes to 40 and in Pimlico, from 48 minutes to 24.
The percentage of time that meters were occupied during the penalty period fell from 19 to 5 per cent in Pimlico with an increase in ‘meter-feeding’.
But in St John's Wood there was a dramatic rise in the time parked in penalty — from 8 to 28 per cent.
The changes in parking behaviour in St John's Wood are similar to those observed in the period after wheelclamping was introduced in central London in 1982.
In the original clamping area the decline in parking on yellow lines was 40 per cent.
Pimlico was shown to be comparatively resistant to clamping, as were Mayfair, Soho and Knightsbridge, all of them part of the original clamping area.
Areas covered by wheelclamping include the City of London, most of Westminster and Kensington and Chelsea, and the southern half of Camden.
Police hunt woman over IRA bombing of Deal barracks
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
AN ARTIST'S impression was released yesterday of a young blonde woman believed to be a fourth member of the IRA unit which bombed the Royal Marine barracks at Deal, Kent, on 22 September.
The drawing and new evidence about cars suspected of having been used by the bombers, has prompted police to call 1,500 Deal residents for further interviews later this week with 50 officers at a church hall.
The woman was picked up by taxi in the afternoon of 6 September from the suspected IRA safe house beside the barracks at 17 Campbell Road.
She was driven for 20 minutes to the Eastern docks, Dover.
From there she could have travelled to France or Belgium but it is not known whether she boarded a ferry.
She did not indicate her destination.
Police described her as aged about 21, between 5ft 4in and 5ft 5in tall, of medium build, wearing a light, fairly baggy trenchcoat.
She had collar-length, straight, ash-blonde hair, parted on one side and spoke with a southern Irish accent.
Other witnesses have described seeing such a woman near the house.
Ten days ago police released drawings of two male suspects.
Sightings have been reported from as far as France and the Netherlands.
Police say evidence suggests there was a third man, although descriptions are confused.
Detective Superintendent Owen Taylor, who is leading the inquiry team, said yesterday that three people were spotted in an E-registration, black Nissan Micra car, near allotments close to the barracks at 8.15pm on 21 September, which was 12 hours before the bombing in which 10 bandsmen died.
They had the car lights switched off for a while.
Witnesses have also identified an old light brown Mark 2 Ford Cortina under repair on Station Road, Walmer, two miles from the barracks, on 2 September.
This evidence fits statements from Dennis Johnson, who had arranged to meet the suspected bombers around midday at 17 Campbell Road to hand over the keys to the holiday home.
When they did not arrive, a man calling himself Richards rang and said: ‘Sorry I am late, Mr Johnson.
The car has broken down and my two mates have taken it to a local garage to get it fixed.’
Police say that at about 11am a man reported at the Green Garage service station that his car had broken down nearby.
A mechanic went to the car and saw two men beside it and a young woman inside.
Police have still to trace where the suspected bombers went between leaving Campbell Road on 16 September and the bombing six days later.
They have ruled out Deal as the site of a second safe house and inquiries are now focused on Dover and Kent villages.
Spanish Riding School of Vienna prepare for London performances
By JACK O'SULLIVAN
Grooms from the Spanish Riding School of Vienna unloading a Lipizzaner stallion at Wembley Arena, London, where the school will stage six performances, starting on Thursday, demonstrating the classical art of riding as practised at the Imperial Court of Vienna.
The performances will feature the school's 25 best stallions 
Art Market: Porcelain inkwell fetches 13,200 pounds
By GERALDINE NORMAN
AN INKWELL was bought by the Victoria and Albert museum for £13,200 (estimate £4,000-£6,000) at Christie's yesterday.
It was made at the Bow porcelain factory around 1758 but its most valuable feature was the signature Ja Welsh on the footrim.
James Welsh and his wife are recorded as decorating porcelain at Chelsea in 1750; by the summer of 1754 they had moved to Bow.
But nothing was hitherto known of their work.
The inkwell is the first signed piece to be discovered.
Welsh has painted a loose bouquet, scattered flowers and a dragonfly around the sides, while the shoulder is painted with quills, dividers, rulers, a mathematical manuscript and a geometrical equation.
It should become a key in attributing other work to his hand.
There was keen competition for the finer pieces in Christie's sale of British ceramics.
An early (1745-49) Chelsea teapot, the sides moulded in imitation of acanthus leaves and painted with sprigs of flowers and insects reached £24,200 (estimate £15,000-£20,000).
Determined collectors bid two lots through the roof.
First to get the treatment was a rare Staffordshire saltglaze oval soup tureen, cover and stand painted with flowers, butterflies and insects.
Jonathan Horne secured it for his client after a long battle at £31,900 (estimate £5,000-£8,000).
At weekend sales in New York and Paris prices for post-war French artists soared to new heights.
In Paris an abstract patchwork of colours by Serge Poliakoff, Composition -1966, set an auction record for the artist at Fr3.6m (£360,000).
In the same Charbonneaux auction, a chair made by Dubuffet from irregular-shaped coloured chunks secured Fr2m (£200,000).
Water authority to be sued over officer's illness
By GERALDINE NORMAN
A POLICE federation is to sue its local water authority in an attempt to win compensation for an officer who became ill after saving a man from drowning in a polluted river.
Malcolm Beavers, a former inspector, has now retired on a police pension after contracting an infection when he dived into a polluted stretch of the River Aire at Selby, North Yorkshire.
Mr Beavers, 37, a married man with two children, won a bravery award for the rescue but is suffering from viral fatigue syndrome which strikes at the nervous system and brain.
David Murfin, the chairman of North Yorkshire Police Federation, said: ‘It's a tragic waste of talent.
What happened to Malcolm Beavers has upset a lot of policemen.’
Yorkshire Water has declined to comment but is believed to be refusing to accept liability.
Oil giant Shell UK appeared in court at Birkenhead, Merseyside yesterday charged with polluting the River Mersey in the first major case brought by the new pollution watchdog, the National Rivers Authority.
The case was adjourned until 6 November for committal proceedings.
Shell is charged with polluting the River Mersey by allowing crude oil to enter the river at Bromborough, Wirral, on 19 August — contrary to the Control of Pollution Act of 1974 — from a fractured pipeline from Birkenhead's Tranmere Oil Terminal to Shell's Stanlow refinery at Ellesmere Port.
A massive clean-up programme followed and the long-term environmental effects of the leak are still being assessed.
An investigation was launched yesterday after one of the West Country's best game-fishing rivers was hit by a second major pollution incident in seven weeks.
The National Rivers Authority confirmed that ‘hundreds if not thousands’ of salmon, sea trout and brown trout had died in a two-mile stretch of the River Erme at Ivybridge, south Devon.
John Hancock, county pollution officer, said the latest incident involved ‘a toxic discharge of some sort’.
Samples had been taken and investigations were centred on a local factory.
On 22 August, 2,000 fish were killed when chlorinated water from a council swimming pool leaked into the river.
More than £120,000 has been paid in compensation to victims of another poisoned water accident in the West Country.
South West Water said 477 claims worth £123,644 had been settled, with 318 more still outstanding.
Supplies to 20,000 people were poisoned in Cornwall when a relief delivery driver accidentally pumped 20 tonnes of aluminium sulphate into the wrong tank at the Lowermoor treatment plant near Camelford on 6 July 1988.
Pipe museum closes
By GERALDINE NORMAN
Anthony Irving inside the House of Pipes he founded at Bramber, in West Sussex, which closed yesterday after more than 16 years because of his ill-health.
Among the hundred most popular museums in Britain, it was visited by more than 900,000 people.
The 40,000 exhibits, covering 1,500 years, may go on display again in Yorkshire 
50m pound computerised theft highlights debate on hacking
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
A MAJOR financial institution in Britain has been the victim of a £50m computerised theft in which the money was sent around the world in electronic parcels.
Det Supt Don Randall, of the City of London Police fraud squad, says the police recovered the money and 25 people are facing prosecution in four countries.
In an interview with Channel 4's Dispatches programme, to be shown tomorrow, Mr Randall says that co-operation between law enforcement agencies in the United States, the Far East and Europe has resulted in ‘arrests and prosecution’.
However, he said yesterday that it was important to distinguish between a crime in which computers were used as a tool, and computer fraud, which involved manipulating or corrupting a mainframe, which was still relatively uncommon.
‘There is very little computer fraud as such, but almost any fraud has now got an electronic aspect,’ he said.
The programme will also reveal that Barclays, one of the few major financial organisations willing to talk openly about computer crime, spends £20m every year on computer security.
Trevor Nicholas, head of Barclay's computer operations, says that the bank has been the victim of attempts to move funds to accounts in other parts of the world, but that as far as it knows, they have been thwarted.
The largest attempt was about £900,000, Mr Nicholas says.
Barclays has specialists on computer security, hacking and computer viruses — programmes which replicate themselves and can cause enormous damage.
Although the bank has software that can spot 200 different viruses, there are always new ones against which there is no defence.
The problem of computer-related crime will be highlighted today in the Law Commission's report on Computer Misuse.
The report will spark the next round in the debate over whether hacking should be outlawed.
Mr Randall said: ‘In general terms, we do see room for hacking to be made a criminal offence.’
Some legal experts, and Eric Howe, the Data Protection Registrar, are concerned about the prospect of outlawing hacking per se.
Mr Howe says the targets for legislation should be hacking for personal gain, the gain of someone else, or to cause damage.
The Law Commission is also expected to deal with the legal issues surrounding computer viruses.
Two barristers, Alistair Kelman and Owen Keane, say in the latest Information Security Guide that the battle against viruses is being lost because of their ability to reappear in new strains which are immune to known antidotes.
Personal computers are too fragile to cope with viruses and must be replaced with sophisticated systems which are resilient to viruses in the first place.
The barristers warn that viruses can be perpetrated inadvertently by computer maintenance engineers and software companies.
They divide viruses into the ‘mostly harmless’ which display messages, ‘fatal distraction’which mean to display messages but accidentally cause loss of data or crash the computer, and ‘information terrorist’which are designed to do harm.
But they warn that any virus is undesirable even if not destructive.
Law Report: Limits allowed on doctor's use of deputising service: Regina v Secretary of State for Health, Ex parte Spencer.
Queen's Bench Divisional Court —(Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Hutchison), 9 October 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
A doctor's primary duty to provide his patients with personal treatment limits his right to provide treatment by arrangement with a deputising service.
Accordingly, having regard to maintaining the doctor's primary duty, a Family Practitioners' Committee is entitled to impose conditions limiting the number of visits per 1,000 patients which might be made by the deputising service, so as to prevent excessive use being made of a deputising service.
The FPC's power to limit the use of deputising services is not confined to conditions which bear on the service's capacity to provide an adequate service.
The Divisional Court dismissed a general medical practitioner's application for judicial review of the Health Secretary's decision that Coventry Family Practitioners' Committee acted within its powers and duties in imposing a condition on the doctor's use of the BMA/Air Call Deputising Service.
Schedule 1 to the National Health Service (General Medical and Pharmaceutical Services) Regulations 1974, as amended, includes doctors' terms of service.
By paragraph 16: ‘(1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) a doctor shall give treatment personally.
(2)…a doctor shall be under no obligation to give treatment personally if such reasonable steps as are appropriate are taken to ensure continuity of treatment, and treatment may be given —(a) by another doctor acting as a deputy…(b) if it is treatment which it is clinically reasonable in the circumstances to delegate, by a person whom the doctor had authorised and who is competent to carry out such treatment.’
By paragraph 19:(1) Before entering into arrangements with a deputising service…a doctor shall obtain the consent of the committee.
In giving such consent, the committee may also impose such conditions as it considers necessary or expedient to ensure the adequacy of such arrangements.’
By circular HC(FP)84 2, the Department of Health and Social Security gave guidance to FPCs in exercising their functions in paragraph 19 and referred to limitations on the use of services, such as a limit on calls.
On Dr Spencer's application to the FPC for consent to use the deputising service, the committee agreed to renew consent subject to the condition which involved a limit of 15 calls per thousand patients per month.
Dr Spencer appealed to the Secretary of State for Health who dismissed the appeal.
Francis Ferris QC and Michael Briggs (Hempsons) for Dr Spencer; John Laws (Treasury Solicitor) for the Secretary of State for Health.
MR JUSTICE HUTCHISON said that the applicant was in effect asking the court to declare unlawful the FPC's use of paragraph 19 provisions in order to put in place a policy for limiting the use of deputising services, save where the power to limit was used for the purpose of keeping the deputising services going properly.
Mr Ferris submitted that the obligation to give personal treatment was very substantially cut down in cases falling within sub-paragraph (2) and that a doctor was entitled to make arrangements for the entirety of his practice to be conducted by some other doctor.
He submitted that paragraph 19 was to be construed without regard to paragraph 16(1).
Mr Laws submitted that (1) the expectation was that the doctor would in general provide for his patients a full-time service.
The fundamental provision was in paragraph 16(1).
Paragraph 19 was merely ancillary to paragraph 16. (2) If the FPC did not impose limitations it would be facilitating the frustration of the doctor's paragraph 16 duties.
(3) The draftsman could never have intended to permit a doctor to lawfully sub-contract all his work.
(4) Reasonable limits had to be placed on the use of deputies to enable the doctor to fulfil his fundamental obligation of giving treatment personally.
(5) While the words ‘adequacy of such arrangements’ in paragraph 19 included the concept that the commercial organisation should be efficiently run and provide cover by adequately qualified doctors, their correct interpretation was adequacy in the sense of its compatability with the continuance of the basic obligations of a doctor to his patients.
Mr Laws contended that paragraph 16(2) did limit the doctor's right to provide treatment by another deputy; that it was legitimate for the FPC to take into account the doctor's reasonable needs for time off duty for relaxation and rest, the advantages of continuity of patient care and the paragraph 16 obligation to give personal treatment.
He submitted that it was quite clear that the FPC reached a considered decision as what it found to be the proper level of use of the deputising service consistently with maintaining the doctor's primary responsibility and as regards the need to maintain the standards of the deputising service efficiently and consistently with that obligation.
His Lordship concluded without hesitation that Mr Laws' arguments were to be preferred.
It was wholly unrealistic to construe paragraph 19 without regard to paragraph 16.
The terms of service had to be construed as a whole.
The primary obligation was plainly to provide personal treatment, though that obligation was subject to limited qualifications.
His Lordship could not accept that a sensible construction of paragraph 19 involved that, provided only the commercial deputising service was large and efficient enough, the FPC was in practice obliged to give its consent even though it knew that the doctor in question intended to delegate his entire practice to such an organisation.
Any sensible construction of the terms of service involved that paragraph 19 must be read in the light of, and subject to , the obligation imposed by paragraph 16.
The challenge to the Secretary of State for Health's decision, which was also effectively a challenge of the FPC's decision and the circular, was misconceived.
Slate quarries given a new lease of life
By MIKE PRESTAGE
A GROWING demand for slate roofs has breathed new life into traditional slate quarrying in north Wales and given a fillip to villages that for centuries have relied on the industry for jobs.
While other Welsh industries, particularly coal mining and steel production, have declined, devastating the villages that grew up to service them.
The soaring market for roof slates, helped by a return to traditional architecture and materials, has come just in time.
The village of Bethesda, four miles from Bangor, has grown cheek-by-jowl with its slate quarry over two centuries.
Penrhyn is now the largest quarry in the world, and 30,000 tonnes of rock a week are gouged out of the Carneddi mountains — 6 per cent of the world's slate output.
Yet five years ago, the quarry faced closure.
Employment was down to 150, from a pre-Second World War high of 3,000, and two rival quarries in neighbouring valleys had succumbed to the depression.
Now Penrhyn, operated by Alfred McAlpine, has seen profits and production increase fourfold in five years, and 400 are employed.
A training scheme enables young people to learn the old skills.
But Penrhyn's success has met a mixed reception.
Over the years, quarrying generally has had a bad record for pay and conditions, and Penrhyn has a particularly infamous past.
It was there in 1903 that quarrymen went on strike for three and a half years, surviving on subsistence farming.
Such times are not easily forgotten.
Since then, there has been a history of militancy and while McAlpine's has brought dramatic improvements in wages and conditions, it has also imported English managers, resented in this staunchly Welsh-speaking region.
Quarrymen stopping for a pint in the King's Head public house on their way home took a stoical view of the quarry's recent success.
‘It pays well and has brought valuable jobs, but if the demand for slate drops they will close us down without a second thought,’ one said.
Talk was of a minor disciplinary measure by management that might lead to industrial action.
A worker said: ‘The industry has changed a lot and is now highly-mechanised, and we work continental shifts, but some things don't change.
What the management has to learn is that we can't be mucked about.’
Today's quarry owner has to take account of the environmental issues his predecessor could safely ignore.
The boundaries for the Snowdonia National Park run round the edge of Penrhyn, which covers six square miles.
Quarries down the road at Ffestiniog are within the National Park, and expansion plans must be carefully thought out.
Geoff Drake, managing director at Penrhyn, said: ‘We are aware of our responsibilities, and tipping is now below ground level to avoid creating an eyesore.
The quarry has been here 200 years and is part of the landscape, rather than a blot on it.’
Certainly the galleries where the slate is blasted, which go down 1,500ft in giant steps, have a dramatic quality of their own.
They cannot be seen from the village, but are visible from Anglesey across the Menai Strait.
Mr Drake said: ‘We are seeking to redress some of the ills of our predecessors.
The quarry had a bad reputation, but we are trying to get involved in the local community and are improving the image of quarrying.’
He added that £10m had been invested in equipment and there was a commitment to the future; growing export markets, particularly in Japan, were being exploited and the quarry would be Bethesda's main employer for some time.
Study shows 100,000 young people run away each year
By PHIL REEVES
NEARLY 100,000 young people go missing in Britain each year, many of whom are lured into prostitution in fear of their lives by ‘the unscrupulous and powerful’, according to a study into the country's first safe house for young runaways.
The young people arrive on the streets penniless and homeless and turn to prostitution to support themselves, the report says.
Once involved in prostitution, they often find it hard to give up.
Some fall victim to pimps, others are preyed upon by men who hang around main-line railway stations, waiting for runaways to arrive.
‘Young people's bodies are still a saleable commodity in Britain in the 1980s,’ the study concludes.
The report is based on information from 532 young people admitted over two years to the Central London Teenage Project, Britain's first ‘safe house’ for runaways.
The house, which has 10 beds, is at a secret address and is funded mainly by the Children's Society, a charity.
Most were aged between 14 and 16, but some were as young as seven.
Of the 532 — members of all social classes and from all over the country — 24 girls and 13 boys said they had been involved in prostitution at some time.
Only 39 per cent had been reported missing to the police.
Cathy Newman, author of the report, which is based on the project's first two years of operation, from 1985-87, said: ‘Many of those involved in prostitution, particularly females, were the victims of physical abuse from the pimps they worked with.
Several girls had been badly beaten and threatened by these men and forced to return to return to the streets for fear of their lives.’
One girl at the safe house said she was beaten up by two other girls trying to persuade her to ‘go on the game’.
In another case, a pimp repeatedly followed a girl to her house in an attempt to force her back on to the streets.
About a third of those interviewed said they had run away because of‘problems at home’.
A similar number ran away after being placed in local authority care.
Many spoke of being unable to get on with parents, often a step-parent, leading to constant arguments or violence.
Ninety-eight (18 per cent) said they had been sexually abused at some time, including 82 girls — the victims of rape, incest, sexual assault or prostitution.
Seventeen girls said they were sexually abused by more than one person.
The report, which the Children's Society says is the first detailed study of runaway youngsters, calls for a national centralised system for collecting statistics on missing juveniles.
It says that about 98,000 young people go missing annually, sometimes only for a short period.
But this is a ‘conservative’ estimate, as not every police force collates figures on missing juveniles.
‘It is alarming that in the annual reports of chief constables the number of stray dogs is always recorded but not the number of missing children,’ Ms Newman writes.
She calls for a national policy for dealing with runaway children, and more government funding.
Young people should have the right of independent counselling, and should not be held in police cells.
An independent complaints procedure should be established for youngsters in care, she says.
Frank Field, Labour chairman of the Commons Social Services Select Committee, said a common thread was that many of the youngsters came from broken homes.
‘We have a divorce law which allows marriages to be broken up after less time than the run of an average HP agreement,’ Mr Field said.
Dark Age cemetery reveals ‘Barra's people’
By DAVID KEYS, Archaeology Correspondent
THE REMAINS of the shields and spears of five Dark Age warriors together with the jewellery of at least eight of their womenfolk have been unearthed near Cambridge.
Excavations, nine miles south-west of the city, have revealed the rich graves of a pagan Anglian cemetery in use between 550 and 630AD.
For much of that period the area was probably part of one of many statelets beyond the western edge of the early kingdom of East Anglia.
The cemetery, which probably contains at least 300 Dark Age graves, may have been used by the inhabitants of a statelet possibly known as the Barringas -‘the people of Barra’.
This can be deduced from the surviving local parish name of Barrington which, when translated from Anglo Saxon, means ‘the village of Barra's people’.
Barra was probably the fifth or sixth-century founder of the statelet.
Archaeologists have found 28 skeletons, six iron spearheads, five iron shield bosses, 18 iron knives, 12 decorated bronze brooches some of which are gilded, six pairs of bronze wrist and clothes clasps, two spindle whorls -one ceramic and one of glass — one bone comb, two pots and 90 beads.
Most of the beads are of amber, probably imported from the Baltic, but some are multi-coloured in blue, yellow and red glass.
The cemetery, which contains graves of men, women and children, covers about 15,000 square yards.
Less than 10 per cent has been excavated.
The remaining graves, probably about 280 — filled with up to 1,000 more weapons and jewellery items — will be excavated only if finance for future digs becomes available.
It is estimated that the cost of completing the excavation and related research will be about £40,000.
However, if excavations do not take place the cemetery and its treasures are likely to be destroyed by ploughing within a few years.
It is not known whether all the material will be permanently exhibited, because South Cambridgeshire District is one of the few local authorities in Britain not to have a local museum.
The cemetery has been excavated, mostly over the past fortnight, by a team directed by Tim Malim, of Cambridgeshire County Council.
‘This particularly rich pagan cemetery still contains skeletons and grave goods in good condition and will provide us with a wealth of information on the health and culture of the sixth-century inhabitants of Cambridgeshire,’ Mr Malim said.
Foreign student raped at knifepoint on campus
By DAVID KEYS, Archaeology Correspondent
A FOREIGN student was raped at knifepoint just hours after she arrived in Britain to start the new term.
The 21-year-old was spending her first night at Sussex University, near Brighton, when she was woken at about 4am by a man who turned on the bedroom light, held a knife to her throat and raped her, before escaping through the open window by which he had entered.
Sussex police have warned other female students on the campus to be on their guard after the attack on Sunday.
Det Insp Brian Welfare, of Sussex CID, said that he had met the university's residential advisers to alert them to the risk to other students.
‘It's obviously a possibility that this man could strike again,’ he said.
The rapist, believed to be aged 20 to 22 years, was described as lean but muscular and about 5ft 8in tall.
He was clean-shaven with straight blond hair and angular features.
He wore dark trousers with a light cotton shirt.
‘Clever’ calculators pose problem for exam boards
By BY SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
FEARS are mounting that increasingly sophisticated electronic calculators could give some pupils an unfair advantage in GCSE and Advanced level exams.
The pace of technological change is such that the latest generation of machines is now capable of drawing graphs, working out algebraic formulae, correcting spelling mistakes and communicating with computers outside the examination room.
The Scottish Examination Board is so concerned about the advent of the ‘clever’ calculator that it has redrafted its regulations to schools for maths exams.
In future, while candidates will be allowed to use advanced calculators, they will be forbidden from storing information in the memories of such machines or from using calculators that can be linked by aerial to computers outside the examination room.
While recognising that there are educational advantages in using such machines, the board is anxious to prevent candidates with advanced calculators from having an unfair advantage over contemporaries with less sophisticated machines.
Colin Vickerman, secretary of the Joint Matriculation Board, said: ‘It is a continuing problem which all the boards are having to keep a fairly close watch on.
Things that take up no more space than a cigarette packet can now have vast amounts of data in them.
The state of the art is quite incredible.’
Machines which once cost £400 to £500 as prototypes are now available for £3 to £4.
While there was no evidence of widespread abuse of calculators in the examination room, the boards, he said, were attempting to anticipate possible problems.
Dick Whittaker, deputy secretary of the JMB, said that there were now calculators available which, for example, offered computerised foreign language dictionaries and others which provided a complete guide to fossil groups in palaeontology.
Specialised computing functions were not just confined to scientific and mathematical calculators.
The Scottish Examination Board says that word processors/ calculators which correct spelling mistakes are posing ‘some problems’.
Candidates using them for project or course work may have an advantage if spelling is one of the skills being tested.
The board is preparing notes of guidance to schools about how and when such calculators should be used.
Whereas in the past the boards would say that advanced calculators could be used without additional calculating programmes or memory banks, such programmes and data banks are incorporated in the latest generation of machines as a matter of course.
The problem, Mr Vickerman said, was to ensure that while all students were able to use technology appropriate to their subjects, some examination candidates should not be disadvantaged by having less advanced calculators than others.
There was a need, he said, to specify the maximum allowable functions that a calculator used in an exam could be capable of.
There might even be a case for a standardised calculator to be used in all A, AS and GCSE examinations nationally.
Extradition case
By BY SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
A man on the run from Crumlin Road prison, Belfast, was ordered to be extradited from the Irish Republic.
Justice Desmond Windle ordered at Dublin District Court that Anthony Gerard Sloan, 35, from Summerville Drive, Belfast, who is serving 20 years for possession of an M-60 machine gun, be handed over to the RUC at the Co Louth border.
Sloan has 15 days to appeal.
Fish fingers ‘overpriced’
By BY SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
Fish fingers cost, on a fish-per-pound basis, as much as fresh salmon, researchers said.
Most brands analysed by The Food Magazine were less than half fish.
The rest was batter and up to 10-20 per cent extra water, the magazine said.
Happy Shopper fish fingers contained 49 per cent fish; Findus cod fillet fingers 40 per cent; Findus Crostinos cod fillet 42 per cents; Birds Eye Value fish fingers 45 per cent and Birds Eye cod in wholemeal 44 per cent .
At less than 50 per cent fish per portion, fish in this form could cost more than £6 per pound.
Call for blasphemy law change
By BY SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
One person in three would like blasphemy scrapped as an offence — but an equal proportion want it extended to cover all religions, not just Christianity, according to a survey published yesterday.
Of the 1,792 people over the age of 15 questioned by Public Attitude Survey, 7 per cent believed the law should be the exclusive preserve of Christianity.
Most atheists were in favour of abolishing blasphemy while nearly all Muslims wanted it to cover Islam.
Women, Roman Catholics and older people preferred the retention of existing laws.
Housing crisis forces young to leave dale
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
WENSLEYDALE, better known for its cheese than its housing problems, is facing a serious shortage of houses which is forcing young people to move away from one of the most picturesque parts of the Yorkshire Dales, according to a survey published this week.
Some 4,690 Wensleydale households took part in the survey which shows that nearly 10 per cent of local residents need immediate additional accommodation or will do so shortly.
The survey for the Wensleydale Housing Forum was conducted by Lancashire Polytechnic and funded jointly by the Yorkshire Dales National Park and Richmondshire District Council with help from the Sanctuary Housing Association and local businesses.
The findings, which will be published on Friday, follow concern voiced nationally by the Association of County Councils and other organisations at the plight of young people being forced to leave their home villages for lack of affordable accommodation.
The housing forum in Wensleydale was set up to assess the severity of the problem.
It hopes the findings of the survey will provide ammunition to press for government funding as well as policy changes to encourage housing associations or similar schemes to help local people.
The survey shows that 861 people needed various types of accommodation.
It also reveals that 18.9 per cent of households, 434 in all, are made up of people who have retired to the Dales and of these some 54 per cent previously lived outside Yorkshire.
Many local people also expressed concern at the number of holiday cottages and second homes in Wensleydale.
The survey also highlights the fears of many elderly people about the contraction of local services.
One suggestion put forward is that there should be a programme of starter homes, perhaps provided through housing associations.
Nigel Watson, chairman of the housing forum, said: ‘The survey confirms our fears that there is a problem and it is one which is getting worse as more young people are being forced to leave the dale.’
The forum would now use the information to ‘press for changes in legislation to enable more money and resources to be directed at the problem, while at the same time doing all we can to enable local people to find local solutions’.
Sacked teacher awarded 12,000 pounds
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
A TEACHER who was sacked because some of his lessons were said to be too sexually explicit has won £12,000 compensation for unfair dismissal.
The ruling came after a 10-day industrial tribunal hearing at which Robert Nicholson, 58, challenged Birmingham Education Authority's decision to dismiss him.
The authority had also accused him of encouraging homosexuality in his religious education lessons.
The tribunal was told that Mr Nicholson had shown a vibrator to a class of teenage boys, and also invited pupils to chalk four-letter words on the blackboard and to shout-out ‘the F-word’ and other swear words.
Mr Nicholson said his intention was to make the pupils realise that he could not be shocked.
After they had used swear words once in class, he argued, they would never use them again.
After being dismissed from his post as head of religious education at King's Norton Boys' School in December 1988, Mr Nicholson began a fight for compensation.
His stand was vindicated by the tribunal chairman, John McMillan, who criticised the actions of Birmingham Education Authority.
Mr McMillan said: ‘They have been guilty of what we would not expect from professional people in the late twentieth century.
‘They have seen a phenomenon they believe to be smoke, and with nothing but their personal opinion to guide them, they have promptly pronounced its origins as fire.’
He also criticised the authority's principal witness, Diana Harrap, a senior schools adviser.
‘Her reports were at the best misleading and at worst untrue reports,’ Mr McMillan said.
‘Mrs Harrap has a secret and furtive approach to sex education.’
Mr Nicholson, of Russell Road, Hall Green, Birmingham, was awarded £12,436 in compensation.
He is not seeking re-instatement.
After the hearing he said: ‘I am so pleased that my character and reputation has been cleared.
That is the most important thing.’
Police find van owned by murder victim
By MALCOLM PITHERS, Northern Correspondent
POLICE have found the van belonging to a murdered social worker half-a-mile from the drugs centre where her battered body was found.
Detectives said they discovered Elizabeth Page-Alucard's old black Mini van in the car park of an empty DIY warehouse.
They immediately started a hunt for any witnesses who may have seen the vehicle during its last journey.
A team was also carrying out checks on all 250 addicts registered with the Turning Point drugs centre in Worcester, where the body of Mrs Page-Alucard, aged 41, was found at the weekend.
She was reported missing by her boyfriend, Peter Hook, 25, who discovered her body with the help of an official from Turning Point, the drugs advisory charity for which she had worked as a counsellor for three years.
Mrs Page-Alucard had apparently been murdered while she was working alone at the centre.
Police discovered the Mini van in the warehouse in the nearby City Walls Road while carrying out a systematic search of the whole city.
‘The movements of the van form a vital part of our investigation,’ Chief Superintendent David Foster, the head of Worcester police, said.
‘It seems that it was taken from the car park next to her office but abandoned almost immediately.
‘We urgently appeal to anybody who may have seen it during the 48 hours in which it was missing to contact us.’
Forensic scientists were examining the vehicle yesterday.
Detectives said Mrs Page-Alucard may have been murdered as early as Friday morning, more than 24 hours before her body was discovered.
Mr Foster said she was last seen alive at 10.30am on Friday by five people who were registered with the centre.