

Demonstrators fill streets of Leipzig
From STEVE CRAWSHAW in Leipzig
TENS OF THOUSANDS of East Germans — perhaps as many as 50,000 — streamed through Leipzig last night, calling for the legalisation of the New Forum opposition group.
It was almost certainly the largest protest the German Democratic Republic has seen.
There had been widespread fears of police violence, and water cannon had already been used against demonstrators on Saturday.
Leipzigers feared live ammunition could be used.
In one sidestreet alone there were 16 trucks full of the so-called ‘workers’ militias' on standby.
But the demonstration took place peacefully.
The march began after several thousand people had filled four churches to overflowing in the centre of Leipzig, for a special service of ‘prayers for peace’.
The local bishop, Johannes Hempel, spoke in all four churches, and called on the state to open a dialogue with the protesters.
By the time the church meetings ended, the Nikolaikirche Square and the surrounding streets were already full to overflowing with the crowds who had failed to gain entry into any of the churches.
The Nikolaikirche, with 2,000 seats, was full one and a half hours before the church meeting began.
The crowds in the church, where protest meetings began to gain momentum last month, applauded the bishop.
Then, outside, in an indication of just one of the unusual qualities of the growing East German opposition, they chanted ‘Gorby, Gorby’ and sang the ‘Internationale’.
The huge crowd proceeded from outside the church to fill the largest square in the city, Karl Marx Square.
The multitude then filed past the Opera House and down towards the central station.
It seemed that the police, in Leipzig at least, had lost their enthusiasm for beating up citizens pressing for change.
One elderly man said: ‘We were all very frightened of what the police would do, but they behaved sensibly.’
But another demonstrator said the softly-softly tactics have a disadvantage for the regime.
‘People will be less frightened.
And more and more will come out on the streets.’
A message from a local party leader was broadcast on Karl Marx Square, calling for dialogue with all groups.
If that offer is serious, it will mark a radical change in policy.
Many Germans express scepticism about how amenable to reform the hardline regime can be.
Last night however, crowds gathered round the workers' militia standing by their trucks, trying to include them — sometimes successfully — in conversations about the need for change.
Pin-headed aliens invade Russia — official
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
NIGHT LIFE in Voronezh, a dour city of 850,000 people in the great Russian heartlands, is definitely looking up.
Once the best you could hope for was a 50-year-old prima ballerina who sometimes starred at the local opera house.
If you go there after dark now, you may see UFOs and small-headed hominoids 12 feet tall.
We have this from no less an authority than Tass.
As deadpan as in its more accustomed role of relaying verbatim endless speeches by Mikhail Gorbachev, the official Soviet news agency reported yesterday on a town terrorised by ‘at least three’ visitations from outer space — and vouched for by eminent local scientists, no less.
But the tale is best told in Tass's sober prose.
‘A large shining ball or disc was seen hovering above the park.
Then it landed, a hatch opened and one, two or three creatures similar to humans and a small robot came out.
The aliens were three to four metres (10-13ft) tall, but with very small heads.
They walked near the ball or disc and then disappeared inside.
Onlookers were overwhelmed by a fear lasting several days.
Many also claimed to have seen a banana-shaped object in the sky, and a characteristic illuminated sign.’
Confirmation of this astounding occurrence — which must banish any churlish suggestion that the affair is to be put down to Russia's eternal obsession with the supernatural — was provided by Genrikh Silanov, head of the Voronezh Geophysical Laboratory.
His account to Tass follows.
‘We identified the site by means of biolocation.
We detected a circle 20 metres across.
Four dents, each 4-5 centimetres deep and with a diameter of 14-16cm, were clearly visible.
They are situated at the four points of a rhombus.
We also found two mysterious pieces of rock.
At first glance these looked like sandstone of a deep-red colour.
However, mineralogical analysis showed that the substance cannot be found on Earth.
But additional tests are needed to reach a more definite conclusion.’
Meanwhile, one odd coincidence must be noted: the ‘banana-shaped object and characteristic illuminated sign’ were apparently similarly described by an American journal, Saga.
But, as Tass concluded: ‘It is unlikely that residents of Voronezh could have read the magazine.’
PC accused of raping woman in patrol car
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
A YOUNG mother yesterday told an Old Bailey jury that she was raped by a policeman on the front seat of his patrol car.
After agreeing to give her a lift home from a discotheque, PC Peter Anderson was said to have stopped his Metro car on a deserted allotment, and threatened the 18-year-old woman by pushing his truncheon under her chin.
PC Anderson, a 40-year-old officer with 20 years' experience, warned her not to report the incident, saying he knew where to find her and could arrest her for soliciting, the court was told.
The woman, now 20, said she began to feel ‘wary’ when the officer turned off the main road to her home, saying he knew a short-cut.
He stopped the car, reached over into the back seat and grabbed his truncheon, putting it under her throat and rubbing her legs.
She told the jury: ‘I said to him, ‘You are a married man,’ but he tried to get on top of me.
I tried to push him off, but he was too forceful.’
She said that after he raped her, he forced part of his hand into her, causing pain, and threatened to use the truncheon.
‘I begged him not to and he stopped.’
The woman made no complaint to the police for five days.
Questioned about why she had not sought help immediately after the alleged attack, she said: ‘I had just been raped by a policeman, and I did not trust no police after that.’
PC Anderson, who was based at Surbiton police station, has denied raping the woman in Kingston, south-west London, on 4 April last year.
Godfrey Carey, for the prosecution, said PC Anderson admitted that sexual intercourse took place, but claimed the woman was a willing partner ‘and indeed egged him on.
He says it was one of the best sexual experiences he has ever had.’
When questioned PC Anderson allegedly told police: ‘I have had personal problems.
I have split with my mistress today, my wife gave me an ultimatum — and now this.
I never raped anybody.
A more willing partner you couldn't wish for.’
Mr Carey told the jury it would have to decide whether the woman had made a ‘wicked and false allegation’ against a serving police officer or whether the officer had gone to the ‘very depths of the pit of deceit’by claiming the woman, less than half his age, had encouraged and enjoyed sexual intercourse with him.
The court heard the woman had approached PC Anderson as he sat in his car.
She said she asked for a lift for herself and a male friend as a joke.
He dropped the friend off, then drove to the allotment.
Fears of crisis as pound plunges: Collapse of confidence leads to 6bn pound drop in share values
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
THE POUND yesterday posted its steepest one-day fall in more than three years, sinking almost 6 pfennigs within a few hours.
There are now worries in the City that the plunge in sterling could flare up into a full-blown crisis and, in the last resort, force the Government to raise interest rates even higher.
Sterling closed at DM2.9737, its weakest finish against the West German currency since 4 March last year.
London share prices also fell sharply.
The FT-SE 100 Index slumped 34.9 points at one stage before ending 30.5 points down at 2247.0, which wiped £6.54bn off share values.
Fears in the financial markets that government policy towards the pound was in disarray also drove down the currency 3.05 cents against the dollar to $1.5775.
Reports in weekend newspapers of a rift between Margaret Thatcher and Nigel Lawson over the recent rise in interest rates and the value of sterling also contributed to the fall.
The sudden collapse in sterling came despite last week's 1-point rise in base rates to 15 per cent, intended to defuse the selling pressure and reinforce the Government's battle against inflation.
The Bank of England stepped into the currency markets three times yesterday morning, selling dollars and buying pounds.
The intervention was modest and trading was thin because US markets were largely closed for a holiday.
Trading was comparatively light in both currency and equity markets, but the collapse in confidence seemed widespread.
There were reports of sterling sales from all around the world and also by major British companies.
Government sources yesterday denied the reported rift between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor.
They also played down the role of Sir Alan Walters, the Prime Minister's personal economic adviser, in the critical decisions to intervene heavily in the past two weeks and raise interest rates to protect the pound last Thursday.
Sir Alan has in the past written about his deep misgivings over intervention and has recently let it be known in the City that he believes the economy is at last showing signs of pronounced slowdown, a view not fully shared by the Treasury.
The Chancellor had the Prime Minister's support, according to government sources, in intervening to the tune of $2bn to $3bn to shore up the pound after pressure intensified following the news two weeks ago of a £2bn current account deficit in August — the third worst on record.
It is also understood that the Treasury by then was concluding that an interest rate increase would be needed to ensure a clampdown on inflation.
The sources also said that intervention in the currency markets was not expressly aimed at averting an increase in interest rates.
One senior source said: ‘Clearly if there had been a fundamental disagreement (between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor) then the Government wouldn't have raised interest rates.’
Despite yesterday's slump in the pound, most analysts believed the Government would be extremely reluctant to raise interest rates again.
The Treasury stressed yesterday that, despite the pound's fall, the increase in rates meant that overall monetary policy had been tightened.
Ian Harwood, chief UK economist at Warburg Securities, said: ‘I don't think anybody seriously thinks interest rates are going to rise any further.’
Financial markets are apprehensive that the trade deficit has still not turned the corner and a poor figure could shake sterling again.
Another rise in interest rates would make recession much more likely without necessarily ensuring a rapid easing of inflation.
Partly as a result, there was growing market speculation yesterday that the Prime Minister might reconsider her strong objections to sterling's membership of the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
Although there is disagreement in the City over whether recession is inevitable, there were warnings yesterday that high rates could reduce package holiday bookings by as much as 40 per cent next summer — something that would help to narrow the current account deficit.
Halifax 1 per cent rise sets mortgage rate benchmark
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
THE HALIFAX, Britain's biggest building society, yesterday attempted to stem a wholesale move to 15 per cent mortgage rates by announcing a comparatively modest 1-point hike in its own lending rate to 14.5 per cent.
The announcement, hastily brought forward from the middle of the month, was designed to forestall other lenders from following the Yorkshire Building Society, which lifted its rate to 15 per cent at the weekend.
The benchmark now set by the Halifax is certain to influence how other societies respond to last week's 1-point increase in bank base rates to 15 per cent.
There are fears that large mortgage rate hikes could tip the already stagnant housing and mortgage market into deep and long-lasting recession.
A Halifax spokesman said: ‘Hopefully this will give the lead to other building societies to restrict their increases to 1 per cent.’
Virtually all mortgage lenders plan to lift their interest rates.
Most aim to bring in the increase from 1 November.
However, they are split on how high to raise their rates, now around 13.5 per cent.
The Leeds Permanent and Abbey National want to go up by 1.25 points or more.
The Woolwich and Cheltenham & Gloucester societies believe they can live with a 1-point rise or less.
The Halifax increase takes effect from 1 November, but four-fifths of the society's 1.6 million borrowers are on semi-fixed mortgages and will not face any changes to their monthly payments until 1 April next year.
The Halifax lifted its interest rates for savers by 0.75 of a point.
More societies are expected to announce mortgage rate increases during the Conservative Party conference this week.
The Leeds Permanent said yesterday it would announce an increase of at least 1.25 points ‘within a day or two’.
Derek Roberts, chief executive of the Yorkshire, said he believed societies which raised their rates by only 1 point would be forced to increase them again to attract savers.
Mortgage rates are already at their highest since November 1981.
In real terms, after adjusting for inflation and taking account of the diminishing impact of tax relief, they are at record levels.
Societies privately admit that they would have to respond with still higher mortgage rates if the Government raises base rates again to prop up sterling.
Borrowers with companies financed by the wholesale money markets are already paying rates of about 14.75 per cent.
They face new rates of up to 16 per cent.
The Conservatives in Blackpool: Upbeat Thatcher supports Lawson
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
THE PRIME Minister gave her support to Nigel Lawson last night over his decision to raise interest rates to 15 per cent.
She told Conservative agents at a private dinner in Blackpool: ‘The interest rate rise was necessary and this government always does what is necessary and always has.’
Margaret Thatcher also set the tone for the conference with a deliberately upbeat message.
She said: ‘The economy is stronger than ever.
Living standards are higher than ever.
One has only to look at the new jobs created and investment.
It is a totally different situation now from the one the Government inherited.’
Her remarks could ease the way for Mr Lawson's speech to the conference on Thursday.
Kenneth Baker, the Conservative Party chairman, last night said the Chancellor would defend his use of high interest rates to reduce inflation and reinforce the Tories as the party of sound money.
Mr Baker failed to end speculation about opposition from Sir Alan Walters, the Prime Minister's economic adviser, to last week's 1-point increase.
But the party chairman insisted in a BBC interview that the Cabinet was united.
Last night, Mr Baker dismissed questions about the possibility that interest rates could be raised again and refused to be drawn on whether the pound's dip below DM3 on the exchange markets during the day signalled a change in policy.
Mr Baker made it clear that the leadership was determined to use the conference — under the slogan ‘The right team for Britain's future’— to lift the flagging morale of supporters and raise the party in the opinion polls.
He said he would ‘come out fighting’— a style not normally associated with annual Conservative conferences.
The conference which begins today is one of the most difficult for the Tories since Mrs Thatcher came to power.
The party leadership faces unrest over the poll tax, water and electricity privatisation and the changes to the health service, in addition to rising mortgage rates, which are damaging Tory support.
Mr Baker said Mr Lawson's speech would be ‘well received’ because the party would understand the problems the Government was facing.
‘He took a difficult decision last week to increase interest rates.
It's unpopular — I don't disguise that from anybody — and it is harmful and painful to people paying mortgages.
I accept that.
‘But then it was the right decision for the longer term, to bring down inflation.
We have got to reinforce the fact that we are the party of sound money.’
Party managers are hoping that by delivering a positive message and creating an upbeat mood, they can avoid too much unrest surfacing during the debate on the economy.
Mr Baker said: ‘There is no black cloud over me.
I am not downhearted.
We are behind in the opinion polls.
So what?
We have been behind before.’