

Television /Rising to the Cajun
By SABINE DURRANT
ALONG A long, wide highway, palm-trees swaying, sun glinting on distant windscreens, cruised a low, sleek convertible Corvette.
It could have been the opening sequence of any off-beat, low-budget American cop series, but closer attention to the soundtrack ('Green Onions' would be an unusual choice for Florida Felony) gave it away.
This you realised, the moment the driver turned to give the camera a typically vague, rumbustious salute, was the first programme in Floyd's American Pie (BBC 2).
Keith Floyd, the housewife's galloping choice and tippling gourmet extraordinaire, has said goodbye to the roues of Provence, the stews of West Cork and embarked upon, as he so professionally put it, ‘the BBC maxi-break of a lifetime’.
While American grub generally has little of the yearning deliciousness of French cuisine, New Orleans, Floyd's first port of call, has certain obvious attractions.
Huge concoctions of gumbo and jambalaya, crawfish pie and Andouille sausage, against a backdrop of swamps and snakes, street-cars and Creole Queens, suit the postcard, throw-it-all-in format of this particular culinary genre, and life in the Big Easy clearly made Floyd feel at home.
He toyed with raccoon meat, alligator fat and ‘trinity’(green peppers, onions and celery) in a shack on the bayou, stirred steaming okra stew in K-Paul's Louisiana Kitchen, and concocted a vast, suppurating cauldron of seafood gumbo (crab, oysters, shrimps, sausages, seafood boudin, mudbugs, salted pork) in the New Orleans Cookery School.
Throughout, his banter came as thick and fast as softshelled crab, only halting as he paused to take a slurp from his Dixie Beer or to wipe the steam off the camera lens.
The programme's frenetic shuffling of history lesson, Holiday ‘89 and Fanny Craddock at times seemed irritatingly brash.
But Floyd's air of mock humility, constant stream of self-reflexive comments ('Quick cut away; lots and lots of minutes have gone by now’) and bossy remarks to the cameraman were as refreshing as ever.
‘If you want the exact quantities, buy my book,’ he said at one point, one eye in the direction of the BBC publicity department, before adding, as the other swivelled down towards his drink, ‘if I can be bothered to write it.’
Energy is not a quality one could easily accuse Wilfred Thesiger, ‘The Last Explorer’, of lacking, as last night's Viewpoint ‘89 (Central) showed.
Now in his eightieth year, Thesiger looked back on a life travelling in the Sudan, Arabia, Afghanistan, Morocco, East Africa and ‘Eth…
Abyssinia, as I insist on calling it’.
Milky blue eyes disappearing behind bushy eyebrows, Thesiger told interviewer Julian Pettifer of the dignity, pure morality and barbaric splendour he had found in civilizations since destroyed by ‘the drab uniformity of the modern world’.
Oddly, though, his public school /Oxbridge language ('Bloody Italians') seemed unaffected by life in strange, savage worlds.
A young Abyssinian, returning to camp with a victim's testicle hanging from his belt, he compared to ‘a deserving young Etonian who has just got his colours for cricket.’
Jazz Diary
By CHRIS PARKER
Legend is an overworked term in jazz: it can describe a figure like Eubie Blake, who died at 100 after a lifetime's achievement, or those who died young, their promise unfulfilled, like everyone from Jimmy Blanton to Charlie Parker.
But the word fits singer and composer Slim Gaillard, whose extraordinary life is to be celebrated in a four-part Arena series, Slim Gaillard's Civilisation.
Born in Cuba to a German-Jewish father and a black mother —‘I was sort of kosher, but swinging’— he cut sugar-cane in his youth before joining his father, a ship's steward, on his travels, only to be accidentally left behind on Crete at 12: ‘I had to sit down for a minute — almost cried.’
From there, at 16, he moved via Lebanon to Detroit, where he worked in a beauty shop and a car factory before helping the notorious Purple Gang smuggle alcohol from Canada in a hearse.
He also freelanced, collecting bodies from alleys for medical students.
All this was before he became a jazz legend, writing such hits as ‘Flat Foot Floogie’ and appearing in films like Hellzapoppin.
After the war he set Hollywood alight with his invented language, Vout, and played with Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie.
He has been idolised by fictional characters from Dean Moriarty in Kerouac's On the Road to Barley in Le Carre's The Russia House, and he is one of only two people looked up to by Miles Davis.
Now, he is living in the UK: ‘I like the weather here and the people are friendly — no revolvers.’
Slim Gaillard's Civilisation begins on 22 October on BBC 2 GIVEN the renewed popular interest in bebop, it might be supposed that drummer Max Roach, who came to prominence playing it, would take a pragmatic view of two movies which helped that resurgence: the Charlie Parker film Bird and Round Midnight, loosely based on the life of the pianist Bud Powell.
But his reservations outweigh his praise: ‘They may have done some good in creating interest in two people who've made major innovations in twentieth-century music, but they've also given a negative impression: that the people involved in this music have serious flaws in their personalities.
This obscures the fact that many major contributors — Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Dizzy Gillespie — are the total opposite; it also ignores the fact that the freak depicted in Bird is not the Charlie Parker I knew and worked with at all.’
More generally, Roach has reservations about the direction the music took after bebop —‘There was a change-over: it went into dance and party music, functioning as an entertaining vehicle rather than an intellectual, enlightening thing’— and he sees the effects of this slackening of purpose in the playing of a number of later-1980s musicians.
Roach is a busy man: as well as continuing work with his quartet (currently touring the UK), his double quartet, a percussion ensemble known as M'Boom and a forthcoming collaboration on a play about the Harlem Renaissance, he's also involved with New York rappers in a project called From Bebop to Hiphop and Then There's Max.
Many jazz-players, often to the detriment of their later careers, rise to prominence through a single performance or achievement and find themselves saddled with an epithet expressing public expectations.
An example of this typecasting has been US alto-saxophonist Lee Konitz, customarily referred to as ‘Doyen of the Cool School’.
Not that he resents this: ‘Categories are essential for describing phenomena and I'm a phenomenon of some kind.
I've always tried to play as intensely as I can.
I'm not a high-energy person, though.’
Anyone who has seen a recent Konitz performance won't argue with this; taste, attention to tonal delicacy and a striving after melodic inventiveness are his hallmarks.
Indeed, in the interval of a gig on his 1986 UK tour, a disgruntled punter was heard to remark: ‘If I'd wanted something this cerebral on a Friday night, I'd ‘ve stayed at home and read Proust.’
Konitz acknowledges that there is some basis in his history for this view: he and his 1950s musical guru, the pianist Lennie Tristano, in a sense set themselves up as a (white) alternative school to bebop: ‘Tristano was keen to prove that whites could play jazz, though Charlie Parker, Lester Young and Louis Armstrong were his heroes.
Tristano's was an improvised music, and part of its quality was that it wasn't as flashy and virtuosic as bebop.
We made the first free-jazz record, with no plan, just improvised.
It had its effect: Ornette Coleman heard it.’
These days Konitz plays everything from standards to samba — he's recently recorded a wonderfully relaxed album with Brazilian accompanists, Lee Konitz in Rio — and he's shortly to tour the UK.
For details, see tomorrow's Listings.
THEATRE /Sublime to ridiculous: Kemp on the Ninagawa Company's Suicide for Love at the National
By PETER KEMP
AT THE start of Yukio Ninagawa's Suicide for Love, a geisha puppet — picked out from pitch darkness by a spotlight — is manipulated through a series of formalised attitudes.
Then, as lanterns start to glow on wooden balconies and red gleams fall through slatted screens, the stage gradually brightens to reveal a gaudy, tumultuous crowd in the pleasure district of seventeenth-century Osaka.
Visually resplendent — like everything in this production — it's an effect that also makes vividly manifest the play's twin concerns of control and unruliness.
For Suicide for Love — a synthesis by Matsuyo Akimoto of works by the seventeenth-century dramatist Monzaemon Chikamatsu — depicts a world in which individual impulses are kept in place by fierce restraints.
Shutting in all the characters of this drama is a society of unyielding rigidity.
Reminders of this are visible even in the decor of the red-light quarter.
People riotously reel around here, fighting, fondling, tittering, clowning.
But penning in this raucous melee are buildings that seem all shutters and grids.
Lolling behind a screen of vertical bars, girls in a brothel resemble animals in a cage.
Demarcated as the one zone where people are allowed some liberty, the pleasure district is in itself testimony to a stringently regulated society.
And, even amid its licensed disorderly streets, ceremonial and ritual can hold sway — as is displayed by the stately procession through the teeming revellers of a stoop-kneed, silk-swathed geisha and her entourage.
Her face a rice-white mask of impassivity above the elaborately arranged draperies of her kimono, she looks more objet d'art than human being.
What most strikes you about this elegantly swaddled creature is that she seems encumbered by the costume of her role.
Likewise, aesthetically lacquered trappings dramatically impede the movements of the drama's main characters.
Taking two contrasting stories of thwarted aspirations from Chikamatsu, Akimoto's play juxtaposes — to evoke the atmosphere of popular melodrama -high-flown sentiment and down-to-earth sense.
While one tale is all doomed romantic passion, the other portrays an unglamorous urge to stay alive.
The heroic plot has Chubei, an ardent, sensitive youth, falling in love with Umegawa, a courtesan chance brings his way.
A further accident — stumbling over a coffer of government funds in his care — fatally scatters temptation before him.
Stealing the money, Chubei is able to buy Umegawa from the clutches of a wealthier rival.
Abetting him in this is his childhood friend Yohei, a woebegone young husband much harassed by a matronly dragon of a mother-in-law.
The broad comedy he brings into the drama is, like the operatic emotions of the romantic plot, performed with masterly finesse.
As not only Chubei and Umegawa but also Yohei and his wife find themselves under sentence of death from the Shoguns' inexorable laws, both couples make a suicide pact.
In Yohei's case, this collapses into a craven botch — hilariously acted by Ryo Amamiya — in which he more or less accidentally dispatches his wife but can't bring himself to take the plunge and throw himself into the river as promised.
While this interlude spoofs the love-suicide convention, though, Chubei's story spectacularly dramatises it.
In a thrilling climactic scene during a howling blizzard in the mountains, he and Umegawa do kill themselves.
With macabre gracefulness, she is strangled with a crimson scarf.
When Chubei slashes his neck, a thread of scarlet spurts out.
With its splashes of red standing out from the swirling whiteness of the snowstorm, this tableau combines the decorative and the dramatic in a manner reminiscent of the finest Japanese prints.
And throughout the evening, making you almost afraid to blink in case you miss anything, Ninagawa fills the stage with a constantly shifting sequence of such pictures — including a magnificent riverside landscape with clumps of reeds bleached by the light of an enormous moon.
The plash of flowing water is authentically audible throughout this scene.
And, everywhere in the production, there is deployment of carefully-chosen sound effects.
The most noticeable of them is a throbbingly emotional ballad — as if from some oriental Tom Jones — which intermittently wells out to remind you of the popular nature of the love dramas you are witnessing.
But what most impresses you about this phenomenal piece of theatre is less its class affiliations than its national attributes: a drama of mutinous impulses crushed by an authoritarian social system is given consummate rendering by a cast who very triumphantly unite energy and discipline.
THEATRE /Bowling without spin: Macbeth — Redgrave, Farnham
By ALEX RENTON
THE MOST remarkable thing about Graham Watkins's Macbeth is that it only has two women.
You suspect, though, that featuring male witches is a reaction to economic demands rather than any sort of radical reinterpretation in this, the Redgrave's first Shakespeare in many years.
But it works well enough.
Just about everything works well enough in this competent but hardly inspiring production.
It seems that Watkins's energies have gone into making sure he has got the details right at the expense of analysis.
Details are indeed slavishly attended to: at the ‘cry of women’ you hear a light offstage wailing; when the owl shrieks after Duncan's death, we get a ‘tu-whit-tu-whoo’.
These are acceptable, but the witch who, at ‘by the pricking of my thumbs’, held up his thumbs and twiddled them for us all to check out was excessive.
Macbeth, short and severely to the point, is not a play onto which you can get much spin, but what we are given here is a treatment devoid of ambiguity.
Even an A-level student might want a little more in the way of interpretation.
But at the Redgrave you sit back and watch an unarguable Macbeth unroll.
James Bolam takes the lead, and he makes a fair job of it.
He is not a Macbeth who seems particularly hag-ridden, by wife or witches, nor grotesquely ambitious.
Until the final scenes Bolam's Macbeth is a placid, middle-management man who may reckon he has been unfairly passed over for promotion.
Many of his speeches are given in the quiet, confidential way he might explain his predicament in the pub.
It is hard not to sympathise with his desire to knock off managing director Duncan, a hammy, cantankerous old fool in Kevin Stoney's playing.
Susan Jameson makes a similarly polite and suburban Lady Macbeth.
For excitement you have got to look elsewhere: David Lancaster's music has cracked brass blowing doom-laden fanfares, and Clare Southern's costumes are samurai studded quilts, suitably grubby for a Stone Age Scotland.
The English, by contrast, sport pristine chainmail.
Some characters live up to their dress: Peter Craze's pig-tailed Banquo, earthy and violent, and Stephen Hattersley's no-nonsense Macduff are a welcome contrast to Bolam's King.
The pace picks up towards the end: Bolam's hair goes awry, and for the first time a sense of desperation enters his acting.
But generally this is a straight Macbeth with the morality all in order: nothing fancy, and precious little to dwell upon afterwards.
MUSIC /Tedium in one key: Tess Knighton on The Sixteen at Broadcasting House
By TESS KNIGHTON
THE IBERIAN Baroque is waiting to be rediscovered; with Antonio Teixeira's 20-voiced setting of the Te Deum The Sixteen uncovered a Portuguese corner of a vast, but largely forgotten or ignored, musical tapestry.
By the eighteenth century, the music of the Iberian Peninsula, so long dominated by North European developments, had a decidedly Italianate weave: Scarlattian, even occasionally Vivaldian threads run through the texture.
Yet this piece has much that is freshly inventive and original, even if these were epithets that, alas, did not readily spring to mind with regard to the performance it received.
The Te Deum was never the most popular text amongst composers of the pre-Baroque, but in the eighteenth century it enjoyed a new, though rather limited, vogue: from Purcell and Handel to Haydn, festive settings with large and colourful forces became the norm.
Teixeira's contribution to the genre was first performed in 1728, just after he had return to Portugal from Rome, and it reveals Italian influence in its polychorality (it is scored for five ‘choirs’ of four voices each) and the florid, operatic nature of the solo snippets.
The question is whether The Sixteen, having revived this work, could breathe life into their performance.
A church setting would undoubtedly have been more atmospheric than the shocking pink of the BBC Concert Hall, but then listeners to the broadcast will only need to worry about aural aesthetics.
There were one or two things that may concern them (the scratchy sound of the orchestra for one), though nothing that should deter them from tuning in, for the singing was generally fine, with particularly good contributions from the basses (Michael George and Peter Harvey), the soprano Nancy Argenta, the tenor Andrew Murgatroyd, the ‘cantor’ Nicholas Robertson and the choir itself, here expanded, of course, to The Twenty.
It happens in the musical world that conductors sometimes rely on their performers to do their work for them; it is currently happening rather too often in the field of ‘early music’.
This disturbing fact passes mostly unremarked, partly because the repertory is often unfamiliar, but partly, too, because the role of the conductor in pre-nineteenth-century music can be a source of embarrassment.
Be that as it may, this work, heavily reliant on repetition and never straying far from the home key, cried out for someone to nurture its more lyrical passages, to shake its often delightful phrases, to exploit its contrasts; in short, for a far more imaginative approach than that brought by Harry Christophers.
DANCE /Scatty, logical humour: Judith Mackrell reviews the Groupe Emile Dubois at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, opening this year's Dance Umbrella
By JUDITH MACKRELL
THIS YEAR'S enthusiastically Francophile Dance Umbrella opened with one of the most prestigious of the French new-wave companies — Jean-Claude Gallotta's Groupe Emile Dubois.
Gallotta's whimsical approach receives heavy support in his own country.
But on Monday night the audience at the Queen Elizabeth Hall appeared neatly divided — between those who were willing to prolong the applause indefinitely and those who either disappeared discreetly halfway through or scarpered quickly at the end.
Gallotta's Mammame is true to a very French type, with its scatty logic, its mix of dance, gesture and slapstick and its ability to polarise opinion between ‘joyously unconfined choreography’ and ‘mildly diverting tosh’.
By the end of 90 minutes I was close to the tosh school, but still buoyed up by the work's genuine pleasures; the unflagging force of its energy, the wit of its timing and the comic unlikeliness of some of its performers.
The women admittedly conform to standard dancerly mould, and it is an awkwardness in the piece that little of its clowning comes from them.
But the men look, refreshingly, as if they have spent years away from the studio mirror.
There is a tragic buffoon with bald pate and flowing hair; a short, bespectacled man entering a grey and paunchy middle age; and Gallotta himself, who patters manically around the stage, fixing the dancers with an unfocused glare, while waving his arms and muttering instructions down a microphone.
When Gallotta works up steam he has the dancers going through some startlingly slick paces — polished dance routines, split-second falls and lifts and a brisk formation crawl.
But this adroitness is constantly fighting against a humanly disruptive counterpoint.
During a jazzy quartet for the women, the company's shambling clown is dangerously over-excited by one dancer's leggy prowess, attempting to nuzzle up against her or to initiate a wildly mismatched pas de deux.
At one point, half the company are banging rhythmically on a table like kids at a tea party.
At another, the women wrap themselves in blankets and line up pitifully like a group of refugees.
But in a piece where every idea is disposable, very little turns out to be memorable.
What ought to be exciting about Mammame is the unpredictability with which an image or a movement switches into something new.
Yet too often its lawlessness feels like an empty romp.
For all its tension between unison and bedlam, its freedom to use any kind of gesture or step, you are rarely exhilarated by a sense of newly-discovered movement.
Few of Gallotta's ideas are developed rigorously enough to see all their possibilities, and too many degenerate into rituals for marking time.
It is good to see the French contingent at the Umbrella.
But I have yet to be convinced (as some publicity suggests) that the centre of the dance universe is now located in France.
THEATRE /A spark of Greek fire: The Trojan Women -Liverpool Everyman
By JEFFREY WAINWRIGHT
THE FULL resonance of this production may not be felt until next May.
By that time the Everyman's new artistic director, John Doyle, and his permanent company will have worked their way through an ambitious and unusually schematic programme culminating in two works of twentieth-century apocalypse: a Solzhenitsyn piece from the Gulag, and the Chernobyl play Sarcophagus.
But they begin at the beginning, with three works derived from the Greeks; the first is Euripides's dramatised cantata of desolation, The Trojan Women.
The scene is Troy immediately after its fall.
King Priam's widow Hecuba and other women await their fate from the victorious Greeks.
In four episodes Cassandra, Andromache, Helen and, most affectingly, Andromache's small son Astyranax, are remorselessly accounted for.
The corralled women are emphatically at male disposal, though the contradictory figure of Helen is twisted into the torque of human hatreds by hands from both sides of the sexual divide.
On stage, Euripides's plainness is both promising and exposing.
The promise, of imaginative setting, is very well taken up here by Elizabeth Ascroft's designs.
She presents us with a glistening floor bordered by a number of bells hanging from long ropes, each lit from above to produce its own pool of light.
As the action proper begins, Poseidon and Athene rush a white curtain round the perimeter of the auditorium.
The actors take up this hieratic style, and achieve considerable physical stillness, exemplified by the profile of Irma Inniss's Helen.
Their exposure is extreme.
Nicholas Monu's Poseidon seizes the attention at the beginning, but the scale of the speeches one actor after another must face is daunting.
They are permitted no naturalistic embellishment, but given that choice the stylisation should be taken further.
For instance, Maria Gough as Cassandra brings great energy and commitment but has a modern prettiness where the implacability of the classical mask might have made her more awesome and compelling.
Similarly, having chosen to use a large Chorus, John Doyle has not developed their ritual of voice and movement far enough.
To go further in these directions would also require more boldly gestural language than Philip Vellacott's plausible, if prosaic translation provides.
This is altogether a bold and uncompromising enterprise.
But, although it tries, it fails to persuade us that with Greek drama we are not secular theatre-goers but communicants in a religious mystery.