

Commodities
By JEFFREY WAINWRIGHT
GOLD was slightly easier yesterday, ending in London at $362.00/$362.50 an ounce after the dollar surged following comments by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, which implied the US would keep interest rates firm.
It was joined by silver and platinum, both of which also slipped back.
On the LME, copper attracted most of the attention, trading up to £1,900 per tonne during second ring afternoon dealings, its highest level since late August when sterling values hit an all-time high of £1,932.
Armchair Investor: Crest Nicholson
By JEFFREY WAINWRIGHT
THE latest interest rate rise put the dampners on the housebuilding sector.
The housing market is the worst seen for 25 years, and a 15 per cent base rate and rising mortgage rates cannot help.
The downgradings in the sector may be justified on some housebuilders, but others look severely undervalued at current levels.
Prime among these is Wilson Bowden, the Leicestershire-based housebuilder which increased profits despite a 25 per cent fall in house sales.
The group is strongest in the resilient Midlands and a land bank stretching five years is good security.
At 212½ p, down 111 2 p yesterday, the shares are on five times earnings assuming pre-tax profits of £43m this year.
Westbury Homes, the Cheltenham-based group, also has a long land bank, but its main market, the West country, is relatively weak.
It needed some land sales to achieve pre-tax profits of £36.2m for the year to February.
This total is achievable this year, putting the shares at 196p, down 2p yesterday, on a very cheap multiple of 4.4.
Crest Nicholson is the exception, not having much of a land bank and relying on its skills in land buying.
Like the well regarded YJ Lowell, Crest is interested in urban regeneration, and a large development in Swindon should start contributing to profits next year.
Profits for the year that ends this month should reach £42m pre-tax, putting the shares at 179p, down 5p yesterday, on 5.9 times earnings.
All these shares should be bought and tucked away for when interest rates ease.
Column Eight: Mobil slips up over pound
By SIMON PINCOMBE
The prize for the most unfortunate advertisement this year must go to Mobil, the oil major, for yesterday's offering in the Financial Times.
xo Keen to trumpet its part in the future of offshore energy, the company went back 25 years.
‘Mods and rockers fought on the beach at Clacton; John Steed and Emma Peel joined forces against evil as The Avengers; West Ham froze out Preston North End to win the FA Cup; Treasury officials defended the pound by borrowing £1,080m.
And Britain announced the first licence awards for North Sea Oil and Gas’.
So far, so good.
But the ad continued: ‘Times change, occasionally for the better…
Today, the pound is holding its own.’
And this after the Treaury has spent roughly $3bn defending sterling in the last 10 days, probably to no avail.
Gerrard & National, the venerable City discount house, is not easily swayed from its time-honoured customs.
Neither, it seems, does it believe in new- fangled technology.
As guests sat down to lunch in the company's magnificent dining room earlier this week, the fellow with his back to the window was asked if there was too much of a draught.
There was, so the waiters were dispatched at once.
They returned with a huge roll of green baize which was then gently placed on top of the groaning air conditioner.
Gordon Dunlop, the former director and chief financial officer of British Airways, has turned his interest towards the Lloyd's insurance market.
He is running for a place on its ruling council in the forthcoming elections.
If elected, Mr Dunlop, who is also a past chief executive of Commercial Union, says he would question whether the services offered by Lloyd's are efficient and cost effective.
He also has reservations about the market's accounting procedures.
It may seem tame stuff after helping out in the privatising of British Airways.
However, previous attempts to change those procedures at Lloyd's have usually presented more problems than privatising the water authorities.
Having flatly denied that he has any intention of going to British Rail, Sir David Plastow, chairman of Vickers, yesterday announced that he has installed a ‘safety valve’ guaranteeing that he will not be solely responsible should his company hit the slippery slope.
He has granted his lieutenants carte blanche to rebel should his performance ‘go crook’, to use his phrase.
They have been formally invited to ring Dick Lloyd, the deputy chairman, to vent their spleen.
View from City Road: Paying over the pop for cellular
By SIMON PINCOMBE
McCAW'S revised offer for just over 50 per cent of LIN Broadcasting is cleverly structured.
It is more attractive to LIN shareholders, who will retain an interest in their company, and reduces the exposure to the risk that the US cellular radio market bubble will burst for British Telecom, which has a 22 per cent stake in McCaw.
BT's role in the new offer is hidden but doubtless significant.
By bidding for half rather than all of LIN there should be no need for McCaw to seek additional funding from BT since its cash resources and existing lines of credit should cover the cost.
And by deferring for five years the right to purchase the balance of LIN's shares BT is protected against a downturn in cellular company prices.
That downturn remains a real risk in an industry where the true commercial prospects have still to be established.
Although the ‘price per pop’, the measurement used to value US cellular businesses, has risen steadily it is far from certain that the trend will continue.
The terms of the revised McCaw offer value LIN at $293 per pop, which is the highest yet recorded.
But it is also an inflated price since it represents a healthy premium for control of the last really big established national player in the US cellular market.
The price also reflects the ominous presence of BellSouth which has tabled a rival offer for LIN.
While BT can be pleased that it bought into McCaw at a much lower price than today's going rate and that it will be difficult for other overseas companies to enter the US domestic market, it will be some time before its investment begins to yield a return.
There is still no guarantee that McCaw, even with LIN, can achieve the penetration rates necessary to make cellular radio commercially viable.
For the time being all BT is buying is a concept.
The danger for UK investors is that they will be lured into thinking that the inflated prices paid in the US translate into an undervaluation of British cellular operators.
It is a dangerous assumption.
The British and European cellular markets are very different from that in the US.
The position is further clouded by the curious share structure of Racal Telecom where most of the free floating shares are US held.
The US investors' enthusiasm for cellular radio, therefore, has a strong bearing on Racal Telecom's price performance.
The cellular business remains complex and uncertain and investors should continue to view it with a healthly degree of caution.
View from City Road: Murdoch loses Midas touch
By SIMON PINCOMBE
RUPERT Murdoch's profit warning will not lead Australian and US shareholders to desert News Corporation the way they have dumped Alan Bond, but it must be rather worrying.
Suddenly, there is just the slightest hint that Mr Murdoch is losing the magic touch, and for many investment banks and financial institutions around the world that magic touch was the main reason for backing him.
The news was not entirely unexpected.
In August, announcing profits of A$496m net for 1988/89, he said that in future losses on Sky TV in the UK would be charged directly against the profit and loss account.
In the worst possible case, that would slice A$250m off the result for this year, and nobody could have expected him to make up that sort of ground.
But other problems have arisen which will make 1990 a difficult year even when Sky is taken into account.
The first is the world economic situation, which hits him in two ways.
First, he has enormous debts totalling $7.9bn at the last year end, which are an obvious burden in a period of rising interest rates, even higher in Australia than the UK.
Second, there is the knock-on effect to the advertising market in the UK and Australia, which is looking weaker than it has for a long time.
Not everything is black.
Mr Murdoch can draw some comfort from the fact that News' own interest rates are 70 per cent fixed at long-term rates, and it looks as though he will narrowly avoid joining the A$1bn interest payers list at next year end.
Cash flow from Wapping, and from the Fox TV business in the US, will continue at around twice interest payments, and debts will be within the agreed limits.
But there is little leeway for anything to go wrong.
Sky may do better than most people think, but it will not turn into another Fox, breaking even in its second year.
The launch of BSB, still scheduled for next spring, will be the true test of the Sky formula, while an advertising downturn would take away some of the very good margin the UK papers enjoy, especially The Sunday Times which is operating in an increasingly competitive Sunday market.
The Murdoch image has also taken a knock with the failure of Media Partners, when investors proved unwilling to back his management style.
News Corp must be hoping that the sins of the son are not visited on the father.
View from City Road: Water holds hidden perils
By SIMON PINCOMBE
THE Government's efforts to ensure that all 10 water authorities are successfully floated on the Stock Exchange in December are becoming more than a little disingenuous.
The impression given by the marketing campaign is that you are being invited to invest in a single entity — the British water industry — and that there will be attractive perks for those who do.
This is not the case.
In fact you are being invited to invest in 10 separate companies each with different characteristics and ambitions.
The perks are specifically designed to encourage people to invest in their local water authority despite the fact that it is patently obvious that some are not going to be as attractive as others.
In other words, if you live in the North-west but believe Yorkshire to be a fundamentally more attractive investment, you are being cheated.
Meanwhile the individual authorities are gagged from revealing anything meaningful about their business or aims and it is doubtful that the prospectuses, when they are published, will be any more illuminating.
The Government's aim is to make the authorities all appear the same in investment terms.
The effect of this is that nobody, some City professionals included, really knows much about any of them.
The growing number of people registering their interest in investing are being driven by the greed factor alone.
They know little about what they are being asked to invest in, but they do believe that the Government's determination to make the privatisation succeed will ensure that the water authorities are presented as a steal.
In an uncertain market and given the water flotation is already something of a lottery, that is a dangerous attitude to take.
Market Report: Burmah bucks trend on day of gloom and doom
By DEREK PAIN
BURMAH, the oil group which nearly came to grief in the 1970s stock market crash, was one of the few shares to resist Barclays de Zoete Wedd's gloomy forecast on shares.
In occasionally active trading it closed 16p higher at 635p after touching 648p.
In two days, when the market has been in ragged retreat, the shares have climbed 34p.
Although many oil experts are taking a more bullish view of the sector, the Burmah performance indicates corporate activity.
SHV, the powerful Dutch group which has aready made its presence felt in the UK oil industry, is known to have approaching 5 per cent of the capital.
There is continuing speculation it wants Burmah to buy Calor Group, where it has 43 per cent.
The SHV objective is to end up with a significant stake in Burmah, perhaps as much as 29.9 per cent.
The rest of the market was under the BZW whip.
Consultant Peter Thompson destroyed a hesitant rally when he forecast the FT-SE share index ending the month at 2,100 or 2,200 points and sinking to 1,800 next year.
At one time the FT-SE was riding 17.2 points higher.
But gradually confidence weakened.
And once Mr Thompson's views became known in mid-afternoon the market collapsed — with the index swinging from a 14.2-point gain to close 28.2 points down at 2,218.8.
The index is at its lowest since July.
It has lost 58.7 points in two days and 93.3 points since the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, hoisted interest rates to 15 per cent on Thursday.
With sterling again weak against the dollar and mark, fears continue to grip the market that the Chancellor will be forced to move base rates to 16 per cent.
Comments by Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Board chairman, were another unsettling influence.
But while sterling remains weak exporters should prosper — although the market would not acknowledge such a fact yesterday.
Not all securities houses agree with BZW.
For example, Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers is still looking for the index to end the year between 2,300 and 2,400.
Insurance shares produced some excitement.
Royal Insurance Holdings continued to ignore the drip of the John Spalvin share sales, gaining at one time 20p.
The shares closed up 9p at 469p.
A Continental bid was rumoured.
Sun Life Assurance lost much of an early gain but managed to close 10p higher at 1,123p.
Union Assurance de Paris, which has 19.2 per cent, is said to be talking to Sun's other big shareholder, the South African controlled Trans-Atlantic Holdings.
If UAP can buy the Trans-Atlantic stake, it would be obliged to bid for the rest of the capital.
Trans-Atlantic, which has experienced a stormy relationship with the Sun board, would demand a fancy price.
Saatchi & Saatchi lost some of its exuberance, falling 17.5p to 332p.
Recent activity is explained by a 1 per cent shareholding, built by Fininvest, a Milan-based media group run by Silvo Berlusconi.
Guinness, at one time 22p higher on talk that LVMH was buying, closed 6.5p to the good at 608.5p.
Scottish & Newcastle Breweries lost an early gain to close 5p lower at 367p.
Kwik-Fit, the tyres and exhausts gorup, was another to lose an early gain, closing 3p down at 140p.
Another round of talks with 10 per cent shareholder Continental have been futile.
Continental is expected to try and increase its stake — or bid.
Jaguar retreated 32p to 653p with stories flowing that Ford had given up its pursuit and planned to buy 50 per cent of the Swedish Saab group.
Ferranti fell 4.5p to 55p on the British Aerospace/Thomson-CSF interest.
James Neill closed at 269p on the agreed bid.
The shares were suspended on Monday at 202p.
Guinness Mahon, the merchant bank, rose 1.5p to 147p.
The second slice of the The Bank of Yokohama's ‘excess’ stake has been placed.
The Japanese bank cut its shareholding to 61 per cent.
Ford Sellar Morris, the property group, slipped 1p to 140p.
It has sold another £28m of assets and has now pulled in £70m from disposals since it took over the Brookmount property group in August.
The inflow will reduce gearing.
A hesitant rally in share prices was undermined by another poor performance by sterling and a bearish market outlook from brokers BZW.
A 17.2 gain in the FT-SE 100 index turned into a 28.4 fall to 2,218.8 by the close.
The FT 30 eased 26.2 points to 1,796.7.
Gilts lost around £3/4 Goal Petroleum was among the oils to improve, up 1p to 85p.
Nomura says the group is ‘poised for a rapid recovery’.
Analysts Alan Marshall and Christine Baker are impressed by the 20-well drilling programme for next year.
The shares are selling on a 25 per cent discount to assets and ‘there is virtually no downside risk but at least 25 per cent upside potential’.
ADT, the security systems and car auctions group, has spent £74m building a 4.2 per cent stake in BAA, the old British Airports Authority, up 2p at 337p.
It has also returned to auctioneer Christies International, lifting its stake back to 5.7 per cent.
Christies fell 7p to 310p.
Canada's Laidlaw Transportation has a near-30 per cent ADT holding.
Company News
Business and City Page 29
Patricof takes control at Neill with 78m pound bid
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
JAMES Neill, the 100-year-old Sheffield engineering company, lost its independence yesterday in just two hours after MMG Patricof, the fund manager, launched a cash bid valuing the company at £78m.
A buy-in fund managed by Patricof, a 12-year-old firm based in Chicago, London and Paris, announced the bid, after securing the support of Neill's directors, at 10.00 am.
By noon Patricof had acquired control of more than 50 per cent of the company.
James Neill shares, which were suspended at 202p on Monday, closed at 269p against Patricof's 280p offer.
The Patricof team met Hugh Neill, the chairman, in August and has been planning the bid since then.
It decided to launch the bid sooner than planned after Neill announced a sharp drop in interim profits from £2.71m to just £28,000 before tax last month.
Mr Neill, whose grandfather founded the company, said: ‘I am sorry that in the future I will not have any shares in the company that bears my surname.’
But he was more interested in seeing the Neill name being carried forward.
Patricof plans to operate Neill as an independent company.
Ronald Cohen, Patricof's chairman, said: ‘Our strategy is expansion based.
It is not shrinking the business.’
Mr Cohen will become chairman of Neill and two Patricof appointees will join the board as executive directors.
They are Ian Fisher, formerly of Bain & Co, management consultants, and Paul Bristow, formerly finance director of London International.
Mr Cohen said these men will ‘support’ the existing management.
But it is not clear whether Peter Bullock, the chief executive of Neill, will be staying.
Patricof, which manages funds for a number of UK institutions including Eagle Star and Standard Life, hopes to float the company on the stock market in five years.
Mr Cohen suggested the company might then be worth £500m.
Patricof plans to invest further sums in Neill allowing it to make acquisitions on the Continent.
Mr Fisher said Neill had perhaps taken too many initiatives at once in the past year.
Mr Cohen said there was ‘great scope for building up a British-based group hand tools business over the next few years.’
Grampian hives off its sales team
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
GRAMPIAN Television, the Independent Television contractor in the North of Scotland, is to have its advertising airtime sold by Television Media Marketing, the sales company set up by Welsh franchise holder HTV Group.
The deal was won by TVMM against strong competition from Scottish Televison, which used to be part of the same organisation as Grampian.
It is part of a growing trend for television contractors to hive off their advertising sales.
Most of Grampian's sales staff will be taken on by TVMM, and the group expects to make savings through increased usage of resources such as research, computers and office space.
All the television company's sales teams are based in London, where 90 per cent of the advertising comes from.
Earlier this year Central and Anglia teamed up in a jointly owned group, Television Sales & Marketing Services, which has now won contracts to sell time for Border TV and the cable channel Discovery.
The Independent Broadcasting Authority has said that groups can team up as long as they have no more than 25 per cent of the total independent television advertising market.
TVMM will have just under 8 per cent and Charles Romaine, the sales director of HTV, said TVMM would be willing to take on any other groups to bring that total closer to 25 per cent.
Top of the list would be Television South-West, the West Country contractor, although Mr Romaine said that discussions had yet to be opened.
Worries have been expressed within the industry about the trend towards amalgamating sales teams.
The advertising market is tough at the moment, total sales fell in real terms in both August and September and no growth is expected in the run up to Christmas, and some contractors believe that combining sales staff could cost them dearly in the battle for market share.
Slump in building hits Walter Lawrence
By GAIL COUNSELL, Property Correspondent
WALTER Lawrence yesterday became the latest housebuilder to release sharply lower profit figures.
In the six months ended 30 June pre-tax profits fell from £7m to just £5.1m, and earnings per share dropped 36 per cent to 6p.
The shares lost 25p to 104p on the results.
The interim dividend is held at 2p.
Lower volumes were primarily to blame.
Sales — mostly of properties in the North-west of England, so far one of the more resilient areas in the slump -fell by more than a third, from 502 homes to 316.
Property price inflation lifted turnover and operating profits, but costs also increased steeply, with interest charges leaping from £1.236m to £3.94m, reducing the pre-tax result.
Brian Pritchard, chairman, insisted that all was not gloom and doom, pointing to the success of West Venture Development, the group's Southern Californian subsidiary, which this year is expected to double its output to about 500 homes.
Around 242 homes were sold by the company in the first half of this year.
West Venture was acquired in March 1988 but only began to make significant sales this year.
Mr Pritchard, said results had so far been good, and it was well placed to achieve excellent full year figures.
He hoped it would help shelter the group against the UK downturn in housebuilding.
Setback for Britannia Security
By PAUL DURMAN, City Reporter
A HEFTY £4.85m interest charge helped cut full year pre-tax profits at Britannia Security by 4 per cent to £9.6m.
Yesterday's poor figures to 30 June were expected after the fire alarm and data storage group warned two weeks ago that it was unlikely to beat last year's £10m.
As Britannia's shares dropped 8p to 125p, one analyst placed a break-up value of 180p a share on the company.
Besides the interest charge, up from £1.6m, Britannia also suffered from delays in introducing reliable products at Actron, the electronic tagging company, reorganisation costs at Britannia Fire and underperformance at Sentrymatic Britannia.
In the US, Leahy Business Archives suffered a loss in revenue when major customers decided to destroy obsolete records.
Britannia is expected to sell Leahy.
The UK data management business, which contributed £751,000 to pre-tax profits, was sold in June.
This £14.38m disposal produced a £4.8m extraordinary profit.
A £1m loss on the sale of a quoted investment left an extraordinary credit of £3.79m.
Anthony Record, Britannia's chairman, said Actron had overcome its problems and was performing well.
The Swiss-based firm is regarded as having have high potential, since there is only one other manufacturer of anti-shoplifting electronic tagging equipment.
Mr Record said Britannia had net debts of £40m and gearing of 110 per cent.
The rise in interest rates was particularly damaging because of the money borrowed to buy Mather & Platt Alarms last October.
Laurentian Holding to get new chief executive
By PAUL DURMAN, City Reporter
PAUL SEYMOUR, formerly Michael Hepher's right-hand man at Abbey Life, is leaving to be chief executive of Laurentian Holding Company, the financial services group headed by Lord Marsh, former Labour minister and British Railways Board chairman.
Since the formation of Lloyds Abbey Life at the beginning of the year, Mr Seymour has been the company's deputy chairman as well as group director Europe for Abbey Life.
Until Lloyds Abbey Life has found a replacement for Mr Seymour, Stephen Maran, finance director, will have responsibility for Abbey Life (Ireland) and Gary Jones, sales and marketing director, will look after continental Europe, which includes the German subsidiary.
London & Manchester, the life insurance group, yesterday announced a 15 per cent increase in its interim dividend to 3.795p and warned that its profits would be hit by reduced turnover margins on its mortgage lending and estate agency business.
NMW posts return to profitability
By NEIL THAPAR
NMW Computers, the computer bureau which specialises in settlement systems for the City, has returned to the black with pre-tax profits of £48,000 in the half year to 30 June, writes Neil Thapar.
This compared with a £428,000 loss in the corresponding period last year.
The company slipped into the red after the stock market crash of October 1987 led to sharply lower share trading.
The crash also happened just as NMW was expanding into other markets.
As a result it slipped into a loss of £1.33m in 1988 against a £1.71m taxable profit in 1987.
Since then NMW has carried out a heavy rationalisation programme and the return to profits has come despite a fall in turnover from £5.92m to £4.66m.
NMW, however, is cautious about the second half.
‘It should be borne in mind that seasonal variations in stock market activity ususally result in lower turnover in the second half.
Therefore, further progress is required to maintain profits and return the company to its previous levels of profitability,’ it said yesterday.
BM shares rise as profits climb 78 percent
By WILLIAM BOWN
ROGER Shute, whose takeover of the helm of Ross Consumer Electronics last Friday quadrupled that company's share price, excited the market again yesterday by reporting sharply higher profits for BM Group, the industrial holding group where he is chairman and chief executive.
Pre-tax profits rose 78 per cent to £15.8m in the year to 30 June and pushed BM shares up 15p to 508p.
Turnover rose 62 per cent from £120m to £193m, with sales of construction equipment accounting for more than half at £106m.
The £14.3m acquisition of Austoft Holdings last April enlarged the distribution network in Australasia and the US.
Overseas earnings accounted for 9 per cent of the total last year and could reach 30 per cent this year.
SEP, the French company acquired last October, will form the basis of expansion into Spain and Portugal.
There will be no more European purchases this year.
Millwall oversubscribed
By WILLIAM BOWN
THE OFFER for sale of five million shares at 20p each in Millwall Holdings, which owns London's Millwall Football Club, has been one-third oversubscribed.
The company has received applications for 6.615 million shares.
‘The response has been fantastic particularly from Millwall supporters, many of whom brought their applications into The Den (home of the football club),’ said the chairman, Reg Burr.
More than 2,750 people applied for shares, the majority being Millwall supporters.
Mr Burr said many had applied for between 500 and 1,000 shares.
Applications for 15,000 shares or fewer will be granted in full.
Bids for more will be scaled down to 17,000 shares.
The company has placed another 20 million shares with institutions.
Dealings begin on Monday.
Alexandra lifts profits by 19 percent
By WILLIAM BOWN
ALEXANDRA Workwear, the maker and supplier of boiler suits and nursing uniforms, increased pre-tax profits by 19 per cent to £3.7m in the 28 weeks to 12 August.
John Prior, chairman, said that profits and sales — up £4.7m to £31m — increased despite economic problems.
Earnings per share were 7.31p, up from 6.11p, and the interim dividend was 1.6p against 1.33p last time.
The shares rose 1p to 205p on the results before closing 2p lower in a falling market.
OutlooK: Fear of technical bear trap grows
By WILLIAM BOWN
As traders fall over themselves to dump the pound, the wise grow wary that a bear trap may await them further down the line.
Yesterday afternoon the New York markets opened for the first time since Friday night and saw that sterling had weakened about 9 pfennigs since then.
The immediate reaction of the American markets was to intensify European selling pressure — briefly pushing the pound through the critical chart point of DM2.95 despite fairly determined intervention from the Bank of England.
A technical bear trap may indeed lie ahead, perhaps before the pound sinks to DM2.90.
If history is any guide, the Bank of England could force overnight money rates up into the 20 to 30 per cent range and ram home the message with aggressive buying of pounds.
That would make it extremely painful to have gone short of sterling in the past few days.
Yet, however great the pain, the effect of a technical tactic may fail to have a lasting impact in such a bear market.
Still, it would probably be futile to look for another increase in base rates immediately, if at all.
There is speculation that the Government is working to the rule that for every 4 per cent depreciation of the pound, there would be a 1 point rise in base rates to maintain the tightness of monetary policy.
On those grounds, a 4 per cent decline since the last base rate increase, last week, would mean trigger points of around DM2.90 and $1.54.
But does the Government dare risk another increase?
Quite apart from the political fallout, there is the nagging worry that the economy may already be on the brink of recession.
Certainly that is what yesterday's steep sell-off in the equity markets may suggest.
Unfortunately, another crutch for sterling was kicked away yesterday when a speech by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the United States Federal Reserve, reinforced the impression that US interest rates are unlikely to soften soon.
The dollar strengthened as a result and had the temporary effect of relieving pressure on sterling against the mark.
But that is not expected to last.
In the absence of a concrete policy towards the pound, the best that the Government can hope for is to ride out the crisis until the next set of trade figures, due on 24 October.
There are predictions that the deficit could narrow significantly, which would undoubtedly provide support for sterling.
But two weeks is a long time when the markets believe that the Government has no clear policy.
And there is little confidence that Nigel Lawson's speech tomorrow will alter the outlook fundamentally.
Outlook: Liffe climbs out of the pit
By WILLIAM BOWN
In announcing yesterday that its Automated Pit Trading system will start on 30 November, the London International Financial Futures Exchange inserted the final element in a cautious but promising strategy for intergrating electronic trading and open outcry, and setting the pace for exchange reform in London.
APT is the last building block in a set of systems — blessed with the contrived name LIFFEforce — which will allow exchange members and their clients fast and competitive access to the markets, enabling them to track and record their positions and settle them on the same day.
APT is impressive, not least because it comes nearer than any rival to retaining essential qualities of open outcry, a feat unmatched by American exchanges which profess the greatest attachment to traditional trading.
The advantages to Liffe are clear.
Clients will be able to trade electronically out of hours, initially between 4.30pm and 6pm, and probably from 7am next year.
This 11-hour day, longer than that of any other exchange, will give Liffe a crucial edge in the increasingly competitive European arena.
Launching APT at the end of November with the Euromark futures contract will reinforce the point.
Liffe is also likely to steal a march on Globex, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's electronic trading system now the victim of the ancient rivalry with the Chicago Board of Trade.
So far, however, Liffe has taken the modest route of allowing access to APT through any authorised carrier, such as Telerate, with whom agreement was announced yesterday.
The open approach contrasts favourably with Chicago's exclusivity.
The question now is whether this openness, of which the common access protocol Tramp is a crucial component, will set the standard for cooperation between London's fragmented futures and options exchanges.
Outlook: Accounting for Europe
By WILLIAM BOWN
That the European Commission should toy with imposing a set of uniform accounting rules is viewed in London with abject horror.
There is fear that such rules will be over-bureaucratic, while demanding less financial disclosure than the UK requires.
Instead, the UK accountancy bodies would rather see the Commission adopt the guidelines of the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), which has been working progressively towards the international harmonisation of the rules by which companies report.
But there is a problem.
The Commission sees the IASC as a private club.
It is for this reason the UK accountancy bodies have put forward the idea of a European accounting standards body in the hope of persuading Brussels to toe the IASC line.
The argument is tricky.
Given a free hand, the Commission could put the development of international accounting standards back 15 years.
But having lobbied for state backing in the policing of financial reports in the UK, the accountancy bodies cannot argue the same should not apply in Europe.
The solution would appear simple.
The Commission should be encouraged to develop and police European accounting standards.
But it might do well to look very carefully at the IASC's work.
Sooner, rather than later, Europe will be forced to bring the standard of its financial reporting in line with the rest of the world, not least the US.
Vickers, the engineer and defence group, has confirmed the appointment of Sir Colin Chandler, 50, as managing director-elect.
By WILLIAM BOWN
Vickers, the engineer and defence group, has confirmed the appointment of Sir Colin Chandler, 50, as managing director-elect.
Sir Colin is the former head of export services at the Ministry of Defence, having been seconded in 1985 from British Aerospace 
Pressure mounts as Bond shares slide to 10-year low
From TERESA POOLE
BOND CORPORATION shares slid to a 10-year low yesterday as pressure intensified on the beleaguered Australian group.
At one stage the company was valued at just A$97.3m (£49.1m).
Yesterday was the deadline for Bond Corp's 58 per cent owned subsidiary, Bell Resources, to pay $24m to Corona Corporation, the Canadian gold group, to satisfy an option agreement under which Bell Resources was due to purchase a 7 per cent stake in Bond International Gold from Corona.
Bell Resources would not comment on whether the payment had been made or whether the BIG shares had been sold on to another party.
Meanwhile, the slide in Bond Corp shares prompted the Australian Stock Exchange to suspend short-selling in the shares.
This is required when a company's value falls below A$100m.
Although there was no specific new item of bad news yesterday, there is now a growing perception in the market that the Bond group is faced with insurmountable difficulties.
The most crucial is the possible suspension on 23 October of Bond Corp shares if the company fails to report preliminary full-year results, which are already 10 days overdue.
After touching 23 cents, Bond Corp shares closed at 25 cents, down 4 cents on the day and compared with A$1.78 at the beginning of the year.
Other Bond group companies also suffered.
Bell Group, 75 per cent owned by Bond Corp, lost 8 cents to 30 cents and Bell Resources lost 5 cents to 95 cents.
The exchange will decide today whether to restore short-selling in Bond Corp.
Bond Corp would not comment on the situation.
Michael Cross, executive director of Alan Bond's private company Dallhold Investments, which controls BIG, was in New York where BIG is quoted.
Under Corona's put option agreement, Bell Resources was due to pay $7.25 a share for the Corona stake, well below the present market price.
This means that Bell Resources could meet the option demand by selling the BIG shares in the market.
But any premature sale could thwart Dallhold's hopes of attracting an outside party to purchase both the 7 per cent stake and a big slice of Dallhold's 58 per cent BIG holding, releasing a profit for Bell Resources and a much-needed cash injection for Dallhold.
Bond is already facing a series of ‘crunch’ days over the next two weeks: 18 October: This is the deadline by which Bond Corp planned to issue the ‘Part A’document for its bid for Bell Resources, the first stage of the proposed A$2.5bn Australian brewing joint venture with Lion Nathan, the New Zealand brewer.
Bond Corp has already said this deadline may be delayed if the regulatory authorities insist that full Bond Corp accounts are included in the document.
The brewing deal is central to Bond Corp's restructuring and is the key to shifting about A$3bn of debt off the balance sheet.
20 October: The Western Australian State Government Insurance Commission hopes to announce the successful tenderer for its 19.7 per cent stake in Bell Group.
If the SGIC sells this holding, Bond Corp faces paying out more than A$160m under an indemnity agreement entered into when it and the SGIC bought out Robert Holmes a Court's Bell Group stake last year.
The indemnity is likely to be subject to legal action between the parties.
23 October: Shares in Bond Corp and Bell Group are likely to be suspended if the companies have not published their preliminary profit and loss statements by this date.
31 October: This is the deadline for Bond Corp to produce the keenly awaited full audited accounts for the company.
Why US carmakers are looking for European partners: Larry Black explains an unexpected effect of US restrictions on imports of Japanese cars
By LARRY BLACK
BLOODY-MINDED rivalry between America's two biggest car makers explains at least some of their renewed interest in European producers like Jaguar and Saab, say Wall Street analysts.
But, ironically, the longer-term explanation lies in the restrictions Washington has maintained on Japanese car imports for almost a decade.
General Motors and Ford both expect to lose money on car manufacturing this quarter for the first time since the 1982 recession, largely as a result of overcapacity in the market.
In response to the import quotas, Japanese manufacturers have been rapidly expanding production in the US.
But the quotas limited imports by number of vehicles rather than sales, encouraging the Japanese to develop luxury cars that earn higher per-unit profits.
Following the success of Honda's upmarket Acura line, this autumn Toyota is introducing the Lexus and Nissan the Infiniti, both with expensive advertising campaigns.
Both cars will retail at roughly $40,000, challenging a market currently dominated by European luxury imports.
The Big Three US carmakers, who controlled more than 85 per cent of the luxury market 10 years ago, saw their share drop to below 50 per cent last year.
While their manoeuvring with Jaguar is in part defensive — ensuring that the other does not win control of the British car maker — both Ford and GM were ‘clearly anxious to improve their slumping image in this market’, he said.
Jaguar, which dropped its prices in North America last year, now sells into the market the Lexus and the Infiniti are targeting.
Jaguar sold 21,000 cars in the US last year, well shy of the 82,000 sold by Mercedes-Benz and the 72,500 of its German rival BMW.
Saab similarly sells relatively few cars in the US, though its numbers have been rising dramatically.
But analysts say better distribution and marketing by either GM or Ford could exploit these valued brand names far more extensively.
Their own luxury marques, GM's Cadillac and Ford's Lincoln, appeal to an older and shrinking share of the domestic US market, notes analyst Gerry Paul, of New York's Sanford Bernstein brokerage.
‘They need to add some panache to this line of products,’ he said.
‘Many Americans who drive luxury European imports simply wouldn't be seen in a Cadillac or Lincoln.’
Both GM and Ford have tried to introduce high-priced European models of their own without much success.
Ford imports the Merkur, a line of cars made by its West German subsidiary, while GM fabricates the body of its Cadillac Allante in Italy.
The purchase of an interest in either Jaguar or Saab would extend another trend by the two Detroit carmakers which has seen both buy a number of small motor engineering firms in Europe in recent years to acquire technology.
In Britain, GM has used Lotus to develop a new engine for its Corvette sports car.
Rover new 200 series gets off to 400m pounds start
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
ROVER today launches a new 200 series model, backed by a £400m investment and vital to the company's attempt to maintain its resurgence as a profitable manufacturer of niche market cars.
The new five-door car, which is aimed at a middle sector of the market dominated by the VW Golf, Vauxhall Astra and Fiat Tipo, is one of Rover's most important launches this decade.
The £400m investment in the new Longbridge-built car represents one of the biggest single spending programmes in Rover's history, involving new production lines, paint and body shops and engines.
Rover has invested £200m on just the development of the all-aluminium K-series engine, which will power three of the four versions of the new 200.
The car also represents the second full-scale collaboration between Rover and its Japanese partner Honda, which has shared design and development costs.
Honda's version of the 200 — to be known as the Concerto — will be built under contract at Longbridge in Birmingham by Rover at an initial rate of 40,000 a year.
Honda will also assemble Rover-badged 200s in Japan.
Aimed at young families, small business users and aspiring professionals, the car is the first new model to emerge from Rover since the 800 series in 1986.
The Rover 200, priced between £8,775 and £10,940, will make its public debut at next week's Motorfair in London.
The launch comes at a time when Rover's share of the record UK car market is slipping.
The Rover chairman, Sir Graham Day, argues, however, that the model mix being put through its Longbridge and Cowley plants is increasing profits.
The Rover 200 will be joined in the showrooms next month by the first new Land Rover model for 20 years, the Discovery, aimed at the sector of the four-wheel drive market dominated by Japanese manufacturers.
Earlier this week Rover also announced it is to introduce a new sports coupe model in 1992 — the first sports car to be built by the company since production of the TR7 ended in 1981.
The new car will be a coupe version of the Rover 800 executive car and will be styled on the CCV concept car which Rover designed three years ago.
Sales will initially be limited to the US, although Rover may launch the car in other markets, including the UK.
Lloyd's members leave in droves
By JOHN MOORE, Assistant City Editor
RESIGNATIONS of underwriting members from the Lloyd's insurance market could top 2,000 by the end of this year, a new record in the number of departures from the market.
Currently, resignations of the underwriting members, the wealthy individuals who back the market with their private wealth which allows it to function, are running at 1,900.
That compares with total departures last year of 1,750.
Moreover, the number of new members seeking to join could be significantly lower than last year.
So far 500 individuals are seeking to become members, compared with the 970 who joined last year, and the 2,572 who joined in 1987.
If a net 1,400-1,500 underwriting members leave the market, Lloyd's total membership will be reduced from its record high point of 33,532 at the beginning of last year to just over 30,000.
During last year 1,750 members resigned compared with 489 a year earlier.
Last year's 970 new entrants were the smallest number of new members to come forward since 1980.
Lloyd's officials have stressed that the departures are taking place among members who do not have large investment commitments at Lloyd's.
In September, when Lloyd's announced record profits of £650m for its market's last completed trading period, Murray Lawrence, Lloyd's chairman, said that the financial capacity to accept insurance business next year would be the same as this year's £11bn.
He admitted that this financial capacity would be provided by fewer underwriting members.
Many professionals within the Lloyd's market welcome the current crop of departures as there is an excess of financial capacity within the market at a time when business is not growing at the same rate as the available capacity.
Lloyd's has been under-utilising its financial resources for some time.
Lloyd's argues that many members who are leaving are those with limited resources who joined the market during a period of rapid expansion in the 1970s.
Sky losses bring warning of News Corp downturn
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
NEWS CORPORATION is set for a fall in profits this year, mainly because of the haemorrhage of cash caused by losses on Sky Television, its satellite TV station.
Rupert Murdoch told the annual meeting in Adelaide: ‘This may well be the first year in some years when our earnings do not show their customary increase.’
The effect of the Sky losses will look even more dramatic after a change in accounting policy which takes them directly out of the profit and loss account.
After Sky losses of up to A$250m (£126.3m), analysts are forecasting net profits for the year to June 1990 of about A$370m, which compares with a reported A$464m for 1989, excluding foreign exchange dealings.
The profit downturn will also reflect the world economic outlook.
‘We are entering, at the very least, softer economic conditions in Australia and Britain,’ Mr Murdoch said.
‘We see it in our advertising revenue…
So far this year our revenues are ahead and still healthy, but they are not what we expected.
Clearly some deterioration has set in.’
He said that Sky ‘is our largest risk undertaking, perhaps ever.
Certainly it is this year.
We have taken various risks looking back over the years, like Wapping.
‘But Sky is a major risk which has grown largely because of the activities of the competition, which have forced up the price of the product infinitely higher than we expected or was necessary.
But that's life.’
Sky's main rival, British Satellite Broadcasting, is due to launch next spring.
There are also problems with 20th Century Fox, the US film group News Corp owns.
‘Quite frankly, we are having a bad year,’ Mr Murdoch said.
‘We have not made enough films in the last 12 months.
We had to fix some management problems.’
An improvement is not expected until next summer.
The newspaper war in Melbourne, where three Sunday titles were launched in August, also affected profits.
Mr Murdoch also told the meeting that plans for Media Partners International, the investment vehicle, had been ‘put on hold’.
There was some good news from the US television station Fox Broadcasting, where advertising revenue is up by 150 per cent, and from sales of Sky receiving dishes.
These had risen by 70,000 in the month from mid-August, and Mr Murdoch said the group was likely to reach the target of one million homes by 1 February 1990.
News Corporation shares shed 55 cents to close at A$15.9, while in London the shares of the News International subsidiary fell 21p to 352p.
Building societies ripe for takeover: Speculation is rife in the building society industry.
Patrick Hosking reports
By PATRICK HOSKING
WHISPERS of a takeover of a British building society have been circulating in the City since the spring when the Abbey National won the overwhelming backing of its savers and borrowers to convert itself into a bank.
So far not one deal has materialised.
But the whispers in recent weeks have got louder.
Numerous societies including the Cheltenham & Gloucester, National & Provincial, Norwich & Peterborough and Birmingham Midshires have been in the frame as possible targets.
The list of suggested buyers is almost limitless -ranging from Royal Trust of Canada to National Australia Bank and from Credit Lyonnais to the Pru.
Ben Thompson-McCausland, managing director of National & Provincial, believes a lot of the speculation about bid approaches is overdone.
‘We're not getting approaches.
We're really not.
And we're not aware of anyone else getting them.
There are merchant bankers who find it convenient to stir up apprehension with a view to drumming up business for themselves.’
One highly placed source says ‘deliberate disinformation’ is being put about, creating ‘a South Sea Bubble’of speculation.
With the housing and mortgage market depressed and competition in retail banking intensifying, the appeal of buying a building society is if anything diminishing.
Equally, however, there are respected industry commentators who are certain that the first agreed takeover of a building society is just around the corner.
According to John Wriglesworth, analyst with UBS-Phillips & Drew: ‘Just as 1989 was the year of the Abbey National flotation, 1990 will be the year of the building society takeover.
‘An agreed takeover is the most sensible option for many of the medium-sized societies,’ by which he means those ranked 4th to 35th.
‘They're too big to be niche players and too small to be low-cost producers.’
Geoff Cooper, director of the Spicers Consulting Group, which is advising several societies on how to construct defences to hostile takeover offers, says a bid within the next 18 months is extremely likely.
‘We've been involved with a number of societies who have been approached by potential predators.’
He predicts that bidders, including insurance companies and investment management groups, will form strategic alliances with societies, initially using the branch networks to sell their own financial services, and later agreeing full mergers.
‘Building societies are being approached almost daily with offers of this kind,’ he claims.
John Franklin, director of corporate finance at the merchant bank Morgan Grenfell, whose clients include both societies and prospective bidders, is convinced a bid for a society is on the way: ‘The first merger will see the light of day early next year.’
Any bid would probably be with the blessing of the society's management.
But some societies fear hostile bids — a subject on the agenda at the Building Societies Association council meeting tomorrow.
Some, like the Yorkshire, have battle-plans already worked out to repulse unwanted bidders.
The size and direction of the Abbey vote on conversion strongly suggests societies would succeed in meeting the more stringent voting criteria required for takeover.
Moreover, the saving and borrowing members of a society stand to make much bigger gains in the case of takeover than the £150 or so of free shares offered in the Abbey flotation.
Farmers back in court
By PATRICK HOSKING
LOS ANGELES (Reuter)— Farmers Group of insurance companies, the California subsidiary of BAT Industries, yesterday said it has filed a motion in Los Angeles County Superior Court to stay a recently imposed state freeze on automobile insurance rates.
Farmers, the second largest car insurer in the state, had previously sought a 5.9 per cent increase to offset projected losses of about $100m on high-risk drivers.
But State insurance commissioner Roxani Gillespie imposed a six-month freeze on all car insurance rates on October 2.
Cities may block MBB bid
By PATRICK HOSKING
HAMBURG (AFP)— Two West German city governments with a stake in Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, the aviation company, have said they will not approve its merger with Daimler-Benz under the current plan.
The authorities in Hamburg and Bremen said on Monday that the merger plan does not take sufficient account of the interests of the north of the country, particularly in terms of employment.
The two cities indirectly hold more than 17 per cent and 10 per cent of MBB which could be enough to stop the merger, observers said.
Business and City Summary
By PATRICK HOSKING
Saatchi approach: Southeastern Asset Management, which owns 10.2 per cent of Saatchi & Saatchi, said one or more parties had approached it about a possible restructuring of the advertising group.
It said it may discuss such transactions, which would not involve a change in control, with the management.
LIN bid: US-based McCaw Communications, which is 22 per cent owned by British Telecom, launched a revised $2.9bn bid for LIN Broadcasting, the cellular radio and TV stations group.
This page and View from City Road, page 29 Wills factory bought: A consortium including developer Skillion and Peter Earl's Tranwood Group, has bought the WD & HO Wills tobacco factory at Bedminster, Bristol, which covers 10 acres in the city.
Savings rates raised: The Yorkshire, the first building society to increase mortgage rates after last week's base rate rise, announced 0.75-1.5 per cent hikes in its savings rates and a top rate of 12.75 per cent.
New Visa boss: Jacques Kosciusko, general manager of retail banking at Credit Lyonnais, is to head the Europe, Middle East and Africa division of Visa International, the credit card network, from early next year.
Bond plunge: Shares in Bond Corporation slid to a 10-year low at one point valuing the beleaguered Australian group at less than £50m.
Page 27 News warning: Losses at Sky Television will produce a fall in profits at Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation this year.
Page 27 and View from City Road, page 29 Bank steps in: The Bank of England again stepped in to the currency markets to prop up sterling, taking its interventionist spending since the trade figures a fortnight ago to an estimated $3-$4bn.
This page and Outlook, page 27 Investor fears: Institutional investors fear share prices have further to fall than yesterday's 28.2 point drop in the FT-SE 100 index.
This page and Outlook, page 27 Ferranti action: Ferranti International is planning legal action against some intermediaries in the ‘phantom’ arms contracts which have brought it close to collapse.
Page 26 New Rover: Rover today launches a new 200 series model — a key product in its strategy to make niche market cars.
It is investing £400m in the project.
Page 27 Millwall oversubscribed: The offer for sale of shares in Millwall Holdings, the football club, was taken up by 2,750 people, mainly supporters.
Page 29 Pathe sold: British Pathe News Library, the film newsreel archive, was acquired for $16m by the mini-conglomerate Parkfield Group.
Page 26 James Neill sold: MMG Patricof, the fund manager, successfully took over the Sheffield engineering company James Neill after launching a £78m cash bid.
World Markets New York: Shares see-sawed in moderate trading.
By the close profit-takers had the upper hand and the Dow Jones Industrial average was down 6.08 points at 2,785.33.
Hong Kong: Strong institutional and overseas buying after a morning decline drove the Hang Seng index up 17.83 to 2,844.04.
Singapore: The Straits Times index inched up 0.73 of a point to 1,420.91 in moderate trading.
Sydney: Concern about the performance of News Corporation following a warning by Rupert Murdoch helped to pull the All Ordinaries index down 17.5 points to 1,755.8, the day's low.
Paris: Intense speculative interest in merchant bank Paribas was the feature of a session in which the CAC-40 index posted a record 1,961.74, up 19.2.
Zurich: Shares closed slightly weaker in moderate trade.
Milan: In position squaring ahead of today's expiry of options the MIB slipped three points to 1,166.
Madrid: Uncertainty ahead of Friday's inflation data brought a 0.79 fall in the index to 322.32.
Brussels: Renewed confidence on the first day of the new forward account enabled shares to close firmer in heavy trading.
Stockholm: Sharp gains in Volvo and Ericsson shares dominated a moderate session in which prices generally fell back from early advances.
Volvo has refused to comment on reports of merger talks with Renault.
Water perks intended to ensure maximum take-up
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
SHARES in the water industry are to be made ‘as attractive as possible to as many people as possible’, the Government's advisers on water privatisation said yesterday after announcing a series of perks for investors which go beyond anything seen in previous privatisations.
Gerry Grimstone, a director of Schroders, the Government's merchant bank for the water flotations, claimed that the response so far had been extremely encouraging, with interest spread broadly across the country and ‘no signs of an investor strike’ in any of the regions.
City analysts are convinced that the Government will price shares extremely favourably to ensure success, with the average dividend yield among the 10 authorities a little under 8 per cent.
Incentives were announced yesterday which analysts agreed ought to guarantee a very high level of retail demand for the shares.
Customers will be able to opt for discounts worth £20 for every £250 invested up to a maximum investment of £3,750 or for bonus shares on the basis of one for every 10 bought.
The value of the discounts works out at about 8 per cent of the sum invested.
For British Telecom and British Gas, where the perks took the form of discounts on quarterly bills, they were worth only 6.9 per cent and 7.4 per cent respectively.
Labour condemned the incentives as ‘another effort to ensure that the sale is not a flop’.
Anne Taylor, Labour's water spokeswoman, said: ‘No one will be very impressed with discounts on something they already own.
People want high quality service, and that's what money should be spent on — not on expensive public relations and giving shares away free.’
The Goverment is spreading the incentive net wider than in previous privatisations.
Every member of a household down to the youngest child will be eligible for perks, whereas for British Telecom and British Gas they were limited to one set per metered outlet.
This may account for the relatively high level of interest being expressed in the issue.
With two months to go, more than 2.5 million people are said to have pre-registered, more than invested in either British Telecom or British Gas.
Bonus shares will also be available for non-customers, but on a less favourable basis of one for 20 up to a maximum investment of £7,500.
Mr Grimstone stressed that the perks would only be available to those who registered their interest in advance, with the cut-off date likely to be some time in mid-November.
The Government's research showed that many of those who were interested in investing were still not aware of the importance of pre-registering.
Water authority prospectuses will carry a ‘health warning’ about the Opposition's stated intention of bringing the industry back into public ownership.
Bryan Gould, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, has said that the industry may be renationalised at a lower price than it is sold for.
More share price falls expected
By CLARE DOBIE in London and LARRY BLACK in New York
LARGE investors expect London share prices to fall still further, some by as much as 20 per cent, after yesterday's sharp drop on the stock market.
As the widely-based FT-SE 100 index dropped 28.2 points to close at 2,218.8, pension fund managers and other institutional investors spoke of their fears of further falls.
A spokesman for Phillips & Drew Fund Management, one of the largest fund managers in the City, said recent movements looked like the start of a downturn.
‘In a bear market you normally expect shares to drop 15 to 25 per cent over 18 months.
It would not surprise us to see something like this over the next few months.’
Mike Payne, of Legal & General, the insurance company, said the market was unsure whether the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, was in control.
If Mr Lawson was, he might be happy to see the pound fall to ease the burden on companies.
But the danger was that the pound would fall further than planned, said Mr Payne.
If the Chancellor was not in control the pound could go into free fall, leading to much higher interest rates, Mr Payne went on.
‘I've got a nasty feeling he may need to jack up interest rates further, but possibly not for very long.’
The fall in London, most of which took place in the afternoon, was triggered by a combination of factors.
These included a pessimistic forecast from BZW, the stockbroking arm of Barclays Bank.
In the BZW forecast, Peter Thomson said the FT-SE index should be back to 2,100-2,200 by the end of this month and would at best hold its own next year but more likely fall to 1,800, where it started this year.
Mr Thomson also said the Government's aims of controlling inflation would put pressure on company profits and make a share prices surge in the winter/spring unlikely.
These views reinforce BZW's well-publicised caution on the market, which is not fully shared by other leading houses.
The fall was not helped by remarks made in Moscow by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, who said it might be counterproductive to give great importance to short-term stabilisation of domestic financial or foreign exchange markets.
Though there was some selling yesterday, volume was not heavy.
Some large investors stood on the sidelines, happy to have moved money out of UK companies earlier in the year to overseas markets.
Most fund managers believed it was too early to say when they would consider buying London shares again.
Wall Street, however, experienced an unusually quiet day, with stock markets drifting slightly lower despite the strong dollar and firm credit markets.
Investment strategists said the decline was attributable to profit-taking after six days of climbing prices, which brought the Dow Jones Industrial average up by more than 100 points.
Prices were lower across the board, with nearly all blue-chip stocks losing ground.
‘Eventually, traders want to cash in their chips,’ said Hildegard Zagorski, market analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities in New York.
‘It isn't a real sell-off.’
Airline stocks, which have been surging for months on a series of high-stakes takeovers, declined after one potential target, US Air, declared lower than expected earnings.
American Airlines, which last week received an unsolicited buyout offer from developer Donald Trump, fell several dollars as scepticism about the bid widened.
Delta Airlines, the only other major US carrier not in play, also fell about a dollar.
The three major US car makers saw their stock prices decline after analysts predicted quarterly losses on their North American businesses for the first time since the 1982 recession.
But European car makers fortunes were mixed.
Volvo's over-the-counter US shares jumped more than $5 on word of a merger with Renault, while Jaguar — the object of a run-up since Ford hinted at takeover plans two weeks ago — fell nearly a dollar on word that rival General Motors will take only a minority share in the British car maker.
Bank fails to halt sterling's slide
By PETER TORDAY
STERLING succumbed to heavy worldwide selling again yesterday despite sizeable intervention in the foreign exchange markets by the Bank of England to break the fall, writes Peter Torday.
In London, sterling closed 2 pfennigs down at DM2.9537 and was 1.9 cents lower at $1.5585.
The Bank stepped into the markets early yesterday to steady a bout of selling in the European markets.
It sold dollars at $1.5715 and German marks at DM2.96.
The Bank repeated its intervention just as the New York markets opened during the European lunchtime to signal that it did not want the American markets, closed since Friday night, to push the pound down further.
But the Bank was later forced to continue its intervention.
It sold dollars and European currency units for pounds in a determined fashion to counter heavy selling, which briefly pushed the pound down below DM2.95 for the first time since August 1987.
Market estimates for yesterday's intervention put the Bank's purchases of pounds as high as $500m, and there were indications that the authorities may have intervened to a similar extent the day before, when sterling fell almost 6 pfennigs.
That suggests the Bank has spent $3bn-$4bn of its foreign exchange and gold reserves, worth $42bn when the latest official figures were released last Tuesday, since the £2bn current account deficit for August was disclosed on 26 September.
The Bank supported the pound the day the trade figures were released and its support grew through that week, culminating in heavy intervention on Thursday and Friday.
Last week started quietly, but on Tuesday fresh pressure developed as speculation mounted that the West German Bundesbank was set to raise its key interest rates.
Last Wednesday the Bank was believed to have spent as much as $1bn.
The 1-point rise in base rates last Thursday bought 1½ days of calm to the currency markets.
EC mergers plan bogged down again
From DAVID USBORNE in Luxembourg
EUROPEAN Community trade ministers meeting in Luxembourg last night seemed set to fail in an attempt to make any new progress towards a common mergers policy, giving final right of veto on large-scale mergers to Brussels.
The failure of yesterday's meeting to achieve even a preliminary compromise makes the prospect of a final agreement before the end of this year highly unlikely.
The 15-year-old proposal aims to give the European Commission exclusive jurisdiction over the largest industrial mergers involving companies from more than one EC state.
However, governments have for a long time been divided over how large a merger must be before it passes out of national hands to Brussels.
Britain, France and West Germany have argued for a joint world turnover threshold of £3.5bn, while the majority want it set lower at £1.4bn.
Last night ministers continued to look at a compromise prepared by the EC commissioner Sir Leon Brittan, incorporating a Dutch-led formula where the higher level would be the norm but governments would have the option of asking Brussels to intervene for mergers breaking £1.4bn.
Ferranti plans to sue contract intermediaries
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
FERRANTI International is planning legal action against a series of obscure European registered companies which acted as intermediaries in the ‘phantom’ arms contracts that have brought the UK defence contractor to the brink of collapse.
Lawyers acting for Ferranti concede that there is no chance of getting back the full £215m which the company is being forced to write off as a result of the International Signal and Control fraud.
However, they believe there could be some hope of recovering lines of credit which were extended by International Signal and Control to a number of European intermediaries.
It emerged yesterday that, from the moment Ferranti acquired International Signal and Control two years ago, executives were put on alert about the suspect contracts because, unusually, they involved the granting of credit on open account to sub-contractors and intermediaries.
Ferranti's senior management was extremely unhappy about the arrangements, but at that stage took the view that they amounted merely to a credit risk rather than a fraud.
Ferranti carried on with the contracts because it did not want to give the purported customers an excuse not to pay back the credit.
It has now emerged that the fraud was carried out by using the credit to pay back money to International Signal and Control as if it was the customer making stage payments on the contract.
In a separate development, British Aerospace and Thomson CSF of France confirmed they were considering making a joint offer for Ferranti.
If successful, it would be their intention to maintain Ferranti's position as a leading UK defence contractor and to share operational responsibility for Ferranti's businesses with overall management vested in British Aerospace.
The two companies said the Ministry of Defence had been supportive of their approach and they did not anticipate any regulatory problems.
However, neither would contemplate any direct involvement without ‘an appropriate period of due diligence’.
British Aerospace said its advisers would have to take a detailed look at Ferranti's books to satisfy themselves that there were no further problems before the company could proceed.
Ferranti will be sending British Aerospace and other interested parties prepared to sign a confidentiality clause a detailed information pack on the company's present state of affairs.
Two private shareholders called on Sir Derek Alun-Jones, Ferranti's chairman, to resign at the company's reconvened annual meeting yesterday.
However, Sir John Hoskyns, a non-executive director, defended Sir Derek.
The board had considered the chairman's position seriously, he said, and decided ‘it would have been a very foolish thing to ask him to step down’.
There had been no suggestion from the company's bankers or major institutional shareholders to date that he should do so.
The composition of the board would be reconsidered when the situation had been sorted out.
McCaw offers 2.9bn dollars for LIN
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
MCCAW Communications, the US cellular radio company in which British Telecom has a 20 per cent stake, has launched a revised $2.9bn bid for LIN Broadcasting.
McCaw is offering $125 per share for 22 million shares.
The bid price is equivalent to $293 ‘per pop’— the way in which cellular radio licences are valued in the US, based on the population of a catchment area.
This makes it the highest price offered so far in the rush for licences.
A previous bid of $110m per share was due to expire on Friday, and faced strong opposition in the form of a proposed merger between the cellular radio operations of LIN and BellSouth.
The $2.9bn renewed bid by McCaw would leave 26 million shares in LIN outstanding.
It has been designed to lure shareholders by allowing them to keep a stake in LIN, and by offering a private fair market guarantee.
Under the guarantee, McCaw will buy the remaining LIN shares in five years at an agreed private market price or will put the entire LIN company up for sale.
The renewed bid for LIN further complicates the battle for supremacy in the US cellular radio market and in particular for the prized New York licence, currently owned by LIN and Metromedia.
McCaw last week agreed to pay $1.9bn for Metromedia's half of the licence, but that deal in turn hinged on whether LIN took up its right of first refusal on Metromedia's stake.
If the new McCaw/LIN deal succeeds it would bring McCaw's stake in LIN Broadcasting to 50.3 per cent.
The Metromedia interests in New York would subsequently be sold to LIN at no profit to McCaw, bringing an entire New York licence under one roof.
Nynex of the US holds the second New York cellular radio licence.
McCaw believes it needs LIN, which also has substantial cellular radio interests in Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston and Philadelphia, to build a national cellular radio service in the fragmented US market.
BT, which bought its stake in McCaw in June for $1.3bn, said that it would not have to invest further to support the current McCaw bids.
Barry Romeril, BT's finance director, said: ‘This deal will make McCaw manifestly pre-eminent in the US cellular business, the only one able to offer a full national service.
Once LIN has gone there is not much left on the open market.
BT would be the only foreign company to get a significant stake in this market.’
Pathe library sold for 16m dollars
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
BRITISH Pathe News Library, the film newsreel archive which chronicled world events of the last 100 years, has been acquired for $16m by Parkfield Group, the mini conglomerate.
Pathe, epitomised by its crowing cockerel and mildly patronising commentaries, stopped producing newsreels in 1970 after 75 years' coverage of world events because of the decline of the film industry and a change in cinema audience tastes.
But the library occupies an important position in British cinema history and includes unrivalled coverage of events, spanning Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee, the Wright brothers' flight, the world wars and the onset of the space age.
Its footage is mainly licensed world-wide to film makers for inclusion in features and documentaries.
Chris Davies, a Parkfield director, said the library makes a profit of ‘a few hundred thousand pounds annually’ but its potential is ‘enormous’.
Pathe's library is being sold by Weintraub Entertainments, a Los Angeles and London film and concert business.