

Court Circular
By STEVE CRAWSHAW, East Europe Editor
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 10 October: The Duchess of York, President of Action Research for the Crippled Child, this morning visited the Duncan Guthrie Institute at the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow.
Her Royal Highness was received by The Right Honourable The Lord Provost of Glasgow (Mrs Susan Baird).
Afterwards, The Duchess of York, Patron of Museums Year 1989, opened the Customs and Excise Museum and Exhibition at HM Customs and Excise Custom House, Greenock, and was received by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Renfrewshire (Major JDM Crichton Maitland).
Her Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight and was attended by Mrs Harry Cotterell.
10 October: The Prince Edward this evening attended a gala performance of Buddy at the Victoria Palace Theatre, London, in aid of the Sharon Allen Leukaemia Trust.
Major William McLean was in attendance.
10 October: The Princess Royal this morning visited Hampshire and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Hampshire (Lieutenant-Colonel Sir James Scott Bt).
Her Royal Highness visited The Elizabeth Foundation, Southwick, Portsmouth.
In the afternoon Her Royal Highness opened Whitbread Brewery's new depot at Hedge End, Southampton.
Afterwards The Princess Royal opened the new hostel development at Sparsholt College, Sparsholt, Winchester.
Her Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
In the evening The Princess Royal, President, The Save the Children Fund, attended the Industry and Commerce Group Reception at Buckingham Palace for Patrons of the 70th Anniversary Training Appeal.
Subsequently The Princess Royal, President, REDR — Engineers for Disaster Relief, attended the Vice-Presidents Dinner at the Institution of Civil Engineers, Great George Street, London.
Her Royal Highness was attended by Mrs Malcolm Wallace.
Mrs George West, Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN and Mr Richard Arbiter were in attendance.
10 October: The Duchess of Gloucester, Patron of Asthma Research Council, today opened the Department of Allergy and Allied Respiratory Disorders at Guy's Hospital, London SE1.
Mrs Michael Wigley was in attendance.
YORK HOUSE 10 October: The Duke of Kent, President of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, this afternoon received the Duke of Atholl upon relinquishing his appointment as Chairman.
The Duke and Duchess of Kent this evening attended a Gala Evening in aid of the Council for the Protection of Rural England at the Royal Festival Hall.
Their Royal Highnesses were attended by Mr Andrew Palmer and Mrs Alan Henderson.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess of Wales, Patron, The Natural History Museum, attends the launch of the Natural History Museum Development Trust at the Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7.
The Princess Royal, Patron, College of Occupational Therapists, opens the College's new headquarters, Information & Study Centre at 6-8 Marshalsea Road, London SE1; opens the Young Designers' Centre, The Design Council, 28 Haymarket, London SW1; visits the Headquarters of The Special Escort Group at their Barnes Headquarters, London SW13; and, this evening, attends a Banquet at the Guildhall given by the Worshipful Company of Framework Knitters to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the invention of the knitting frame by William Lee.
Princess Margaret, President of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, opens the Hertfordshire Child Protection Team's Unit, Hemel Hempstead.
The Duchess of Gloucester, as Patron, visits the offices of Counsel and Care for the Elderly, at 16 Bonny Street, London NW1.
The Duchess of Kent attends a Thanksgiving Service to mark the 150th Anniversary of the foundation of the West of England School for Children with Little or No Sight in Exeter Cathedral.
Obituary: Daan Van Der Meulen
By ARTHUR IRVINE
DAAN VAN DER MEULEN is best known in English-speaking circles as the first reliable explorer of the Wadi Hadhramaut in South Africa, a little-known, wild region, riven by tribal feuds, hardly explored, and fraught with danger for the outsider; though he himself would probably have liked to be remembered equally for his services in the Dutch colonial administration in Sumatra.
Van Der Meulen was an austere, patriarchal figure, deeply imbued with the rigidly Calvinist outlook he had acquired from his father, a schoolmaster in a small village near the German frontier.
At an early age he developed a desire for foreign travel and it was the Dutch East Indies which first attracted him.
He grew up in an age when the youth of the Netherlands were preoccupied with the tales of oppression and corruption in the colonial service revealed some 50 years earlier by the writings of ED Dekker (writing as ‘Multatuli’).
Moved to rectify this situation, he abandoned plans of working in the missionary field, and offered his services to the Netherlands Indies civil service.
His first posting in 1915 took him to the Toba Batak country in Northern Sumatra in time to witness the Muslim Acehnese rising against their Christian rulers; an event which made him appreciate the approaching crisis of Islam as a focus for nationalism, and impressed upon him the urgent need for Muslim-Christian accommodation.
Further postings gave him experience of Muslims and heathens in Central Sumatra, and he finally became Resident Adviser to the Netherlands East India government at Batavia (1945-48).
Throughout Van Der Meulen's long career, his primary concern was that of peaceful co-existence and co-operation in a region where a Muslim majority had to live in close proximity to large communities of Christians and pagans.
He viewed the establishment of mutual recognition and trust as a prerequisite for the future prosperity of the region and was largely responsible for its realisation with the creation of the non-Islamic Republic of Indonesia.
The Dutch administration had long seen the need for consular representation in Jedda, the port of Mecca, where the security, health and transport of large numbers of Indonesian pilgrims could be supervised by the Batavian authorities.
In 1923 Van Der Meulen applied for the post of consul there and was selected for a three-year training in Arabic and Islam by the great Leiden Arabist, Snouck Hurgronje.
His studies in Leiden proved congenial to him and he developed a love for Arabia and Islam, which he felt provided a solid background for his Calvinist faith.
His arrival in Jedda in 1926 coincided with the expulsion of the Hashemites from the Hijaz and their replacement by the strict Wahhabis under King Ibn Saud.
He thus witnessed the birth of Saudi Arabia and could observe its growth and development at a crucial period in its history.
By the time he left in 1931 it was clear to him that there was a need for the Dutch to establish trading and cultural links not only with Saudi Arabia but with the Yemen and Hadhramaut, and most of his subsequent career in Arabia was devoted to this end.
Van Der Meulen's austere but charming character was to stand him in good stead with the Saudis.
He developed good relations, often deep friendships, with prominent figures of the time, including Ibn Saud, who frequently sought his advice and from whom Van Der Meulen was able to obtain a number of concessions for the Dutch.
This last relationship is poignantly chronicled in his Faces in Shem (1961).
Van Der Meulen's reputation as an explorer was founded in 1931 when, at the close of his first posting to Jedda, he was commissioned by the Dutch Ministry for Foreign Affairs to explore the mysterious Wadi Hadhramaut.
The Dutch interest there was inspired by the presence in the East Indies of large numbers of Hadhramis who had emigrated there to make their fortunes.
Accompanied by his close friend the German geographer Hermann von Wissmann, he set out from the port of Mukalla and visited the cities of Shibam, Saywun and Tarim, closely studying the society and minutely describing the topography, geology, flora and fauna of the valley.
His account of the journey, Hadhramaut, some of its mysteries unveiled (1931), immediately became a landmark in the description of Arabia.
A further exploration with von Wissmann in 1939 took him from Aden, through the almost unknown highlands to the north-east as far as the Wadi Jirdan and on into Hadhramaut, the results appearing in his Aden to the Hadhramaut (1947).
Van Der Meulen has been characterised as a good explorer rather than as a great one.
There is some truth in this.
His vision was direct, concrete and simple and he recorded faithfully the accidents of every-day life.
He possessed the true explorer's curiosity but did not bring to his journeys his own creative touch.
As a diplomat and administrator he really belonged to the Imperialist age before the discovery of oil and could be rather paternalistic in his attitudes.
He was prepared to vindicate the bombing of South Arabian villages by the RAF as necessary for the pacification of the country.
He also had a high opinion of British travellers and officials but felt that they were not dedicated, or good examples of Christian virtues; they had not been chosen for their moral worth and were likely to be judged by Muslims in that light.
His 1939 journey took place at a time when anti-British sentiments were beginning to reach Hadhramaut from Cairo and there was increasing criticism of the privileges of sayyid rulers.
Van Der Meulen realised that change had to come but he was surely saddened by the way it happened.
Obituary: Ian Scott-Kilvert
By ARTHUR FOSS
IAN SCOTT-KILVERT, writer, editor, translator and Director of the British Council's Department of Publications and Recorded Sound from 1962 to 1967, devoted his considerable energies to an unusually wide range of interests, which he pursued with quiet determination and unswerving loyalty.
His war service after Cambridge, where he was an exhibitioner at Gonville and Caius College and gained a first in English, pointed the way to his future career.
His duties with the Friends' Ambulance Unit in the Western Desert reinforced a desire to give service.
Later joining the intelligence corps, his attachment to Special Operations Executive in German-occupied north-west Greece and afterwards with the British Information Service in Athens gave him an abiding affection for and an understanding of the Hellenic scene.
His achievements were considerable.
While at the British Council, which he joined in 1946, he was responsible for the recording of Shakespeare's plays, under the direction of George Rylands.
He was also general editor of an important series of pamphlets, ‘Writers and Their Works’, each containing an essay on an author and an extended checklist of his or her work (those for John Webster and AE Housman he wrote himself); Scribner's, the New York publishers, later collected these in eight volumes.
He also became one of the small group of scholars who translated from the classics for Penguin Books, for which he contributed versions of Plutarch, Polybius and Dio Cassius.
Scott-Kilvert showed his affection for Greece by serving for many years on the council and executive committee of the Anglo-Hellenic League, in due course becoming honorary secretary.
He was one of the three judges of the league's annual £1,000 Runciman Award for a book about Greece.
Greece also stimulated his interest in Byron, first aroused while at school in Harrow.
He was responsible for the British Council's highly successful Byron exhibition in Athens in 1974, a timely reminder of the long-standing friendship between the two countries.
He later became joint chairman of the UK Byron Society and joint president of the International Byron Society; in this capacity he chaired international Byron symposia in Cambridge and Athens, on one occasion conducting members in the footsteps of Byron's Childe Harold to Epirus, into which he had parachuted in summer 1944.
He also composed dramatic entertainment for the society in London.
Scott-Kilvert's other interests included membership of the European-Atlantic Group, becoming a committee member in 1984 and an executive editor of its Journal.
He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature: his last few weeks before his death from cancer, which he fought uncomplainingly and with great courage, were spent in devising an entertainment, ‘The French Revolution through British Eyes’, for the RSL.
Two years ago he became chairman of the Wednesday Club, at which writers, publishers and others of note meet fortnightly for luncheon.
This, together with his membership of the Athenaeum and the Beefsteak show how much he was liked and respected.
Quiet and modest in manner, speaking with an occasional stutter, his initiative, absolute reliability and willingness to help in the humblest duties endeared him to his many friends, not only in the literary world.
He had gained a half-Blue for athletics at Cambridge, was a member of the MCC and played tennis regularly at Hurlingham until stricken by illness.
Obituary: The Rev Hugh Bishop
By ALAN WEBSTER
HUGH BISHOP was one of the most significant Anglicans of his generation.
As a Mirfield monk his strong profile, cassocked figure and deep resonant voice had power among universities, schools and parishes.
After a crisis in his life in 1974, his ministry in Leeds and London led women and men, archbishops and students to his home, meeting an increasingly gentle, humane and wise priest, who might greet his visitors in an apron preparing the meal.
Some of Hugh Bishop's confidence came from being a countryman from a secure Shropshire home, safe among those ‘blue remembered hills’.
History at Oxford and theological training at Cuddesdon increased his assurance.
In his earlier years he could counsel priests to celibacy and doubters to Catholic dogma with almost papal infallibility, untroubled by a fiance's feelings or a questioner's uncertainties.
As a retreat conductor, preacher and speaker for religious communities in the Assembly and the Synod he had few rivals.
The shocks of ministry changed him.
In early years as a curate at Workington, the cruelties of the means test for taxation shook him into protest.
After capture at Tobruk as a chaplain he listened as well as lectured and poured himself out as father, brother and friend, empathising with the religious difficulties of his fellow prisoners which gnawed away at the rigid Anglo-Catholicism of more sheltered days.
Easter Day 1945 found him in the darkness of a cattle truck in a German railway tunnel; there was a true resurrection moment when prisoners were allowed out in to the sunshine and flowers of the railway cutting.
On demob Bishop returned to the Community, holding a series of offices and attracting many fresh novices.
Visiting his brethren in Southern Rhodesia he attacked apartheid in a sermon in Salisbury Cathedral so directly that he was deported and declared an ‘undesirable visitor’ by the UDI regime.
This incident sharpened his radical catholicism.
He had already accepted the need for reunion of churches in South India and agreed with Archbishop Michael Ramsey's view that risks should be taken for the sake of Gospel.
So he supported reunion with Methodists and believed that it was Canute-like to oppose the ordination of women.
In his theology — largely spoken: all his four books were printed addresses -he had begun to experience what John Hick describes as a ‘Copernican revolution’.
Always committed to God, the sacrament and prayer, he became agnostic about much else.
For him Mirfield felt claustrophobic, a position no longer consonant with his role as Superior.
After much consultation with the Archbishop and with his approval he resigned in 1974 to continue his ministry first in Leeds and afterwards in London living with a friend, Dr Robert Towler.
Bishop's change in theological position and his abandonment of monastic life both caused sorrow to his community.
He had the weakness of dramatising his position.
He could hurt those who cared most about him — his parents when he became a monk and Mirfield when he followed his resignation with a national television account of what was personal and private.
His discovery of a new freedom both theological and psychological was not easy for him to articulate though his widely circulated letter Ad Amicos revealed his absolute devotion to the search for God.
Hundreds of friends found Hugh Bishop a supportive fellow pilgrim on their own spiritual journeys.
In particular women discovered they were treated with rare attention and understanding.
His power to help the perplexed, and his liberating refusal of over-definition in religion, gave him an authority more profound than he had exercised even when he was Superior.
Anniversaries
By ALAN WEBSTER
On this day: the Order of the Bath was constituted, 1399; Pope Leo X conferred the title ‘Defender of the Faith’ on Henry VIII, 1521; Peter the Great became Tsar of Russia, 1669; the Chicago Fire ended, having almost completely destroyed the city at a cost of $196m, 1871; the Anglo-Boer War started, 1899; Czechoslovakia became an independent republic, 1918; inflation overtook German currency, with the mark dropping to an exchange rate of 10,000m to the pound, 1923; fighting broke out in China between the Nationalists under Chiang Kai-shek and the Communists under Mao Tse-tung, 1945; Pope John XXIII opened the second Vatican Ecumenical Council, 1963.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 34
Obituary: Patricia Cockburn
By JAMES PETTIFER
IN THE EDWARDIAN world in which Patricia Cockburn grew up, writes James Pettifer (further to the Obituary by Richard Ingrams, 9 October), there were rational certainties: the family bank, as an Arbuthnot; the Empire, as a source of employment and, in the case of the grandparents, huge wealth from China; and within the Empire, the natural world, as something to be explored, revered, loved.
Only the last survived a long complicated life as a passion, and led to her single-handed revival of the eighteenth-century art of shell pictures, an obsessive pursuit of Irish aristocratic ladies in the time of Sheridan and Goldsmith.
She had early ambitions to be a marine biologist, and always claimed that lack of formal educational opportunity prevented her.
Whether that was the whole story no one will ever know.
To many of her friends she seemed more a mystic than a likely scientist, despite her encyclopaedic knowledge of natural history; a woman with religious respect for and understanding of the environment, an ecologist long before the term was widely known.
But most of all, she belonged in her native landscape, around Youghal and later Ardmore.
A small figure wrapped in an old duffel coat and woolly hat, she accompanied her Collie dog along the great open beach at Ardmore, in solitary contact with the Atlantic.
Like Euripides she believed the sea could cure the ills of man.
But her wider life was anything but solitary.
Immensely learned about all aspects of modern Irish life, she knew almost everybody and was known to them.
Perhaps the number of thinly-disguised character studies in modern fiction, from Molly Keane to Emma Tennant, are a better tribute to her than anything else, not all of them flattering, it must be said.
She was an excellent shrewd local politician and a comfort to her at the end of her life was the defeat of the atrocious plans of the Merrell Dow Chemical Company to build a plant near her beloved River Blackwater, the last campaign in which she played an active part.
Deeply kind and warm-hearted, despite her somewhat formidable exterior and a conversational style which could tend towards the monologue, she remained a generous radical to the end, one of the few of her generation who integrated the immense energy and self-confidence of the Ascendancy families into modern Irish life.
She will be missed as much in the tiny village halls in County Waterford, where she was active in the Irish Country Women's Association, as in fashionable dining rooms in Cape Cod or London.
Obituary: Mark Dignam
By GILES GORDON
OSSIA TRILLING's obituary of Mark Dignam (5 October) mentions that the actor played a dozen major Shakespeare parts at Stratford in the late 1950s, writes Giles Gordon.
They included the most sinister, malevolent Claudius I've seen, drenched like Satan in Motley's red costume, to Michael Redgrave's last Hamlet.
The star, not inclined to be bored by his own performance, gave a slightly different interpretation every time, keeping the rest of the cast on its toes.
Dignam, in the role second largest to Redgrave's, coped magnificently in the two performances I saw.
Never a star perhaps but stars, on the boards, come and go.
Character actors and second leads, like Dignam, tend to stay, not seduced by celluloid.
Down the decades, I never saw Dignam give a performance that wasn't true to his classical text.
When he was in a production the overall power was somehow raised.
He belonged more to the Gielgud tradition than the Olivier.
Nothing inadequate about his physical acting but his voice was his asset, the driest, most pungent of sherries at the command, so often, of Shakespeare's verse, utterly lacking the fruitiness and histrionics of so many over-tired classical actors of his generation.
His performances were ever at the service of the text, and invariably characters were created.
I never felt: ‘Oh, so old Dignam's playing Claudius’(or whomever); always: ‘I wonder what Dignam will make of Claudius?’
A year or so back I found myself sitting next to him, bearded in his old age and wearing plus fours, overall resembling a successful if slightly barmy countryman, at a ghastly new play at the Almeida.
His concentration throughout was total, and at the end he clapped vigorously.
He was one of those relatively few actors — Ian McKellen and Simon Callow are others — who somehow boost the confidence of regular theatregoers by taking the opportunity of a free evening to watch fellow actors at work.
At Riverside Studios during the interval of a play in Russian, I was chatting about anything other than the play to the Guardian's critic, Michael Billington, when Mark Dignam approached Billington and, most courteously and with a touch of a bow, said: ‘Mr Billington, I look forward to reading you tomorrow and seeing what I think of the play.’
Clearly a man who understood and relished his profession.
Obituary: Carlo Dapporto
By GILES GORDON
Carlo Dapporto, Italian comic actor, died Rome 1 October aged 88.
He was known in Italy as the ‘King of the Joke’ and had his greatest critical success in Ettore Scola's film La Famiglia.