

VIDEO /Chilling case of child's play: A critical guide to films available for hire this month by Elkan Allan
By ELKAN ALLAN
Best of a full but not very dis tinguished rental month (the blockbusters are coming in November, leading with Rain Man, Roger Rabbit, Dangerous Liaisons and Mississippi Burning) is Parents (18 Vestron), which is simultaneously both scary and funny.
From the start of this modest but compelling chiller, you sense that the family, moving to suburban Indiana in 1958, has got a skewed and sinister undertow.
Just how black isn't fully apparent until about half-way through, when you discover that the glum little son (a brilliant performance by a child, Bryan Madorsky) of the happy couple (Randy Quaid and Mary Beth Hurt) has a great deal to be disturbed about.
To give away much more of first-time director Bob Balaban's plot would be a shame: sufficient to say that I was seriously put off meat and more cosily frightened than by any film since the original Halloween.
BEST OF THE REST The casting of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny De Vito as Twins (PG CIC) is funny in itself, and the comedy that Ivan Reitman (Ghostbusters) has fashioned for them is consistently inventive.
In its crazy way, it is more touching than the similar fraternal discovery in Rain Man.
Both Schwarzenegger as the nicest of guys and De Vito as a sneaky crook are surprisingly convincing and delightfully funny.
Dead Bang (18 Guild Home Video) marks a welcome comeback for John Frankenheimer in his Manchurian Candidate conspiracy mood.
Starting as a conventional thriller about a cop (Miami Vice's Don Johnson) with marital and drinking problems, it escalates excitingly.
Claims to be based on the real-life experiences of LAPD detective Jerry Beck.
Two goodies for the whole family: if Willow (PG RCA/Col 20 Oct) never quite manages to fulfill its own fantasies, it is nevertheless an impressive box of tricks.
In essence a simple sword-and-sorcery entertainment, it carries enough sophistication to keep adults as entertained as children.
A nice change for Joanne Whalley after Scandal.
And Danny, Champion Of The World (U Collins Home Video) is one of those occasional British children's films in the tradition of The Railway Children, where a horrid grown-up (here Robbie Coltrane with a moustache and slicked-back hair) is defeated by a kid (Samuel Irons) and his adult allies (notably real-life father Jeremy Irons).
The Dressmaker (15 MGM/UA Home Video) is an adaptation of Beryl Bainbridge's post-wartime novel about three women (Joan Plowright and Billie Whitelaw, turning in impeccable performances as sisters, and Jane Horrocks, holding her own as their ward) mixed up with American GIs.
Emotionally chilling and horribly convincing.
THE REST The return to low-budget film-making by the director of Halloween, John Carpenter, fails to generate anything like the same tension.
In They Live (18 Guild 26 Oct) the endless fist-fights are boring and the Orwellian tyrrannies familiar, to say the least.
The little-known cast is unlikely to become better known.
Something of the same quality of camp horror is to be found in The Blob (18 Braveworld 25 Oct), a remake of the 1958 B movie about a mysterious substance that eats people.
Remarkable special effects tend to get in the way of the story.
Madame Sousatzka (15 Virgin Video 20 Oct), is a sickly confection, turning Bernice Rubens's clear-eyed novel about a German refugee piano teacher and an 11-year-old Jewish prodigy into a star vehicle for Shirley MacLaine, now a Russian-American with a 14-year-old Indian pupil.
Messily directed by John Schlesinger, it fails to evoke admiration or sympathy for its characters.
A gallery of eccentric supports (including Twiggy and Peggy Ashcroft) cannot save it.
In 1969 (15 Entertainment in Video 25 Oct), Robert Downey Jnr and Kiefer Sutherland do well enough as heroic Vietnam War draft-dodgers.
Its heart is in the right place, the detail is right but the texture is wrong.
Lillian Gish, Bette Davis and Ann Sothern don't quite gel together in The Whales Of August (U Vestron 23 Oct).
Stubbornly a stage play and resisting all Lindsay Anderson's attempts at opening out, this study of old age is charming but static.
Stealing Home (15 Warner Home Video 13 Oct), one of a cycle of baseball stories, gets lost in a maze of flashbacks, as the self-regarding Mark Harmon returns home and scores home runs.
Jodie Foster, fresh from her triumphs in The Accused (released on video last month), is the only reason to bother, as with Five Corners (15 Pathe 13 Oct), where she is almost raped again and is carted about, unconscious, by a psychopath.
Punchline (PG RCA/Col 20 Oct) fails to convince that either Tom Hanks or Sally Field, who idolises but won't love him, are natural stand-up comedians, and the general standard of jokes is pretty thin all round.
However, Hanks's ‘Singin' In The Rain’ routine is brilliant.
Billy The Kid (15 Turner Home Entertainment 19 Oct), called on the titles ‘Gore Vidal's Billy The Kid’ because the novelist wrote the script, must be the twentieth remake of this particular story.
It has gone straight to video despite being promoted with a National Film Theatre lecture on 29 October.
Frankly, it is hard to see what Vidal has brought to the familiar myth, most recently remade as Young Guns.
In the name part, however, Val Kilmer is charismatic.
DOA (15 Buena Vista 12 Oct) is another remake, this time of a 1949 film noir, starting well as Dennis Quaid discovers he has been poisoned and will die within 24 hours: the initials stand for Dead On Arrival.
Unfortunately, it soon degenerates into an unconvincing whodunit.
Despite a large helping of hokum, Warlock (15 Medusa 18 Oct) makes the supernatural transition from 1691 to 1988 fairly successfully and with a touch or two of knowing humour.
To cast Julian Sands from A Room With A View and Richard E. Grant from How To Get Ahead In Advertising as a male witch and his pursuer shows a certain imagination, even if the whole affair is complete nonsense.
The only strength of Farewell To The King (PG Vestron 18 Oct), its exotic Borneo scenery, is lost on the small screen; the rest is mumbo-jumbo about leadership and how the egregious Nick Nolte achieved the position of chief to the savages.
Tequila Sunrise (Warner Home Video 13 Oct) is a dull thriller with the over-rated Mel Gibson and Kurt Russell as friendly enemies and Michelle Pfeiffer as an unconvincing restaurateuse.
The House On Carroll Street (PG Virgin Video PG) Kelly McGillis, blackballed by McCarthy, takes the job of reading to an elderly woman; across the garden is a dark old house whose mysterious goings-on intrigue her.
With the help of the unattractive Jeff Daniels as an FBI agent assigned to watch her, she solves the mystery, culminating in a sub-Hitchcockian chase over Grand Central Station's roof.
TICKET OFFER /Caught in the spider's web: From the Amnesty International Film Week in Bristol
By JAMES RAMPTON
THE Amnesty International Film Week ‘89 at the Watershed, Canons Rd, Bristol (0272-276444) presents a screening of Hector Babenco's gripping picture of life in a nameless Latin American jail, Kiss Of The Spiderwoman, with the Oscar-winning William Hurt (above) and Raul Julia, tonight at 6pm.
After the film, there will be a discussion on the ‘disappearances’, the extra-judicial killings of individuals by the state in Latin America, chaired by Dawn Primorolo, Labour MP for Bristol South and Chilean expert.
The panel will include: The Observer's Latin American specialist Hugh O'Shaugnessy; Chilean refugee, Helia Lopez, whose brother-in-law joined the ranks of the ‘disappeared’ in 1973; and Andy McEntee, who is secretary of the Chilean Committee for Human Rights.
The Independent has five pairs of free tickets to offer for this stimulating event, available to the first five readers to present this page at the Watershed Box Office from 10am this morning.
INTERVIEW /The merchant's tale: Playwright Arnold Wesker tells Paul Arnott about the latest production of his jinxed Shylock
By PAUL ARNOTT
‘If I had been able to run my own theatre, like Alan Ayckbourn or Neil Simon, I would definitely have directed all my plays myself.
I can't bear being dependent upon other people.
It has been the biggest frustration of my career.’
So spoke Arnold Wesker at the Riverside Studios where, next week, he will take the unusual step of mounting eight rehearsed readings of his play, Shylock, formerly titled The Merchant, in a bid to raise enough interest from commercial backers to persuade them to mount a full production.
For Wesker, the fortunes of Shylock have been all too typical of a career plagued by bad luck which has left him with a sizeable canon of rarely performed work.
He is perfectly earnest when he says, ‘I feel that the people who run the big national companies are in my way.
They are the guardians of a door of a house that belongs to me.
I think it genuinely irresponsible that someone with my theatrical track-record has written a play about this internationally known theatrical figure yet it has only been seen by a few people.’
The story of Shylock began with its premiere at the Royal Dramatic Theatre, Stockholm in 1976 from where it was picked up by Broadway producers for a full-scale run starring Zero Mostel.
However, on the pre-Broadway run in Philadelphia, Mostel fell ill and died after only one performance.
Thereafter the play received a few critically acclaimed performances in Birmingham but has otherwise been unperformed in this country.
An article in the Jewish Chronicle last year, in which Wesker wrote that all he wanted was enough money to give the play a chance to be seen in London led to a benefactor, who wishes to remain anonymous, phoning him up and offering to underwrite the venture to the tune of £13,500.
Another £7,000 followed and Wesker was ready to mount the readings.
To understand Wesker's determination to see Shylock produced it is salutary to consider his views about Shakespeare's The Merchant Of Venice.
‘When I saw Dustin Hoffman in Peter Hall's production, which was strong and clean, I thought that the strength of the production showed up what an awful play it is.
Everyone is unpleasant.
Who are Lorenzo, Bassanio, Antonio?
None of these characters has any interesting or redeeming features.
The Jew is nothing more than a popular villain (bear in mind that Marlowe had just had a success with The Jew Of Malta).
The play was a brilliant pot-boiler which has been reinforcing the Jewish sterotype ever since.
Hoffman was good, but I think he'd be more interested in playing my Shylock.’
Although Wesker expresses the utmost admiration for Shakespeare, he was determined to write an original work which would change people's perception and create a new Shylock.
Of Shakespeare he says, ‘Being a great poet the lines just tumbled out of him, and, like the whore an artist sometimes is, he distributes his favours to undeserving characters.
It is not an anti-semitic play.
Rather, its impact inflames anti-semitism.’
Wesker might be accused of being somewhat subjective about the play, a charge that may be repeated as the producer of his own work.
‘I think that this argument about objectivity is nonsense.
As the director I have the big advantage that I know all the melodies.
I do, however, keep giving the actors directions which belong to a five-week rehearsal period and then have to tell them to forget what I've just said.
It is difficult, to remember that what we are presenting here is an entertaining rehearsed reading rather than a full-scale production.’
This is a very different Wesker to the public socialist, the man who has been a regular correspondent in newspaper letters pages on major public issues.
He is aware that what he is involved in now is nothing less than Thatcherite self-help.
He also confesses that, in short bursts, the role of theatrical entrepreneur excites him.
For this production he believes that he has found the Shylock to replace Zero Mostel.
Oded Teomi, one of Israel's leading actors was seen by Wesker in a one-man show.
‘I think that he is an actor of international standing and if the production is taken up I want him to stay with it.
I like the idea of my shows making stars.
Joan Plowright was made by Roots and Frank Finlay by Chips With Everything.’
Unfortunately, Wesker was struck by another (albeit minor) disaster: Teomi was not able to attend the first day of rehearsals because Wesker had forgotten, when writing his schedule, that it was also Yom Kippur.
‘I blush, I blush.’
1958 John Dexter produces Chicken Soup and Barley at the Belgrade, Coventry 1959 Dexter directs Roots.
1960 The Wesker Trilogy, The Kitchen, Chicken Soup and I'm Talking About Jerusalem open to great acclaim at the Royal Court.
Over 350,000 copies of the trilogy have been sold and the hardback is now in its fifth reprint.
1961-1970 Artistic director of Centre 42, a cultural movement for popularising the arts primarily through trade-union support.
1972 The Old Ones.
Controversial clash with the RSC begins over Wesker's play, The Journalists, which is cancelled after an actors' rebellion.
Financial settlement is only reached seven years later.
1975 Shylock, then known as The Merchant, is first produced.
Stage News
By PAUL ARNOTT
As the Conservative Party wends its way home from Blackpool next weekend, another conference will be warming up in London at the Almeida Theatre on 15 Oct entitled, Subsidy, Sponsorship Or What?
The subject under discussion is that old chestnut, public or private financing of the arts, but there is a particularly exciting line-up of speakers to chew the cud.
Terry Hands, retiring director of the RSC, will be facing up to Douglas Mason of the Adam Smith Institute, whose Expounding The Arts has been one of the most interesting discussion documents of recent years.
Thomas Sutcliffe, Arts Editor of The Independent, will be chairing the debate which will be thrown open to an audience including Ian McKellen, David Puttnam and Ned Sherrin.
John Sessions (above) will open the afternoon with a specially written piece on this contentious subject.
The debate begins at 3.00 and tickets are available from the Almeida box office on 01-359 4404.
Tickets are priced £3.50, £2.50 concs.
One man who could have a busy day on Sunday if he drops in on the above conference will be Michael Billington, the theatre critic of The Guardian.
Later that day, 15 Oct, at The Questors Theatre in Ealing, he will be the guest of honour at a fund-raising event for the Questors in which we are promised the opportunity to ‘find out what makes a critic, what are his prejudices and his preferences, and what are his fears and hopes for British (and world) theatre.’
The evening begins at 7.45 and tickets, priced £3, are available from the Questors, 01-567 5184.
London does not have a monopoly on chat this Sunday, however.
At the ever active Theatre Royal, Plymouth, there is a day-long workshop looking into the history of the musical.
The Art Of The Musical will be led by the artistic director, Roger Redfarn and will explore the contention that, although America is thought of as the home of the musical, the Brits have been busy in the Eighties conquering Broadway.
But are the new musicals any good?
Tickets are available from the Plymouth Theatre Royal on 0752-669595.
If you can't make it to Plymouth, you can check out their own latest musical production, Buddy, which is playing in preview at London's Victoria Place.
Buddy tickets 01-834 1317.
THEATRE /Paradise Now And Then — Drill Hall, WC1
By HELEN ROSE
Stonewalls, Judy Garland, Hair, Vietnam, the Summer of ‘69 — Noel Greig's retrospective on a particular period in Gay history loosely ties together snapshot scenes from the past with episodes from the present and links the whole with a curious blend of choral music which is part protest song, part hymn.
The play takes place on two sides of the Atlantic and deals with two sides of a story.
Why did a young black American idealist leave his British lover to fight the Vietnam war?
Greig explores the way in which people choose to remember the past through the reactions of the boy's sister (her angry rejection), the boy's lover (her confused sadness), and the impartial perspective of a young girl's view from 1989.
To be able to live fully in the here and now one must first learn how to honour the past, appears to be the message.
But it is buried in the indigestible and clumsy structure of Greig's play.
And really, it is surprising that a company such as Gay Sweatshop still finds a need to have a dyke in a dress suit and a queen in a fluffy frock bitching over a Judy Garland album.
Richard Coles (of The Communards) has written an insipid score and Paul Heritage's stilted direction is confined to a foursquare stage.
THEATRE /The Eight O'Clock News — Riverside, W6.
By LYDIA CONWAY
Like a best-man's speech, Edward Petherbridge's The Eight O'Clock News is an anecdotal monologue, often rambling, occasionally funny and inevitably far too long.
Offering us ‘the entire history of World Theatre’, a kind of pop-up guide to the theatrical imagination, he artfully avoids dry chronology, beginning instead with the modern, virtuoso excesses of Simon Callow, reaching Shakespeare through Jane Austen's observations of Edmund Kean, and the Greeks via puppetry.
In illustrating Voice through a recording of Beerbohm Tree's lament over the body of Julius Caesar, or Walks and Exits as passed down to him by Esme Church, Petherbridge conjures up a strong, if erratic, sense of theatrical tradition.
It is, however, by drawing on his own past performances, from Aldwych farce to Newman Noggs, from Volpone to Vershinin, that he gives real substance to the evening.
Dressed in white tie, his delivery is conversational and informal, but, to sustain the illusion that he is making it all up as he goes along (it is in fact directed by Peter Barkworth), he launches into too many rambling sidetracks.
The result is neither comprehensive enough to inform nor selective enough to fully entertain.