

Graduate Careers: The closing of the jobs gap between universities and polys: Unemployment rates for polytechnic graduates fell dramatically last year, Peter Wilby reports.
But the real test will be how they fare in an economic recession
By PETER WILBY
ARE EMPLOYERS looking more favourably on polytechnic graduates?
For years, unemployment rates among poly graduates, six months after finishing, have been higher than those among comparable university graduates.
There are various explanations.
One is that personnel officers, themselves often educated at universities, are simply prejudiced against the polys; another, which can be supported by reference to A-level qualifications, is that universities recruit a superior class of student.
A third view is that the proportion of students going into permanent employment is what really counts and, here, the polys at least hold their own.
The figures for 1988 graduates suggest that the polys are still poor relations.
In 19 out of the 24 subjects in the table (right), their graduates are more likely to be unemployed or to be in short-term employment only.
But there is some evidence that the gap is closing.
Overall, the poly graduate unemployment rate (excluding short-term employment) was down from 9.2 per cent to 6.9 per cent, bringing it closer than ever before to the university unemployment rate, which was 5.3 per cent in 1988.
Further, the table reveals 10 subjects where the university jobless rate (this time including short-term employment) has risen or stayed the same while the poly rate has fallen.
The reverse is true in only four subjects.
In 13 subjects, proportionately more poly than university graduates are going directly into permanent employment; in another four, there is no significant difference.
Before the polys uncork the champagne, it should be added that it is always dangerous to infer a trend from one year's figures.
This time last year, I was reporting that the gap between the two sectors of higher education was widening.
In eight subjects, poly unemployment rates had risen while university rates had fallen; the reverse was true in only three subjects.
In some areas (such as psychology), the figures bobble about for no apparent reason.
The real test for the polys will be what happens if the economy goes into recession, as it may next year, and unemployment rises again.
Will employers make their main cuts in recruitment of poly graduates?
If the polys are indeed achieving the parity of esteem they have long sought, their graduates' relative position during the next recession should prove better than it was during the early 1980s.
So what are the conclusions for prospective students, now completing the entry forms?
First, it must always be emphasised that long-term graduate unemployment is extremely rare.
Unemployment or short-term employment immediately after graduation is largely a reflection of the time that graduates take to find the right openings.
The rates should not be compared with those for, say, 16-year-old school-leavers; what we are really measuring is difficulty in finding a graduate-level job, not difficulty in finding a job of any sort.
Second, the subject you study is far more important than where you study it.
A sociology graduate, whether from a university or polytechnic, is 10 times more likely to be unemployed or in short-term employment than a building, pharmacy or civil engineering graduate.
There is no subject where attending a polytechnic increases the statistical likelihood of being unemployed by more than three or four times.
Choice of a particular university or polytechnic makes even less difference.
If you take the crude figures, the differences between universities look dramatic.
Over the three years, 1986-8, 7.3 per cent of Aston's graduates were unemployed or in temporary employment six months after graduation; at Sussex, 13.5 per cent.
Yet, according to calculations by the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, the two universities performed much as expected, given their subject mix.
The committee calculated, for each university, the unemployment rate expected if the fate of graduates in each subject had conformed to national averages.
It compared this expectation with the actual unemployment rate.
Unemployment was higher than expected by 3 per cent or more at Ulster (5.5), Liverpool and Queen Mary College, London (both 4.8), East Anglia (3.4) and Sheffield, Aberystwyth and the London School of Economics (all 3.2).
Other universities where unemployment was higher than expected included Stirling (2.8) and University College London (2.5).
Education: How politicking has split the vice-chancellors: The students' fees campaign has exposed differences between university leaders, Ngaio Crequer says
By NGAIO CREQUER
VICE-CHANCELLORS are not normally known for their speed of action and this is how it should be: universities are reflective, discursive communities.
But on the question of private tuition fees they are moving with remarkable alacrity.
Although the question of fees was billed at their recent Leeds meeting as only one of the options to be pursued in funding the doubling of student numbers, a political campaign to promote the acceptance of fees has quickly got underway.
A leaflet headed The Case for Charging Full Cost Fees, with the sub-heading Why this is felt to be necessary, has been dished out at the party political conferences.
It says vice-chancellors believe this Government, any government, will not fund expansion.
It quotes John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education, in support, and John Smith, the Shadow Chancellor, as saying: ‘We cannot spend what we have not earned and we intend to earn it before we spend it.’
It does not quote Jack Straw, the Labour education spokesman, who is opposed to private tuition fees.
It is nifty footwork.
What has not yet been made clear is that the vice-chancellors are seriously split over the issue and some are expressing grave misgivings over the direction being taken.
Dr Clark Brundin of Warwick University said: ‘We did not say at our meeting in Leeds — and this is where we have shot ourselves in the foot — that no government is going to meet the cost of higher education.
We did not accept that.
I have never accepted that.
‘The really worrying thing is that higher education is being regarded as a commodity for sale rather than something that we should invest in.
We did not talk about ‘Robin Hood’ schemes, not at all.
We discussed how to identify the full costs of courses, and the mechanisms by which funding could flow, which could include funds through students, but we did not rule out all of this being government money.
‘One of the things I thought we did agree was that we should not do the Government's dirty work for them.
Our job is to say what higher education costs.
It is not for us to make political decisions.
My job is to ensure my institution is adequately funded.
It is for government to say it will not fund us adequately, not for us to go round saying it rather like a lot of sheep.
‘There are undoubtedly people around who would like to bounce things in that direction (towards fees).’
Berrick Saul, vice-chancellor of York University, is also unhappy.
‘A lot of people think it is the Secretary of State's problem to provide the funding.
It is not for us to say we are going to do it.
The impression has been created that we want to charge fees.
It has put us in the position of villains, whereas the Secretary of State is the villain because he will not pay.
‘I do not see how you can expand access by any means other than the Government paying.
If you charge students, they will not come.
If you are going to double student numbers, then the extra students are going to come from lower-income families and they will need a full grant.
‘We should be saying to the Secretary of State: ‘If you want fees say so, go to the electorate and ask them.’
This is a political question and now is a good time to start pushing the Government.’
Ken Edwards, vice-chancellor of Leicester University, voted against the proposal to investigate the fees option.
‘This is a very serious question about the methods of funding the expansion of higher education and to say that we are seriously interested in the proposal that fees should be charged at full cost is not going to increase or widen access.
‘We are in danger of taking a political decision.
The way it should be funded is a matter for governments to decide.
I do not see how expansion could happen without a substantial increase in government funding.
‘Any other scheme could lead to great difficulties of inequality and make it harder to recruit from those groups we need to reach.’
He said that a number of vice-chancellors see the fees scheme as a way of getting the Government off the universities' backs, giving them freedom from detailed control.
He is not persuaded that this would be the effect.
Lord Flowers, vice-chancellor of London University, says the vice-chancellers are prepared to discuss funding mechanisms with the Government, but must make the point that they will not accept under-funding of the universities.
Identifying the full cost of courses makes it clear to the voter where the funding gap is.
‘I no longer want full government funding from a government that is going to be dictatorial as hell, which is not to say I would not prefer it under a government of a different kind.’
The vice-chancellors committee wants to consult polytechnic directors and the Government about ‘how a full cost system might work’, recognising that it will need help to ensure that any changes, if made, increase opportunities and avoid hardship.
Education Update: Poor recruiting by employers
By NGAIO CREQUER
POOR standards of schooling are a frequent employers' complaint.
But heads and teachers complain just as much about low standards among employers.
A survey of 140 heads, deputies and careers teachers by a marketing consultancy found that 54 per cent thought that businesses went about recruiting school-leavers ‘not very well’ or ‘very badly’.
One head said: ‘Careers officers and pupils have to do all the work…
Most companies have a lackadaisical approach to recruitment — as if they're doing us a great favour.’
Only 37 per cent agreed that employers handled applications efficiently and fairly against nearly 70 per cent who thought that universities and polytechnics did so.
‘They take so long to get back to pupils,’ was one comment.
‘Sometimes they don't answer at all unless nagged into it.’
Another head said: ‘It's more than rude, it's disruptive.’
Education Update: College for the over-50s
By NGAIO CREQUER
PEOPLE OVER 50 who have not previously had any further or higher education should be entitled to spend a year at college, with their fees and maintenance paid by the state, a new pamphlet argues.
Tom Schuller, senior lecturer in continuing education at Warwick University, says that this ‘third-age entitlement’ would enable the over-50s to switch careers, to continue working longer and to preserve their independence.
Costs would be limited by keeping the offer open only until 1995 and by using a means test.
Full entitlement to fees and maintenance could be offered to those on a basic income level; 25 per cent to those earning, say, £12-£15,000 a year, and nothing to those with higher incomes.
Mr Schuller argues that costs would be offset by the increased economic activity of older people and by the reduction in social dependency.
It costs the taxpayer £130-£165 a week to keep someone in a residential or nursing home, he says.
Education Viewpoint: Hands-off stance on teacher quality
By PETER WILBY
I CAN still remember the overpowering smell of alcohol on his breath.
As I passed the hall in a large comprehensive school, where notices proclaimed ‘Quiet please: examination in progress’, the invigilator, a geography teacher, staggered out to engage me in slurred discussion of educational issues.
Since the man was in this incapable state most afternoons, the head rightly wanted to be rid of him.
It took three years, and the man was backed every inch of the way by his union.
Another head recently told me of a teacher who had been in the habit of twanging the sixth-form girls' bra straps.
After repeated complaints, the head attempted to lodge a final warning on his record.
This was unfair, the union protested.
The man had been trained in the 1950s when the ‘tactile’ approach to teaching was favoured.
He could not help touching the pupils; extensive re-training was required.
A system of teacher appraisal, of the sort proposed in a report from a national steering group last week, would not have helped in either of these cases.
First things first: schools still need a speedy mechanism for getting rid of those guilty of gross misconduct, negligence and incompetence.
Such teachers are a tiny minority; colleagues, parents and pupils know perfectly well who they are.
The steering group proposed ‘a biennial cycle’, involving an initial appraiser/appraisee meeting, self-appraisal, collection of data, target setting, follow-up discussions and a formal review meeting.
You do not need all this to establish that a man is drunk or that there is mayhem when he is in charge of a class.
So appraisal has, or should have nothing to do with what the tabloid press likes to call ‘weeding out’.
It is, nevertheless, fundamental to a sound education system.
The steering group's proposals may seem a touch elaborate but, for two reasons, appraisal in education is bound to be more complex than in other areas of life.
First, most companies devote resources to quality control and product testing.
Apart from crude measures of test and exam results, schools have no equivalent; appraisal of what happens in classrooms must include some of the quality-control functions.
Second, most other businesses have simple objectives; schools have a multiplicity of aims.
The decision by John MacGregor, the Secretary of State for Education, to delay introduction of a national appraisal scheme is therefore singularly perverse.
A ridiculously complicated national curriculum and assessment system; new budgetary arrangements; records of the time that pupils spend on different subjects — with all these and more, schools must press ahead without delay.
But, when there is a development that might improve the quality of teaching and learning in classrooms — and one, moreover, on which unions and employers are agreed — ministers suddenly recognise that schools are overloaded.
Or so they say.
I suspect that other considerations are in Mr MacGregor's mind: appraisal would require the equivalent of an extra 1,828 full-time teachers, according to the steering group, and a total cost of £36-£40m — or 0.5 per cent of the annual teachers' salary bill.
The national curriculum and its tests are also expensive: but appraisal does not somehow have the same political glamour as announcing that children must learn the facts about British history or correct grammar.
The biggest danger of Mr MacGregor's decision is that he perpetuates a system that fails to reward good classroom teaching.
At present, promotion decisions in teaching are based on evidence from bland references, stilted interviews and lists of in-service training courses attended.
Information on a teacher's classroom ability is almost entirely lacking.
In future, no doubt, interviewers will look at test scores attained by teachers' pupils and every school governing body will have a statistician capable of producing appropriate graphs.
Mr MacGregor will then have created the worst of all worlds.
Education: A broader base for the A-team: Hilary Wilce looks at the pressures for change in traditional sixth form studies and examinations
By HILARY WILCE
CAROL HAMMERTON is a sixth form pioneer.
She has just started at Luton Sixth Form College, in Bedfordshire, but she has picked a more varied menu than the traditional sixth form diet of three A-levels.
As well as A-level history and English, she is studying French and performing arts for AS (half an A) exams and psychology for GCSE.
‘I wanted to be a primary teacher, and you have to teach so many different things at that level that it seemed better to study a broader range of subjects,’ she says.
Joanna Kemp, also at Luton, is taking A-level music and English, and AS-level courses in psychology, music and drama, not because she knows what she wants to do, but because she doesn't.
‘There are so many different subjects, it seemed pointless narrowing myself down at this stage.
And they tell you that two AS-levels are equal to an A-level when it comes to applying for university places.’
For years, people have been calling for sixth form studies to be broadened and updated, but now the pressures for change have become urgent.
For one thing, teaching and examination styles have changed dramatically lower down the school system.
‘Our biggest problem with A-levels is that they have not been modified in the light of the GCSE,’ says Brian Howseman, principal of Luton Sixth Form College.
‘In some areas we have had to put on special courses to prepare students for A-level.’
Since the GCSE was introduced, Luton's intake of A-level students has risen.
It took in 400 last year, 500 this; other colleges and schools also report big increases.
The GCSE, which stresses individual initiative and competence, has boosted students' confidence and encouraged their interest in learning.
But the next exam on the educational ladder lays emphasis on what people know, rather than what they can do, and is seen primarily as a passport to university entry.
Many subjects are still examined by a single pass-or-fail hurdle at the end of a two-year course, and the failure rate is around 30 per cent.
‘A-levels have a very high standard, but these standards are protected by failure,’ says Professor Alan Smithers, professor of education at Manchester University.
‘Many spend two years in the sixth form and get nothing at all, and it is hard for people who get a low grade at A-level to realise they have actually done very well.’
The A-level system is also creaking under pressures from above.
Universities and colleges are looking to expand their intakes, but are drawing on a shrinking population of 18-year-olds.
Increasingly, they are taking students with non A-level qualifications and finding that many of them perform superbly.
The glitter of A-levels in today's broader, more diverse, degree market is starting to tarnish, and is unlikely ever to be restored to its former glory.
A further problem with A-levels is the narrowness they impose on students.
Our high-flying 18-year-olds are superbly grounded in their specialist areas, compared to their counterparts in other Western countries, but we seem incapable of producing engineers with a fluent second language, or historians who understand information technology.
The Government's answer has been to introduce AS-levels, equivalent to half an A-level syllabus, designed to encourage sixth formers to take a broader range of subjects.
But parents and pupils are suspicious of the new exam, and the early indications are that, in many places, AS-levels are being mis-used as trial-run A-levels.
So the time is ripe for a major overhaul of the sixth form.
But A-levels are much admired for their depth and rigour.
Attempts to change the system — and there have been many — have always foundered on an unwillingness to abandon the gold standard of British education.
The latest, a Government-sponsored inquiry by Professor Gordon Higginson, vice-chancellor of Southampton University, concluded there were far too many A-level syllabuses, and that they were stuffed too full with information.
Students should take five tougher, leaner A-levels, he said.
The plan drew wide support from schools, universities and industry, but was turned down flat by the Department of Education, apparently on instructions from Downing Street.
However, the proposals, kicked out of the front door last year, are now coming in through the back.
This summer the Government accepted recommendations from its Secondary Examinations and Assessment Council to put A and AS-levels into a clear, common framework and to look to further ways of updating and broadening sixth form studies.
‘They have in fact taken a big step towards our recommendations,’ says Professor Higginson.
‘Many very significant aspects of our proposals are being implemented, like the need to set down a number of general principles, and to tighten up syllabuses.’
In practice, many A-level syllabuses have already changed beyond recognition.
‘The education system is very good at subverting things that are pushed onto it,’ says Brian Howseman.
‘It has already found numerous ways of making changes at A-level acceptable.
There is a lot of teacher input into the examination boards, and all sorts of moves towards introducing more course work, and more practical elements into the syllabuses.’
Barry Gore, head of economics and business studies at Luton, points out that all business studies candidates have to undertake an extended case study.
‘A-levels now test a huge range of skills, not just knowledge.
There are practical assessments, orals and so on.
We've come a long, long way in just five years.’
But they, and others, believe there is room to go much further.
John Millington, principal training adviser for the Engineering Industry Training Board, says employers would like to see the present system streamlined, with fewer syllabuses and more emphasis on assessing a wider range of skills.
But, he adds: ‘There is an enormous advantage in building change on to something that is already known and respected.
Far better to take what is, and bring in progressive changes, than to radically alter the whole thing.’
Schools, too, see that change has to come.
‘Only 11 per cent of the country's 18-year-olds pass three A-levels,’ says Michael Duffy, head of the King Edward VI School, in Morpeth, Northumberland.
‘Schools have been dealing in failure too long, and with the demographic and consumer pressures the present system is simply no longer viable.
But in the short-term AS-levels are the only instrument we've got for change.’
Like many others in education, he would like to see a structure that meets the needs of all 16-to 19-year-olds by bringing together the academic A-level syllabuses, with all the various vocational courses, into a common system.
This would allow students to build up their qualifications by taking a variety of units, or modules.
However, the practical problems of matching up hugely varying exams, at different levels, in a vast variety of subjects, while also paying due respect to the inevitable sectional interests and sensitivities, seem almost insurmountable.
But Professor Smithers argues: ‘It's perfectly possible, especially now we've got all the experiences of devising a national curriculum and of working out key stages and ways of testing them.
If people want it enough, they can do it.’