

Stuck fast in the mire: Ford's at Dagenham may now be in a state of terminal decline.
Michael Harrison, our Industrial Editor, contrasts its performance with that of its foreign counterparts
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
FORD'S ageing and ramshackle Dagenham site in Essex, once the jewel in the company's overseas operations, enters the 1990s with its very survival uncertain.
The plant now dubiously boasts the poorest levels of productivity, quality and working conditions of any Ford factory in Europe.
Unless it can effect a remarkable recovery, the factory may well disappear back into the bleak and sodden marshes of Essex from which it emerged nearly 60 years ago.
The evidence of Dagenham's predicament can be gauged from internal company documents which illustrate graphically the task confronting Ford and its workforce.
These show that it takes Dagenham nearly twice as long to produce a Sierra car as it does Ford's Genk plant in Belgium.
The picture is similar when Fiesta production is compared at Dagenham and Valencia.
The British plant takes 53 hours to turn out each car, the Spanish factory 30 hours.
Product quality at the Essex factory is also inferior, measured against any index, whether it be ratings out of 10, defects per vehicle or warranty costs on each car leaving the factory gate.
The Dagenham workforce would argue that there are good reasons why the ageing plant cannot match the performance of its modern Continental rivals.
However, the documents also show that Dagenham's car body and assembly operations are failing to meet even its own internal targets.
In 1988 the plant was scheduled to produce 992 cars a day.
It actually achieved 861 — a shortfall of 13 per cent.
The only consolation was that this was a slight improvement on 1987 when Dagenham fell 14 per cent short of target.
Dagenham, which is currently scheduled to produce 1,100 cars a day, is one of the few Ford plants in Europe where output is not planned to increase.
At Genk it will rise by 400 cars a day, at Halewood on Merseyside and at Valencia by 150, and at Cologne in West Germany by 50.
At Dagenham it will remain static.
With its 14,000 workers, Dagenham may still be the company's biggest centre of employment in the UK, it may have produced more than 10 million vehicles in the last 60 years and its name may be inseparable from Ford of Britain.
But unless quality and productivity can be improved in leaps and bounds by the early 1990s, then Dagenham is unlikely to have a future as a car production plant.
Executives at the Ford of Britain headquarters at Brentwood in Essex have undoubtedly already looked into the future and examined what would happen if car production were to end at Dagenham.
In Ford-speak, these are called ‘I wonder’ exercises.
The political ramifications of shutting Dagenham would be immense.
The omens, however, are not promising.
Ford has already announced that production of the Sierra — one of its most profitable and best-selling cars -will end at Dagenham next summer and be switched to Genk, leaving the Essex plant with only production of the new Fiesta.
Union observers believe that unless Dagenham can be transformed by 1994 into an efficient, viable plant then it will not be selected for another new model.
‘When the decision was announced to end Sierra production it was tantamount to a five-year death sentence,’ one said.
The reasons why Dagenham performs so poorly are complex and partly historical.
The site was designed to be a mirror-image of Ford's main US plant.
When it opened in 1931, erected on 22,000 concrete piles to lift it clear of the water-sodden ground, it already sported its own blast furnace, foundry, jetty and power station.
Special trains were chartered to transport 2,000 employees and their families down to the gleaming new plant from Ford's Trafford Park factory in Manchester which was in the process of closing.
In its first year Dagenham produced 25,571 cars and trucks but as Ford's presence in the UK grew, extension after extension was tacked on to the plant to accomodate tractor and commercial vehicle production, new foundries, paint shops, furnaces and export packing plants.
By 1959, the 1.7-square mile site had become a small industrial town in its own right and production peaked at 470,000 cars, trucks and tractors.
In the early 1960s, all that began to change, however.
A new £30m car plant opened at Halewood on Merseyside in 1963.
Production of tractors and trucks was transferred elsewhere and, much later, engine production was largely relocated to South Wales.
Ford was left with a huge, sprawling, under-used mess at Dagenham.
Yet, ironically, car production today is still being crammed into a pint pot.
Halewood produces only one car, the Escort/Orion range, against Dagenham's two models and yet it has 20,000 more square feet of storage space.
Similarly the production area at the Saarlouis plant in Germany, another single-model plant, is 10 per cent bigger than at Dagenham.
The result is that Dagenham is a cramped, unpleasant and inefficient place to work.
Lack of space, for instance, has prevented Ford from building locker facilities — meaning that some shop-floor workers still have to change their clothes at the side of the production line.
Nor is there enough space at the side of the production lines to stock components.
Thousands of boxes of parts arrive at the assembly line every week to be emptied and then simply discarded in a corner because Dagenham is not geared to what the modern motor industry calls ‘just-in-time’ delivery.
‘The place is like a pigsty,’ said one union source.
The fact that Dagenham currently produces two cars makes the operation of the plant even more chaotic.
Nearly 7,000 different parts flood into Dagenham for assembly of the Sierra and Fiesta — 50 per cent more than at Halewood or Saarlouis.
Since 1984 Dagenham has had to cope with double the number of product changes at Halewood.
The senior management of Ford recognises and accepts all these shortcomings.
Its answer has been to reduce Dagenham to a single-product plant.
The solution the unions and workforce prefer is increased investment to overcome the numerous production bottlenecks at Dagenham.
In the next two to three years Ford intends to spend £105m on the body and assembly lines at Dagenham, modernising the press shop and paint line, upgrading computer-aided facilities in the toolroom and streamlining the trim and final assembly lines.
As part of a £60m investment programme, Ford also intends to begin production of a high-roof Fiesta van at Dagenham in 1991.
Output could eventually rise to 300 a day, making Dagenham the sole European source of the new van.
However, this is small beer set against the £1.8bn Ford has earmarked for investment in the UK between 1988 and 1993.
Dagenham's problems need to be viewed not just in the context of Ford but of the European motor industry as a whole.
Between 1984 and 1988 Ford's share of the European new car market fell from 13 per cent to 11.5 per cent, to leave it trailing Fiat, Volkswagen and Peugeot.
Of equal concern, the steady encroachment of the Japanese car industry into Europe is gathering pace.
By the latter part of the next decade, Nissan, Toyota and Honda could be producing nearly one million vehicles in the UK alone, according to some industry analysts.
Dagenham cannot match other Ford plants right now but its performance will appear even less satisfactory against the Japanese.
Last year the 8,500 workers in body and assembly produced just under 200,000 cars.
In 1993 Nissan's factory at Washington, Tyne and Wear, will produce the same number of cars with a total workforce, including white-collar, managerial and support staff of 3,800.
Such vast advantages in costs and production are a source of great concern to Ford management.
Although the long-term outlook for car manufacture at Dagenham may be uncertain, engine production there is more secure.
Ford has invested £157m to make Dagenham the sole European source for the new lean-burn 2-litre engine for the Sierra and Granada.
It also supplies all 1.6 and 1.8 diesel engines for Escorts, Orions and Fiestas as well as the 2.5 diesel engine for the Transit van, which is built in Southampton.
Dagenham produced a record number of engines last year.
However, if car assembly were to end then Dagenham's wheel plant might also disappear.
When Edward Grace, the Ford manager sent over to England in 1923 to find a production site, finally settled on Dagenham, paying £167,695 for the acreage, the choice came as a surprise to some people given the geological conditions.
Six years later when Henry Ford's son, Edsel, cut the first sod of earth on site with a silver spade, the site looked barely more promising.
Indeed, Ford's own potted history of Dagenham records that ‘some experts said it was unworkable’.
Dagenham's employees can only hope that Ford does not resurrect the phrase in the 1990s.
Sweet-talking greater output from car workers: Barrie Clement, Labour Editor, on a bid for more shopfloor commitment
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
IN THE words of Jimmy Airlie, a fiery Scotsman and a senior union negotiator at Ford, ‘you don't get owt for nowt’.
In a fortnight's time, when the company replies to a call for a substantial increase in pay and a reduction in the working week, John Hougham, personnel director, will probably throw that philosophy back at him.
The company realises that it will probably have to pitch the offer at or near 10 per cent.
But Mr Hougham will also try to attach some productivity strings to the deal in an effort to close the gap with the Japanese.
Since the 1970s, working practices have changed out of all recognition.
And where once union leaders talked of struggle and solidarity, now they speak of profitability and competitiveness.
The pressure to change emerged out of the recession in the early 1980s and the increasing incursion of the Japanese into world markets with productivity levels light years ahead of European competitors.
Ford management chalked up its most significant coup over working practices in 1985 when 500 job titles were reduced to 58.
An attempt to emulate such progress in 1987 ended in almost three months of wildcat action followed by a damaging two-week official strike.
As part of the 1987 pay deal, Mr Hougham had sought to win agreement for the introduction of temporary workers to cope with seasonal variation in demand, the establishment of quality discussion groups and moves to have skilled men working on the production line.
Ford — and indeed the unions — badly misjudged the mood of the workforce.
It was, to use another of Mr Airlie's aphorisms, ‘a bridge too far’.
Instead of a three-year deal the unions eventually signed a two-year agreement with a second year in which pay was increased by the inflation rate plus 2.5 per cent.
It gave the 33,000 manual workforce 8.9 per cent, which at the time was considerably higher than the ‘going rate’.
This year management will also be looking for concessions on working practices.
The company's strategy, according to Professor Garel Rhys, the industry's guru, will be one of gradualism.
A ‘drip feed rather than a torrent’, he says.
Management has decided that workers are still not ready to be pushed too far towards Japanese-style working methods, or as one assembly worker at Dagenham put it: ‘If they think I'm going to do physical jerks and sing the company song before I start my shift, they've got another think coming.’
The company has signalled its keenness to sign another two-year deal, and unions have indicated they might be prepared to accede, as long as there is an ‘inflation-plus’ element in the second year.
Workers are only too aware that Ford of Britain's pre-tax profits doubled to more than £673m in the last financial year and they feel they ought to share in its success.
No doubt the company will contend in negotiations that such a profit compared with the capital sums needed for investment is ‘peanuts’.
Ford's employees are also wont to point out that their mortgage payments have rocketed over the past year and negotiations will take place against a background in which interest rates seem to be moving in one direction only.
An attempt by Dagenham shop stewards to win the approval of colleagues from other plants to a South-east weighting to cope with higher living costs in the area and ease problems over recruitment and retention was rejected.
So far the company has not registered any enthusiasm for such a payment either.
This year's talks come in the wake of a regeneration among unions and a feeling that industrial action — following the rail strikes early in the summer — can pay.
It would be simplistic and indeed inaccurate, however, to ascribe a single ‘mood’ to the workforce, although industrial relations are considered generally to be good as memories of last year's conflict dim.
Workers at Halewood, particularly in the engine plant, have co-operated with management to give a productivity record comparable with any in Europe.
No longer does the complex have the reputation as a hotbed of Merseyside militancy.
The company's satisfaction with labour relations at Bridgend in South Wales must also have been a factor in the decision to build a £750m engine plant there.
Equally the problems at Dagenham may have influenced the decision to switch the Sierra away to Ford's Belgian plant at Genk even though the company's strategy is to concentrate a single model at each plant.
Union leaders were told recently that the Essex plant, which currently produces the Sierra and the Fiesta, was experiencing more stoppages than any of the company's plants in Europe and that quality levels were also the worst.
Most unrest at the plant takes the form of lightning stoppages of between 10 minutes and half an hour, often health and safety issues are cited as the cause or disciplinary matters.
Most of the stoppages have a negligible impact on output, but the cumulative effect, particularly in the body and assembly plants, is considerable.
Professor Rhys, of Cardiff Business School, points out that the Essex plant is in an area of low unemployment and that the same could not be said of the other big plants.
‘The reality is that workers at Dagenham can get jobs elsewhere and their colleagues at Halewood can't,’ said Professor Rhys.
He believes that training is insufficient at the plant and that morale is at a low ebb, largely because of the working environment and the ageing equipment.
This has spawned and sustained a shop stewards' movement reminiscent of the 1970s.
The far left is also being blamed for taking advantage of grievances.
Steve Hart, of the Transport and General Workers Union at Dagenham, believes the degree of unrest can be exaggerated.
‘There is a better atmosphere now than for many years — fewer stoppages, better relationships.
But we acknowledge that things aren't perfect and we are seeking to improve the situation.’
The threat to the plant's existence is being taken seriously by the unions even though the management denies any intention to close it.
Senior union leaders acknowledge privately that they have to win a hearts-and-minds campaign among their members.
Mr Hart believes there should be a more structured approach to problem-solving as there is at the Halewood plant.
Efforts are being made to improve the relationship between frontline managers and shop stewards and to evolve a system for dealing with disputes as and when they occur.
Nationally, the company has been attempting to win a higher degree of commitment from the workforce.
One such attempt is the £1.5m personal training and development scheme.
The programme offers evening classes in courses not related to the job and a range of health services.
The Employee Development and Assistance Programme, as it is called, is part of the campaign to win greater ‘employee involvement’.
Having burned their fingers two years ago, senior Ford executives will continue to press for change, but preferably not at the expense of another strike.
Or to use another of Mr Airlie's sayings: ‘You catch more flies with honey than with vinegar’.
End of the musical football manager: The megalomaniac conductor may finally have had his day, argues Fiona Maddocks
By FIONA MADDOCKS
AS THE dust settles on the surprising, but widely approved decision to appoint Claudio Abbado chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra to replace Karajan, a new round of speculation is about to begin.
Will the Italian Abbado remain musical director of the Vienna State Opera where he has been for the past three years?
If not, who will replace him?
Will any of those disappointed Berlin front-runners stand a chance, and who would replace them in their respective jobs if they go?
With the traditional rivalry which exists between Berlin and Vienna, such a tournament would be especially enthralling for spectators of the international music chess board.
The reality, however, is probably more prosaic.
Abbado has yet to confirm the terms of his Berlin contract.
The likelihood is that after such a short time in Vienna, he will stay on there, if with reduced involvement.
Some have suggested that his appointment at Berlin was the result of a compromise by the orchestra, an attempt to secure someone as far removed from Karajan in character, musical and personal, as the world could offer.
Whether or not this is so, few would deny that Abbado is a sound choice, a man of few words who nevertheless commands great respect among orchestral players and is as highly praised for his Rossini as for his Mahler, his Mozart or his Brian Ferneyhough.
Is it not time, though, to ask whether all this heady ferment over a mere conductor — Abbado or any other — has not got out of hand?
To suggest, sotto voce, that we may be in danger of inflating the man (woman, rarely) way out of proportion to the job itself?
For most listeners today, it is true, concerts are attended, records purchased, orchestras identified by the name of the conductor.
In discussing any of these we revert to foolish solecisms: ‘Rattle's Stravinsky’ or ‘Karajan's Missa Solennis’, or of ‘seeing Giulini conduct Verdi’.
Strictly speaking, this last description is accurate.
The conductor's role, after all, is silent.
The audience sits mesmerised by his expressive choreography, watching each inflection of the hand or eyebrow.
We almost convince ourselves that the music is created not by the orchestra but by the tip of the baton itself, rich sounds oozing out like some exotic genie.
Yet not so long ago orchestras managed perfectly happily without this apparently indispensable Merlin.
Like football managers, conductors are a phenomenon of the modern age.
The job hardly existed until a century ago, when orchestral works began to require such large forces that composers -Berlioz, Wagner or Mahler — resorted to doing the job themselves to ensure a modicum of accuracy (Haydn and Mozart, with their smaller orchestras, had managed effectively by waving a hand from the keyboard).
The conductor's earliest origins, though, were humble, his duties confined to banging time loudly with a stick — a sort of dull musical beadle.
So lowly, indeed, was the job that it was long considered too insignificant to warrant a credit on the programme.
The late Hans Keller, the most peppery and venerable writer on music since George Bernard Shaw, dearly wished that this were still the case.
He dismissed conducting as a phoney profession, responsible for turning players into mindless dependents, powerless without the hypnotic beat of a little white stick in front of them.
('You have to attain a high degree of musical stupidity in order to find watching the beat, or the conductor's inane face for that matter, easier for the purpose of knowing how or when to play than simply listening to the music,’ he argued.)
But in the twentieth century, conductors have replaced composers as the most influential people in musical life.
They determine repertoire, secure multi-million-pound recording contracts, hire and fire players.
Their whim can make or ruin a reputation.
Moreover, they interpret a piece of music and make it their own, even if they have never encountered the given orchestra until a few hours before.
Can any conductor, though, be said to have made the same impact on recent musical history as that made by Bach or Beethoven or Wagner in the past?
The short answer is no.
A more qualified response might be, yes, in various ways which collectively have shaped musical life as we know it.
The Berlin Philharmonic, founded in 1882, has grown up in tandem with the evolution of the star conductor.
Its most notable musical directors — Von Bulow, Richard Strauss (though primarily a composer), Nikisch, Furtwangler and Karajan — remain models on which subsequent conductors have based themselves.
Nikisch, for example, was among the first to perfect the technique (etiquette, mannerisms and devilish good looks included) of the ‘virtuoso conductor’; Furtwangler established a new and enduring tradition which transformed orchestral playing out of all recognition.
Other great names have played their part: Toscanini, the god-like showman, worked hard to popularise repertoire; Mengelburg, with the Amsterdam Concertgebouw, proved a gifted orchestral trainer.
Some, like Klemperer, have brought a knowledge of composing to the podium.
Recently, composer-conductors like Pierre Boulez or Oliver Knussen have cajoled orchestras into playing better than they ever knew how, by extending their technique, especially in contemporary repertoire.
Less high in the popularity-winning stakes, but ultimately more important for posterity, are those who have acted as patrons — either playing new works (Klemperer, Boult) or commissioning them.
How many, for example, have heard of the Swiss-born conductor Paul Sacher?
Yet he alone has been responsible for bringing about some of the seminal works of this century, Bartok's Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta among them.
Claudio Abbado already has a good record in many of these areas.
His instinctive methods, and his belief that the spontaneity of a performance, whatever went on in rehearsals, is of prime importance, keeps players on their toes.
His work with the youthful Chamber Orchestra of Europe confirms both a commitment to training and to performing new works.
Furthermore, his quiet, democratic manner gives no indication of harbouring an aspiring despot.
Nor would the Berlin Philharmonic welcome him if that were so.
Today, orchestral musicians wish to assert their identities again, to escape the thrall of the baton at last.
The conductor is now, without doubt, a permanent fixture in musical life.
But if players have their way, as they have in Berlin, the age of the megalomaniac conductor, the age of Karajan, may be over for ever.