

Prague dissident goes into hiding
From EDWARD LUCAS in Brno, Czechoslovakia
ONE OF Czechoslovakia's most prominent dissidents, Stanislav Devaty, has gone underground rather than face an appeal hearing which could have confirmed a 20-month jail sentence.
Mr Devaty, a former spokesman for the Charter 77 rights group and an associate of the dissident playwright, Vaclav Havel, is, like Mr Havel, one of four organisers of the ‘Several Sentences’ petition for political reform and liberalisation, which more than 30,000 people have signed since its launch in June.
Mr Devaty is one of the few dissidents who do not come from a Prague-based intellectual background.
His practice of hunger-striking when detained has attracted international attention and the displeasure of the authorities, and led to his release from custody earlier this year.
Mr Devaty was sentenced in August to 20 months in jail on charges of incitement connected with the petition.
Following the trial, the official news agency said he had ‘mendaciously accused the socialist state…of violating constitutional laws and international agreements’.
A bizarre aspect of the case is that Mr Devaty's ‘crimes’ include the apparently punishable offence of sending the authorities papers about their human rights abuses.
At yesterday's appeal hearing in Brno, a colleague of Mr Devaty, Jana Petrova, handed the judge a statement on his behalf which said that Mr Devaty did not regard his trial as just and would pursue his activities underground while the risk of punishment remained.
The judge postponed the hearing; Ms Petrova read the statement aloud outside the courtroom to cheers and applause from several dozen friends, including Vaclav Havel, who had attended the hearing with British and American diplomats and representatives of Amnesty International and the official Czechoslovak Committee on Human Rights.
Mr Havel was one of a handful of people who knew of Mr Devaty's decision in advance.
He told The Independent: ‘It's an experiment…and very respectable.
We shall see what will happen later…until now nobody has tried such a method.’
Although the opposition has no experience of sheltering such a prominent figure underground, Mr Devaty's move appears to have caught by surprise not only his friends, but the country's creaky legal machinery, and it may be some time before his non-appearance prompts a full-scale police hunt for him.
The wife of the detained dissident, Sasha Vondra, said yesterday that she had had no news of her husband for three weeks.
Tax inspectors' strike may hold up Beaujolais
From PATRICK MARNHAM in Paris
A STRIKE by French tax officials for more pay is threatening early sales of this year's wine harvest, including the Beaujolais Nouveau.
The taxmen, who are among the most efficient and unpopular figures in France, have been engaged in various forms of industrial action for 19 weeks.
But only now are the effects becoming apparent.
Among innumerable other tasks they are responsible for stamping the lead or paper seals which enclose wine bottle corks.
Until these are stamped as ‘duty paid’ the wine cannot be sold.
Pre-Christmas sales of this year's vintage — wine known as nouveau or primeur — from many parts of France are due to start in November.
But an enormous backlog of untaxed cases of wine is building up in the producers' warehouses.
The strike has begun to affect almost every branch of commercial life.
Customs officers at many ports are refusing to pass commercial traffic.
On Tuesday union leaders claimed that every French customs post along the Spanish border was closing to all traffic except private cars.
But yesterday at the Hendaye border post, near Bayonne, lorries were passing freely without any form of control.
At Marseilles airport, one customs officer said: ‘You can bring in anything you like — including drugs or weapons.
We're taking a breather until further notice.’
At Roissy airport, near Paris, the customs officers have refused to check cargo flights since last week.
The strike affects not just tax and customs officers but every branch of the state's financial service.
So jewellers cannot get their new stock hallmarked and 800,000 articles are now waiting to be examined before they can be put on sale.
Thousands of property deals are waiting to be completed because local tax offices are refusing to deal with the French equivalent of stamp duty.
The strikers have also extended their tactics.
They started by taking action that diminished goverment receipts.
They are now refusing to handle government payments as well.
This month five million government employees and pensioners, including soldiers, judges and diplomats, may not be paid.
Town halls will be unable to make payments on many of their contracts, and the hospital service is also threatened.
The tax inspectors, whose annual earnings are between £7,150 and £23,140, almost exactly the French civil service average, are demanding a steep increase in pay.
Their negotiators have refused to take part in further talks with departmental heads and yesterday Pierre Beregovoy, the Minister of Finance, gave in to their demands and agreed to a meeting with the leaders of the five unions involved.
Next week the strike is expected to spread to the Post Office.
East Germany admits concern over refugees
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
EAST GERMANY'S Communist leaders said last night they were prepared to discuss ways of improving life in their country.
But they flatly refused to relinquish their grip on power.
In a long statement read out on television after the evening news programme, the Politburo admitted for the first time that it was ‘not indifferent’ to the mass exodus of its people to West Germany.
‘Together we want to shape our fatherland in such a way that the growing material and cultural needs of each person can better be met, according to his contribution,’ it said, and called for suggestions from the public.
‘We are ready for discussion.’
The issues, the Politburo said, would include better economic performance, ‘democratic togetherness’, better goods, ‘life-oriented media’, opportunities to travel and a healthy environment — all burning topics in East Germany.
It promised to present its ‘strategic concept for continuity and renewal’ at its next meeting at the end of the year and that it would all be thoroughly discussed at the party congress next May.
But it firmly rejected any idea of reforming the system, saying: ‘We are against suggestions and demonstrations which aim to lead people astray and change the constitutional basis of our state.’
The party already had all the necessary channels for debate, it said, adding: ‘Socialism on German soil is not in question.
The people of the German Democratic Republic have opted for socialism forever.’
The statement, entitled ‘Socialism needs everyone’, followed a meeting of the 21 members of the Politburo, who also brought in numerous members of the lower-ranking Central Committee — a rare event which only occurs when urgent and important issues are at stake.
There was no confirmation of a news agency report that Erich Honecker, the East German leader, might resign.
Mr Honecker, 77 and still recovering from a gall-bladder operation, has so far flatly rejected all notions of change.
When asked by journalists recently about the refugee problem, he said, ‘What refugee problem?’
Earlier, Kurt Hager, 77, the party's oldest and most authoritative hardline ideologue, said the first priorities were to involve the population in the solution to important social problems and to improve the government's information policy.
Obstacles which prevent young people from using their talents at home must be swept out of the way, he said.
Meanwhile, contradictory reactions by the authorities in various parts of East Germany continued, reinforcing the suspicion among experts in Bonn that the party leadership's authority is crumbling and it no longer has a firm grip on the situation.
While city leaders in Leipzig held talks with reformists, reports indicated that police in Halle had made a baton attack on about 3,000 people as they were leaving a church to march in silence round the town.
Many were clubbed to the ground and kicked.
Shortly after Gunter Krusche, a leading figure in the East Berlin Protestant church, said there were signs that the reformist New Forum would be granted legal status in several regions, police in East Berlin detained 15 members of the group and confiscated papers they were carrying.
The 15 were later released.
There was a telling indication that the police and other forces who have to impose Communist rule were not immune to the general discontent.
Wolfgang Rosch, the deputy commander of the Leipzig worker's militia, which had been out in force during recent demonstrations, admitted that members ‘had the same concerns as the people who were on the streets’.
WARSAW — Poland announced yesterday that it had stopped sending home East Germans who cross the border illegally, seeking transfer to West Germany, Reuter reports.
Malgorzata Niezabitowska, the government spokeswoman, said the Foreign Minister, Krzysztof Skubiszewski, was opposed to expelling East Germans.
Mr Skubiszewski has said the problem of East Germans who come to Poland to seek transfer to West Germany should be resolved in a humanitarian way.
About 1,500 East Germans who managed to reach Bonn's embassy in Warsaw in the past few weeks have been sent to the West in two special trains.
More than 500 more East Germans have reached the Polish capital since the last train left.
Storms threaten mild Greek election climate
From PETER THOMPSON in Athens
THE CHIEF JUSTICE of Greece's Supreme Court, Yannis Grivas, was appointed by President Sartzetakis yesterday to head a caretaker government which will conduct fresh elections, probably on 5 November.
His government will be sworn in today.
After the election, Mr Grivas will preside over the special tribunals due to hear cases of corruption against the former prime minister, Andreas Papandreou, and several of his colleagues.
Despite agreement among party leaders that the elections should be held in ‘a mild climate,’ it looks like being a divisive contest.
This results from the strategy adopted by Mr Papandreou, whose eight years in office ended when his socialist Pasok party was defeated in an inconclusive election last June.
He rejected proposals for an all-party government, leaving his opponents on left and right to join forces in the house-cleaning needed after Pasok's rule.
Mr Papandreou paid lip service to the clean-up while condemning it as a political plot to end his career and destroy his party.
Preferring attack to defence, he refused to answer charges against him in Parliament, saying instead: ‘I accuse my accusers’.
Now that MPs have committed him for trial for allegedly ordering telephone-tapping and accepting bribes, he describes the three months of coalition government as ‘a lamentable political parenthesis’.
In June, the conservative New Democracy Party, headed by Mr Papandreou's long-standing opponent, Constantine Mitsotakis, won 44 per cent of the vote and 145 seats out of 300, Pasok 39 per cent and 125 seats, and the Communist-led coalition of the left, under Harilaos Florakis, 13 per cent and 28 seats.
Mr Mitsotakis, who stood aside for one of his backbenchers, Tzannis Tzannetakis, to form an interim government with the support of the left, is confident of gaining the extra 2-3 percentage points needed for an overall majority next month.
Mr Papandreou, in good voice despite his poor health, launched his election campaign this week with a rally of 75,000 Pasok loyalists at the Olympic Stadium in Athens.
Despite the charges against him, he does not anticipate many defections.
Voters have voiced complaints at the elections being held before the trials begin, and before Mr Papandreou has a chance to prove his innocence.
Pasok denied yesterday it was waging a battle on two fronts.
But this is precisely what Mr Papandreou is doing.
To compensate for votes lost on the right, he needs to attract Communists horrified by the summer's iconoclastic alliance, and has described the left-wing coalition as ‘a crutch for New Democracy, a spare part’.
Le Pen enjoys day of embarrassment
By DAVID USBORNE
STRASBOURG — Jean-Marie Le Pen's European Right party has offended both Switzerland and Israel, brought the European Parliament to a standstill and embarrassed the British Conservatives in Blackpool, writes David Usborne.
The row erupted on Tuesday when it was discovered that, by a quirk of the rulebook, Mr Le Pen's neo-fascists would chair the assembly's permanent delegations to Switzerland and Israel.
Mortified, all the other political leaders voted to change the rules to exclude the far-right MEPs from their new posts, especially after it was discovered that Mr Le Pen's man for Israel was likely to be from West Germany's Republicans, led by an ex-SS officer, Franz Schonhuber.
Mr Le Pen launched a tirade of Nazi terminology, suggesting that his MEPs were being treated as Untermenschen.
When the ruling was announced yesterday, Bruno Gollnisch, a European Right MEP, shouted ‘Dictator, dictator’ at the Parliament's president, Enrique Baron, and called other MEPs ‘Gestapo men’.
When officials tried to eject him, Mr Gollnisch tried to punch his neighbours.
The session was suspended in disarray for two hours.
Mr Gollnisch has been invited to speak at a Conservative fringe meeting in Blackpool, organised by Western Goals UK, a movement run by the former Tory MP, Sir Patrick Wall.
The letter of invitation said Mr Gollnisch would have ‘the perfect opportunity to show support for Mrs Thatcher's policy of protecting the identity and national sovereignty of all European nations’.
Uranium-seller
By DAVID USBORNE
ATHENS (Reuter)— A Briton, named as Derek Smith, 49, was arrested in Greece for trying to sell 5.5lb of radioactive uranium to a nuclear research centre in the outskirts of Athens.
Sadeq ‘lost’
By DAVID USBORNE
LONDON (Reuter)— The former Sudanese prime minister, Sadeq al-Mahdi, deposed in a military coup in July, was taken from Khartoum's Kober prison last weekend and has not been heard from since, his cousin said.
Soviet budget
By DAVID USBORNE
MOSCOW (Reuter)— A Soviet parliamentary committee rejected the government's proposed budget and economic plan for 1990 saying it did not go far enough in adapting the Soviet planned economy to competition and market forces.
Tass news agency reported that the committee on economic reform said the proposed budget had failed to meet ‘the critical character of our situation’.
Britain balked
By LEONARD DOYLE
NEW YORK — A British effort to bring the international drug trade before the UN Security Council has been balked by Brazil and Algeria, who objected to Britain's plan to include the drug trade in its definition of threats to international peace and security.
Brundtland goes
By TONY SAMSTAG
OSLO — Gro Harlem Brundtland, Norway's minority Labour Prime Minister, is to resign tomorrow, writes Tony Samstag.
A new government, a centre-right coalition led by the mainstream Conservative Party, takes over formally on Monday.
Old guard rebels
By IMRE KARACS
BUDAPEST — The Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party, extinguished at the weekend by its congress, rose from the ashes yesterday in Budapest's communist heartland, the industrial district of Csepel, Imre Karacs writes.
Forty-three members of the old party set up an HSWP cell, and urged their comrades all over the country to do the same.
‘Lax security’
By PATRICK MARNHAM
PARIS — The pilot of the UTA DC10 which exploded over the Sahara desert on 19 September, killing all 171 people on board, had previously complained of lax security on the Libreville to Paris route, according to a report in Le Canard Enchaine, writes Patrick Marnham.
The paper quotes documents which suggest the pilot learnt that the French authorities had received several bomb threats against UTA's African flights which were not passed on to him.
The Ministry of the Interior and UTA have repeatedly denied that any bomb warnings were received.
The airline actually withdrew special security precautions shortly before the DC10 went down.
Norwegian wins Economics Prize
By PATRICK MARNHAM
STOCKHOLM (UPI, Reuter)— A Norwegian professor, Trygve Haavelmo, 78, described as a humble man who spends much of his time in seclusion at his mountain cottage, was awarded the 1989 Nobel Economics Prize for pioneering use of mathematical statistics to interpret economic data.
Meanwhile, France's Minister for Research and Technology urged the two US winners of the Nobel Medicine Prize to honour Dominique Stehelin, a Frenchman who took part in the award-winning cancer research at the University of California in the 1970s.
He has said bitterly that he was overlooked by the Nobel committee.
Armenian passions flare anew
By RUPERT CORNWELL
MOSCOW — Nagorny Karabakh, already effectively partitioned between its feuding Armenian and Azerbaijani communities into two armed camps, was yesterday facing further turmoil after the shooting by troops of an Armenian demonstrator in the capital, Stepanakert, on Tuesday, Rupert Cornwell writes.
According to official accounts, Spartak Okopyan, 39, was shot when a column of soldiers returned fire after coming under attack as it patrolled Stepanakert, now exclusively populated by Armenians.
His death brings to at least 118 the number of those killed in Transcaucasia since Armenia's campaign for the return of a territory controlled by Azerbaijan began in February 1988.
This ominous escalation of tension has come amid reports that the rail blockade of Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh by Azerbaijan — partially lifted at least in recent days — has been re-imposed after fresh violence.
Last night the extent of the blockade remained confused.
But the shooting has once more raised Armenian passions to boiling point.
Hong Kong receives an injection
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Hong Kong
CHINA'S political turmoil has had a ‘traumatic’ effect on Hong Kong, but in announcing plans for a Bill of Rights and expenditure of HK$127bn (£10.1bn) on a new international airport and port facilities, Sir David Wilson, the Governor, made a bold attempt yesterday to bolster the territory's confidence.
In an upbeat policy speech that marked the opening session of the Legislative Council, Sir David was at pains to show a government committed to building a future for the territory beyond the 1997 handover to China.
He referred to plans to develop social programmes and infrastructure projects as a ‘vision that I hope will sustain Hong Kong during the present period of uncertainty and give us all confidence in our ability to overcome whatever problems confront us’.
The speech, billed as the most important address ever made by a Hong Kong governor, was mostly well received by community leaders, with criticisms focusing on its skimpy attention to important political issues.
Sir David did not comment on Britain and China's war of words over Hong Kong's future, or Hong Kong's recent differences with Peking over the Chinese swimmer, Yang Yang, who was allowed to leave Hong Kong for the United States.
The Governor urged China to take ‘action to restore confidence’ in Hong Kong, but gave greater emphasis to locals finding confidence within themselves.
He warned people against ‘becoming directly involved in China's domestic politics’.
Peking was upset by Hong Kong's support for the pro-democracy movement.
Sir David acknowledged a demand for political reforms to be speeded up, but hedged on how far Britain would go in backing them.
He reiterated that Vietnamese boat people considered to be ‘economic migrants’ must be sent back to Vietnam, but did not say when.
He expressed hope that Britain's long-awaited scheme to grant some Hong Kong people the right to live in Britain would be ‘as generous as possible’.
More positive was confirmation that draft legislation for a Bill of Rights should be ready by July 1990.
This will give effect in law to provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The bill is aimed at preserving social and political freedoms and is welcomed by most people.
However, critics note that China does not obey human-rights guarantees contained in its own constitution.
The new airport, at Chek Lap Kok, off Lantau Island's west coast, will, with new port facilities and related infrastructure, be the territory's biggest-ever development.
The airport will be linked to Hong Kong by a high-speed railway and a six-lane highway.
Sir David said the private sector would be invited to participate in the project, and that the first of two runways should be open in early 1997.
While the airport is seen as a big confidence-boost for business, Sir David said little to reassure Hong Kong people.
‘The question of how to resolve the fear which so many people have in Hong Kong was omitted,’ said Peter Harris, a political scientist.
‘There was simply a hope that somehow in the future things would get better because of this enormous expenditure.’
Jimmy McGregor, a member of the legislative council, said, ‘If we did not have to depend on China we would be looking at a most marvellous future.’
Party unleashes assault on Zhao
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
CHINA'S ousted Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang, has come under renewed attack in the official media, amid hints of a power struggle in the Chinese leadership.
The Peking Daily, organ of the city's ultra-conservative party organisation, accused the disgraced former leader of trying to turn the party into little more than a ‘social club’ shorn of power.
It accused Mr Zhao, who was sacked as party secretary in June, of encouraging the formation of independent workers' unions during student-led protests.
The critique, the first such assault on Mr Zhao's record in several weeks, focuses on the policy of allowing factory directors greater freedom to run their business without meddling from local party cadres.
The policy has been the cornerstone of China's efforts to revive state industry over the past five years.
Officially it remains in force, but an attack in the official press suggests hard-line ideologues want to criticise not only Mr Zhao but also the economic policies he helped to implement.
Mr Zhao's fate, and by association his legacy, have become a big bone of contention in the leadership.
He has already been stripped of all his posts, but hardliners had been pressing for a public trial on criminal charges, though this looks unlikely.
Complaining that the grass-roots party cadres had been excluded from decision-making, the Peking Daily called for new emphasis on the party's role in economic as well as political matters: ‘If the party only controls the party then it would no longer be a political class party but an amateur group for the masses, or a kind of club.’
Despite the crackdown on student protesters, Chinese leaders have repeatedly ruled out any big change in economic reform or the open-door policy.
Pressure seems to be growing, however, from party conservatives for a review of such policies and a stronger campaign to root out suspected ‘counter-revolutionaries’ in the government and party apparatus.
Leading the attack is the Peking Municipal Party Committee, stacked with zealous ideologues who played a key role in suppressing the student movement.
Fearing that the crackdown after the Tiananmen Square assault may be softening, city authorities warned this week that ‘counter-revolutionary’ remnants would become a ‘time bomb’unless ‘ferreted out’with more vigour.
However, the Peking Youth News has reported that ‘many people’ are worried about the high incidence of wrongful arrest and torture by martial law forces and police.
De Klerk meets the reformist trinity
From JOHN CARLIN in Johannesburg
AT A MEETING in Pretoria yesterday which FW de Klerk said he hoped would prove a milestone in South African history, the President talked for three hours with the country's three most politically prominent church leaders, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Dr Allan Boesak and Rev Frank Chikane.
Mr de Klerk described the meeting as ‘talks about talks,’ an important step before negotiations get under way between the government and black political leaders.
The churchmen were less buoyant, having presented Mr de Klerk with a memorandum in which they listed six steps he had to take ‘immediately’ before negotiations about the government's much-vaunted new political dispensation could start.
Archbishop Tutu said in a news conference after the meeting that he was concerned about Mr de Klerk's failure to give any specific undertakings.
However, no doubt mollified both by the President's dramatic decision on Tuesday to announce the release of eight long-term political prisoners and by the urbanity of his style, the archbishop did note that the talks had proceeded in ‘a far better atmosphere’ than previous encounters he has had with the government.
Appearing to agree in part with Mr de Klerk's assessment of the meeting, the churchmen said they saw their role as ‘facilitators to get negotiation going’.
The six steps proposed by this celebrated trinity of black anti-apartheid leaders were: lifting the state of emergency; lifting political restrictions on individuals; releasing all those detained without trial; unbanning political organisations; releasing all political prisoners; reprieving all those sentenced to death.
In every detail, the proposals are exactly those made by the African National Congress in a document released in August in which they list the conditions necessary to create the climate for negotiations.
The British and the US governments have asked for similar concessions from Mr de Klerk..
Mr Chikane, the secretary-general of the South African Council of Churches, said that unless the six points were met negotiations would be a non-starter.
Rather more positive, Archbishop Tutu said that, if Mr de Klerk responded positively to their initiative, they would respond in kind.
‘We would be ready to say to our friends: ‘Put the sanctions programme on hold because it appears there is a commitment here which we can accept…’
If these things happen we'll say to our people: ‘Give them a chance.
They are serious’.'
Mr de Klerk, while failing to offer any firm assurances, did say in a press conference of his own that the government would look at ‘areas’ where the state of emergency might be lifted.
(There are strong suggestions that he might, for example, lift restrictions on press freedom.)
He pleaded that the time had come for government bona fides to be accepted at face value and reiterated, emphatically, that the fact that all South Africans should have the vote was no longer a point that required further discussion.
A family to make Pretoria tremble: Walter Sisulu will leave his cell to join a wife and son who have themselves been restricted, John Carlin writes from Johannesburg
From JOHN CARLIN in Johannesburg
WALTER SISULU will have cause in the coming days to reflect, perhaps not for the first time, that stone walls do not a prison make.
Upon his release after 26 years in jail he will discover that he is more free than either his wife, Albertina, or his journalist son, Zwelakhe, who are both ‘restricted’ by the authorities under the long-standing state of emergency.
Whereas Mr Sisulu's release will be ‘unconditional’, according to President FW de Klerk, his wife and son are prohibited from participating in any kind of public political activity and they are allowed to move — unless special exemption is granted — only within the boundaries of the Johannesburg area.
Zwelakhe Sisulu, who was released last December after two years of detention without trial, must report to the police every day and be indoors after 6pm.
His older brother, Mlungisi, may not enter South Africa, as an exiled member of the African National Congress.
There is no black South African family more rebellious, more doggedly persistent in their political opposition to apartheid, than the Sisulus.
Walter Sisulu himself, who as secretary-general of the ANC was more senior even than Nelson Mandela when the two were jailed for life in 1964, served seven jail terms between 1953 and 1963.
He also underwent several periods of de facto house arrest and trial for treason between 1956 and 1961.
He was acquitted, but virtually denied any time for family or politics during those five years.
The upshot is that, since he married Albertina in 1944, they have spent rather more than 30 years of their 45 years of marriage apart.
In spite of consistent repression, they produced five children.
Faced with the classic choice facing revolutionaries between a quiet family life and the turbulence of the greater good, they opted for the latter.
After her husband's life sentence, Mrs Sisulu, 68, was detained without charge twice.
She was banned from politics between 1964 and 1981, and spent 10 of these years under house arrest.
During a fleeting unrestricted period in 1985 she was named co-president of the United Democratic Front, the mainstream anti-apartheid organisation inside South Africa.
Then she was swiftly ‘restricted’ again, a condition which has endured since.
Demonstrating the arbitrariness of the emergency regulations, she was granted a passport in June this year so that she could head a UDF delegation which met Margaret Thatcher and President Bush.
Her appeal to them was more from the heart than the head, stressing the pain of being black in South Africa more than the broader strategies to be pursued.
She is an articulate, brave and exceptionally sweet-natured and compassionate woman, a nurse by training, who has stolen the hearts of the people of Soweto, where she lives, in a manner that the more queenly Winnie Mandela has not.
In the 1940s, when she trained as a nurse in Johannesburg, she began a lasting friendship with Mr Mandela's first wife, Evelyn.
The two couples were very close.
Mr Sisulu, now 77, was six years older than Mr Mandela and became something of a mentor to him on his arrival in Johannesburg in 1941.
The two men were born in the same region, the Transkei, but whereas Mr Mandela was a distinguished personage of royal blood, Mr Sisulu came from an impoverished peasant family and engaged in politics as a consequence of his exposure to the daily indignities of life for blacks through his work in a dairy, a bakery, in mines and factories.
But Mr Mandela arrived in Johannesburg penniless, while Mr Sisulu was already in the ANC, gaining prominence through his work in the unions.
Mr Mandela sought out Mr Sisulu and was rewarded with a loan to buy a suit and money to start a degree course in law.
Mr Sisulu's generosity and warmth did not waver during his time in the maximum security prison of Robben Island, where other inmates deferred to him as a charismatic senior statesman of what has been called ‘the government-in-exile’.
One trait that former ‘Robben Islanders’ recall is his remarkable, almost photographic, memory — a quality that served him well in his ascent through the ANC hierarchy.
Physically he is unusually sturdy and has not fallen prey to illness during his long confinement.
He is said, despite his years, to be fit, lucid and raring to re-enter the political fray.
As a close friend of the ANC president, Oliver Tambo — with Mr Mandela the three were seen as the organisation's ruling ‘troika’— he is certain to become a leading force in South African politics.
It will be interesting to see whether Mr de Klerk has the courage to lift the state of emergency, unban the ANC and unleash against himself and his government the full might of the Sisulu family.
Welcome progress, but not enough
By RICHARD DOWDEN
IF President FW de Klerk was hoping to ease the pressure on his government by announcing the release of eight prominent prisoners on Tuesday, he must have been disappointed by the reaction.
It was, from Mrs Thatcher to the African National Congress, the same: a welcome move, but now get on with releasing Mr Mandela and negotiations, writes Richard Dowden.
Mrs Thatcher called the move ‘a major step in the right direction…we hope it will lead on to the release of Nelson Mandela and open the way for negotiations for a new constitution for South Africa’.
In Washington, the State Department welcomed the move but hoped that it was the ‘first step in a process’.
Its statement spelt out the process: the release of other political prisoners, the return of political exiles, the lifting of the state of emergency and other political restrictions, and negotiations on a peaceful transition to a non-racial and democratic South Africa.
These conditions are almost identical to those of the ANC contained in a document endorsed by the Organisation of African Unity in August.
A statement from the ANC's exile headquarters in Lusaka welcomed ‘with great joy’ the announcement of the releases but rejected Mr de Klerk's use of the word reconciliation.
‘The ANC is not aware of any spirit of reconciliation,’ it said.
Nor did President de Klerk gain much by telling Mrs Thatcher and the Americans of his plan in advance.
The move caused some surprise in Whitehall, where the belief is that it would be damaging to Mr de Klerk if he were seen to be making reformist moves because of external pressure.
If he hoped to persuade Mrs Thatcher that the releases were a favour to her and should be rewarded by her support for lifting sanctions, he will be disappointed.
The firm message from Whitehall last night was that Mrs Thatcher was not going to the Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Kuala Lumpur next week to propose a reduction in sanctions, although she would not agree to an increase in the measures already in place.
Rivonia gave immortality to the men it jailed for life
By RICHARD DOWDEN, Africa Editor
HISTORY will judge whether the Rivonia treason trial, which began in 1963, did more damage to the African National Congress or to the South African government.
At the time it seemed as if the government had crushed the nationalist movement by locking up its leaders for life.
In fact it immortalised them and ensured that all future anti-apartheid movements would vow their allegiance to the heroes of Rivonia.
Nelson Mandela was already serving a five-year sentence for inciting a strike and leaving the country without travel documents when, on 12 July 1963, the police raided Lilliesleaf Farm at Rivonia, near Johannesburg.
The house was the underground headquarters of what became the military wing of the ANC, Umkhonto we Sizwe, Spear of the Nation.
At the time it was an embryonic sabotage unit.
Nine men were arrested, including the five now due to be released: Walter Sisulu, Raymond Mhlaba, Elias Motsoaledi, Andrew Mlangeni and Ahmed Kathrada.
The police also found Mr Mandela's diary, documenting his travels to raise support for armed rebellion, and hundreds of documents which betrayed the plans of Umkhonto.
Mr Mandela was brought from prison on Robben Island to join his colleagues, and the trial began on 9 October.
The prosecution's first attempt quickly collapsed.
It accused Mr Mandela of carrying out acts of sabotage on dates when he was in prison.
But as the judge quashed the indictment, the men were re-arrested in the dock and four other charges were brought: recruiting persons for training in sabotage and guerrilla warfare for the purpose of violent revolution, conspiring to aid foreign military units when they invaded the republic, furthering the aims of communism and soliciting and receiving funds for these purposes from several countries.
The defendants, caught between the need to demonstrate their innocence and to stand by their political commitment, opted to make a political defence.
They pleaded not guilty.
In a recent book on the trial (The World That Was Ours — The story of the Rivonia trial, by Hilda Bernstein, published by SAWriters.),
Hilda Bernstein, the wife of one of those on trial, wrote: ‘The Rivonia trial was a confrontation in which the opposing forces in South Africa appeared face to face; those who stood for apartheid…and those who opposed it.
The court was an ultimate court of morality: the issues were not the guilt or innocence of the accused but the guilt or innocence of those who opposed apartheid.’
The defendants tried to prove that Umkhonto we Sizwe was not part of the ANC.
They denied that they had adopted a plan for guerrilla warfare and denied that the ANC was communist.
The state's case was based mainly on accusations of sabotage and planned sabotage, a case well supported by the evidence found at Rivonia.
Detailed plans for Operation Mayibuye, an outline for guerrilla warfare and foreign intervention, were revealed.
Mr Sisulu said that it was just a draft plan, which had not been adopted.
The prosecution alleged that the men had been responsible of 222 acts of terrorism which it then reduced to 193.
The defendants admitted 20, thereby conceding the government's main case.
The trial ground on through the long hot summer in Pretoria.
It drew to an end in April 1964 with Mr Mandela's four-hour speech from the dock, in which he defended the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe and said he had done what he did for the ideal of a free and democratic society, ‘an ideal for which I am prepared to die’.
The only question was whether they would indeed be executed.
Convicting eight of the nine, the judge said they had, in essence, been convicted of high treason, which usually carried the death penalty.
But he sentenced them to life imprisonment.
The New York Times called the men heroes, and The Times said ‘the verdict of history will be that the ultimate guilty party is the government in power...’
Denis Goldberg was released in 1985 and Govan Mbeki in 1987.
Soon only one Rivonia man will remain in jail.
Out of the West: A prince is found in the quartet of ex-presidents
By PETER PRINGLE
WASHINGTON — Under normal circumstances, when the by-line Gerald R. Ford appears, I frankly don't bother to read it.
In my book, there is nothing this ex-president has done, or said, since leaving the White House which is worthy of attention — especially considering the many worthy things ex-presidents can do and say.
But yesterday was different.
Under Mr Ford's byline on the editorial page of The Washington Post was the headline ‘Poland: I Told You So’.
Instantly, I knew the article would be irresistible: a glorious return to one of the most famous, and fatuous, lines ever uttered by a presidential candidate debating with his opponent.
The year was 1976; the date, 6 October; the place, San Francisco.
By pre-arrangement the debate was limited to foreign and defence matters, which Mr Ford considered his strong suit because he had been a congressman and a vice-president while his opponent, Jimmy Carter, had been a mere governor of Georgia and a peanut farmer.
A question was asked about American power.
Mr Carter droned on about the United States not being strong any more and being too afraid of the Russian bear and being out-traded and so on.
‘I might say this in closing,’ he said, ‘…as far as foreign policy goes, Mr Kissinger (Mr Ford's secretary of state) has been the president of this country.
Mr Ford has shown an absence of leadership and an absence of grasp of what this country is and what it ought to be.’
Mr Ford recalls in yesterday's article that his ‘slow-burn really reached lift-off’.
When chided by his questioner about signing the Helsinki accords on human rights which, the questioner suggested, allowed the Russians to have dominance in eastern Europe, Mr Ford, as he put it, ‘pranced with both feet across the open mine field’.
He declared: ‘There is no Soviet domination of eastern Europe, and there never will be under a Ford administration.’
Like millions of Americans I was watching the debate on television and, like millions of Americans, I leapt out of my seat yelling something like: ‘I can't believe he said that…
Carter wins!’
And he did win — not solely because of that statement, of course, but it helped the unknown Georgian enormously in the final stretch of the campaign.
No one has ever given a satisfactory explanation of why Mr Ford said what he said — and it has gone down in the history books as just another Ford pratfall.
Yesterday, in his rather large article, Mr Ford could have offered an explanation for the statement — for instance, had the CIA briefed him that eastern European communism was about to unravel?
To know the answer to that would have been really interesting.
It would also be comforting to learn that the agency's analysis was that far ahead.
But no.
Mr Ford writes only: ‘My mother taught me it was wrong to crow.
But former presidents, as well as small boys, know no greater joy than being able to say, ‘I told you so’…
I come out pretty well as a prophet.’
Taking this in the spirit in which it was written — as a joke — Mr Ford's self-deprecation is admirable, but his limited understanding of what his role as an ex-president could be is appalling.
When he is not on the golf course, he is making large sums as a company director.
That's about it.
Richard Nixon is no better.
He writes books and articles few people want to read.
And Ronald Reagan accepts $2m from the Japanese to give a single lecture.
The prince among the four ex-presidents turns out to be Jimmy Carter.
His rehabilitation — from the leader they could not wait to get rid of because he represented high taxes, inflation and military failure (over Iran), to the president everyone loves to cite as the model elder statesman -has been remarkable.
He is everywhere, doing good things from building houses for the poor, helping farmers in Africa raise better crops and fight disease, to monitoring Panamanian elections, which he declared a fraud before it was officially agreed, and generally promoting peace and justice around the world.
When he goes back home to his tiny home village of Plains, Georgia, he teaches Sunday school.
Mr Carter graciously attributes his return from the political wilderness to the fact that Mr Bush has been more interested in his advice than Mr Reagan ever was.
‘Under Reagan, everything bad that happened was either my fault or Nixon's fault or Congress's fault or some foreigner's…
It's a totally different attitude (under Mr Bush).’
Mr Carter's closer relationship with Mr Bush has got his smile back into the newspapers, but Mr Carter has never stopped believing he can help solve the world's problems.
He never needed any encouragement in these moral quests, and my guess is that the recent favourable publicity about him means we will be hearing a great deal more of the Preacher from Plains.
Syrian airman asks Israelis for asylum
By PETER PRINGLE
MEGIDDO, Israel (Reuter)— A Syrian air force major yesterday landed a Soviet-made MiG-23 fighter in Israel and an army statement said he requested political asylum, becoming the first Arab airman to do so in more than 20 years.
In Damascus, a Syrian official said the plane had made an emergency landing because of mechanical problems.
He said Syria had asked the International Red Cross to arrange the man's return.
Israeli military experts said the advanced version of the MiG-23, from the arsenal of Israel's most significant frontline enemy, would provide valuable data.
The pilot could also give vital information on Syria's air force.
Military sources named the pilot as Major Adel Bassem, 34, and said he was co-operating with his Israeli debriefers.
‘It doesn't look like he came here to keep quiet,’ an army officer said.
Israeli planes made the jet land at an airstrip in the plain of Armageddon, used by crop-dusting planes, to ensure it was not booby-trapped.
Workers at the airfield said they offered the pilot water and greeted him in Arabic.
Military sources said the unarmed plane split off from another MiG during a training flight east of the Golan Heights.
Israeli sources said a second Syrian MiG-23 landed at the same time in Egypt, near Alexandria.
But Egypt denied the report.
UN team reports on Swapo detainees
From SUSAN BROWN in Windhoek
A UN MISSION has not yet found any detainees in Swapo refugee camps, prison camps, bases and other facilities in Angola and Zambia, the UN Special Representative for Namibia, Martti Ahtisaari, said yesterday.
In making public the findings so far of the Mission on Detainees in Angola and Zambia, Mr Ahtisaari said that the group would keep trying to find about 250 people reported to have been detained or missing.
‘At the alleged places of detention,’ Mr Ahtisaari said, ‘the facilities were found to have been stripped of all valuable material and not to have been inhabited for several weeks at least.’
As a result of interviews with local people, he said, the mission did not believe that any detainees were moved from prison camps ‘to another place prior to the mission's arrival’.
The UN team spent three weeks visiting the camps in September.
It found that a number of them were ‘what could be described as pits’, according to the Nigerian ambassador, BA Clark, who headed the team and who represents the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (Untag) in Angola.
He described the facilities as ‘bricks, cement or mud-lined holes in the ground without steps or, by now, roofs’.
Before it left, the UN mission compiled information on 1,100 people who had been detained, were alleged to have been detained or who were said to be missing, back to 1977.
The information came from a variety of sources, including Swapo itself.
The mission then cross-checked the names with those of people repatriated to Namibia through the UN High Commissioner for Refugees programme, which has brought back 41,000 Namibians, including most Swapo guerrillas.
Mr Ahtisaari said that only 315 people were then found to be unaccounted for, because the mission's list contained duplications, vague identifications, names of people who have been released and repatriated, names of people never detained and some who have been reported dead.
But Mr Ahtisaari said that more recent checking, against the roll of Namibians who registered to vote in recent months, turned up 54 more names, and the mission expects to find that at least 20 others have been repatriated.
An anomaly in the report is that it lists 21 ‘locations of alleged detainees’ in Angola.
The team visited only 10.
But war was under way again in southern Angola, the team faced obvious difficulties and had to rely on information from the Angolan government.
It is still not clear whether the approximately 250 people still listed as missing include those whom ex-detainees say were still alive in May, or if they include the names of those last seen in 1984 or 1986.
Automatic cuts in US budget start next week
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
THE FINANCES of the most powerful country in the world will jump the rails this weekend.
Senior congressional sources yesterday wrote off all hopes of agreeing a 1990 US budget before the 16 October deadline.
As a result, automatic cuts will fall next Monday on $16.2bn (£10.1bn) of US spending plans, equally divided between defence and some domestic programmes.
Who cares?
In the short term, no one much.
But budgetary relations between the White House and Democratic leaders in Congress are now so strained that some officials warn that the whole process of long-term deficit reduction could be threatened.
The last time that automatic budget cuts, mandated by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit-cutting law, took effect was in October 1987.
Three days later the stock market crashed.
Members of Congress and administration officials ought, in theory, to be wringing their hands this week; most are shrugging their shoulders.
Wall Street has long been bored with the US budget deficit.
With fears of a US recession calmed, the conventional wisdom is that the deficit does not matter much any more.
In the short term, next week's budget crunch is more like a toy train crash rather than the real thing.
When the White House and Congress do reach a 1990 budget agreement (no one is willing to predict when) the spending cuts will be restored and the carriages lifted back on to the rails.
But some senior members of Congress in both parties remain concerned by recent developments in US budget politics.
They believe the Bush administration's promise of steady deficit erosion, in co-operation with Congress, is being more systematically derailed.
Democratic leaders in Congress have been wounded and baffled by the fight picked by President Bush over his promised cut in capital gains taxes.
The acceptance of the tax cut in the House last month, against the wishes of Democratic leaders, has used up much of the good will cautiously built up earlier in the year for a medium-term, bipartisan deficit-cutting campaign.
The White House yesterday spurned a conciliatory offer by Senate Democrats to unload the tax cut from an already overloaded 1990 budget cart with a pledge to return to pick it up later.
Democratic leaders say the fact that the White House remains determined to pursue the capital gains cut suggests that the administration has lost interest in a steady, bipartisan campaign to reduce the deficit.
In that case, they say, all bets are off for co-operation on the budget next year.
Republicans say Mr Bush's win on capital gains suggests that the White House might be able to put together a majority of its own for budget restraint, with or without the Democratic leaders.
But they concede this is likely to take the form, sooner or later, of a less demanding timetable of deficit cuts.
Under the existing Gramm-Rudman law, the deficit is due to shrink to zero by 1993.
One of the original sponsors of the act, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, a Democrat turned Republican, will sponsor legislation later this month to extend the deadline for a balanced budget until the end of the century.
Does this matter?
As long as the economy continues to grow, the political risks for President Bush are minimal.
The deficit has been reducing as a percentage of GDP.
Admittedly, this has been achieved, in part, by the kind of chicanery and double book-keeping which would earn a jail sentence for the treasurer-secretary of a small glue factory.
But no one appears to care too much.
Conservatives have even learnt to love the deficit: it helps to resist any movement towards an increased government share in the economy.
Others point out, however, that the combination of high public deficits and budget restraint is already beginning to eat into necessary public and private investment in infrastructure, from roads to new technology.
Shuttle's foes given a second chance
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
A TECHNICAL failure on the space shuttle Atlantis has given anti-nuclear activists time to return to court for a second attempt to prevent the space craft's launch, which they believe risks raining radioactive material over Florida.
Atlantis was to carry the Galileo space probe on the first leg of a six-year voyage to Jupiter this afternoon.
But a fault in the computer controlling one of the engines has forced the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Nasa) to delay the launch until at least Monday.
The dispute concerns two nuclear batteries, each containing 24.7 pounds of plutonium oxide to power Galileo's scientific instruments.
Critics argue that if the probe should explode on lift-off or veer off course and re-enter Earth's atmosphere, the batteries could be pulverised, dispersing 260,000 curies of radioactive waste — more than half as much as has been released in all nuclear tests.
Lenny Sinken, a lawyer for the Washington-based Christic Institute, wants the mission delayed for 18 months while Nasa studies alternative power sources or arranges for Galileo to leave Earth on an unmanned rocket, less prone to failure than the shuttle.
Nasa won the first round of the legal battle on Tuesday, when a federal judge refused to order the launch be postponed.
The mission's opponents said they would appeal.
Each side claims that its estimate of the chances of nuclear catastrophe is more accurate.
Nasa said that the chances of a repeat of the 1986 Challenger disaster were 1 in 78.
Other estimates begin at 1 in 25.
The odds against radioactive contamination, Nasa told the court, are 2,500 to 1.
The evidence is not conclusive.
Nuclear batteries have been used in 22 other US missions.
Three involved accidents.
Radioactive contamination occurred in one, in 1964, but Nasa says it was designed to — a policy which has been changed.
Nasa said the plutonium is in marshmallow-size nuggets, each encased in three layers of protective material and set in a ceramic honeycomb, in turn contained in a cylinder made of layers of metal and fibreglass ¾ in thick.
‘Nasa conducted tests on those canisters early on,’ said Mr Sinken.
‘They detonated an explosive device next to one, and it disintegrated into so many pieces they couldn't find them all.
So they decided the test wasn't valid and used computer simulations instead, where they get to punch in all the assumptions.’
The search goes back to Moscow for the truth about Wallenberg: This Sunday leaders of Sweden's Raoul Wallenberg Society arrive in Moscow for meetings with Soviet officials.
John Eisenhammer recalls the story of the Swedish diplomat who vanished into Stalin's Russia almost 45 years ago
By JOHN EISENHAMMER
ON A GRASS verge along Szilagyi Erzsebet avenue in Budapest stands a bronze figure flanked by blocks of granite, bearing the inscription: ‘While good fortune stands by your side, friends are plentiful.
But should grey clouds gather, you are alone to withstand the storm’.
It took more than 40 years for that memorial to be raised, near the place where Raoul Wallenberg's car was found after his disappearance into Russian hands.
For 40 years in Hungary, his selfless and ultimately tragic struggle in 1944 to save Budapest's Jews from extermination was conveniently forgotten, as Moscow wanted.
Not until the Kremlin signalled that times had changed could life be breathed back into Wallenberg's heroism.
Only then could tributes be written and statues erected.
Even more importantly, as Mikhail Gorbachev gradually allows so many officially forgotten barbarisms from the Soviet Union's past to slide into the glare of public scrutiny, so the prospect grows of solving one of the post-war era's most persistent enigmas.
For a frenzied seven months in 1944, Raoul Wallenberg, special envoy of the neutral Swedish government at its embassy in Nazi-occupied Budapest, waged a perilous struggle on behalf of the city's Jews.
His adversary was SS Colonel Adolf Eichmann, chief administrator of Hitler's final solution.
Eichmann's challenge in Budapest was to liquidate the last substantial urban Jewish community in Nazi-dominated Europe, some 230,000 trapped people.
Often as many as five trains a day, each one packed with 4,000 Jews, trundled eastwards to Auschwitz.
Later Eichmann, faced with a lack of rail transport, began a programme of deportations by foot —‘death marches’ along a 120-mile route from Budapest to the Austrian border at Hegyeshalom.
Ignoring attempts on his life, and constant threats, Wallenberg used every means possible to outwit the executioners, bribing Hungarian and German officials, threatening the Gestapo and issuing Swedish passports which, surprisingly, offered some protection in a period hardly renowned for respect for the law.
He began by giving official passports to Jews who could claim some vague connection with Sweden, and ended by thrusting, in defiance of the Gestapo, cyclostyled papers bearing his signature into the hands of anyone he could reach, in the cattle trucks in railway sidings or along the road as the tragic columns struggled by.
Gideon Hausner, the Israeli lawyer who prosecuted Eichmann in 1961, estimates that Wallenberg personally saved 30,000 Jews in Budapest.
Others claim that some 100,000 owe their lives to his efforts.
When the Red Army finally reached the outskirts of Budapest, Wallenberg went to discuss his operations with the commander.
Soon after arriving at Marshall Malinovsky's headquarters in Debrezcin on 17 January 1945, Wallenberg was handed over to the NKVD, the predecessor of the KGB, and disappeared.
It is assumed that he was arrested on suspicion of being an American spy.
Indeed, Wallenberg was sent to Budapest with the backing of the US government and the World Jewish Congress.
The years in Lubyanka prison in Moscow transformed Wallenberg into a hostage of the Cold War, and then into one of the many errors of the Stalinist period whose truth became too ghastly to reveal.
The official Soviet version of events was provided in 1957 by Andrei Gromyko, then Deputy Foreign Minister, who claimed that Wallenberg had died of a heart attack in prison in 1947, a date conveniently set before the end of the Stalin era.
Few were inclined to believe this version, a scepticism reinforced over the years by countless reports, some highly credible, of sightings of the Swede, in prisons, mental homes and labour camps.
Some believe he is still alive; he would be 77.
The Soviet Union edged closer to this when its delegate at the international human rights conference in Paris this summer said of Wallenberg: ‘His fate, like that of thousands of others, is unknown, as are the circumstances surrounding it…
Rumours floated in the West that he is alive are not true.
This was a dark period in our history.
We deeply regret the death of this noble person.
If we knew any more, we would let the world know.
We have thousands like him, people who passed into oblivion.’
Those who have campaigned on behalf of Wallenberg find it hard to believe that, in a bureaucratic system like the Soviet Union's, a file on the missing Swede is not somewhere.
In August the Soviet ambassador in Stockholm, Boris Pankin, wrote that Moscow wanted to ‘turn the case of the search for Raoul Wallenberg into a mark of honour for his memory,’ but again claimed that the Swede had died under Stalin.
The ambassador said it was not surprising that many people refused to believe Wallenberg was dead, since the Soviet authorities initially denied he was in custody: ‘Who believes you if you have lied before?’
For years it was left to the family and close associates to keep the search alive.
The Swedish government's intermittent diplomatic efforts to solve the mystery got nowhere, often bungled out of deference to the Soviet Union.
America, which supported Wallenberg's activities in Budapest, quietly forgot, while Israel did little to honour him and even less to secure his release.
At last, the single-minded resolve of the Wallenberg Association in Sweden, of Nina Lagergren, his half-sister, Sonja Sonnenfeld, the association's secretary, and Per Anger, who was first secretary in Budapest during Wallenberg's time, may be rewarded.
The meeting with Kremlin officials could mark another significant step by the Soviet leadership as it comes publicly to terms with the unpleasant truths of a hitherto denied past.
‘He would be 77, have you seen him?’
Rupert Cornwell looks at the predicament facing the Kremlin hosts this weekend
By RUPERT CORNWELL
THE 26 August 1989 edition of Do i Posle Polinochi, the popular late-night television magazine was offering its usual mixture of chat and interviews when suddenly there was a pause.
A black and white photo of a young man appeared on the screen.
‘This is a picture of the Swedish diplomat, Raoul Wallenberg, taken in the 1940s,’ ran a caption beneath.
‘Today he would be 77, have you seen him?’
That was it.
But the moment alone was enough to prove that the Soviet authorities are sincere in their efforts to resolve the riddle of a romantic, mythical figure who single-handedly saved the lives of tens of thousands of Jews in wartime Budapest before disappearing for ever, at the start of 1945, into the darkness of Stalin's Russia.
At the invitation of the Soviet government, and accompanied by no fewer than 25 Swedish journalists, members of Raul Wallenberg's family and the society which bears his name will meet, during their week-long visit to Moscow, representatives of the KGB and the Foreign Ministry, who have promised to submit to them all available material.
The only problem is that the Soviet side insists there is nothing new.
For over three decades, Moscow has stuck to the explanation it gave in 1957 to the then Swedish Prime Minister, Tage Erlander: that 10 years before, in July 1947, Raul Wallenberg had died in Lubyanka prison.
Diligent searching of the Lubyanka files had unearthed a memo signed by one Dr Smoltsov, chief of medical services at the prison, to General Viktor Abakumov, the Minister of State Security, under whose ‘special supervision’ Wallenberg was being held.
He had died in his cell, the memo claimed, ‘presumably of a heart attack’.
On the orders of Abakumov the body was cremated without a post-mortem.
There, officially, the trail ends.
General Abakumov, by bitter irony himself a Jew, was shot on the orders of his rival, Lavrenti Beria, in 1951.
Dr Smoltsov's fate is unknown.
Stalin is dead, and so since this summer is Andrei Gromyko, who as Deputy Foreign Minister at the time of the 1957 note, might have been in a position to provide some elucidation.
In its absence, the Wallenberg enigma has persisted.
For 20 years after 1957, reports of ‘an old Swedish prisoner’ somewhere in the giant Soviet penal camp system would reach the West.
The instinctive secrecy of the Soviet Union, its propensity to lie, only fuelled the suspicions that the full truth had not been told.
Now the advent of Mr Gorbachev, and the departure of Mr Gromyko, have rekindled hopes that it will be.
If the 1957 explanation was false, the theory runs, then the subsequent loss of face would have been too great for a correction to be issued in Gromyko's lifetime.
And it is surely in keeping with the Kremlin's efforts to win trust abroad, to remove once and for all an issue which intrudes into every high-level encounter with Sweden.
Today no-one — with the possible exception of members of his family -seriously believes that Wallenberg is still alive somewhere in what is left of the Gulag Archipelago, four and a half years into perestroika.
The question is rather exactly when, where and how he died.
In the Soviet Union, unlike the West, Raoul Wallenberg is a little-known figure.
Maybe, however, someone's memory will have been nudged by that photo flashed on television screens six weeks ago.
In the meantime Andrei Sakharov, the human rights campaigner, has demanded a special investigation, independent of the government, to check the evidence and sift every rumour.
He himself paid two fruitless visits to the site of a camp near Torzhok, 200 miles north of Moscow, where as late as 1987 Wallenberg was said to have been held.
But no corroboration was forthcoming, either from local residents or from former camp officials.
More nagging is the suspicion that Wallenberg did not die of a heart attack at the age of 35, but was murdered or tortured to death.
The problem is the familiar one when trying to establish the exact fate of millions of Stalin's victims: detailed records of the security police, if they ever existed, have probably long since been destroyed.
Barco moves too late to break the drug barons
From SIMON FISHER in Bogota
ALMOST two months into Colombia's crackdown on the cocaine cartels, it is becoming increasingly clear that President Virgilio Barco has launched a war he cannot win.
Although President Barco is given credit for good intentions, the fear is that his move has come too late: by now, the money at stake is too big, the drug barons too firmly entrenched in Colombian society, and the state institutions too deeply compromised by too many years of complacency, if not complicity.
At the moment, the ‘war’ has become distilled to a hunt for Pablo Escobar and Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, two of the heads of the Medellin cartel.
The Ochoa family, whose patriarch freely gives interviews to the press on his family farm, seem to have been forgotten, as do the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers and Jose Santacruz, who lead the Cali cartel.
Rodriguez Gacha and Escobar are undoubtedly worthy of pursuit.
But the others are no prettier, and neither are the hundreds of hoods behind them waiting to take their gold-plated places.
Neither has been caught because both seem to have known of the swoops on their many hide-outs even before the authorities who conducted them.
This drug duo may have been singled out because their penchant for fine racehorses and private zoos, not to mention murder on a massive scale, made them the most public of the mafia bosses.
But some commentators believe that it may also be because, unlike other cartel kingpins, Escobar and Rodriguez Gacha are social upstarts who have clawed their way out of the gutter.
Colombia's ruling class maintains the conservative interests of its aristocratic lineage.
The clampdown has exposed the close links between landowners, the security forces and the cocaine cartels, who set up paramilitary squads to ‘clean out’ left-wing activists from rural areas such as the Magdalena Medio.
Politicians who have their power base in these areas, including several presidential candidates, are also implicated.
The drug barons have themselves become substantial land holders, effectively controlling several departments.
Amnesty International's report that this unholy alliance is responsible for at least 2,500 political killings in the past two years demonstrates that the Colombian authorities are more interested in waging a war on the left than on the drug cartels.
After 10 years, the cocaine trade has joined, and to some extent displaced, the traditional elite class.
The drug dollars have become an integral part of the economy.
The current offensive has provoked a sharp recession, with investment, construction, travel and commerce suffering badly.
Colombia does not have a consumption problem comparable to that of the US or Europe.
Consumption is relatively low, and the problem in Colombia is really one of politics and poverty.
For many ordinary Colombians, the drug traffickers have become heroes who fund social programmes and provide work, in a classic beans-and-bullets strategy.
They sought legitimacy and a political outlet to match their enormous economic power.
Until two months ago, they had achieved considerable success: the recent launch of a new political party, the National Restoration Movement (Morena), is credited to the cartels.
But after the assassination of the presidential candidate, Luis Carlos Galan, which triggered Mr Barco's clampdown, Morena was banned.
Secret talks with the government, which went on over a period of more than a year, were also broken off.
But many commentators believe that there are points of common interest between the government, the traffickers and the traditional ruling class, and that Mr Barco, a lame-duck president in the closing months of his administration, may no longer have the power within his own party to sustain his offensive.
One possible outcome of the current stalemate is that Colombia's next government will quietly accommodate with the traffickers, as did its predecessors, after the fuss has died down.
MONTERREY — Luis Cano, publisher of the Colombian daily, El Espectador, said yesterday that his newspaper would continue operations in Medellin despite threats from drug barons and the murder of two of its employees there, Reuter reports.
Presidential hopefuls confuse Brazil's voters
From RICHARD HOUSE in Brasilia
FIVE WEEKS before Brazil's first presidential elections in 29 years, an increasingly volatile political and economic situation favours a struggle between youthful candidates of the right and left.
For a month, more than 80 million voters have been bombarded with twice-daily doses of television broadcasts from 20 candidates.
Hours of lavishly-produced films have deployed mystical predictions, humorous pastiches of advertisements and evocations of Winston Churchill, all underscored by a vitriolic trade in insults between rivals.
The seven leading candidates have shunned firm manifesto proposals in favour of vague attacks on foreign creditors or elites who benefit from Brazil's crippling income disparities.
Those favouring taxation or recession have kept quiet.
But the broadcasts have confused voters — the number of don't-knows has risen to almost half — and produced complex movements in the far-from-reliable opinion polls, where four candidates are now closely bunched in second position behind a fast-flagging leader.
There has been an uncanny duplication of the pre-election economic chaos that Argentina experienced in May.
Brazilian monthly inflation has topped 36 per cent and the flight into gold and dollars has produced dramatic leaps in black-market rates.
Economists predict 50 per cent inflation by polling day.
As no outright winner is expected to emerge from 15 November's poll, a run- off will be held on 17 December between the two leading contenders.
The new president is not expected to take office until March 1990, or at best 1 January if Jose Sarney steps down from the presidency early.
This means Brazil will not have the rapid handover of power that saved Argentina from hyperinflation.
Brazil's latest political phenomenon, Fernando Collor de Mello, the governor of Alagoas state and a defector from the ruling PMDB, who founded his own party last year, astonished Brazil's political class by taking a dramatic early lead in the opinion polls.
He began the campaign with more support than all his rivals combined, but it has trickled through his fingers.
His 43 per cent support has shrunk to 32 per cent, according to the latest poll.
As the educated urban elite abandon Mr Collor, following a series of media exposes of his political record, he has relied on continued support from rural voters at rallies of up to 70,000.
But yesterday Mr Collor struck back by announcing a detailed Thatcherite economic plan to roll back the frontiers of the state.
‘We must replace a state that's gigantic, inefficient and corrupt with one that's modern and austere,’ he said.
He promised a ‘shock of credibility’ to beat inflation.
Zelia Cardoso de Mello, his chief economic adviser, proposed to increase tax revenues by 25 per cent, reduce government spending by 10 per cent and raise $18bn (£11.46bn) through privatisation programmes.
Mr Collor promised to reduce inflation to just 3 per cent a month within a year by using shock tactics similar to those of President Menem of Argentina.
He said this would be paid for by ‘speculators and those who have been living off the state like cannibals’.
Polls show a surge in support to 12 per cent for the left-wing Workers' Party (PT), whose candidate, Luis Inacio ‘Lula’ da Silva, could supplant the main social democratic contender, Leonel Brizola, and emerge as Mr Collor's rival in the run-off.
The union-backed PT favours an immediate debt moratorium and statutory controls on company profits.
Mr Collor is pleased by this polarisation, which could drive defecting conservatives — fearful of radical socialist advances — back to his camp.
Drug summit call to Europeans
From SIMON STRONG in Lima
The US yesterday welcomed a proposal made by the presidents of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia that European nations should participate in a drugs summit with President Bush.
The interior ministers of Peru, Bolivia and Colombia and representatives of Spain, France and Italy are to meet in Madrid in two weeks' time to discuss drug trafficking.
The issue was expected to be high on the agenda at the summit of presidents of the so-called Group of Eight — Peru, Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay — which started in Ica yesterday.
Meeting in Ica on Tuesday, Presidents Alan Garcia of Peru, Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia and Virgilio Barco of Colombia said there was an increased global sense of ‘co-responsibility’ for the drugs trade.
They welcomed last month's initiative by Mr Bush and called for a summit with him within 90 days.
Mr Bush doubled international military and police aid to stamp out drugs.
Mr Bush's failure to acknowledge the need for financial compensation for the three main producer countries, Peru, Bolivia and Colombia, has been condemned by all three, but this criticism was conspicuously absent from their declaration.
It was believed they differed on how to deal with the US and that Mr Garcia had pushed for a stronger stance.
Mr Paz Zamora said Europe was being invited to the summit because it had ‘demonstrated a marked interest in dealing with the problem alongside other countries’.