

Court Circular
From SIMON STRONG in Lima
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 11 October: This morning The Princess Royal, Patron, College of Occupational Therapists, opened the College's new Headquarters, Information and Study Centre, at 6-8 Marshalsea Road, London, and was received on arrival by The Mayor of Southwark (Mr Tony Ritchie).
Afterwards Her Royal Highness opened the Young Designer's Centre, The Design Council, 28 Haymarket, London, and was received on arrival by The Lord Mayor of Westminster (Councillor Simon Mabey).
This afternoon The Princess Royal visited the Headquarters of the Special Escort Group at their Barnes Headquarters, St Ann's Road, London.
Afterwards The Princess Royal, President, The Save the Children Fund, chaired the tenth meeting of The Save the Children Fund Industry and Commerce Group at Buckingham Palace.
In the evening Her Royal Highness attended a Banquet at the Guildhall given by the Worshipful Company of Framework Knitters to celebrate the 400th Anniversary of the invention of the Knitting Frame by William Lee.
The Princess Royal was attended by Mrs Malcolm Wallace.
Miss Anne Beckwith-Smith was in attendance.
11 October: The Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, President of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, this afternoon opened ‘Treetops’, the Society's Child Protection Team's Unit in Hemel Hempstead.
Her Royal Highness was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Deputy Lieutenant for Hertfordshire (Brigadier F. De Butts).
The Countess Alexander of Tunis was in attendance.
11 October: The Duchess of Gloucester, Patron of Counsel and Care for the Elderly, today visited the Counsel's new offices at 16 Bonny Street, London NW1.
Mrs Howard Page was in attendance.
YORK HOUSE 11 October: The Duke of Kent, Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers, today received Lieutenant-Colonel GW Henderson on assuming command of the 2nd Battalion and Lieutenant Colonel JC Gunnell on relinquishing the appointment.
The Duchess of Kent this morning attended a Thanksgiving Service in Exeter Cathedral to mark the 150th Anniversary of the foundation of the West of England School for Children with Little or No Sight, and later opened St David's House.
Her Royal Highness this afternoon visited the Devon Guild of Craftsmen's Centre, Bovey Tracey, Devon.
Her Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Mrs Alan Henderson.
The Duchess of York, Patron of Museums Year 1989, opens the Food for Thought Gallery at the Science Museum, London SW7; and, this evening, attends the opening performance of the Spanish Riding School at the Wembley Arena, Middlesex.
Prince Edward attends the presentation of the Historical Association's Young Historians prizes on the First National History Day at the Imperial War Museum, London SE1.
The Princess Royal, President, Riding for the Disabled Association, attends the Council Meeting at Saddlers Hall, London EC2; as Chief Commandant, Women's Royal Naval Service, attends a luncheon on board HMS London in the Pool of London; and, as Chancellor, University of London, attends a reception and dinner at the Senate House, Malet Street, London WC1, on the occasion of Foundation Day 1989, and attends the Fundation Ceremony and Reception at the Institute of Education, Bedford Way, London WC1.
The Duchess of Gloucester, attends an Anglo-Danish Society Ball at The Savoy Hotel, Strand, London WC2.
The Duchess of Kent, as Patron of Age Concern, opens a new Day Centre in Hockley and Hawkwell, Essex.
Obituary: Charles McCall
By BERNARD DUNSTAN and CHARLOTTE HALLIDAY
CHARLES McCALL was a painter who worked all his life unaffected by fashion or the pressures of the art world.
He belonged to no movement but his attitude could be described, like that of many good British painters of the last 50 years, as being in the tradition of Vuillard and Sickert.
Coming between the poetic neo-romanticism of the war years and the potentially overwhelming influence of American abstraction, theirs was a quiet but genuinely felt and observed art which shows its strength by continuing to flourish in its unsensational way.
McCall was happiest working on a small intimate scale, dealing with the domestic interior and the urban scene.
He used a solid rich surface of paint and liked the simplified shapes produced by artificial lighting.
In his person he matched his art perfectly: he was distinguished in appearance, erect in bearing and with a certain unselfconscious, slightly old-fashioned, courtesy.
Apparently preferring silence to chatter, in company he would let the froth bubble around him yet then produce a wry, always shrewd, comment.
Likewise, though a loyal supporter of the societies of which he was a valued member, he managed to remain detached from any of the inevitable petty politics.
Charles McCall began life as a clerk to a firm of lawyers in Edinburgh, but in 1933 he won a scholarship to Edinburgh College of Art, where he studied under DM Sutherland and SJ Peploe.
He was made a Fellow in 1938.
In that same year he returned from studying on the Continent and began to exhibit work in the Royal Academy and with the New English and the London Group.
He had One Man shows at many London galleries including the Leicester Galleries and the Belgrave and in Manchester, Dublin, New York, Montreal and Winnipeg.
Though dogged by ill health in later years he was still able to work in his particularly single-minded way, largely because of the devotion of his wife Mitzi whom he met during the war, while serving with the Royal Engineers.
Throughout their married life she was a tremendous support, managing their everyday affairs, helping to organise his exhibitions on both sides of the Atlantic and allowing him the freedom — one might say the luxury — to paint without interruption.
Obituary: Penny Lernoux
By PETER HEBBLETHWAITE
THROUGHOUT the last 20 years Penny Lernoux was one of the best interpreters of Latin America to the United States.
Born in Los Angeles in 1940, she majored in journalism and Spanish studies at the University of Southern California.
She found her bearings conventionally enough by working for the US information office in Bogota, Colombia, and then in Rio di Janeiro where she acquired a lifelong love for Brazil.
She served the Copley News Service for a decade and then, married to a British businessman, Denis Nahum, settled in Bogota and became Latin American correspondent for The National Catholic Reporter.
These were exciting years for the Catholic Church in Latin America.
The Medellin Bishops' meeting in 1968 launched the movement known as ‘liberation theology’.
A network of ‘base communities’ sprang up in response, and began to live the Gospel on the humblest level.
Lernoux's first book, Cry of the People (1980), was a superb piece of first-hand reporting about the way God appeared to have changed sides.
No longer the prop of an unjust social order, the God of the Magnificat was to be found on the side of the poor while the mighty trembled at the prospect of being toppled from their insecure thrones.
Lernoux became ‘the voice of those who had no voice’.
It was not a voice North Americans were used to hearing.
Lernoux was partisan.
She wrote from the shanty-towns, not from air-conditioned hotel rooms.
Her next book, In God We Trust (1984), tackled the effect of international banking on Latin America and the debt problem.
Her last book, which appeared this spring, The People of God: the struggle for world Catholicism (1989), struck a more sombre note.
It also contained her unconscious valedictory: As a Catholic observer who has lived in the Third World for nearly 30 years, I have followed developments in the Church, at times with despair but mostly with optimism.
The hope that a new Church of the poor has given to the impoverished masses of this region is the most significant political development in the region in recent decades.
This Church has also given me new faith.
She now thought that the Church was under attack from a Vatican more concerned with power and control than with the good of the people.
Cardinal Paolo Evaristo Arns, Archbishop of Sao Paolo, was in Belgium at the time of her death and would have liked to have said her Requiem Mass.
She was, he said, ‘a great journalist’—‘We must recommit ourselves to the important mission to which Lernoux was devoted.’
It is difficult to think of any comparable tribute from a cardinal to a journalist, still less to a woman.
It reminds us that there can be an invaluable ‘women's ministry’ well this side of the ordained priesthood.
The last cause she took up was that of Dom Pedro Casaldaliga, poet and bishop of a remote Amazonian diocese, unjustly pursued by the Vatican.
She began her last book with these lines of his: When you say law, I say God.
When you say peace, justice, love, I say God.
Obituary: Tony Hewitt-Jones
By LEWIS FOREMAN
TONY HEWITT-JONES was a versatile musician and a great character in Gloucestershire music.
Avuncular and sociable, he was a warm and friendly person who might be encountered conducting a Women's Institute choir, accompanying an audition at the piano, as a freelance organist or providing harpsichord continuo.
As a bass, his appearances in the choir at the Three Choirs Festivals found a singer who ‘could really get the bottom notes’.
By the wider public he will be remembered as a composer whose style, founded in practical music-making, has an immediate appeal which rewards both performers and audiences.
He more or less started the Gloucester County Youth Orchestra, which he conducted for 13 years, as well as running the County Music Summer Schools.
These activities gave him an enduring influence in the development of young musicians.
He conducted the Cheltenham Bach Choir, the Stroud Choral Society and all manner of local choirs.
The anti-clash diary of regional events which he compiled was widely distributed.
Hewitt-Jones went up to Christ Church, Oxford, where he was a pupil of Bernard Rose (who later recorded his Magnificat, written for Magdalen).
Later he studied with Herbert Sumsion, and was made an Associate of the Royal College of Organists in 1957 when he was awarded the Limpus and Read prizes.
In 1969, he took six months' sabbatical leave to study with Nadia Boulanger in Paris.
The earliest music Hewitt-Jones acknowledged was a cello sonata written in 1951.
His many anthems and music for church performance include delightful settings of Psalm 150 and ‘Bring Unto the Lord O Ye Mighty’.
One organist remarked to the present writer on the ‘marvellous’ Fanfare for organ, for which he also wrote a Sonata (1971).
Two of his best-known works, the unaccompanied setting of Donne's ‘At the Round Earths Imagin'd Corners’ and the Seven Sea Poems for soloist, chorus, oboe and strings, date from the mid-1950s, the latter making a strong impression during the 1968 City of London Festival.
The format of the traditional choral suite with soloist is also reflected in the light-hearted Good Company for baritone, chorus and orchestra (1964), and later in The Celestial City written for Adrian Beaumont and the Bristol Bach Choir in 1977.
Hewitt-Jones also wrote orchestral music, including a Sinfonietta for Strings (1959), concertos for oboe, for clarinet and for trumpet (1966, 1968, 1976), the first and last being works of considerable substance and worthwhile additions to somewhat restricted repertoires.
While not primarily a composer of chamber music, his substantial Piano Trio performed by the Joubert Trio in 1985, would appeal to a wide audience.
The majority of his music was written for particular occasions, for performers known to him or in memory of friends and colleagues.
Possibly the best known of these is the Mass of Reconciliation written for Coventry 25 years after the bombing (a service which appeared on disc), and his association with the Three Choirs Festival which included his Te Deum in 1962, his setting of ‘Let Us Now Praise Famous Men’ at the opening service in 1977, and the Benedicite (in memory of Cecil Adams) in 1986.
There is not space to enumerate all his works which arose from such associations, but The Battle of Tewkesbury for voices and instrumental ensemble for the 1971 Tewkesbury Festival and Henry Purcell for counter-tenor, clarino obbligato and strings for Alfred Deller and Stour Music (1971), the Jubilate for Charlton Kings Choral Society (1979), the Scherzo for piano and orchestra for Douglas Smith and the Cheltenham Sunday Players, the moving Concerto for trumpet and strings in memory of Bernard Brown (1976), and the Cantate Domino in memory of John Clough (1978) are all interesting examples that deserve to be heard again.
During the 1980s Hewitt-Jones suffered from depression, which inhibited composition, though he continued to produce new works.
For the last year of his life he suffered from myeloma, a form of bone cancer, and entered hospital for the last time in July where he made friends with another patient who, unfortunately, soon died.
This experience appeared to transform him and he threw himself into a great surge of composition, writing a Mass of Thanksgiving for unaccompanied choir filling 100 pages of manuscript, which he completed in 15 days, as well as other works, including a setting of Out of the Deep which is given its first performance by his choir at St Philip and St James, Cheltenham, at his funeral on today.
Obituary: Joe Crossman
By STEVE VOCE
Joseph Crossman, alto saxophonist and clarinettist, born London March 1905, died London 4 October 1989.
ODDLY enough, although he was for almost 50 years a pillar of the British dance band scene, by his own account Joe Crossman's only popular acclaim was given to him in the United States for his beautiful alto saxophone solo on Stanley Black's mid-Forties recording of Django Reinhardt's ballad ‘Nuages’.
Aptly enough Crossman died after leaving the El Coda Club, while walking down Archer Street.
The club was a meeting place for musicians of his era, and Archer Street was for many years the centre of the British dance music business.
‘He was never a progressive musician,’ recalls pianist Gerry Moore, who in contrast always was, ‘but he had the most beautiful tone.
I remember playing a concert with him at Portsmouth Town Hall, and he played one of the most moving versions of ‘Stardust’ that I ever heard.
During the Thirties when we were all in the big bands, I remember the really fiery jazz clarinet he used to play with us in the Bag O' Nails, just about the first jazz club in Britain.’
Crossman joined Ambrose's Embassy Club Orchestra in 1926, some years before the band made its name as the finest jazz group in Europe.
In 1932 he left to join the Lew Stone Band which, like Ambrose, played ‘society’ clubs in London.
Although conventional, Crossman's technique, dazzling for the time, shines through many of Stone's records, notably ‘Tiger Rag’ from 1934, where it is obvious that the American clarinettist Jimmy Dorsey had had a strong influence on him.
Unlike most other musicians, he did not seem to have been impressed by Louis Armstrong's seminal appearance at the London Palladium in 1932.
‘His actual presence gave me a shock,’ said Crossman then, ‘and I much regret to have to admit finding something barbaric in his violent stage mannerisms.’
Crossman left Lew to work for Jack Hylton and then, two days after the Second World War began, rejoined Ambrose.
‘Lew was a very communicative chap, who liked to discuss the musical arrangements with the boys in the band,’ he remembered.
‘Ambrose was much more stringent, and a sense of discipline could be felt, which was reflected in the style of clip phrases and a tighter rhythmic background used in his band.’
The Ambrose Orchestra played at the Mayfair Hotel until it was closed down by an unexploded bomb.
Forced to leave, Crossman played alongside Ted Heath in the Maurice Winnick Orchestra before touring France briefly for ENSA.
He then joined Harry Roy's band in 1940.
Roy was also a clarinettist, and when Joe soloed brilliantly on some of his records, the credit was given to Harry.
In October 1940 Joe was called into the RAF where he played in the band of Fighter Command with embryo jazz musicians like trumpeter Kenny Baker and reed player Aubrey Franks.
On his release he rejoined Harry Roy and later the novelty band Sid Milward And the Nitwits.
Working for ‘Geraldo's Navy’, the group of bands put together by Geraldo to play in cruise liners, he became band master of the SS Caronia in the middle Fifties.
He continued to work until a few years ago and from then on passed much of his time in London.
He was most often to be found in that jazz Mecca, Dobell's Record Shop in Tower Street, where he was happy to reminisce about earlier times and to discuss who played what on the records from his heyday.
Anniversaries
By STEVE VOCE
On this day: Christopher Columbus discovered San Salvador, 1492; the first Morris Minor car designed by Alec Issigonis was produced at Cowley, 1948.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 27
Bridge
By ALAN HIRON
GREAT BRITAIN has had mixed fortunes in international competition this year.
Our Open team finished tenth in the European Championships in Turku — their lowest ever placing — while our Women's team (generally regarded as ante-post favourites) could manage only sixth place.
It was left to our Juniors, competing in the Second World Junior Bridge Championships in Nottingham, to salvage our national pride.
This they did handsomely, leading the Round Robin qualifying rounds, defeating France, who had been strongly tipped, in the semi-finals and Argentina in the finals.
This was a deal where Andy Robson, playing with John Pottage for Britain, did all the right things.
Well done, but no bidding system yet devised could have identified the absence of the nine of clubs.
If this card had been with either North or South the slam would have been a 75-per-cent chance.
As the cards lay, some inspiration was needed.
The opening lead of a small trump did not solve any problems and declarer set to work to eliminate hearts and draw trumps.
Then came the ace and king of spades and a low club from dummy.
East played low, the ten lost to the king and back came a low club.
As you can see, if West had led his last spade dummy would have been forced to ruff and successfully play the ace of clubs.
At least by leading a club he gave declarer a choice.
There were a number of clues available to Robson: if West had still held the guarded queen of clubs he would almost certainly have kept and exited with his last spade; if he had held both the king and queen of clubs he would have been equally likely to win the first club with the queen; and, from what had happened so far, it looked as though West had started with more clubs than his partner.
At any rate, declarer went up with dummy's ace to drop the queen and land his slam.
I will ask him some time what prompted his winning play but it has been known for players to forget matters like that after a week's hard work.
Obituary: Huynh Tan Phat
By ALAN HIRON
Huynh Tan Phat, Viet Cong political leader, died Ho Chi Minh City 1 October aged 76.
In 1964 he became secretary-general of the National Liberation Front — the political arm of the Viet Cong — and thus officially the top communist leader in southern Vietnam, although more power was held by senior leaders from the north.
Following the Communist victory over the pro-American regime in 1975, Phat was named president of the short-lived Republic of South Vietnam.
When the republic was merged with North Vietnam in 1976 he became deputy prime minister.
In 1982 he was given the ceremonial post of vice-president.