

Commodities: Gold
By WADHAM SUTTON
GOLD bullion closed up a dollar in London helped by a pause in the dollar's advance with an absence of fresh news.
Meanwhile, a report from Credit Suisse says China will step up gold sales to 100-120 tonnes this year, to help pay off its mounting foreign debts.
China produces about 60 tonnes of gold annually.
Armchair Investor: Evans Halshaw
By WADHAM SUTTON
IT IS IRONIC that at a time when the shares of motor traders are dropping like stones, the price at which dealerships change hands has remained steady.
Though the volume of cars sold has come off its peak, the damage caused to this market by high interest rates has been less marked than in, say, housing.
Evans Halshaw, which runs Britain's largest chain of Ford dealerships in addition to selling a broad range of other marques, yesterday added another marque to its portfolio when Toyota granted the group a franchise at Stavordale Garages in the Wirral, Cheshire, after Evans bought the operation for £355,000 in cash.
Evans has been active in outlet trading.
In recent weeks it sold one Ford franchise for £8m and bought another for £6m.
This might seem curious, but Ford of Europe only allows dealers to have a maximum of eight franchises and Evans was at its limit.
Evans is convinced it ended up with a better dealer than it started with, and has £2m of cash to play with.
Despite this the market treats Evans like a black sheep with a severe attack of Chancelloritus — the disease that afflicts any company that people think will be affected by the Chancellor's high interest rate policies.
This month Evans has had its second downgrading of the year.
The first came when the group reported what seemed to be rather minor problems at its parts side.
Evans should make pre-tax profits of £12m this year, putting the shares at 223p on an earnings multiple of 6.1.
Far too cheap.
Market Report: Bid speculation puts some fizz into S & N
By DEREK PAIN
SCOTTISH & Newcastle Breweries starred again yesterday as the stock market was gripped by rumours that a mega takeover bid was imminent.
In often busy trading Scottish shares frothed up 20p to 389p with stories flowing that the French BSN foods and drinks group or the giant US brewer Anheuser-Busch was about to pounce.
The bid rumours, which also embraced other old takeover favourites such as Morgan Grenfell and Burmah, helped the market higher.
Chancellor Nigel Lawson's Tory conference speech had little impact.
The rush into speculative bid candidates was seen by some observers as further evidence of the fragility of the market.
‘It is a day for speculative stocks.
Fundamental considerations, such as looking for stocks which will beneift from sterling's weakness, are out of the window,’ said one bemused dealer.
A series of profit downgradings were shrugged off.
One leading stockbroker cut estimates for a string of leaders.
Amstrad, the electronics group, came out badly with this year's forecast slashed from £85m to £50m.
Its shares fell 2p to 55p But it was Scottish and the rest of the takeover in-crowd, with new time buyers active, which dominated the day's trading.
The brewing group has been the subject of intense speculation for decades.
This year the excitement has centred on the 23.7 per cent shareholding which Elders, the Australian group, has to cut to 9.9 per cent.
It is widely assumed that Elders will not bother to hold on to any Scottish shares and its 23.7 per cent stake will be acquired and used as the springboard for a bid.
An offer within the next few days could also hinder the £645m sale of Scottish's Thistle Hotels chain to Mount Charlotte Investments.
There is little doubt that in the Monopolies and Mergers Commission-inspired upheaval in the brewing industry Scottish represents the most obvious entry into the British beerage by an overseas group.
Another theory is that Scottish, in a pre-emptive move, is about to buy the brewing interests of Grand Metropolitan.
Merchant bank Morgan Grenfell rose 16p to 406p, with suggestions resurfacing that insurance broker Willis Faber had sold its 20.5 per cent holding to a Continental predator.
Burmah, in a firm oil section, remained in demand.
The market is convinced that the Dutch SHV group is adding to its near-5 per cent shareholding.
The shares rose 9p to 647p.
They have climbed 46p this week.
Conglomerate BET rose 4p to 260p as Normura forecast profits up nearly £50m to £320m and said the shares were oversold.
APV was little changed at 131p.
Angus Sibley, at CIBC Grenfell & Colegrave, said: ‘With 80 per cent of sales to overseas customers, APV is an excellent hedge against sterling weakness.’
Ferranti International rose 1.5p to 58p as Hoare Govett and others sought to pick up shares.
Hoare is acting for British Aerospace, which yesterday admitted it had a 1.7 per cent stake.
Tozer, Kemsley & Millbourn, the garages group, edged ahead 2.5p to 132.5p.
Speculation continues that New Zealander Sir Ron Brierley is planning to sell his controlling stake, with takeover-threatened Unigate emerging as the most likely buyer.
Hogg Robinson, the travel group, was unchanged at 143p as Sir Ron's stake went to 12.7 per cent.
Jaguar recovered 27p to 663p on hopes of takeover developments in the next account.
BTR rose 7p to 437p with Kolhberg Kravis Roberts, which has filed notice of its intention to go to 15 per cent, reported to be buying.
Trafalgar House improved 13p to 349p.
Asda, the stores group, rose 4p to 163p.
The acquisition of the 61 Gateway stores was approved by shareholders.
Macarthy, the pharmaceutical wholesaler and retailer, surged 38p to 308p as stories of a West German bid were revived.
Saatchi & Saatchi fell 3p to 344p following management changes and WCRS Group continued to attract speculative interest, up 25p to 304p.
ML Laboratories, expected to announce new drug developments soon, jumped 40p to 495p.
Shares bounced back yesterday although the rally carried little conviction.
The FT-SE share index closed near its best level at 2,237.8, up 19 points.
The FT 30 share index gained 20.4 to 1,817.7.
Government stocks were firm, scoring gains of £1 8 in places.
Shares of Pennine Optical slipped 2p to 75p on the Third Market as the company paid £1.6m for A-Z Dental, a false teeth maker.
Pennine, with a £3.2m capitalisation, is raising £2.2m through an open offer to shareholders on a two-for-three basis at 70p.
Stockbroker Charlton Seal Schaverien yesterday conditionally placed the new stock.
Shares of Harrisons & Crosfield, the chemical, timber and plantation group, rose 2p to 158p yesterday.
Bob Carpenter at Kitcat & Aitken believes they are undervalued and should be purchased for the 7 per cent dividend yield and the group's medium term potential.
He expects profits this year of £135m and has pencilled in £150m for next year.
View from City Road: Anxious times for the Panel
By DEREK PAIN
ON THE wall of a waiting room at the Takeover Panel hangs a ‘notice to advisers in contested bids’ anticipating the reaction of whichever side receives an adverse ruling.
It says: ‘Self-regulation as we know it will end if the executive rules against you.’
The Panel's self-regulatory status is often under verbal threat from those on the receiving end of adverse rulings.
But now it faces a more serious threat.
While the rest of the City has had to relinquish self-regulation under the Financial Services Act, the Panel has continued as a non-statutory body.
Its independent status has been supported by many companies, merchant bankers, stockbrokers and lawyers.
That is not to say its decisions go unchallenged -witness the furore over Consolidated Gold Fields and Newgateway.
Lurking in the corridors of Brussels is a draft EC directive which could fundamentally change the way the Panel works.
There was a drafting meeting yesterday and discussions are under way in a Council of Ministers working group and various committees of the European Parliament.
The directive — which is quite separate from the proposals for vetting large takeovers from the point of view of competition — is in itself uncontroversial.
It requires member states to set rules on mandatory bids, providing information to shareholders and treating them equally.
All of this is already covered in the Takeover Code.
The problem is over who administers the rules.
EC regulations normally have to be implemented by statutory authorities, but the Panel has little statutory backing.
It wants the EC to make an exception in its case.
The Panel wants to be the competent authority and to be explicitly designated as such.
It believes this would prevent legal challenges to its status while retaining its flexibility to interpret the code according to changing circumstances.
Precedents are few and far between.
The Advertising Standards Authority provides the nearest model, but even this is not ideal for the Panel.
The ASA is not a competent authority — this status has been accorded to the Office of Fair Trading, which effectively delegates the task of monitoring misleading advertisements to the ASA.
A similar structure would not entirely satisfy the Panel.
Whether it can persuade the Government to dig in its heels over this issue looks very uncertain.
But the City should support its call.
View from City Road: LWT's schedule for a repeat
By DEREK PAIN
IMAGINE the reaction if, say, Ladbroke came to its shareholders and said: ‘The Government have decreed that we will have to rebid for our betting licence in 1992, and to put ourselves in a better position to win it we are taking on borrowings equal to our equity and giving our managers around 15 per cent of the company.’
LWT revealed the details of a similar scheme yesterday and also let slip that its advertising revenue and market share were on the slide.
Yet its shares jumped 10 per cent, compounding the strength of the shares since the scheme was first mooted.
The plan is that a new company, soon to be renamed LWT (Holdings), will buy in all of LWT's shares, paying one new preferred share plus a package worth 130p made up of a special dividend of 60p, an associated tax credit of 20p and either loan notes or cash worth 50p.
In 1993 or 1994, these preferred shares will be swapped for ordinary shares.
Forty of LWT's managers will be allowed to subscribe for these at a price equal to LWT's share price today, minus 130p.
LWT's managers will end up with between 5 and 15 per cent of the new company depending on the performance in the interim, for which they will pay £3m — £700,000 in cash and £2.3m in forgone share options.
To pay for all this LWT is turning £50m of cash into £72.5m of debt.
Its market capitalisation will fall from £200m to £70m, the size Christopher Bland, LWT chairman, thinks is ideal to bid for the franchise.
Mr Bland is banking on the ability of TV companies to generate cash.
Borrowings will fall immediately as the company releases advanced corporation tax reserves, and two-thirds should be paid by 1992.
But the spanner in these works could be falling advertising revenue.
The winter is going to be bleak for the TV companies as income from advertising falls off, and the New Year bleaker as they have to fork out a higher Government levy.
LWT, whose market share is under attack, may find it hard to maintain the 40 per cent return on capital that would make its share incentive scheme worthwhile to the managers.
LWT needs 75 per cent of its shareholders to approve the scheme, which does not seem too difficult now the plans have been moderated.
Shareholders will end up with a highly leveraged vehicle — which is fine if the group is going to thrive and win its franchise, but dangerous if either the group's stream of advertising revenue or its franchise is under threat.
View from City Road: Saatchi needs radical refocus
By DEREK PAIN
THE SAATCHI & SAATCHI share price responds better these days to gossip and innuendo than it does to hard fact.
The announcement of a new senior management team was greeted with a 3p mark-down to 344p by a market that is much happier with rumours of bids and break-ups at the troubled communications group.
The fall in the shares also reflects the fact that the more Saatchi does to put its house in order, the less chance there will be of a third party doing the job instead.
The new appointments demonstrate a commitment by the Saatchi brothers to restore the company's fortunes and suggest they are a long way from turning their backs on the business they built.
It was not an easy decision to make but one that was helped by the undoubted pedigree of the new team.
However, the arrival of fresh management does not translate automatically into an immediate upturn in Saatchi's performance.
Its problems are too deep rooted and a more radical refocusing is required before it can return to its more traditional profits growth pattern.
But the arrival of Messrs Louis-Dreyfus and Scott will give the group an injection of basic management skills and strategy that has been missing of late.
The newcomers will be hoping that the unsettling bid talk will die down so they can set about the more urgent tasks that lie ahead.
Investors, who have seen life breathed into a share price that was destined for the doldrums this year, may have a different view.
They may prefer short term bid speculation to long term recovery but if Mr Louis-Dreyfus has his way, they will have to settle for the latter.
Column Eight: Giving your mortgage a service
By SIMON PINCOMBE
The building society grapevine is buzzing with rumours of foreign predators queuing up to bid for a large British society.
The latest whisper surrounds Ford.
Yes, that's right, the car maker.
The American corporation refuses to comment, of course, but the notion is not quite as bizarre as it sounds.
Ford has a massive financial services division, with a $100.2bn balance sheet and net income last year of $691m.
More to the point, it is looking to expand its European credit operations which are comparatively small, but highly profitable.
In Britain, Ford Motor Credit has a banking licence, and has therefore already cleared the Bank of England's ‘fit and proper’ hurdle.
And doesn't the Bradford, Bingley & Dagenham have a convincing ring to it?
Just a joke Mr Bingley.
Red faces all round at Chase Manhattan following a foray into London's docklands in search of new offices.
The leading US bank is leaving its City headquarters in Wolgate House.
And according to next week's edition of International Financing Review, a high powered scouting party was dispatched under the command of Willard Butcher, the chairman.
Alas, on boarding the Docklands Light Railway the party was confronted by an inspector only to find that they had purchased childrens' tickets by mistake.
It was either off the train or pay the fine.
They paid the fine.
Savoy Hotel directors evidently have an awesome regard for the talents of Willy Bauer, the celebrated manager who left them to supervise the links at Wentworth.
The company is buying three of the 40 ‘A’ units in the golf and country club in a deal worth roughly £2.4m.
Payment has been satisfied by the issue of 274,914 Savoy ‘A’ shares.
Of course, the deal will also allow certain ‘selected’ Savoy clients to hack divots out of the championship course.
The company secretary of a very well known firm in Yeovil, Somerset (he prefers to remain anonymous) was yesterday spotted emptying the contents of the office's hole punchers.
Happily this is not a security crisis.
Purely an attempt to gather some confetti for a wedding in the town tomorrow.
Having stumped up £250 to help sponsor a general practitioners' management meeting in Nottingham, the Royal Bank of Scotland saw fit to leave it at that.
Not so John Emmerson of the National Westminster's medical unit in London.
He travelled to the meeting for ‘observation purposes’ and cheerfully mopped up all the business.
A dejected David Mellor, of the Royal Bank, told the magazine Doctor: ‘I was led to believe it wasn't an appropriate venue for a bank representative.’
Ferranti puts own man in charge at ISC
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
FERRANTI moved yesterday to take full management control of its International Signal and Control subsidiary where a £215m fraud has been discovered.
The UK defence contractor has been strongly criticised for allowing ISC, a highly secretive US arms manufacturer, too much independence since acquiring the company two years ago.
Albert Dodd, a long-standing Ferranti director, has been put in charge of ISC and its subsidiaries including Marquardt, EMP, Datacom, Cardion Electronics and Laben and Elmer in Italy, with a view to bringing about closer integration.
ISC used to be run as a state-within-a-state by James Guerin, its founder, until his forced departure from the group in May.
It is now under the wing of Joe Zilligen, ISC's finance director.
In a separate development, British Aerospace confirmed it had raised its stake in Ferranti to 1.7 per cent through the purchase of 5.72 million shares.
BAe's stockbroker, Hoare Govett, was in the market again yesterday but is not believed to have added significantly to the stake.
A huge volume of Ferranti shares has changed hands since they returned to trading just over a week ago and a number of other potential bidders are believed to have built up small stakes.
Ferranti continued with presentations yesterday to the group of more than 10 companies believed to have expressed an interest in bidding for the company or providing it with equity capital.
Mr Zilligen is to relinquish his posts as chairman of Ferranti International USA and chief executive officer of Ferranti Italia though he will remain a main board director and assist Mr Dodd at ISC's Lancaster headquarters in Pennsylvania.
Surprise has been expressed in some quarters that Mr Zilligen has been allowed to stay on the Ferranti board given his key role at ISC during the £215m deception.
Other directors are understood to be satisfied that he was not implicated in the fraud and had no knowledge of it.
Since discovery of the deception, which involved the creation of non existent profits and stocks in the books through use of ‘phantom’ contracts, Mr Zilligen has given investigators every assistance in helping to get to the bottom of the debacle.
Company News in Brief 
Business and City Page 23
AMI Healthcare in good shape
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
WITH the future ownership of its American parent still in the balance, AMI Healthcare, the British private hospital group, has announced an increase in pre-tax profits from £15.8m to £20.9m.
Sales in the year to August grew by 19 per cent to £131m, while operating profits were up 17 per cent at £22.1m.
Operating margins were squeezed from 17.2 to 16.9 per cent as the company had to increase wage rates in line with NHS rises.
A final dividend of 4p makes a total of 6p.
Earnings per share rose from 18p to 20.5p.
AMI is 65 per cent owned by American Healthcare International, the US group.
The parent company is subject of a £1.3bn leveraged buyout from IMA, an investor group.
AMI Healthcare operates 13 acute care hospitals and four psychiatric hospitals in the UK.
It also has corporate health screening and medical diagnostic interests.
Acute care operations account for 93 per cent of sales and 94 per cent of profits.
AMI spent £14m last year refurbishing existing facilities and acquiring new ones.
Strong cashflow allowed borrowings to fall.
Interest paid was down from £3.1m to £1.2m and gearing at the year-end was 9 per cent.
Dr Marvin Goldberg, chief executive, expects continued growth in private health care.
‘Private companies are spending £2.2bn a year on their employees’ health care, which is a tenth of the National Health Service budget of £22bn,’he said.
Occupancy of AMI's acute care hospitals averaged 63 per cent throughout the year.
Admissions rose by 6.4 per cent to 62,000, with the average stay falling from 4.6 to 4.4 days.
In an £8m programme AMI is doubling the resources in its psychiatric division, which accounted for just under 5 per cent of group sales last year.
Rentaminster in court action against director
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
RENTAMINSTER, the third market company which supplies labour to the construction industry, has instituted court proceedings against Anthony Swales and dismissed him as a director of the company and its subsidary BES Construction Services.
The action follows detailed investigations carried out by the board last month.
The company and its solicitors, Jeffrey Green Russell, could not elaborate on the reasons for the action against Mr Swales as they said the matter was sub judice.
Rodney Toogood, chairman, said the matter was not material to the business.
It would not affect results in the period to the end of June or current trading, which was to budget.
Rentaminster joined the third market in August last year through sponsor Brewin Dolphin.
Earlier this year it acquired the sales training agency Sales Booster International for £9.3m.
The placing and rights issue to fund the acquisition were undersubscribed, with 61.2 per cent of the rights issue taken up.
USH may cost extra 25m pounds
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
MEGGITT'S £110m bid for United Scientific Holdings could cost a further £25m, if the Singapore Securities Industry Council rules that Meggitt must buy out the 35 per cent minority in AVS, USH's Singapore subsidiary.
USH has approached the securities council for a ruling.
Ken Coates, managing director of Meggitt, dismissed the issue as ‘a diversion’, but said the company had the cash.
By yesterday's first closing date Meggitt had acceptances of 7.2 per cent of the ordinary shares of USH, taking its total stake to 10.2 per cent, and 5.2 per cent of the preference shares.
Nu-Swift gets 219m pounds from buyout
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
NU-SWIFT GROUP has put the finishing touches to France's second biggest leveraged buyout, confirming yesterday the £218.7m sale of an 88.5 per cent stake in Compagnie Centrale Sicli.
The buyer, Financiere Sicli, controlled by a group of investors including Bankers Trust and Wasserstein Perella, was formed especially for the acquisition.
Nu-Swift will repay £65.3m to retain HP Cleaning, the US business maintenance group bought by Sicli last year, and will also subscribe for a 33 per cent interest in Financiere Sicli.
Confirmation of the deal, the terms of which were adjusted marginally for exchange rate movements since a letter of intent was signed in July, coincided with the release of Nu-Swift's interim figures revealing pre-tax profits of £16.4m (£15.5m) and earnings per share of 19.78p (18.73p).
Outlook: Lawson revives loan rate threat
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
Financial markets yesterday naively expected something, although they did not know what, from Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
In the event, his speech was aimed primarily at reassuring Conservatives, and secondarily at mollifying markets.
But the disappointment was restrained, even if Mr Lawson left important questions such as joining the European exchange rate mechanism unanswered.
Sterling, helped conveniently by the Bank of England, was relatively steady, and equities closed 19 points up.
But there may have been more to the Chancellor's remarks than meet the eye.
Mr Lawson declared that the Conservatives ‘never have been and never will be the party of devaluation.’
Anodyne though those remarks may seem, they revived the threat that the authorities were ready to take action to defend the pound.
And it cannot be ruled out that even higher interest rates -whatever the political consequences — would be used in the last resort.
Before Mr Lawson's speech the markets had decided that the Government was unwilling to contemplate another increase.
That may still be the case.
But the Chancellor yesterday replanted the seeds of worry, even though another interest rate rise would make the risk of recession unacceptably high.
So with the commitment to defending the pound restated, there was caution in the markets.
Mr Lawson's hints were supported by an increase in overnight rates in the money markets, where the Bank of England has not financed shortages in full.
That makes it painfully expensive to sell the pound short.
But Mr Lawson and the Bank may only have bought a week for sterling.
High hopes are riding on the Chancellor's annual speech on monetary policy at the Mansion House next Thursday.
If the markets are pressing for sterling's entry into the ERM, a negative message could invite a brutal reaction.
Outlook: Americans tilt playing field
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
By early next week each of the 400 members of the Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers, the self-regulatory organisation for com modities, should have received the latest proposal from the United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission for ending the wrangle over London firms doing business for American clients.
But even if the proposals prove sufficiently acceptable, important questions of principle will remain unresolved.
The proposal sets out in detail how profits made, but not realised, by American customers of British brokers dealing in this country can be guaranteed against the broker's financial failure.
Segregation of funds chiefly affects the London Metal Exchange, whose successful hybrid of futures and forward market has baffled the CFTC.
But many AFBD members are disturbed by the implication that they could be answerable in London to a foreign regulator.
The CFTC says that this latest offer is the last.
Given that the AFBD seems to agree, and that the deadline for acceptance is 14 November, the CFTC is in a strong position.
Only a mass revolt by AFBD members — which is unlikely -or legal action by particularly aggrieved firms, for example the Commodity Trad ers' Group, can prevent the great majority of those firms which wish to continue doing business with Americans from signing the commission's order exempting them from the full rigour of its rules.
The AFBD, and probably the LME, will dodge the issue by leaving members separately to decide whether to apply for exemption.
Leadership cannot be expected from those quarters.
Yet the principles remain.
The CFTC will have the right, with the acquiesence of the Government, to intervene in business conducted under a regulatory regime which any reasonable person would consider more than adequate.
The right, moreover, will extend to only one group of customers, Americans.
In other words, the agreement offers privileges of protection to one group not afforded to others.
This is a principle of extra-territoriality, and it is not clear what British firms in America receive in return.
For the Securities and Investments Board, which neogtiated the original sorry deal, and for the AFBD, the episode has been a baptism by fire.
It has underlined how tricky is the interpretation of the level playing field.
The hope must be that both bodies have emerged from the fire hardened in their dealings with other regulatory bodies on behalf of the City and the country.
Outlook: Maintaining an invisible record
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
Unless we do live in an age of miracles, it seems unavoidable that the current account deficit this year will be about £20bn, an unenviable record.
But as Lord Limerick, chairman of the British Invisible Exports Council, points out in the council's latest annual report, British investors appear unusally skilled at building up, and generating earnings from, overseas portfolios.
The hopes of Nigel Lawson, Chancellor of the Exchequer, for financing the trade deficit are partly pinned on this ability.
In 1988 total net private sector invisible earnings were £12.1bn.
Against that, the Government ran an invisible deficit of £5.94bn, and the deficit on visible trade was £20.8bn.
Britain's net foreign assets grew by £4bn, and the total overseas portfolio produced income of £5.9bn and capital gains of £16.1bn.
On this basis, Britain was the world's biggest generator of invisible earnings, and has probably remained so this year.
But can the record be maintained?
Faced with poor trade figures for some time to come, it is an important question.
One concern must be the impact of tighter regulation in Britain on the City's ability to sell services and earn from them.
Up to a point, regulation may attract business by offering a more secure environment.
It is also premature to assume that the single European market means that rival continental financial centres will deliberately keep regulatory standards below London's.
The object of British policy must be to ensure genuine equivalence of standards and to control regulatory costs in London.
Office and shop redevelopment scheme planned for Spitalfields: The Spitalfields Development Group
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
THE Spitalfields Development Group, the consortium planning the redevelopment of the fruit and flower market in the City of London (above), has applied for planning permission for a radically revised 1.9 million sq ft scheme (below), involving 900,000 sq ft of flexible office space, 200,000 sq ft of retail units, residential and lesiure elements.
Two years ago the group won the go-ahead for a different scheme aimed at the banking and financial sectors, but the crash and oversupply in the City market forced a rethink.
Royal Assent for a Bill to move the market to North-east London is expected by the end of the year and the group hopes to complete the redevelopment by 1995 
Water authorities that will make a splash: Jeremy Warner on investment in the floated water authorities
By JEREMY WARNER
STOCK broking analysts are about to start making choices about which of the 10 water authorities being floated in early December are worth investing in.
To ensure the successful flotation of all 10, the Government has attempted to gloss over differences and has reconstructed the authorities financially to make them seem equally attractive.
Stock broking firms that are involved in the issue or act for the authorities have been banned in the run up to flotation from issuing any research.
There appears to be only three front ranking firms not involved and therefore not covered by the ban — CL-Alexanders Laing & Cruickshank, Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers and Hoare Govett.
In private, however, all are making judgements about the relative merits of each of the authorities.
Thanks to the inherently leaky nature of the water industry, there is already a fair amount of information to go on.
The Labour Party recently publicised a series of financial projections for nine of the 10 authorities that not even the prospectuses will contain.
The documents appear to have been working papers that were used for setting price caps for the authorities.
These documents were later issued to bankers who are granting medium-term credit facilities to the authorities.
The fact that there were no projections for South West Water has fuelled speculation that this authority might be left out of the flotation process.
However, there appear to be less sinister reasons behind its absence from the leaked papers.
The Government has stuffed the authority so full of cash -it is being privatised with £242m of cash in its balance sheet (equivalent to more than £140 for every person in the region)— that it does not need any medium-term credit facilities.
Despite its cash mountain, South West is still generally seen, perhaps unfairly, as the least attractive of the authorities and privately the Government is worried about its flotation prospects.
The Camelford pollution incident, coupled with the bungled appointment of a new finance director, has contributed to an impression of management incompetence.
South West appointed the finance director only to have him vetoed by the Government on the grounds that he was caught up in a Department of Trade and Industry investigation.
South West also faces a beach clean-up programme, which worries some analysts.
Some of the water authorities are thought likely to attract predatory interest.
Golden shares will prevent the French water companies that have been investing in the British water industry from bidding outright for five years.
But they will be allowed to buy stakes of up to 15 per cent and after five years the barriers will come down.
Northumbrian, Wessex, Southern and Yorkshire are thought to be vulnerable.
Lyonnais des Eaux already owns the two big statutory water companies in Northumbrian's region and is bound to have ambitions for the region as a whole.
Wessex and Yorkshire are thought possible targets for Compagnie Generale des Eaux and Southern could eventually fall prey to Saur, which owns most of the private water companies in its area.
Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers expects the water authorities to be floated on the stock market with dividend yields of between 6.5 per cent and 8.5 per cent.
The leaked financial projections show that the Government is giving the authorities substantial leaway for raising dividends in real terms over the next 10 years.
The documents indicate that shareholders can look forward to annual rises above the rate of inflation ranging from 3.2 per cent in the case of Severn Trent to 5.5 per cent for Northumbrian, North West and Yorkshire.
Thames Water, the biggest, has traditionally been thought the most attractive.
There are far more potential shareholder-customers in its region than elsewhere and there are greater potential profits from property disposals.
However, some analysts have expressed doubts about management continuity.
Lowndes Queensway loses 16.9m pounds halfway: Jason Nisse examines the problems which have dogged James Gulliver's company since last year's takeover
By JASON NISSE
JAMES GULLIVER, chairman of the troubled furniture and carpets retailer Lowndes Queensway, yesterday announced ‘with sadness’ a £16.9m pre-tax loss for the six months to 30 July.
The loss was £100,000 less than the group predicted when it launched an £18.5m rights issue to refinance the group in August.
But otherwise the City found little cheer in the results.
Losses per share were 7.52p and the shares themselves slipped ½ p to 15 ½ p.
This compares with a rights issue price of 20p and a price of 102p last year when Lowndes took over Harris Queensway for £450m.
Sales, on a like-for-like basis, were down nearly 10 per cent, with operating losses of £5.2m.
Eddie Dayan, Lowndes' managing director, said it was too early to know how the latest round of interest rates would affect sales, but the company has put on hold its £10m store refurbishment programme, which was three-quarters complete.
Interest charges on the group's £180m of debt were £11.7m.
Though £80m of this was swapped into fixed rate money recently, this was still at what the company calls ‘usurious’ rates and only £60m of this total was borrowed at interest rates significantly below the high levels of today.
The group made a provision of £78m last year to cover stock writedowns, reorganisation costs and two outstanding legal actions.
In the half it used up £21m of this provision, and the net cash outflow of the group was £40m.
Since the year-end Lowndes has settled one of its actions, paying £3m to to NFC, the former National Freight Consortium, to cover ending a distribution agreement signed before Lowndes took over Harris Queensway.
The company is not likely to make a profit either in the second half of this year or next year.
Most City analysts do not expect to see a dividend paid before 1992 and the less optimistic believe Lowndes will have to refinance itself again next year.
They point out that the group has a banking facility limit of £190m, and though it does have £10m more of properties to be sold it does not take much to push the Lowndes to this limit.
The company's poor performance has been brought about by adverse factors that have dogged Lowndes since it bought out Harris Queensway, which had grown fast in the early 1980s only to fall on more difficult times.
The former chairman, Sir Phil Harris, soon sold his shares and it was not long before the new company was running off the rails.
Lowndes found that management controls and stock levels were not as good as they had hoped.
Just as they were implementing changes to bring the company to heel the Chancellor started his process of attacking retail spending through higher interest rates.
This hit carpets and furniture retailing particularly hard, as did new furniture fire regulations brought in by the European Commission piecemeal.
UK is heading for ‘acquisitions deficit’
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
THE UK is heading for a ‘balance of acquisitions deficit’ with continental Europe, according to statistics released yesterday by Acquisitions Monthly.
In the first nine months of 1989, British companies spent £2.1bn on buying continental companies, up on the £1.6bn recorded in the comparable period.
But this was less than the £2.3bn that mainland European corporations spent on UK acquisitions.
The trend is further underlined by the relative size of the companies acquired.
Whereas British companies spent an average of £7.6m per deal on their 278 acquisitions, continental takeovers averaged £23m in 99 deals.
The figures highlight the debate over ‘reciprocity’ which arose out of the £2.1bn takeover of Rowntree by Swiss group Nestle last year.
This deal has also figured in the European Council of Ministers' negotiations over a common mergers policy.
Philip Healey, Acquisitions Monthly editor, said UK companies do not go for smaller acquisitions out of choice.
‘In most European countries, government obstacles, complex share structures and cross-shareholdings continue to make many large, and even medium-size companies impregnable to hostile takeovers.’
French companies are the most active in buying UK ones.
They bought 21 UK groups for £918m in the nine months, which compared with 62 deals worth £382m by British companies in France.
The largest deal, however, was by a British company in The Netherlands, with Scottish & Newcastle Breweries' acquisition of CentreParcs.
At £518m, this was £6m more valuable than the £512m spent by Rhone Poulenc, the French industrial group, in acquiring RTZ chemicals.
The figures for European buying in the UK takes in £270m for the buyout of the British Newspaper Printing Corporation by the Liechtenstein based Maxwell foundation.
France, Germany, The Netherlands and Spain proved to be the most popular for UK bidders.
‘European acquisitions are now firmly on the board agenda for a growing number of UK company directors,’ said Mr Healey.
If the trend continues, 1989 will be the first year in which UK companies have made more acquisitions in continental Europe than in the US.
‘The trend towards ever more ambitious takeover attempts looks certain to continue,’ Mr Healey concluded.
‘If a vast conglomerate like BAT can come under attack, no-one is really immune from a bid approach.’
Free market ‘needed for regulators’
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
A DISPUTE over which American regulatory agency should control new financial products could be ended by the application of free market principals, according to Joseph Grundfest, a commissioner with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
New products should be allowed to trade freely in any market overseen only by the agency responsible for that market, he told the Chicago Commodities Law Institute yesterday.
This approach could end the long-running battle between the SEC and the Commodity Futures Trade Commission over which agency should be responsible for which new products.
The SEC and CFTC are fighting in the courts over which should regulate ‘stock-basket’ products, new financial instruments with a cash security and a futures contract.
‘When the product trades in the futures market it can be regulated by the CFTC,’ suggested Mr Grundfest.
‘When it trades in the securities markets it can be regulated by the SEC.’
After-hours computerised futures trading will be operating in the US next year, possibly through a combination of systems being developed by the world's two largest futures exchanges, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the LIFFE.
Hambros launches interest hedge
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
HAMBROS BANK has launched an interest-rate fixing product which is likely to intensify competition in the market for hedging exposure to the fluctuating cost of money.
Called Simple Hedge for Interest Rate Exposure (Shire), the product allows companies to budget for interest from deposits or for servicing loans.
Shire enables a borrower to fix the maximum interest rate payable over an agreed period, and also gives the borrower the benefit of falls in the interest rate below a set level.
At the moment the product is restricted to interest rates and to medium or big corporate clients.
But Graham Steward, director of Hambros treasury and capital markets division, said that the principle could be extended to currencies and small companies, and perhaps even to individuals, for example to hedge mortgages.
Mr Steward said that the bank charges no fees or premiums for Shire.
It makes money from spreads on its hedging operations which fix the interest rate, and on attracting new clients.
The product had three elements.
The contract rate sets the maximum interest rate payable on an exposure.
If interest rates rise above the contract rate, Hambros meets the difference.
Customers can also take advantage of falling rates.
The exit rate is the agreed interest rate below which the contract rate is abandoned.
If rates fall below the exit rate, the customer pays the market rate plus the difference between the contract and exit rates.
Thus, if the contract rate were 14 per cent, the exit rate might be 13.65 per cent .
Should interest rates fall to 9 per cent, the customer would pay 9 per cent , plus 0.35 per cent , the difference between the contract and exit rates.
The third element is the duration of the hedge.
An agreement would normally embrace a number of interest rate renewal periods of three, six, nine or 12 months over a total of two years.
Hawker and GEC in 40m pounds deal
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
HAWKER SIDDELEY yesterday strengthened its position in the European electric motors business by agreeing to purchase GEC Alsthom's electromotors division in a deal worth between £35m and £40m.
The merger of the two operations will transform Hawker Siddeley into the UK's biggest supplier while giving it 10 per cent of the European market -putting it in third place behind the Swedish-Swiss combine Asea Brown Boveri and Siemens of West Germany.
The purchase follows Hawker Siddeley's acquisition earlier this year of a 49 per cent stake in Elco Elettromeccanica, an Italian maker of small electric motors, as part of a plan to strengthen its European presence.
Dr Alan Watkins, Hawker Siddeley's chief executive, said the deal with GEC Alsthom would re-inforce its position in the fiercely competitive UK market and enable it to achieve greater exports than the two companies had separately.
The company's existing electric motor business, Brook Crompton, and GEC Alsthom Electromotors will have combined sales of about £150m.
The GEC Alsthom subsidiary employs 1,400 at three plants in Birmingham, Bradford and Newcastle-under-Lyme.
The merged company will supply motors for everything from heaters and hair dryers to large pieces of industrial plant such as powered conveyor belts.
The GEC Alsthom business, which has assets of about £28m, specialises in the manufacture of industrial and fractional horsepower motors.
Business and City Summary
By MICHAEL PREST, Resources Correspondent
Steel compromise: European Community negotiators have reached a compromise with the United States over limits on Community steel exports, an EC spokesman said.
The new deal marginally increases the EC's market share from 6.68 to 7 per cent.
Any disputes must be settled by mutual consent.
Saatchi stands down: Maurice Saatchi is stepping aside as chief executive of Saatchi & Saatchi, the advertising giant that he formed with his brother Charles.
Maurice Saatchi will remain as chairman.
This page, View from City Road, page 23 Abbey rise: Abbey National followed the Halifax Building Society by increasing its ordinary mortgage rate by 1 per cent to 14.5 per cent.
Page 20 Dealer proposals: Members of the Association of Futures, Brokers and Dealers will soon receive the latest proposal from the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission on London firms doing business for American clients.
Outlook, page 21 Bond remains with BSB: Alan Bond, the troubled Australian entrepreneur, is to pay the £27.5m required to remain part of the consortium behind British Satellite Broadcasting, the UK rival to Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television.
Page 20 Ferranti move: Ferranti moved yesterday to strengthen its control of International Signal and Control, the subsidiary where a £215m fraud is feared, by putting Albert Dodd, a long-standing Ferranti director in charge of ISC.
Page 23 Lawson silent: Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, made no mention of Britain joining the European Monetary System in his speech to the Conservative Party conference yesterday.
Despite the disappointment, sterling lost only 0.5 pfennings to close in London at DM2.9562.
This page and Outlook, page 21 Panel threat: A European Community directive, discussed in draft yesterday, threatens the current working of the City's Takeover Panel.
View from City Road, page 23 Sad Gulliver: James Gulliver, chairman of the troubled furniture and carpets retailer Harris Queensway, yesterday announced ‘with sadness’ an interim pre-tax loss of £16.9m.
Page 21 Dispute solution: Application of ‘free market’ principles could end a protracted dispute over which American regulatory agency should control newly-developed financial products, said Joseph Grundfest, a US Securities and Exchange Commissioner.
Airline offer: The proposed takeover of American Airlines by Donald Trump is looking far-fetched following an offer by Texas businessman Robert Bass to help the carrier remain independent.
World Markets New York: Shares drifted and by the close the Dow Jones average was down 13.52 points at 2,759.84.
The market was apprehensive about today's producer prices figures.
Tokyo: The yen's continued fall after a discount rate rise led to the year's second biggest drop in the Nikkei average, which plunged 444.73 to 34,795.34.
Singapore: Still setting post-crash records, the Straits Times index added 2.87 to 1,431.85 on slightly lower turnover.
Sydney: Continuing negative fallout from News Corporation's slide dragged the All Ordinaries index down 17 points to 1,730.4.
Frankfurt: The market gained ground after two days of losses, with the DAX index climbing 8.73 points to 1,612.78.
Zurich: Shares closed steady after recovering early losses caused by rising interest rates.
Milan: The underlying tone remained weak as the MIB edged up one point to 1,174.
Brussels: Chemicals was the only sector to show resilience as prices were marked down in thin business.
The forward market index fell 73.25 to 6,589.07.
Oslo: The government's 1990 budget proposals had little effect, with the index slipping 2.39 to 515.81 in moderate trade.
Copenhagen: Shares eased as political uncertainty and an ailing bond market reduced trade.
Shake-up at Saatchi
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
MAURICE SAATCHI, who with his brother Charles created Saatchi & Saatchi, the world's biggest advertising group, is stepping down as chief executive.
The move is part of a sweeping re-think about the group's direction.
It comes at a time of growing fear that Saatchi & Saatchi may become the subject of a takeover bid as a result of recent business problems.
Mr Saatchi will continue as chairman but is being replaced as chief executive by Robert Louis-Dreyfus, a French citizen and president and chief executive of IMS International, who yesterday pledged to restore the strength of Saatchi & Saatchi's core business.
‘My first job is to learn Saatchi's activities and to do a good job of selling the consulting businesses,’ he said, in a reference to the company's previously announced plans to sell its management consultancy arm.
‘I would hardly be joining a group if I felt it was about to be taken over.
The problem with Saatchi is cost containment.
But advertising revenue is excellent and is winning major accounts.’
Mr Louis-Dreyfus, who graduated from Harvard with an MBA, promised to tighten budgetary control throughout the group.
‘There will not be any rights issues and my dream is that we can take a 20 per cent share in advertising markets abroad.
We hope to go back to our core business,’ he said.
Saatchi has appointed Charles Scott as group finance director.
Mr Scott worked alongside Mr Louis-Dreyfus for five years and is currently chief financial officer of IMS.
IMS, the world's second largest market research company was acquired by Dun & Bradstreet for $1.7m last year.
It has produced a 25 per cent compound growth in earnings per share in the last five years.
Mr Saatchi has filled the twin role of chairman and chief executive for several years, but Mr Louis-Dreyfus's appointment is designed to bring in financial skills at a senior level at a time when the company's business has been under pressure.
The company said Mr Saatchi would now concentrate on the overall strategy of the business while Mr Louis-Dreyfus would be responsible for its profits growth.
Charles Saatchi is a director of the main board.
Market speculation that Saatchi & Saatchi could be the target of a takeover bid has been intensified by South Eastern Asset Management, a Tennessee- based fund manager, which recently amassed a 10.3 per cent stake.
Although SAM has ruled out a bid, it might participate in a restructuring of the group.
Also this week, Fininvest, the Italian master company of Silvio Berlusconi, disclosed a 1 per cent stake in Saatchi's.
The disclosures have helped Saatchi's shares to a 50p rise in the past two weeks, but yesterday they fell 3p to 344p.
Musical chairs spark problems: Saatchi & Saatchi
By NEIL THAPAR, City Reporter
THE APPOINTMENT of Robert Louis-Dreyfus as Saatchi's chief executive and Charles Scott as financial director comes after a prolonged period of musical chairs involving top management.
The company has experienced a number of high level departures in recent years and some argue that part of Saatchi's problems may be explained by a lack of continuity at senior levels.
The most dramatic defection from its board was that of Martin Sorrell, its former finance director, who left about three years ago to join WPP, a small industrial company, which he transformed into the world's second largest advertising group, principally with takeovers of J Walter Thompson and Ogilvy & Mather, two of the leading US agencies.
Mr Sorrell was replaced by David Newlands, but he resigned from the company this spring, shortly before Saatchi shocked the stock market with a warning that group profits would be substantially below those in 1988.
The problems stem from a high cost structure and an ambitious move into management consultancy that has failed to live up to expectations.
The market is now expecting pre-tax profits to emerge at about £70m this year, a far cry from the £138m taxable profits reported in 1988.
Others who have come and gone include Anthony Simonds-Gooding, former chairman and chief executive of the communications division, who left in October 1987 and later joined British Satellite Broadcasting.
In 1986 the group recruited Victor Millar from accountants Arthur Andersen to head its consulting business.
But Mr Millar, who was instrumental in introducing new financial controls at the company and was forced to look after the communications side after Mr Simonds-Gooding's departure, has also gone.
Meanwhile, the decision to sell Saatchi's ailing business consultancy division has put additional strains on Saatchi management and a number of senior managers have had to be moved to new positions.
Although the two main architects of the group, brothers Maurice and Charles, are still very much in charge at the top, they are essentially ad men and not financial experts.
Lawson says do not expect EMS news
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
STERLING'S fortunes are riding on hopes that Nigel Lawson will provide a clear signal for the timing of Britain's full membership of the European Monetary System next Thursday despite his omission of the issue in yesterday's speech to the Conservative Party conference and a later denial that any announcement was pending.
The Chancellor provided no clue on whether any policy change was in prospect during his address, but when asked about joining the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS on the BBC's Newsnight programme he said: ‘I have no new announcement to make about that, neither today nor indeed at the Mansion House’— referring to his annual speech on monetary policy and City issues at a banquet there next Thursday night.
Despite disappointment in the City, the pound had lost only 0.5 pfennigs by the close to finish in London at DM2.9562.
Nevertheless sterling swung between DM2.97 before the Chancellor began to speak, and fell to DM2.9450 after he had finished.
However, the wide trading range was partly due to the impact of a weakening dollar after speculation revived that the US Federal Reserve is loosening its grip on monetary policy.
Against the pound, the US currency ended 0.60 cents higher at $1.5510.
In the stock market, there was little reaction to the Chancellor's speech and the FT-SE 100 index climbed 19 points to a closing 2237.8.
Mr Lawson's reaffirmation of the Government's commitment to a strong pound coupled with discreet intervention by the Bank of England also helped to underpin sterling.
The Chancellor said the Conservative Party ‘never has been and never will be the party of devaluation’, and underlined the ‘paramount need’ to fight inflation.
Until the Newsnight programme Mr Lawson had refused to be drawn on whether he would address the EMS issue.
But in France, Pierre Beregovoy, the Finance Minister, increased speculation that the British Government would have to make up its mind soon.
He said: ‘What is happening in Great Britain should perhaps show Mrs Thatcher and Chancellor Lawson that they should act more quickly than anticipated in terms of bringing the currency into the EMS.’
But there was no indication that Mr Beregovoy, speaking at a business seminar, was suggesting that there were any negotiations for full British EMS membership.
However, it is understood that the Bundesbank might favour a much lower exchange rate — of around DM2.70 — for sterling's eventual entry into the mechanism.
Karl Otto Pohl, Bundesbank president, said last week that the West German central bank favoured a revaluation of the mark within the EMS to help to reduce international trade imbalances.
And he added: ‘An upward valuation of the mark, especially towards countries with high inflation, would also be a correct response to the problem of (West German trade) surpluses.’
Britain has an annual trade deficit of around £8bn with West Germany and Mr Pohl's comments could be relevant to Britain if the Government decided to join the exchange rate mechanism.
Bond to pay final 27.5m pounds to BSB
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
ALAN BOND, the troubled Australian entrepreneur, will pay the £27.5m he must find to remain part of the consortium behind British Satellite Broadcasting, the UK rival to Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television.
A London spokesman for Mr Bond said yesterday: ‘He has intended all along to meet his commitment to BSB, and that is still the situation.’
The deadline on the payment, which is the final tranche of a total Bond investment of more than £154m, is early November, but it now looks as though the money could be paid over as early as next week.
That will be a considerable relief to Mr Bond, who could in certain circumstances have seen his entire 35 per cent stake in BSB placed with the other equity participants, which include Granada, Pearson, Reed International and Chargeurs of France.
However, it is not yet clear how he will finance the payment, which is believed to be in cash.
The rest of his BSB commitment is backed by bank guarantees.
The payment will remove another obstacle to BSB's goal of a spring launch for their five channel subscription TV system, which now depends on solving the technological difficulties involved in the set of chips that scramble and decode the satellite signal.
The main problem is understood to be integrating the software and the microchip decoder apparatus in the receiver.
The software is being developed by the US company General Instruments, which is working flat out on it at its plant in San Diego, California.
The chips themselves are being worked on by ITT, which has said the problems will be ironed out in the next few weeks.
According to sources close to BSB, the ‘squariel’— the square, flat receiving dish — is no longer regarded as a problem.
Square receivers are in common use in Japan, and the BSB contract could go to a Japanese firm like Matsushita.
They are also manufactured by STC and Marconi.
A large-scale advertising campaign next month will offer a squariel and a three-month film channel subscription for £10.
Once the technological problems are solved Lazard Brothers, the merchant bank advising BSB, will begin the second round of fund raising on the international capital markets.
It now regards £500m as the minimum necessary to see BSB through the promotional expenditure of a launch and the purchase of programmes.
BSB is also committed to spending as much on producing new programmes as it is on buying from the BBC archives.
The money will be raised in a mixture of straightforward borrowing and long-term, high-interest bearing mezzanine finance — often referred to as junk bonds.
The existing equity holders may also be asked to participate in a further round of equity raising, for around 10 per cent of the total.
LWT gives details of share incentive plan
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
LWT (HOLDINGS), the parent of London Weekend Television, yesterday revealed the details of its plan to replace most of the company's equity with debt and give 40 top managers up to 15 per cent of the group's shares.
The company announced the scheme in August, and has had to weather a storm of objections from shareholders and managers.
Christopher Bland, the chairman, said the scheme would place LWT in an ideal position when it comes to rebidding for its Independent Television franchise in 1992.
He said he was confident that at least 85 per cent of LWT's shareholders, and all the managers, would support it.
The scheme offers one share in a newly created company plus 130p in dividends and cash or loan notes for each LWT ordinary share.
It is structured so that LWT's managers will end up with between 5 per cent and 15 per cent of the new company, depending on how well LWT performs in the meantime, which they will pay for in 1993-94 at today's prices.
Mr Bland said that if LWT manages to retain its franchise, the new shares will be worth three times as much as they are now.
The scheme will use up LWT's £50m of cash and bring in £72.5m of borrowings.
Mr Bland said that the cost of the borrowings was much lower than the cost of the group's equity, which he estimated at 20 per cent per annum.
LWT's shares jumped 22p to 223p on the news despite most City analysts being lukewarm about the scheme.
Government ‘responsible’ for rail link to Channel tunnel
From SARAH LAMBERT in Paris
THE MANAGING director of Eurotunnel, Tony Ridley, made it clear yesterday that the Government is ultimately responsible for the Channel tunnel rail link and has a duty to see the project completed successfully.
‘I don't argue the pros and cons of public or private investment per se, but in view of the problems that have arisen it seems to me that if the Government has talked up the price by making rather loud commitments to potential voters, perhaps the Government should spend some of our money overcoming those problems,’ he said.
Mr Ridley added that he was talking in the context of the national good.
‘The effect on the environment will now be far worse if it is not built.’
The cost of the tunnel has risen by £2.2bn to £7bn — forcing Eurotunnel to return to its bankers for fresh loans.
At the same time the cost of the proposed high-speed rail link from London to the tunnel has risen nearly three-fold to £3.5bn because of environmental safeguards demanded by the Government.
Ministers insisted that both projects should be financed by the private sector and the Channel Tunnel Act specifically prohibits the British Government from subsidising either the tunnel or transport infrastructure linked to it.
However, Mr Ridley told a Paris conference that ‘even in the private world there is a role for government to play’.
In order to develop a coherent transport strategy to meet the challenge of increased demand in the 1990s the Government should either invest itself or encourage the private sector to do so.
He cited the Docklands Light Railway and the proposed light railway in Manchester as examples of successful co-operation in the public and private sectors.
The extent of government involvement in such projects should be judged on individual merit, he said.
The Government's insistence that the Channel tunnel rail link be privately-financed is being seen as the first stage in a longer term plan to privatise the entire British Rail network.
Mr Ridley would not be drawn on the thorny issue of rail privatisation other then to say that investment was urgently needed in Britain's rail and road links.
If this was stimulated by selling off BR, so much the better.
But he added: ‘If, however, it means that managers are so distracted discussing the process of privatisation that they have no time left to manage, then that would be a most unhappy state of affairs.’
He was confident that the problems between Eurotunnel, Transmanche Link, the consortium of 10 construction companies building the tunnel, and its financiers would be overcome.
‘If we believe the project is important for the well being of the economy then the money will be found.
It doesn't matter what the source is,’ he added.
Since TML had drafted in a new team, relations with Eurotunnel had improved significantly, Mr Ridley said.
He was generally dismissive of the idea that the two could merge because, he said, they existed to serve the interests of two very different sets of shareholders.
Abbey lifts mortgage rate to 14.5%
From SARAH LAMBERT in Paris
ABBEY NATIONAL yesterday announced a one-point rise in its ordinary mortage rate to 14.5 per cent.
The increase was a carbon copy of Halifax Building Society's increase on Monday and sets a firm benchmark which most other societies will now follow.
At the same time the Abbey raised its rate for borrowers of more than £60,000 from 12.95 to 13.9 per cent.
Both new rates apply from 1 November.
Savings rates will rise by about 0.75 per cent.
Last weekend the Yorkshire Building Society announced a 1.5 per cent rise to 15 per cent in the wake of the one-point rise in base rates.
The smaller rises from the largest two mortgage lenders will deter other societies from following the Yorkshire's move.
The Leeds Permanent, which had hoped to raise its rate by at least 1.25 per cent, is now thought likely to restrict its increase to 1 per cent .
The Woolwich expects to announce an increase of ‘up to 1 per cent’ next week.