

Court Circular
From TONY SMITH of Associated Press
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 12 October: His Excellency Senhor Luis Neto-Kiambata was received in audience by The Prince of Wales and The Prince Edward, Counsellors of State acting on behalf of The Queen, and presented the Letters of Recall of his predecessor and his own Letters of Credence as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary from the People's Republic of Angola to the Court of St James's.
His Excellency was accompanied by the following members of the Embassy, who had the honour of being presented to Their Royal Highnesses: Senhor Virgilio Marques de Faria (Counsellor), Senhor Emilio Sofia Rosa (Head of Protocol) and Senhor Mario Alfredo (Financial Attache).
Senhora Neto-Kiambata had the honour of being received by The Prince of Wales and The Prince Edward.
Sir Patrick Wright (Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs), who had the honour of being received by Their Royal Highnesses, was present and the Gentlemen of the Household in Waiting were in attendance.
12 October: The Duchess of York, Patron of Museums Year 1989, this afternoon opened the Food for Thought Gallery at the Science Museum, London SW7.
Her Royal Highness was received by the Deputy Mayor of Kensington and Chelsea (Councillor Mrs Elizabeth Russell).
The Duchess of York this evening attended the opening performance by The Spanish Riding School of Vienna at Wembley Arena.
Her Royal Highness was received by The Austrian Ambassador (His Excellency Doctor Walter Magrutsch).
Mrs John Floyd was in attendance.
12 October: The Prince Edward this evening presented the Historical Association's Young Historian prizes on the First National History Day at the Imperial War Museum, London SE1.
Major William McLean was in attendance.
12 October: The Princess Royal, Colonel-in-Chief, The Royal Scots (The Royal Regiment), this morning received Lieutenant-Colonel Martin Gibson upon relinquishing his appointment as Commanding Officer of the 1st Battalion and Lieutenant-Colonel Iain Johnstone upon assuming the appointment.
Her Royal Highness, President, Riding for the Disabled Association, afterwards attended the Council Meeting at Saddlers' Hall, London.
In the afternoon, The Princess Royal, Chief Commandant, Women's Royal Naval Service, attended the WRNS 40th Anniversary luncheon on board HMS London in the Pool of London.
Afterwards Her Royal Highness, Colonel-in-Chief, The Worcester and Sherwood Foresters Regiment (29th/45th Foot), received Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Lees upon relinquishing his appointment as Commanding Officer of the 3rd Battalion and Lieutenant-Colonel Malcolm Peatfield upon assuming the appointment.
In the evening, The Princess Royal, Chancellor, University of London, attended a reception and dinner at the Senate House, Malet Street, London WC1, on the occasion of the Foundation Day 1989 followed by the Foundation Ceremony and reception at the Institute of Education, Bedford Way, London WC1, and was received on arrival by the Lord Flowers (Vice-Chancellor).
Mrs Malcolm Wallace was in attendance.
Mrs Michael Wigley was in attendance.
His Royal Highness was attended by Mr Andrew Palmer.
The Duchess of Kent, as Patron of Age Concern England, this morning opened the Hockley and Hawkwell Old People's Welfare Council Day Centre, Hockley, Essex.
Her Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, was attended by Mrs Alan Henderson.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS Prince Edward attends an evening of greyhound racing at Kingsmead Stadium, Canterbury, in support of the Royal Marines School of Music Disaster Fund.
Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, President, The Gardener's Royal Benevolent Society, attends a luncheon and subsequently a Council Meeting at Red Oaks (Home for Retired Gardeners), Henfield, on the occasion of the society's 150th Anniversary Year.
The Duke of Kent, Vice Chairman of the British Overseas Trade Board, visits Reckitt and Colman, Norwich, Norfolk.
Apple Pickers in a South-West Orchard, 1988
By JOANNA GIBBON
Apple Pickers in a South-West Orchard, 1988, a photograph by James Ravilious, which forms part of a touring exhibition called Orchards this autumn.
The exhibition is being organised by Common Ground, a charity, which was created in 1983 to promote new and imaginative approaches to prevent the destruction of the character and fabric of our countryside and towns, writes Joanna Gibbon.
The charity sets up projects, often connected with the arts, to persuade people to value their surroundings, regardless of whether they are unusual or not.
So far they have set up Parish Maps, New Milestones and recently Trees, Woods and the Green Man projects — the last being connected to the Orchards exhibition.
Common Ground is concerned about the decline in old orchards, which grow traditional varieties of fruit, provide habitats for bees, grazing for sheep, geese and pigs and create beautiful landscapes; their exhibition encourages people to grow their own fruit trees, and plant larger orchards for the community.
The exhibition's first venue is the Royal Albert Memorial Museum, Exeter; it runs from 28 October to 2 December, and then tours the south-west of England in 1990.
Common Ground urgently needs to raise £7,000 to publish a small book and poster for the exhibition.
Appointments
By JOANNA GIBBON
Miss Elizabeth Neill Fisher, to be a Circuit Judge (Midland and Oxford Circuit).
Mr Richard Graeme Hawkins, to be a Circuit Judge (South Eastern Circuit).
Anniversaries
By JOANNA GIBBON
On this day: the arrest of the Templars for heresy took place in Paris, on the orders of Philip IV, 1307; Benedict Arnold was defeated at Lake Champlain, 1776; President George Washington laid the foundation stone of the White House, Washington 1792; British forces defeated the Americans at the Battle of Queenston Heights, 1812; Greenwich was adopted as the universal meridian at the Washington Conference, 1884; 41 people were killed during a German air-raid on London, 1915; Ankara became the new capital of Turkey, 1923; Italy declared war on Germany, 1943; the Allies liberated Athens, 1944; the first London production of the musical show The Pajama Game was presented, 1955.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 14
Obituary: David Anderson
By SIMBA MAKONI
David Alexander Anderson, public servant, born Bathgate Lothian 7 June 1920, EEC Delegate to Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland 1975-78, Commonwealth Assistant Secretary General (Managing Director Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation) 1978-83, married 1953 Mary Rammell (two daughters, and one daughter deceased), died Holton Buckinghamshire 9 October 1989.
DAVID ANDERSON was a life-long campaigner for African development and believed in the right, and the ability, of Africans to manage their own affairs.
Anderson was one of the few members of the British colonial administration who, remaining in Africa after British colonialism retreated, made a successful transition to serving the independent governments of the continent.
He worked closely, and made friends with, several leaders of English-speaking Africa and in more recent years had nurtured similar relationships in Angola and Mozambique.
Throughout his life he cultivated and maintained the confidence of his African colleagues, and his faithfulness and loyalty to the African cause were profound.
His love of Africa was paralleled by a deep and abiding loathing of racism, in general, and apartheid in particular .
Anderson spent most of his adult life in Africa.
He served in the Colonial Administrative Service of the Gold Coast from 1945 to 1957 and, from earliest days, was convinced of the urgent need to Africanise the civil service, in preparation for independence.
As Secretary to the Lidbury Commission on the Structure and Remuneration of the Ghana Civil Service (1950-51), and, as a member of the Working Party on Africanisation of the Civil Service (1952-53), Anderson helped lay the foundations for Ghana's civil service.
He subsequently worked closely with Ghana's first president, Kwame Nkrumah, on the country's Africanisation programme, becoming Establishment Secretary, and thus effectively in charge of the Civil Service from 1957 to 1961.
In the early 1960s Anderson moved to East Africa as Staff Development Advise to President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania (1961-64).
He was responsible for a major reform of Government administration, including a new public service act, which helped to facilitate the rapid localisation of the civil service.
He also put in place a long-term programme of staff development.
These reforms made a major contribution to the stability of independent Tanzania's administration.
From 1964 to 1967 he was adviser on the public service to President Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya.
In addition, he advised the newly independent Governments of Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and served on numerous commissions and enquiries across the continent, on public services matters.
As recently as last year, Anderson was asked by the Ugandan government to advise on the restructuring of the civil service there, following the turmoil of recent years.
The experience which Anderson gained while working directly for the newly independent governments of Africa made him uniquely well placed for his second career, in the field of development co-operation.
From 1967 to 1975 he was the Ford Foundation's representative in Nairobi, and was responsible for developing an innovative and highly influential programme to support the process of Africanisation.
He was an active supporter of national and regional institutes of public administration, and was a founding member of the African Association of Public Administration and Management (AAPAM), which links senior civil servants from many African countries.
In 1975 Anderson was appointed the first EEC delegate in Southern Africa, responsible for the EEC Commission's relations with Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland.
In this capacity, he also established ties with the Government of Mozambique, and helped in the gradual process by which relations between Mozambique and the EEC were put on a more constructive basis.
Anderson's life in Africa ended in 1978, when he was appointed Managing Director of the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation (CFTC).
He applied his energies and experience to the Commonwealth countries and, with the support of the Commonwealth Secretary-General, Sonny Ramphal, had ample opportunity to continue his involvement in Southern Africa.
He was convinced of the need for, and the feasibility of, creating a regional economic grouping in Southern Africa.
He believed that the political commitment existed to ensure that the independent countries of the region would co-operate effectively to reduce their dependence on South Africa, and accelerate economic development; and that such a new grouping could influence decisively the way that offical development assistance was used in the region, and the course of development co-operation in general.
Anderson participated in the informal soundings on how best the idea might be given institutional and practical form.
His support for, and contribution to the process leading to the establishment of the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC), in 1980, was another manifestation of his commitment to the cause of African development.
He attended the early meetings of SADCC Ministers and Heads of State and Government, and continued to provide assistance to SADCC, until illness made this impossible.
David Anderson was a selfless public servant with an incisive analytical mind.
He gave, and demanded of others the highest standards of performance.
Although never a public figure, and always shunning the limelight, he was a man of great influence, an efficient administrator, a first-class draftsman and an eloquent communicator.
Obituary: Eric Ball
By ERIC WLISON
ERIC BALL will be remembered as perhaps the most significant contributor to the repertoire of the brass band.
In quantity as in quality his output may never find an equal.
Many of his original works, written as test-pieces for use in competitions, have become cornerstones of the repertoire; Resurgam (1950), Festival Music (1956) and Journey Into Freedom (1967) all find regular places on both the concert and contest stage.
As an arranger of other composers' music, Ball was a master craftsman who carried out his work with a respect for the original and an integrity rarely found today.
His greatest achievements in this field were undoubtedly the Enigma Variations of Elgar and four dances from Sir Arthur Bliss's ballet Checkmate, though even a short hymn setting was done to perfection.
As a musical architect, Ball excelled.
His sense of proportion and balance ensured that his music flowed no matter how the level of his inspiration varied.
As a developing pianist in his teens, he soaked himself in the music of Mozart, Beethoven and, most of all, Elgar, with whose musical language he found much affinity.
Given his deep-rooted Salvation Army connections, it came as no surprise when the 18-year-old Eric Ball found himself employed (not without some misgivings on his part) in their Music Editorial Department.
In 1926 he became a commissioned officer in the Salvation Army, a commission he resigned in 1944 when his interest in spiritual matters had developed beyond the bounds of Salvationism.
His contribution to the literature, both choral and instrumental, of the Salvation Army is vast.
Ball's estrangement from the Salvation Army was to be the secular brass band's gain.
Soon after the Second World War, in which he worked with ENSA (or ‘Every-Night-Something-Awful’, as he called it), he came to work for the music publishing firm of R. Smith and Co Ltd and served as editor of British Bandsman (the brass band world's leading newspaper since 1887) for 15 years.
Here he invested the paper with some of the most wisely conceived editorial pieces in its long history and was a great Christian witness in the world of secular bands.
His success as a conductor of contesting bands was immediate, with victories at the National Brass Band Championships in 1946 (with Brighouse and Rastrick Band) and at the Belle Vue September Contest, Manchester, in 1948 and 1952, with the now-defunct Co-operative Workers Society (CWS) Manchester Band, being the highlights.
In time, he was welcomed back to the Salvation Army, who even arranged for a star bearing his name to be laid on Hollywood Boulevard alongside those of the great movie stars.
Dignified, modest, though not unaware of his charisma and influence, Eric was a serious man, yet with a twinkle in the eye and by no means narrow in his thinking.
Conscious that his gifts were God-given, he was a man of no material ambition.
His ideal was to attain to Christ, and to that goal he pressed forward.
Obituary: Ian McMillan
By A. M. JOHNSON
IAN McMILLAN entered medicine when his chosen speciality was developing rapidly, following wartime and post-war advances in anaesthesiology, diagnostic cardiology and other technologies.
A surgeon's son, he was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford, St Paul's School, London, Jesus College, Cambridge, and St Thomas's Hospital, where he qualified in 1946.
After junior appointments at St Thomas's and Great Ormond Street he entered the Royal Army Medical Corps for two years, during part of which time he investigated the dangers of hyperthermia in tank crews and how they might be overcome.
He then returned to St Thomas's and during nine years there and one in America, at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, he saw cardiac and thoracic surgery from its beginnings and contributed notably to formulating its basic principles.
An apparatus that McMillan designed and built to show, with high-speed cinephotography, how normal and diseased heart valves move and the effects of surgery upon them, aided progress in valve surgery throughout the world.
His teaching film was a classic.
He helped too in the development of the cardiac defibrillator, without which cardiac surgery could not have progressed and which has saved countless lives.
With the Hammersmith team he took part in the evolution of the heart-lung machine and for some years the Melrose pump-oxygenator was the standard in Britain.
All this was continued and extended during his year in America.
McMillan gained surgical experience in these years and when, in 1959, he joined Paul Chin and Eric Machell, both pioneers themselves, at Southampton, they made steady progress in closed and open-heart surgery.
Experience grew with congenital heart disease too and the report (1959) of surgical correction of Fallot's tetralogy, a complex abnormality in very young children, was a landmark.
McMillan was an extremely hard worker but a certain fluidity in his perception of time made him sometimes an unpredictable colleague.
This quirk was, however, outweighed by his integrity and devotion to his patients.
McMillan travelled widely with Pete's Club, an international surgical club of which he was a founder member.
He established a Visiting Fellowship for surgeons in training at the Massachusetts General Hospital to come to the Southampton unit, with mutual benefit.
Following Chin's accidental death in 1960, it was not until 1972 that he was able to reduce and finally to leave cardiac work; and from then until his retirement in June 1987 he devoted himself to chest surgery at Southampton, Basingstoke and King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst.
Obituary: Horace Alexander
By A. M. JOHNSON
Horace Alexander, lecturer, died Crossland Pennsylvania 7 October aged 100.
In 1928 he took leave of absence from a lectureship at a Quaker college in Birmingham to go to India.
There he met Mohandas K. Gandhi, and spent much of the next 20 years acting as a conciliatory intermediary between Gandhi's Congress Party and the British Government, latterly as a member of Gandhi's entourage.
Gandhi described him as ‘British in nationality but Indian in heart.’