

Second Thoughts: Presence of the past: Arthur Marwick on the principles that still sustain his argument in ‘The Nature of History’(Macmillan £8.95)
By ARTHUR MARWICK
‘AH, DOING an E H Carr, eh?’, was the invariable response when, at the end of the 1960s, I told people what I was up to.
For introducing students to history at Edinburgh University the basic text was Carr's What is History?
Carr drove home fundamental points, but said nothing about the actual working practices of historians, and, in his inspirational advocacy of a new kind of socialist history, left students with the impression that the solid, source-based stuff which formed their staple diet might as well be cast into the dustbin.
After almost 10 years in University history teaching I was concerned that my students seemed to have very little idea of how history actually came to be written and of what criteria might be used to decide whether one book was more worth reading than another.
I particularly wished to clarify why one studies history at all.
There was a fair deal of Oxbridge waffle around about history being ‘a training of the mind’, a means of understanding the other chap's point of view.
From Dutch historian Gustav Renier I derived the formulation that history is a social necessity: in face of government philistinism and the fantasies of cultural theory, this, I believe, is the bedrock upon which claims for a proper respect for historical study should be founded.
Knowing our past does not automatically yield solutions to the problems of the present: but without a knowledge of the past it would be impossible even to contemplate addressing these problems.
The achievements of professional history are staggering: whatever topic you choose, you'll find there exists a sound body of historical knowledge.
To me, the nature of history lay not in pseudo-scientific speculation, but in the aims and achievements of working historians.
The heart of the book was a chapter on ‘The Historian At Work’ which I do believe was original in setting out the processes which historians go through, from discovering and analysing sources to producing written history at different levels.
Elsewhere I made a point of discussing historians, such as Taylor and Elton, whom students would actually be reading.
The trouble is that, today, much of this appears appallingly naive and disgustingly obsequious.
Further, the privilege of age is to develop prejudices of one's own: pronounced views about historical explanation, interdisciplinary studies, and how film and other visual sources should be used by historians.
In my second thoughts my aims remain the same, but are more thoroughly developed: and all these grovelling references to ‘great’ historians and their ‘brilliant’works have been extirpated.
Historians are artisans, not geniuses.
BOOK REVIEW /The fading of Eco: a cautionary tale: ‘Foucault's Pendulum’— Umberto Eco: Tr.
William Weaver Secker & Warburg, 14.95 pounds
By HUGO BARNACLE
WHAT HAPPENS in Foucault's Pendulum is that three editors at a Milan publishing house, vetting manuscripts for a series of books on the occult, decide to amuse themselves by connecting up every conspiracy theory advanced by their half-baked authors and fabricating an elaborate master-plan which explains the whole of world history.
For reasons which never seem quite convincing, given the tediousness of the material and the fact that the three do not even believe in it, this becomes an obsessive hobby over a period of years.
They put it all on computer.
In go the Pyramids, Atlantis, the Holy Grail, the Knights Templar, the Freemasons, Napoleon, the Paris Metro map, Hitler, Ayers Rock and, unfortunately, much more besides; out comes a dread secret to do with control of the ‘telluric currents’ which cause earthquakes or continental drift or something; not that it much matters, since they made it all up.
When the various occult organisations get wind of the non-existent secret's existence, of course, they take it in deadly earnest and will stop at nothing to discover it and so make themselves Masters of the World.
Thus the editors — Belbo the disillusioned romantic, Diotallevi the dyspeptic amateur Cabalist, and Casaubon our hero-narrator — are in something of a jam.
It is a slight story, padded out to a mind-deadening 640 pages by the monotonous recital of the great redundant master plan itself.
Did I forget to mention Stonehenge?
The Essenes?
The Paulicians?
The Cathars?
The Jesuits?
Shakespeare?
The Rosicrucians?
Cagliostro?
Nicholas II?
The over-extension of the idea is ludicrous, but not ludicrous enough: the connectedness of absolutely everything is the first principle of conpiracy theory anyway, so for want of exaggeration or originality the joke falls horribly flat.
The book's unintentional humour is a little stronger.
To start with, there is the clunking obviousness of Casaubon's name, a cod-erudite allusion to George Eliot's mythomanic clergyman and his abortive Key to All Mythologies.
Just to explode any lingering subtlety, Unberto Eco even has someone ask, ‘Wasn't he a character in Middlemarch?’
It is Casaubon, too, who supplies the most drolly wooden lines.
‘We didn't know’, he says as the three embark on the master plan, ‘that we were playing with fire — Greek fire,’ he adds, ‘the kind that burns and destroys’, in case we don't know what playing with fire means.
This might be a glitch in the translation, but when Casaubon observes, ‘Life isn't simple, the way it is in detective stories’, the gobsmacking banality can only be the author's.
No irony seems intended.
All characters offer splendid lessons in how not to incorporate research in dialogue, but again Casaubon is first among equals.
‘Remember,’ he tells the others while summarising the Crusades at dissertation length, ‘the new kingdom of Jerusalem was sort of the California of the day, the place you went to make your fortune.’
Later, to allow Eco to work in a chunk of St Bernard's writings, Casaubon actually takes a piece of paper from his pocket and says, ‘I brought this quotation with me, because it's worth hearing…’
He is standing in a crowded bar at the time.
We are not told how rapidly the place empties out.
The thriller element is entirely a matter of cliche.
We begin with Belbo phoning from Paris to say, ‘They're after me,’ and the telephone going dead just as he is about to give the password for the computer file which holds the final explanation known to him alone.
We end, after a protracted flashback, with Casaubon unable to go to the police because nobody would believe his story.
In between we pass through the inevitable stages of people disappearing because they know too much.
The baddie saying.
‘You have been very clever — in fact, too clever’ and the goodie saying, ‘Kill me, but let the girl go’must be taken as read, but Casaubon does not fail to intone after the not tremendously exciting climax, ‘Maybe I imagined the whole thing.’
The cliches may well be deliberate, but in a way this only makes them even more tiresome.
The constant references to Hammett, Chandler and Casablanca, supposed to be chic, are simply commonplaces.
Eco's social perceptions, too, are inclined to be trite.
Much play is made of the dual nature of Woman as madonna and whore: a chestnut by now, surely to God.
And Casaubon says of his left-wing, bar-propping days in the early Seventies, ‘I could write the political history of those years based on how Red Label gradually gave way to 12-year-old Ballantine and then to single malt.’
You are what you consume.
Student rebels become mere trendy bourgeois.
I think we've heard this before as well.
The only character with any psychological depth is Belbo, the wistfully unhappy writer manque who asks, ‘Why write novels?
Rewrite history.’
Umberto Eco himself clearly sympathises.
Belbo's iffy relationship with the evasive Lorenza Pelegrini is is deftly touched in, and his reminiscences of a wartime childhood in Piedmont are the only passages to achieve any distinction or elegance of style, or any vestige of human interest.
It is worth skipping through the rest just to read them, but their bearing on the story proper — Belbo is a man who missed his moment, and conspiracy theory is the refuge of the disappointed — is specious.
If Foucault's Pendulum fails as a novel, does it work as an intellectual game?
The ancient manuscript which sparks it all off is ingeniously devised to yield two possible meanings, one mystic, one mundane.
As for the computer password, on the other hand, this reviewer guessed it in one and had to wait twenty-odd pages for Casaubon to catch up.
And if the vast preponderant mass of occult lore is finally seen as empty and meaningless, so is the book, in which case we are wasting our time.
BOOK REVIEW /Tricks of the trade on show: ‘The Abundant Dreamer’— Harold Brodkey: Cape, 12.95 pounds
By JONATHAN KEATES
PYTHAGORAS is said to have derived his doctrine of metempsychosis, the transmigration of souls, from discussions with Indian Brahmins.
I am not sure what Harold Brodkey may have been in his last incarnation, but he has now reached that most enviable of all earthly states, that of the American cult writer.
Awed critical voices salute his very occasional emergence in print, and invocations of Raymond Carver, Peter Taylor and Ellen Gilchrist are silenced upon reverent lips by a mere mention of his name.
He has been compared to Freud, Whitman and Wordsworth, although the late John Cheever, in one of his more paranoid outbursts, suggested that he was merely an invention of the New Yorker.
One rather sees what he meant.
Brodkey's prose, stately, handsome, so intensely, so painstakingly devised, is the perfect concomitant of those advertisements for the classic suit or the traditional chair which enhance the magazine's increasingly implausible air of quilted, buttonbacked ease.
About everything he writes hangs a faint savour of calculation.
We watch him, as it were, standing back rather too obviously from his work, its rhythms and syntax, its narrative tricks and technical effects suffused with their author's pleasure in his own accomplishment.
The themes that pervade this collection of stories have an appropriate gravity.
Behind the latticework of stylistic decorum lurk the preoccupations of a perturbed middle age, urbane, somewhat over-educated, confronting coarseness and spontaneity with the weapons of obliquity and understatement.
Parents and children stretch out flailing arms towards each other in fumbling efforts to communicate.
In ‘On The Waves’ Henry, a divorced father allowed to meet his daughter Melinda in Venice, sits in a gondola meditating on distance, trust and expectation against a background of ruthless infant prattle.
The vision which opens ‘His Son, in His Arms, in Light Aloft’ is that of the father as inescapable pursuer.
‘The oddly shrewd-hearted torpor of being carried home in the dark, a tourist, in my father's arms’ enshrines the notion of love as essentially menacing and predatory.
In a more expansive variant of this theme, Brodkey's central weakness is painfully exposed.
‘A Story in an Almost Classic Mode’ aims both at analytical biography and, as its title implies, at something grander and more generalised.
Brodkey's relations with his adoptive mother Doris, a Jewish Clytemnestra to his haunted Orestes, involve a bizarre attempt at incestuous symbiosis ('The feeling of obliteration or castration or whatever it was was unsettling as hell') and a deathbed reconciliation with a nervous breakdown as a postlude.
This is all very dignified, courageous and sincere.
It is also, like several of Brodkey's other stories, both here and in his earlier First Love And Other Sorrows, inescapably kitsch.
The final scene, with its tear-jerking hospital-bed supplications for forgiveness, is neither more nor less than the ‘I love you’, ‘I love you too Momma’ curtain-line that has become mandatory in a thousand soap operas.
In the end Brodkey's apparently stupendous equipment as a writer, that sense of an almost Flaubertian anxiety about pitch and cadence which plays about every sentence, can scarcely conceal the second-hand quality of his inventions.
These people, the pubescent schoolkid, the 45-year-old English professor, the dim college girl, we have met before, and we might be pleased to see them again, but neither they nor their predicaments quite justify so uncritical a veneration.
Handel once threw a young composer's music out of the window, saying it wanted air.
Brodkey's talent is robust enough to survive a similar treatment.
BOOK REIVEW /The trail goes cold: ‘Polar Star'-Martin Cruz Smith: Collins Harvill, 12.95 pounds
By ANTHONY LANE
OUT IN the Bering Sea, all is not well.
Onto the deck of the good ship Polar Star comes a net of fish, 40 tons of cod and pollock, flatfish and crabs.
Someone looks closely and cuts it open to see what comes out.
Never mind the pollocks, here's Zita Patiashvili.
A Soviet kitchen hand, hit on the head and thrown overboard.
Martin Cruz Smith is a dab hand at beginnings, as readers of Gorky Park will remember; but he tends to fumble his middle sections, and by the time the climax arrives he's all fingers and thumbs.
Polar Star is no exception; its lovely clueless opening soon snarls up in a mess of motives and half-finished characters.
The author seems to have wandered towards the edge of the plot and fallen overboard himself; one misses the satisfying smack of resolution.
Yet there are strong amusements along the way, not least those provided by Zita herself, who although dead and stretched out on an autopsy table, still has one more shock in store.
Eels come into it somehow, but not in a way that can be described in a family newspaper.
More pleasant is the re-appearance of Arkady Renko, Senior Investigator from Moscow and hero of Gorky Park, now disgraced and employed below decks on the Polar Star.
There he works on the Slime Line, which is basically rather like the Northern Line, but slightly more regular.
A conveyor belt brings you the latest catch, which you then gut, clean and pack for freezing.
Overhead signs read: ‘Strive for a Decisive Upswing in the Supply of Fish Protein!’
There seems to be a terribly quiet joke going on here, based on Renko's former reputation as a bit of a cold fish.
Released from duty and put on the case, Renko builds up a long list of suspects, Zita having slept with most of the crew and possibly some of the flatfish.
Matters are not helped by the presence of filthy capitalists; in a spirit of grudging co-operation, American trawlers supply the Polar Star with fish and split the proceeds.
The Yanks are tough and angry, apart from one who is small and blonde.
Renko takes his pleasure with her on the floor of a very small cabin — his only good break in a grim round of murders and chilblains.
The author is numbingly good on the effects of Arctic weather: ‘as it left his lips, his breath crystallized, glittered and snowed.’
His other forte is in Believe-It-Or-Not items of Russian paranoia: ‘just as Soviet railroad tracks are a wider gauge than foreign ones to prevent an invasion by train, Soviet VCR's took a larger tape to prevent an influx of foreign pornography.’
But for all the research, Polar Star is unsure of itself, tacking back and forth between a leisurely exposition of this frozen world and the more exacting pace of the whodunnit, with occasional bobs towards the spy story.
Martin Cruz Smith has an intriguing hero to play with; if he could only Strive For a Decisive Upswing in Plot Design, his mastery of the chilly thriller would be complete.
BOOK REVIEW /Sorrow drowned: ‘The Waterline’— Joseph Olshan: Bloomsbury 12.95 pounds
By ANDREW ST GEORGE
‘I'VE TRIED to imagine what it's like to drown.
You thrash around for a few minutes, trying not to breathe, but you have to inhale sometimes.’
Death by water haunts Billy Kaplan.
He was seven when Mark Rosen drowned, the last to see the two-year-old alive; now 20, he still feels guilty.
Joseph Olshan's fascinating third novel, The Waterline, charts the emotional journey which Billy and his parents, Susan and Michael, undertake to arrive at this peaceful coexistence with their past; each narrates one of the novel's three sections.
Olshan makes Susan a powerful, smart, sensual woman moving surefootedly through the opulent Westchester County jungle where the Kaplans live: she issues orders to the au pair, knows the Manhattan-Hartsdale train times, and deals honestly with a husband who has taken a sexual vacation from her on the very afternoon of the Rosen drowning.
Later, she divorces Michael and lives with a spiritualist, Ravi, with whom she moves to New Mexico.
Unfortunately, Olshan stretches belief when he then introduces Susan's sister Tina, a virtuoso pianist now in psychiatric care, whose marriage, too, verges on disintegration.
So the narratives from Michael and Billy have much to recoup.
Michael grows into fatherhood and bachelorhood with graceless ease.
Billy's narrative addresses the drowned boy, giving a perspective on the past.
Having returned to haunt the suburbs, he begins a course of penance, teaching children to swim, joining the college swim team.
‘I had become a strong swimmer mainly to conquer fear.’
He survives a therapist, a suicide attempt and the sudden accidental death of a friend.
Finally, travelling upstate on the anniversary of the drowning, he takes a swim in a blood-red lake and meets a girl diving beyond the waterline.
He tells her his complete story and they become lovers: ‘I realised this must be the beginning of my healing’.
The Waterline, then, returns to its origins, as the case study which is Billy's life painfully dredges up the first scenes of his disorder.
Olshan brilliantly captures a life in an incident: a broken marriage in a frayed bedspread, a grief or an infidelity in the domestic smells which waft through the book.
But The Waterline's absorbing issue, forgiveness of oneself and others, disappears in the three narratives overcrowded with portent and incident, as if clear thinking quailed at the messiness of the world.
Recommended Books
By ANDREW ST GEORGE
The Mezzanine by Nicholson Baker, Granta Books £10.95.
The witty account of an American lunch-break, packed with surprising digressions.
Reviewed by Anthony Lane, 2 September.
London Fields by Martin Amis, Cape £11.95.
A typically startling and ambitious novel of murder and other threats.
Reviewed by Wendy Steiner, 23 September.
The Trick of It by Michael Frayn, Viking £11.95.
A novel about novel-writing, which handles its tricky subject with a light comic touch.
Reviewed by Mark Lawson, 23 September.
Europe, Europe by Hans Martin Enzensberger, Hutchinson £14.95.
A lively tour of continental culture, seeking for signs of unity and predicting a grim future.
Reviewed by Anthony Burgess, 30 September.
The Bellarosa Connection by Saul Bellow, Penguin £3.50.
Another late novella to follow on from A Theft (published earlier this year), offering similarly refined pleasures in its account of Jewish suffering and success.
Reviewed by Anthony Quinn, 7 October.
Eighteenth-century Women Poets edited by Roger Lonsdale, Oxford £20.
This new anthology should disturb many literary preconceptions with its forceful and charming discoveries, taken from the work of more than a hundred women.
Reviewed by Claire Tomalin, 7 October.
Wartime by Paul Fussell, Oxford £15.
This survey of personal experiences, ranging from close combat to literary society, constructs a memorable portrait of the last war.
Reviewed by Tim Blanning, 12 October.
BOOK REVIEW /America's double voice: ‘Willa Cather: A Life Saved Up’— Hermione Lee: Virago 12.99 pounds
By A. S. BYATT
THE GREAT writers of the English novel are both male and female.
This is not so with the American novel, with its themes of male companionship and confrontation with death.
Women there have had to fight harder to be heard.
Willa Cather is not well known in this country, though her major work is now in print in Virago paperbacks.
It is to be hoped that Hermione Lee's excellent new book will help to change that, for Cather is one of the most original and inventive of modern writers, a more powerful artist, for instance, than her contemporary Edith Wharton.
Cather was born in 1873 and died in 1947.
She was taken as a child from Virginia to the plains of Nebraska, whose earth and immigrant farmers form the subject of her central fiction.
She went to the University of Nebraska, and was a star pupil, writing scathing reviews of books, theatre and opera, cross-dressing and forming passionate attachments to other women.
She worked as a journalist on McClure's magazine, and gave it up to write.
She shared her home with a woman friend and was intensely secretive about her privacy, leaving complicated embargoes in her will on the publication of her letters, many of which she destroyed.
She was intelligent and prejudiced, formidable and stolid, passionate and reserved.
She created new prose rhythms in the English language, and new formal possibilities for the novel.
She has often been criticised for not doing, or doing imperfectly, things she was not trying to do.
She wrote novels about the frontier, about poverty, difficulty, and the American virgin land, but she was not celebrating the American Dream, nor making any Marxist investigation into culture.
She also wrote novels about passion, adultery, and death in civilised societies, but she was not interested in psychological drama.
She wrote historical novels about Mexico and Quebec, but she was not interested in the drama of conquest or religious conversion.
She has been discovered by the feminists, who have rescued her from being seen as a minor pastoralist; but in certain cases, they have also subject her to psycho-symbolic sexual analysis which she would have loathed, or blamed her for not having cared more for sexual politics or stood out for lesbian sexuality.
Hermione Lee is admirably judicious about all this, pointing out both that we have a perfect right to say things about a writer that we would not have said in their lifetime, and that ‘to account for Cather's fiction by reading it as an encoding of covert, even guilty sexuality is, I think, both patronising and narrow.’
Her own interest is in what she describes as Cather's doubleness.
She sees Cather as a writer whose work ‘gets its energy from contraries’.
Cather explores native American newness but with a deep interest in European cultural forms, the epic and pastoral of Virgil, the opera of Wagner.
She is an iconoclast who became a grumpy conservative, rejecting the modern industrial world in a grand wholesale manner.
She is interested in religion and its cultural forms, but has a deeper darker interest in anonymous human fates and disappearances.
She is interested in the primitive and the raw, both culturally and emotionally, but is endlessly discriminating about the tenacious way in which cultural forms, from cookery to high literature and music, establish themselves and persist.
Cather's attitude to writing, Lee points out, is central to these contrasts.
She is a very conscious stylist, who constructs the form of her sentences, her paragraphs, her narratives, with precise attention.
Yet part of her aim is to ‘invent a fictional language which will be as invisible, as transparent, as close as possible to what it speaks of’.
She felt she had found her own style in O Pioneers, a style as loose, as fluid, as unemphatic, as shifting as the fine earth of the endless prairies she wrote about.
Later she came to depend more upon excision, upon the evocation of what she called ‘the thing not said’; castigating Balzac for delivering an excess of information, she praised the hint, the pared-down suggestion.
As Hermione Lee says, she combines, in a radically new way, two disparate American voices — the immediate one of the oral culture, the homespun, the unadorned, and the complex, civilised and allusive one of international modernism.
Hermione Lee's preference, which I share, is for the disturbed, dark novels of Cather's middle period — she is particularly good on The Professor's House, a story whose protagonist contemplates a failing marriage and a philistine world from a writing room containing two dressmakers' dummies, or ‘forms’.
The centre of this novel is the interpolated tale of the dead and beloved Tom Outland, who discovers a prehistoric and beautiful city in the sun on the mesa, and tells about it in immediate, enthusiastic prose.
Hermione Lee pinpoints what I feel about this novel — that although its subject is depression and waiting for death, it does not feel gloomy because of its own formal delight, its interest in language, including the contrasted languages of the sophisticated ‘writer’, the Professor, a historian of the European exploration of America, and Tom Outland, the indigenous traveller, discovering the primeval inhabitants, but teaching himself to read Virgil, and thus exploring in the other direction.
Cather's genius, in the end, is to do with certainty of pace, and certainty of focus.
She once put a jar in the middle of the table, in the light, and said she wanted her heroine to be like that; her novels create just such memorable images, not static, but still, like remembered paintings.
But they also catch the long and short rhythms of whole human lives and energies, the rush of youth, the coming of exhaustion and indifference, as no other writing I know does.
Her writing is as whole as sculpture and as steady and unobtrusive as breathing.
You can read it and not hear it and it can seem banal.
And then suddenly, its rhythm catches you and takes over, and you know you are in the presence of a deliberate art that seems completely right and natural.
BOOK REVIEW /The Alsatian sensation: ‘Ackerley’— Peter Parker: Constable, 16.95 pounds
By D J TAYLOR
FOR SOMEONE who wrote so little and whose chief recreation — picking up men -involved a high degree of furtiveness, J R Ackerley's life is surprisingly well-documented.
The selected letters make a stout volume.
There are the end-of-tether diaries published as My Sister and Myself by his literary executor, Francis King, and any number of references in the voluminous literature that has grown up around the figure of E M Forster, whose acolyte Ackerley became between their first meeting in 1922 and his death, aged 71, in 1967.
Ackerley himself marches at the head of this file of memorialists.
Given his tiny literary output — four books and a play in 45 years — he wrote endlessly about his habits, frustrations and miseries: even his one novel We think the World of You was so transparently autobiographical as to prompt fears of a libel action.
Such is the volume of self-analysis that Peter Parker, a decent and sympathetic biographer, spends most of his 400-plus pages locked in a nervous struggle to find something new to say.
The result, tracking Ackerley through the Great War, Cambridge, his years as Literary Editor of The Listener and the relationship with the Alsatian dog for which he is popularly remembered, provides a continual feeling of deja vu.
The shabby ghosts of the Forster coterie waft out once more to pool their romantic gossip; Forster himself shuffles forward to complain that Joe's doings with one brawny menial have so put him off the lower classes that he has been obliged to travel first rather than third-class on a railway journey, and once again the air is full of that peculiarly spiritless twitter about guardsmen, homosexual tea parties and cure for pubic lice.
It says much for Ackerley — and Parker — that he emerges out of much camp narcissism as a figure of genuine humility.
As the posthumous My Father and Myself records, and everything else he wrote hints at, he had a low opinion of himself.
Even The Listener job, which he left acknowledged as the best literary editor of his day, produced a characteristic essay in self-denigration.
It becomes clear from Parker's researches that Ackerley's strongest emotion was guilt: over his supposed cowardice in the war, over his own survival at his brother's expense, over his ‘betrayal’ of various working-class boyfriends.
It was later compounded by the fall-out from a family explosion: on Roger Ackerley's death in 1929 the son discovered that, first, his father had been maintaining a separate menage and that, second, the money had run out.
A vague mother, an aunt described as ‘a figure entirely out of fiction’ and a hysterical sister who seems to have elevated emotional blackmail into a minor art-form, made his domestic environment a place of turmoil.
Ackerley's love live, a central feature of this biography, was quite as complex and unrewarding.
‘It may be said to have begun with a golliwog,’ he wrote,’and ended with an alsatian bitch'.
Between these two peaks there intervened four decades of joyless satyromania, two or three hundred invariably unsatisfactory encounters with ‘dumb pump handlers’: working-class youths, often from army backgrounds, who cheerfully milked Ackerley for all he was worth and then disappeared.
It is a dismal chronicle, alternating Ackerley's vision of the ‘ideal friend’ with its glum reality ('It was all done for money.
Oh God, let me manage').
All that emerges from it is the sheer nastiness of a group of homosexual writers for whom the working classes were not much more than a floating brothel.
It is not pleasant to read the account of the plot got up to entice Forster's boyfriend Bob Buckingham away from his wife, and not difficult to agree with PC Daley's description of the Forster circle as ‘pimps’.
If Ackerley derived any satisfaction from this rough, rackety, frustrated life it was in his work at The Listener, where his enlightened editorial policies make him sound like a reviewer's dream (he telephoned contributors at midnight to query the removal of a comma).
But the emotional fracture cut through every aspect of his adulthood.
He was a primitive misogynist whose hatred of the wife of one of his friends led him quite seriously to plan her murder.
Late in life, having transferred his affections to the alsatian, Queenie, he became a professional bore over the superiority of animals to human beings, an obsession that led almost to derangement on the occasions when Queenie was cut by broken glass.
‘I have devised a number of exquisite tortures for little boys who break bottles’ he wrote, ‘such as circumcising them with the jagged fragments’.
Reading his letters about dogs, you incubate a silent fury that any intelligent man could be such an idiot.
For all that, on Queenie's death he was inconsolable: ‘no human being has ever meant as much to me as she’.
Peter Parker does his best for Ackerley, praises his work — minor, but with an odd verve — and tries to bring out the more endearing sides to his nature revealed in letters to friends.
But while one can sympathise with Ackerley in his various predicaments, it is difficult to like him.
Appearing in Ackerley's books pages might, you feel, have been a privilege but an afternoon of Joe and Joe's dog would have been too much.