

Eurodisney share offering is no Mickey Mouse operation: Eurodisney's share offer has drawn crowds but is not one for widows and orphans
By JASON NISSE
THE fact that Mickey Mouse did not turn up in London for the announcement of Eurodisney's share price, preferring to battle it out with anti-Disney demonstrators in Paris, shows where the focus of the Europe-wide issue is.
The issue is on offer in this country until Friday of this week and is likely to attract considerable attention from would be UK investors — not least of all because everyone knows what Disneyworld is.
The raising of Fr6.18bn (£607m) to fund the theme park project, giving investors 51 per cent of Eurodisney with the US Disney group holding the rest, is geared towards Continental investors.
The Eurodisney share price, 707p in sterling terms, is determined by its price in Paris and the relative exchange rates, and the issue will succeed or fail on the willingness of ordinary French people to invest in this project.
It is noticeable that the French tranche, covering 50 per cent of the issue, is being sold by a general offer for sale while the British tranche, half as large, is split between an offer and a placing with institutions.
As this is the framework, the issue will be a roaring success.
The French investors are starved of the kind of new issues common to the British market -big, well-publicised privatisations or pseudo-privatisations aimed more at the general punter than the institutional investor.
The few French privatisations that occurred before the current Socialist government came in — Compagnie Financiere de Suez being a good example -excited heavy demand from French retail investors, rather as British Gas and British Telecom did in the UK.
‘France has not seen many large equity issues recently,’ said Fred Bombrum, French equities analyst at stockbroker Hoare Govett.
‘The Eurodisney issue has been heavily marketed and comes in a year when the French market is very exiting, probably the most exciting in Europe.’
The French are attracted by the fact the Magic Kingdom and the proposed second theme park are to be located at Marne-la-Valee near Paris, the heavy involvement of the French government and the existence of theme parks such as the Asterix near Paris.
These factors have added up to heavy oversubcription in France, and across Europe, where the lists have already closed (British investors still have until Friday).
The French allotment was many times oversubscribed by last Monday and the price on the Parisian grey market, where shares are unoffically traded before issue, has been as high as Fr95, compared to an issue price of Fr72.
But though the excitement in France has been echoed in the London market, there remains heavy scepticism about the financial merits of the Eurodisney share offer.
The close proximity of the issue to the announcement of cost overruns at Eurotunnel has led many analysts to highlight the similarities between the schemes.
Both are gigantic construction projects, needing a large number of people to pass through them to be profitable, and with neither of them is the full return projected for a good few years hence.
Eurodisney, though, is already under construction, which Eurotunnel was not when it was floated, and as one stockbroking analyst commented: ‘It is on budget, overground and only two-and-a-half year's from completion.’
The assumptions made in Eurodisney's prospectus are that 16 million people will visit the Magic Kingdom and 10 million will visit a second, as yet unnamed, theme park a year at their peak.
This will make them the first and fifth most visited attractions in the world, with the other three being existing Disney sites.
Eurodisney is also assuming 60 per cent of these will come from France.
This means that nearly 30 per cent of the population of France would have to visit Eurodisney each year.
The issue price also raised some eyebrows.
In the pathfinder prospectus, Eurodisney's advisers, SG Warburg, indicated the price would be between 600p and 700p.
Until a couple of days before the price was announced Warburg was working towards a Fr70 price, and only pushed this up to Fr72 (707p) when it saw how strong demand was.
Investors have argued that the involvement of the French government, which provided cheap land and finance for, and is promising a rail link to, the project, is seen as an insurance project.
It would be embarrassing for the project to slip behind schedule, especially in the light of Eurotunnel.
Disney has a good record on bringing in projects on time, and there is a great deal of faith in the Eurodisney management.
The latest Disneyland, near Tokyo, has been a roaring success, recently beating the world record for the most visitors at an attraction in a day.
This Japanese success brings another reason for the Eurodisney issue to go well.
Investors from outside the European Community are not allowed to subscribe, and there is strong demand from Japan to buy in the French market once shares start being traded.
The message from brokers is apply for shares, but do not look to hold them for the long term.
Washington Comment: The fight is on for the Fed to reserve its independence
By BAILEY MORRIS
THE chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board is a man people love to hate.
In his role as the world's Central Banker, a position bestowed on him by the dollar's reserve currency status, he cannot please all of the people all of the time.
He is on an unstable pedestal: considered too powerful because the Fed is too independent, a position fiercely guarded by its chairmen.
Therein lie the roots of the difficulties faced by the unflappable reigning chairman, Alan Greenspan.
Politicians are slinging arrows at him from all sides.
The periodic ‘Fed bashing’ which one has come to expect of the incumbent political Administrations has again resurfaced.
There are even suggestions that the US appoint its own Chancellor and rid itself of the high-handed monetary czars who ride unchecked across the economic landscape.
Nicholas Brady, the US Treasury Secretary and David Mulford, his aggressive deputy, have made it clear that they want Mr Greenspan to lower interest rates and do it quickly.
The same message is emanating from the White House.
The Administration is embarrassed that the Fed is not providing more support to its commitment to lower the dollar.
Perhaps more important, the Administration is again under pressure from US exporters who fear that the high dollar will drive them out of international markets.
The Fed and the Treasury are again at cross purposes, with one suggesting that rising inflation is the greater fear while the other insists that the climbing trade deficit is the most serious concern.
The remedy for one will exacerbate the other.
Soon Richard Darman, the budget director not known for his light touch, will resume his attack.
‘The Federal Reserve needs to be more attentive to the need to avoid tipping this economy into a recession,’ he warns.
These are predictable messages.
What is slightly more unusual is that Congress has simultaneously joined the fray.
Suddenly, the Fed is faced with a plethora of legislative amendments to curb its independence.
Mr Greenspan will be summoned next week to defend his turf before a House tribunal and to defend the Fed's decision to focus on inflation, not the dollar.
But nothing terribly adverse is expected to occur, mainly because of the legislative stewardship of Rep.
Stephen Neal of North Carolina.
He is one of the Fed's best friends in Congress.
He supports the view that under current law the Fed has so much leeway that it can honestly claim to be fulfilling the will of Congress no matter what policies it adopts.
The law stipulates that the Central Bank must ‘promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates.’
It does not address the policy trade-offs.
Mr Neal has offered his own bill to check the Fed's independence but only by requiring it to adopt policies that would eliminate US inflation, now in the 5 per cent range, by 1994.
The Fed chairman actually supports Mr Neal's bill.
Not only does it meet his own policy expectations but it does so in language supplied by Mr Greenspan in congressional testimony which would allow Mr Greenspan to run rings around his Administration critics.
But there is other pending legislation which is much less friendly.
Two influential Congressmen, Lee Hamilton of Indiana and Byron Dorgan of North Dakota, are sponsoring bills intended to ‘politicise and democratise’ the Fed.
The bill would restore the US Treasury Secretary to the Fed's policy making committee, a position he lost in 1936 during Roosevelt's new Deal restructuring of the Central Bank.
Treasury Secretaries have been fighting for reinstatement ever since.
In addition, the legislation is intended to make the Fed more accountable to elected officials by insisting on reforms.
As Mr Hamilton explains it, this is not an attack on its authority but merely an attempt to establish communication ‘with the outside world.’
It is populist zeal which is moving Mr Hamilton to clip the Fed's wings.
The prospect of a US Central Bank subject to interference from elected officials is frightening.
In a political system characterised by policy through stalemate, it cannot be tolerated.
Wiliam Proxmire, the former senator from Wisconsin, describes the Hamilton/Dorgam bill as ‘the most dangerous economic legislation before Congress,’ driven as it is by political hunger for short-term prosperity.
What would happen to US monetary policy guided by a Treasury Secretary like Donald Regan, who proclaimed that ‘deficits do not matter’?
Although former presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan endorsed the strong medicine prescribed by previous chairman Paul Volcker, neither was likely to initiate such a devastating cure.
The Fed must remain independent because it is the only US institution which provides the discipline of the long-term view and corresponding policy decisions.
As long as Mr Neal remains a strong bulwark against these incursions, nothing very significant is likely to happen.
But if a crack is allowed to open, a deluge of disastrous legislation could occur.
European Markets: Restructuring provides foundation for stakebuilding
By EDI COHEN
AFTER initial relief about last week's interest rate rises, the markets, most of them now fully valued, immediately searched for new issues to worry about.
The greatest insecurity lingering in investors' minds was the lack of effect the rate rises had on the dollar's ascent and the inflationary implications this might have for European economies.
There is more evidence in Germany that domestic inflationary pressures due to buoyant growth and expected fiscal stimulus for next year will leave little room for relaxation on the interest rate front.
Speculation about a possible realignment of the EMS clouded the air too.
As a consequence the markets were distracted from fundamentals and concentrated instead on special situations and gossip.
The French market was rife with rumours about takeovers in the financial services industry.
Jean Philippe Vernes, of BNP Securities, said although rumours in the French market are sometimes ways for punters to make quick money, some of the current ones are cases of stakebuilding based on the fundamental restructuring of the European financial services industry.
At the end of the week, some rumours became substantiated.
There is evidence now that both Paribas and AGF (Assurance Generale de France) have been allowed to build up stakes of more than 10 per cent in Navigation Mixte, a holding company with insurance and banking subsidiaries.
Navigation's share price rose by 14 per cent over the week as a result.
Since Paribas's rival Banque Indosuez won the insurance company, Victoire, analysts believe that Paribas did not have much choice but to look for a suitable target in the insurance field.
There is also talk of stakebuilding in Paribas itself.
The price of Paribas shares has soared by more than 10 per cent this week.
It could be that Navigation Mixte is teaming up to buy Paribas or that friendly defenders of Paribas such as Axa-Midi are strengthening their holdings.
Another possibility for the rise could be a general re-rating of the company on the basis of its net asset value.
According to those calculations, Paribas should be trading at around Fr650 while it has only this week started to trade over Fr600.
Some analysts believe that Deutsche Bank could be one of Paribas's suitors.
The German bank has been looking for a French opening for its global expansion for some time.
But it is believed that a takeover of Paribas by a foreign entity seems politically improbable.
The Week in Review: Business and City
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
IN Brazil they are wondering what all the fuss is about.
Inflation there was 36 per cent for the month of September alone and is expected to break new ground this month by touching 40 per cent.
So Britain's September rise of 0.7 per cent, revealed yesterday, giving an annualised rate of 7.6 per cent , seems rather meagre.
Nevertheless, it may be enough to keep the markets jittery about the country's economic prospects.
The Chancellor's decision to take base interest rates to 15 per cent was followed this week by mortgage rate rises from the Halifax and Abbey National building societies to 14.5 per cent.
Others are expected to follow suit next week and some may go for even higher rates for their borrowers.
Fears of mortgage defaults are adding pressure to an already depressed property market, while reports of industry feeling the squeeze proliferated.
A growing number of capital projects must now be in jeopardy.
Equity markets recoiled from these gloomy indicators by falling sharply at the beginning of the week, pausing only for the Chancellor's speech at the Tory Party conference, but still failing to recover lost ground by the close.
Market guru, Peter Thompson, now retired from Barclays de Zoete Wedd, but still forecasting market trends, has published a document predicting that the FT-SE 100 could be at 2,100 by the end of the month (it closed at 2,233.9, down 3.9, yesterday).
He says it will spiral down to 1,800 by next year.
Many would dismiss Peter Thompson's pessimism out of hand were it not for the fact that he was the author of a paper in July 1987, when the market was at its pre-crash high, called ‘The End of the Long Bull Market’.
Market uncertainty forced Hays, the business services group which is seeking a stock market listing, to revise the launch price for its offer for sale scheduled to take place this month.
Faced with the decision of raising less money and hoping for a successful issue or shelving the flotation altogether, Ronnie Frost, chairman, opted for the cheaper share price.
Back at the Conservative Party conference in Blackpool, Nigel Lawson's carefully worded oratory did little to satisfy those wanting Britain to become full members of the European Monetary System sooner rather than later, nor did it provide comfort for others claiming that interest rates had reached their zenith.
The Chancellor appeared to be unmoved by the appeals from some of his party faithful, preferring to claim that his actions were in the country's long term interest.
Political expediency seemed far from his mind.
Meanwhile the pound showed some signs of stabilising having slipped below the psychological DM3 level earlier in the week.
The markets still remain unsure whether interest rates are rising to keep the economy in check by containing consumer spending or whether they are rising to protect the pound in the international market.
Interest and exchange rates are the least of Ferranti's problems.
The troubled defence and electronics group has spent the week in talks a clutch of potential bidders.
British Aerospace and Thomson-CSF, the French group are the favourites so far.
British Aerospace has confirmed that it has built up a 1.7 per cent stake in the company.
As for apportioning blame for the £215m fraud at International Signal and Control, the Ferranti subsidiary, rumour and speculation abounded as it will for some time to come.
Ferranti has had its problems in the past so has rarely been an investors' favourite.
The same cannot be said of Saatchi & Saatchi, once the darling of the stock market and counting the Conservative Party as one of its clients.
Responding to hard times, the world's biggest advertising agency is reshuffling its management.
In a move to tighten control of a far-reaching empire and to improve the group's own image, Maurice and Charles Saatchi, credited with building up the company, have stepped down from the day-to-day running of the group.
The new man at the top is Robert Louis-Dreyfus, a Frenchman, who is joining Saatchi from IMS, the market research group with Charles Scott, an existing colleague, as finance director.
Saatchi has been in the doldrums since late 1987.
Mr Louis-Dreyfus will have to work hard to recover the company's standing.
He may also have to fight off a takeover bid — Fininvest, the Milan-based media company controlled by Silvio Berlusconi revealed a 1 per cent holding last week.
Elsewhere in the media world, LWT has come up with a new plan to restructure itself ahead of the new franchise auction in 1992.
The scheme, which is not popular with some of the group's investors, includes tying in 40 of its top managers with the promise of an equity stake in the business.
And as Friday 13th drew the week to a close, City computer users viewed their screens nervously.
Rumours were circulating that a computer virus had been injected into software systems some time ago by computer terrorists and was programmed to break out yesterday, wiping out all data in the ailing computer system.
One suspicious City firm actually changed the date on all its computer systems to 14 October, hoping to side-step any trouble.
Isle of Man investors to get payout
By ALEXANDRA JACKSON
LIQUIDATORS of the Isle of Man Savings and Investment Bank, which crashed seven and a half years ago with debts of £42.4m, said last night they would be paying more than 10p in the pound to the 4,000 mainly small investors who lost money.
Michael Jordan of Cork Gully and Timothy Beer of Peat Marwick McLintock said they had recovered £13.2m of the missing deposits but £5.5m of this had already gone to liquidation costs and legal fees.
That leaves £7.7m to be distributed but Mr Jordan said some of this would still have to be held back for litigation.
The liquidators won an £11.7m judgment against companies owned by disgraced City financier Jim Raper in the Manx court on Monday but said they were not expecting to see any of this.
Mr Raper is believed to be in Switzerland, in hiding from a two-year jail sentence imposed for moving assets out of Britain.
Mr Jordan said a payout, the first of several, will probably be made in early December.
Company News in Brief 
Business and City Page 21
Market Report: Rothmans lights up at close of uneasy account
By DEREK PAIN
IS THE much rumoured takeover bid for Rothmans International, the tobacco and luxury goods group, about to materialise at long, long last?
As the stock market finished a depressing account on an uncertain note, Rothmans improved 21p to 666p.
Some suggested the progress was due to sterling's recent weakness.
Others were inclined to believe that Richemont, the Swiss-based South African controlled group, was preparing to bid.
Richemont and Philip Morris, the US brewing, food and tobacco giant, are the leading Rothmans shareholders with 64 per cent of the capital.
If Richemont should buy out the Philip Morris stake it would trigger an obligation to bid for the rest of the shares.
At 666p, Rothmans is trading below asset value, which some believe is more than 750p a share.
The shareholding shuffle is likely to have been provoked by Philip Morris which is thought to have lost interest in Rothmans.
It acquired its stake in the early 1980s, hoping eventually to acquire the tobacco group.
But with the South African Rembrandt group remaining committed to Rothmans the chance of a successful US offer has dwindled.
Rembrandt underlined its affection for Rothmans by pumping its shareholding into Richemont, a company it set up in Switzerland.
The rest of the stock market had a see-saw day.
When at the opening the mooted megabid failed to appear shares lost ground.
But gradually they clawed their way back, until the twin blows of the Bank of England's property loan warning and the worse-than-expected RPI figure sent prices into retreat.
However, new time buying inspired another rally which petered out towards the close as Wall Street performed poorly with junk bonds under pressure.
There are fears that Wall Street, which this week hit a peak, is in for a torrid time in the next few weeks.
One aspect which is worrying many is the increasing difficulty in dealing in beta and gamma stocks.
‘It's as if there are two markets: the performance that the second liners offer has no relationship with blue chips,’ one market maker said.
The problems among the second liners was underlined by the sharp falls which occured in many USM and Third Market shares this week.
Property shares were hit by the Bank of England's worries about property loans, which revived memories of the 1970s banking and property crash.
Most property shares were marked down, although selling was not heavy.
Among those lowered were Land Securities down 6p to 516p; Rosehaugh 21p to 534p and Speyhawk 16p to 299p.
Banks also retreated.
All Thursday's takeover favourites gave ground.
Scottish & Newcastle Breweries ended 4p lower at 385p.
The merchant bank Morgan Grenfell slipped 7p to 399p and Burmah, the oil group, 9p to 637p.
But United Biscuits responded to new time buying, gaining 6p to 360p.
Willis Faber, the insurance broker said to be on the verge of selling its 20.5 per cent shareholding in MG to a potential bidder, was unchanged at 242p.
Jaguar rose 14p to 677p.
Stories are circulating that Ford will announce it has built a 5 per cent shareholding early next week.
The Ford stake is aimed at frustrating the proposed deal between Jaguar and General Motors.
The GM plan is to buy a significant but not controlling stake in the British car maker.
It is in talks with Jaguar.
Saatchi & Saatchi fell 10p to 334p on the arrival of new management.
Wardle Storeys, he plastic sheeting concern, had a nervous session, falling 27p to 266p.
Last month the company warned, for the second time this year, that profits would be disappointing.
It is expected to produce about £9m which would compare with £16.5m last time.
At one time this year the shares touched 664p.
ML Laboratories rose 33p to 528p.
The company has entered into a research agreement with the Royal Postgraduate Medical School for the development of polymers for Aids treatment.
Shares ended the account on a weak note.
Despite two attempted rallies, the FT-SE share index closed 3.9 points down at 2,233.9.
At one time it was up 10.0 points.
The FT 30 share index ended 0.3 points up at 1,818.0.
Government stocks fell by up to £¼.
Shares in Bennett & Fountain will hit a fresh low for this year on Monday after an out-of-hours announcement last night that ‘the group has made a significant pre-tax loss for the year to 30 June’, due to difficulties in the retail division.
There will not be a final dividend.
Pre-tax profits in 1988 were £5.3m.
The shares stand at 65p against a high for 1989 of 127p.
Shares of Armour Trust, the sugar confectionery and car accessories business headed by Andrew Balcombe, slipped 0.5p to 47p yesterday.
Following recent confectionery takeovers, UBS Phillips & Drew believe the trust has a break-up value of 100p.
Analyst Mark Simpson is looking for profits of £2.4m this year and £2.85m next year.
He rates the shares a buy.
View from City Road: Heavy water for the institutions
By DEREK PAIN
THE CITY is in grave danger of being bullied into subscribing for shares in the water industry that it neither wants nor needs.
The structure of the privatisation is such that institutions are effectively being left with no say in how they spend the funds they are supposed to manage on behalf of their clients.
Investment criteria that are applied as a matter of course to every other company are in danger of being abandoned completely as the institutions face the prospect of being sucked in by the Government's subtle propaganda.
At the heart of the problem is the fact that the Government is selling off 10 different companies but presenting them as a single package.
This makes sound political sense given that Environment Secretary Chris Patten is desperate to ensure an easy transition of water from public to private sector.
However, it is an approach that conflicts with traditional investment strategy.
If the water authorities were presented as individual companies, they would be scrutinised, assessed and either bought or discarded, depending on their merits.
But the Government is not prepared to allow this to happen.
It has to privatise an entire industry and cannot run the risk of the City picking up only the most attractive pieces.
So the institutions are being dragooned into subscribing for a package of shares in all 10 companies.
There is an option for institutions to subscribe for shares in individual authorities but that comes with the ominous warning that there is no guarantee the shares will be available.
The Government is therefore relying on the institutions to help guard against the problems that would be caused by any variations in regional demand from the small investor.
That is an unfair responsibility to impose on institutions that will not want to retain holdings in all 10 authorities.
Certainly they will have a presence in the instant sector that will be created but they will only want to hold shares in two or three companies.
It is made all the more unfair by the fact that the institutions have been deprived of any real access to the water authorities.
It is essential, therefore, that when the water industry prospectus is published next month it provides comprehensive information on all 10 authorities.
If it doesn't, the institutions should be prepared to exercise their power and veto the 10 in one package they are being bullied into.
View from City Road: Dearing bogged down by money
By DEREK PAIN
IT IS a year since Sir Ronald Dearing unveiled his committee's report on the way in which the accounting standards setting system in this country should operate.
The report was widely heralded as a blueprint for re-establishing the accountancy profession's right to set the framework for and to improve financial reporting in the corporate sector.
Yet despite praise for the report and stated commitments to implement it, Sir Ronald still has no tangible evidence that his work had any useful purpose.
That is not to say the report has been ignored completely.
Much work has been done behind the scenes to pave the way for its implementation.
Indeed the Government has draft clauses in the new Companies Bill which carry all the power necessary to put the system Dearing envisaged into place.
Unfortunately those clause do not represent a commitment by the Government to make that system work.
The Dearing Report has become bogged down by that oldest of problems — money.
Unless the Government is prepared to come up with some cash there is a real danger that the Dearing vision will be blinded by the dust which the report is rapidly gathering.
The only significant shortcoming in the Dearing report was its failure to assess the true cost of operating the system it proposed.
The annual cost will be about £3m a year which compares with the £500,000 currently spent on the Accounting Standards Committee.
The difficulty is in finding the sources of finance.
The accountancy profession rightly argues that the cost of establishing a new independent standards setting framework should be met, in part, out of the public purse.
That is only reasonable given that, in the new age of investor protection, the aim of a new system would be to improve the quality of information which was made available to shareholders.
The accountancy profession is prepared to concede that it no longer has the resources or the right to safeguard the integrity of accounting standards.
That is an important concession but one which will be wasted if the Government does not accept that part it now has to play.
It requires no dramatic change in policy to impose a small surcharge on the corporate sector through its filing of the annual return which will provide the funds to support the accounting standards system which this country needs and deserves.
View from City Road: Bidder has DRG sums all wrong
By DEREK PAIN
THE SLIDE in the market could, on the face of it, play into Roland Franklin's hands.
Share prices could fall so far that his cash offer for DRG, the Basildon Bond company, starts to look attractive.
For the time being, however, DRG's shares at 602p, down 2p yesterday, remain 12p above the offer.
Barring market collapse, they should retain their premium.
Mr Franklin was yesterday again arguing that his valuation is fair.
But there are glaring errors in his sums.
He starts by looking at DRG's pension fund surplus, which he says is worth £25m.
But the company, backed by actuaries and auditors, says it is worth £40.8m.
Further, he treats the surplus separately from the business.
But this ignores the effect of new accounting rules set out in SSAP 24, which require companies to spread a surplus over a number of years.
DRG has spread the surplus over 8.5 years, which is long enough to justify valuing it as part of the overall earnings stream.
DRG's property assets have also given rise to argument.
Mr Franklin says the promised stream of profits averaging £10m over the next five years has a present value of roughly £44m.
He says he is prepared to be proved wrong — suggesting he would raise his offer if DRG produced a higher valuation.
It looks as if Mr Franklin and other shareholders will have to wait another three weeks for news on that front.
Estimates vary but profits will probably rise from £58.2m before tax to say £66m this year and £80m next, excluding property.
On this basis, the offer represents 14 times this years' earnings.
While it is a premium to the market, it should be more than accounted for by the property.
Do not be won over by Mr Franklin's arithmetic.
Column Eight: Ash blonde in the hot seat
By SIMON PINCOMBE
Does one detect in the week's events the motif of impending immolation?
It transpires that Professor Sir Alan Walters, Prime Minister Margaret ‘Brunnhilde’ Thatcher's favourite economist, is an ardent fan of the late Richard Wagner, composer of Germanic opera cycles.
Do our leaders remember how Gotterdammerung finishes?
After Brunnhilde throws herself on to the pyre Valhalla comes to an end, to be replaced by a new era of human love.
That cosmopolitan mouse Mickey is a roaring success, it seems, much to the chagrin of Warburgs, one of the sponsors of the Eurodisney float.
Demand for prospectuses has been such that an Independent scribe seeking a Warburgs telephone number for publication was told the firm really would prefer that it did not appear in print.
C'est la vie.
Even The Economist is turning green.
Amid advertisements for accountants and academics in the latest edition is an invitation to ‘cowpea breeders’.
The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture wants a breeder, to be based in Mozambique, as part of its African development initiative.
Duties will include ‘accumulating, describing, evaluating and maintaining cowpea germplasm’.
Candidates must have strong ‘interpersonal skills’.
Headhunters are bound to find this one a challenge.
Steve Gold, the computer wizard and former hacker who got into Prince Philip's Prestel mailbox, still keeps names and addresses on paper.
The astute Mr Gold comments: ‘At least you can't hack a filofax.’
For those who want a little more than Dulux Silk Emulsion, may we recommend ‘Colefax & Fowler, the Best In English Interior Decoration’, a publication lauding the USM-listed interior decorator.
The reader is told that founder John Fowler ‘took the romantic spirit of late eighteenth-century decoration, the simplicity of rural life with its celebration of nature, and fashioned it into a style of its own.’
Later, in a chapter entitled ‘The Application of Paint’ it says that recent books on decoration have ‘done more to debase the traditional approach to decoration than to further an appreciation of its subtleties’.
Now you know.
Next month Lowndes Queensway and Boots will face each other in court to settle a legal action neither started.
Not so long ago AG Stanley, the DIY group, sued Harris Queensway, the furniture and carpets retailer, over an alleged breach of warranties.
Since then Stanley has been taken over by Ward White, Harris by James Gulliver's Lowndes, and Ward White has been taken over by Boots.
And still the lawyers get their fees.
Ferranti had strong warning on takeover
By JEREMY WARNER, Assistant Business Editor
FERRANTI was warned in strong terms at the time of the takeover two years ago of the dangers of buying International Signal and Control.
A report commissioned from Lazard Brothers, the merchant bank, by members of the Ferranti family and obtained by The Independent, reveals that Sir Derek Alun-Jones, Ferranti's chairman, was told that Ferranti ‘may be unable to exercise full management control’ and that ISC was likely ‘to be a significant drain on its (Ferranti's) cash resources’.
A £215m fraud has since been discovered at ISC which has brought Ferranti to the brink of collapse and is likely to cost the group its independence.
The fraud involved creation of false profits and stocks in the books over a seven-year period through use of purported contracts, which in reality did not exist, with third world countries.
Some shareholders have called on Sir Derek, who masterminded the ISC takeover, to take responsibility for the debacle and resign.
Trustees of the family's shareholding in Ferranti commissioned the report on ISC to help them decide whether to support the takeover.
Although the report did not allude to the possibility of fraud, it has proved to be prophetic in a number of respects.
It pointed out that a prolonged period of profits growth at ISC had ended because of insistence by the auditors that ISC adopt more conservative accounting policies on long term contracts.
‘Together with reported delays last year on international contracts, this may have implications for profits in the current year,’ the report said.
It went on to claim that ISC was a ‘highly cash-absorptive operation’.
It had had new borrowings or rights issues in each of the last five years and ‘this pattern appears set to continue’.
The report also questioned ISC's heavy reliance on three international customers with ‘one customer representing 15 per cent of trade debtors and two customers representing 45 per cent of contract work in progress’.
The report noted that ISC was in dispute with the US Department of Defence over $4m of incurred costs relating to an ISC subsidiary and noted the acquisition would ‘lessen the group's attractiveness to a bidder’.
It concluded with the comment that ISC was ‘more akin to a high-risk venture capital play moving between rounds of post-launch financing than as a stable company in conventional trading circumstances’.
Kleinwort makes 11m Adollars on sale
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
KLEINWORT Benson, the merchant bank, has received A$10.66m (£5.3m) from the sale of its increasingly troubled Australian businesses -just half what it hoped for when it announced the deal in August.
It has also had to keep an undisclosed number of doubtful loans before offloading the unit, Kleinwort Benson Australia, to the California-based bank Security Pacific.
KBA's activities include merchant banking, stockbroking, bullion trading and leasing.
It fell into the red last year, losing A$2.6m.
But losses leapt to £5.5m in the first half of 1989.
A strong merchant banking contribution was more than offset by losses on investment management and stockbroking and some heavy loan provisions.
Kleinwort said yesterday the deal price was based on the consolidated net assets of KBA on 31 August, and was still subject to final adjustment.
In August it expected to make about A$20m from the sale.
Kleinwort last month reported a decline in pre-tax profits of almost £5m to £30.1m in the first half, though recovering from loss in the previous six months.
The group now plans to concentrate on Europe, the US and Japan, having already closed offices in Hong Kong and Singapore.
Libra Bank, the London-based consortium bank which trades in third world debts, plunged to a pre-tax loss of £174.6m in the first half of 1989 from profits last time of £10.9m.
A £191.1m exceptional provision caused the damage, but lifted the bank's third world cover from 16 to 32 per cent.
Operating profits improved strongly from £10.9m to £16.5m.
Libra's largest UK shareholder is NatWest with 5 per cent.
Interest charges hit Pergamon
By SIMON MANN
INTEREST charges associated with its continuing restructuring all but wiped out Pergamon AGB's profits in the half-year to the end of June.
However, directors of the 60 per cent-owned member of Robert Maxwell's stable of companies, said they expected to maintain a final year dividend of 3p ‘in view of the satisfactory progress’ of Pergamon's £90m-plus disposal programme.
The half-year payout is steady at 1.5p.
Pre-tax profits slumped to £700,000 (£5.5m last year) derived solely from income on investments.
This was after the interest bill surged to £11.5m from £3.8m, negating operating profits.
The latter came from revenues of £142m (£124.9m).
However, a tax credit of £1.8m checked the slump in Pergamon's net result with earnings per share holding up at 2.9p (4.1p).
Pergamon included an extraordinary charge of £38.7m but gave no further details.
In recent months it has been expanding its market research activities while offloading its education publishing division and other subsidiaries in a bid to slash debt.
The directors said the disposal of non-core businesses would continue with the full benefits of its shift in activities not expected before 1991.
New CNIM fund tracks world markets
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
COUNTY NatWest Investment Management is launching an umbrella indexed fund which allows investors to track markets in different parts of the world and switch between them without incurring huge costs.
CNIM, the investment management arm of National Westminster, is the latest house to launch an umbrella fund of this type.
Others include Barclays' investment management arm, Lazards Investment Management and Paribas/Clerical Medical.
The fund consists of up to 22 sub-funds, each designed to track different markets, including Australia, Hong Kong, Italy, Malaysia, USA and Sweden.
Investors can switch between the sub-funds.
The World Index Trust is designed for investors who want to be able to move between overseas markets but do not want to choose particular stocks to buy.
Each sub-fund is indexed to a local market and so should perform exactly in line with it.
Aitken profits sparkle
By CLARE DOBIE, Deputy City Editor
AITKEN HUME International, the financial services group chaired by Conservative MP Jonathan Aitken, more than doubled pre-tax profits to £1.449m in the six months to 30 September.
There was no interim dividend, but Mr Aitken said the directors would consider paying a final dividend at the year-end in the light of trading conditions then.
There were two large exceptional payments.
One was a £230,000 ‘compensation for loss of office’, the bulk of which went to the former chief executive, Emmanuel Olympitis, who suddenly departed last month.
The other was a £310,000 provision for the diminution in market value of an undisclosed investment.
The bank, which also held its annual meeting yesterday, rejected a shareholders' demand for it to sell its US-based fund management business, National Securities & Research.
The group lost £1.368m last year and has since been radically slimmed down to three operating subsidiaries — banking, a Channel Islands fiduciary management business and NSR.
Caird Group plans a 34.5m pounds rights issue
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
CAIRD GROUP, the waste disposal company headed by former stockbroker Peter Linacre, is raising £34.5m through a two-for-one rights issue of convertible preference shares.
Caird specialises in buying small waste management and landfill companies, integrating them and bringing them up to existing and proposed European standards on waste disposal.
This policy has brought it £24m of borrowings, most at variable rates, and Mr Linacre said replacing these borrowings with convertible preference shares, yielding 7 per cent, would save the group about £1.8m a year.
The convertibles swap into Caird ordinary shares at 535p, compared to a share price of 479p, down 12p, yesterday.
The move has been interpreted as making Caird less likely to bid for Leigh Interests, a rival waste disposal group in which Caird has a stake of about 5 per cent.
Caird is sending shareholders an external environmental audit which it commissioned from consultants Mott MacDonald.
Mr Linacre said the audit answered many of the criticisms voiced by stockbroking analysts about standards at some Caird acquisitions.
Coats sale raises 12m pounds
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
COATS Viyella, the textile group which expects to hear whether it is allowed to take over rival Tootal in the next few days, has sold its medical businesses to Pharma-Plast Holdings for £12m.
The business comprises two operations, Steriseal, which distributes medical and opthalmic products, and Rotax, which supplies scalpels.
Sir David Alliance, Coats chairman, said the sales were part of Coats' continuing policy of disposing of peripheral activities that do not fit in the long term strategy of the group.
Business and City Summary
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
Ford confirms Jaguar stake: Ford has acquired 5 per cent of shares in Jaguar.
The company said it was advised last week by the US Federal Trade Commission that no objection would be raised to the acquisition of up to 15 per cent of Jaguar shares.
Ford said the ISE and SEC were being notified.
Ferranti warning: Troubled defence firm Ferranti was warned two years ago of the dangers of buying International Signal and Control.
Page 21 RPI up: Inflation rose to 7.6 per cent last month, worse than expected.
Page 19 Bank warning: Robin Leigh-Pemberton, the Governor of the Bank of England, has warned about record levels of property company borrowing.
Page 19 Car link: American car maker Chrysler is talking to Mitsubishi of Japan about setting up manufacturing plants in Europe.
Page 19 BSB launch: British Satellite Broadcasting has launched into the market for satellite communications.
Page 19 WH Smith drops claim: WH Smith has dropped its legal action against five directors it dismissed in August from Our Price Music, the record retailing chain.
Page 19 Waste rights: Caird, the waste disposal group, is raising £34.5m through a two-for-one rights issue.
Page 21 Bestwood sale: Bestwood is selling British Drilling & Freezing, its onshore drilling and services subsidiary, to its management, for £4m.
Sterling decline: Sterling closed 0.33 pfennigs higher at DM2.9595 yesterday.
The pound has fallen 10 per cent against the mark since its peak early this year.
Yellow card: The Takeover Panel has rapped Michael Knighton on the knuckles for pulling out of his £20m bid for Manchester United.
Page 19 Kleinwort disposal: Merchant bank Kleinwort Benson has sold its Australian businesses for A$10.66m.
Page 21 Pergamon wipe-out: Interest charges associated with restructuring almost wiped out Pergamon AGB's half-year profits.
Page 21 IoM payout: Liquidators of the failed Isle of Man Savings and Investment Bank will pay more than 10p in the pound to investors.
Page 22 World Markets New York: Prices plunged and by the close the Dow Jones average was down 196.70 points at 2,563.11.
The failure of the United Airlines bid deal was thought to have triggered the selling.
Hong Kong: Selling focused on selected blue chips dragged the Hang Seng index down 11.15 points to close at 2,782.30 on low turnover.
Sydney: The market shook off its bearish mood, boosted by a weaker local dollar.
The All-Ordinaries index closed 11.8 points higher at 1,741.9.
Tokyo: Talk the US may be easing credit policy gave an extra kick to a technical bounce, knocking prices higher in light trade.
The Nikkei index jumped 320.97 points to 35,116.02.
Zurich: Shares closed steady to lower in quiet trading as prices came off their early highs on slight profit taking.
Frankfurt: Prices fell sharply on inflation worries after news that wholesale prices surged by 1.1 per cent.
The DAX index fell 23.44 points, to 1,589.34.
Madrid: Shares closed lower as the government posted worse than expected inflation figures.
Stockholm: Foreigners were noted among the sellers.
The general index lost 0.41 per cent in low turnover.
Brussels: Stocks slipped further in moderate early trade as doubts prompted by high interest rates and the strength of the dollar resurfaced.
Milan: Shares closed lower in dull trading.
Inflation hopes crushed with jump to 7.6 per cent 
By PETER TORDAY, Economics Correspondent
INFLATION last month rose to 7.6 per cent, reversing a recent ebbing of inflationary pressures and ending hopes of a decline by the end of this year.
The increase was worse than expected and led to widespread predictions that base rates will not be cut before next spring at the earliest.
In the US, meanwhile, there was a sharp jump of 0.9 per cent in September wholesale prices, which were 4.5 per cent higher than a year ago.
In the UK, price increases for food, clothing and footwear, tobacco, alcohol and petrol helped to drive the retail price index 0.7 per cent higher in October, taking the retail price index (January 1987=100) to 116.6.
The figures deepened City anxiety over the outlook for inflation which is now expected to end the year between 7.5 and 7.75 per cent and remain above 7 per cent for the first quarter of 1990.
The figures were released as Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor, warned that interest rates could climb even further to clamp down on rising prices.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4 the Chancellor said: ‘You cannot escape the need to raise interest rates if you want to keep inflation down, nor can you escape the possibility that interest rates may go even higher.’
But City sources said they believed that Mr Lawson might reinforce the fight against inflation without resorting to another increase in base rates, by announcing a further tightening of monetary policy in next Thursday's Mansion House speech.
The Chancellor is expected to modify the Government's policy of buying in enough long-dated gilt-edged stock in a single fiscal year to offset the financial drain on the economy created by the budget surplus and foreign exchange intervention to support the pound — the so-called full funding rule.
Current policy is intended to repay the national debt and also to ensure that long-term interest rates stay below short-term rates, in order to encourage the development of a corporate bond market and provide industry with lower borrowing costs.
But that policy has come in for sharp criticism from monetarists who insist that it has fed the rapid expansion of broad money supply, M4, and inflamed inflationary pressures.
The City expects the Chancellor to alter but not altogether abandon the rule, effectively reducing the amount of gilt-edged stock bought in by the Bank of England.
The measure would force up long and short-term interest rates and could help to support the pound.
Sterling's immediate fortunes are widely believed to hang on a positive reception to Mr Lawson's speech.
It is understood that the Government has done nothing to discourage City expectations that it will curtail its gilt-edged buying programme.
However, a Treasury official yesterday dismissed the reports as ‘pure speculation’.
September's 7.6 per cent inflation rate follows one of 7.3 per cent in August and compares with a current peak of 8.3 per cent in May.
Although inflation in October is expected to decline to around 7.2 per cent, because a 1.25 per cent increase in mortgage rates in October last year will drop out of the annual comparison, the recently announced increases in mortgage rates will send inflation back up again in November.
Economists yesterday expressed concern that the increase in prices was becoming more generalised.
Excluding the impact of mortgage rates, regarded as the best guide to the underlying trend, inflation rose 0.1 points to 5.8 per cent in September, which suggests that high interest rates have yet to subdue inflation significantly.
But there was little reaction to the news in the London market.
The pound ended slightly higher at DM2.9595 but rose more sharply against the dollar, which fell on rumours of central bank intervention.
Bank governor warns of record property borrowing
By GAIL COUNSELL, Property Correspondent
ROBIN Leigh-Pemberton, the Governor of the Bank of England, sent shivers through an already-nervous property sector yesterday when he issued the latest in a series of warnings about the record level of property company borrowing.
Figures published on Thursday show lending to property companies grew by 50 per cent in the year to August to £30bn.
‘We cannot neglect the possibility that current levels of interest rates may challenge the assumptions underlying some of this lending,’ he told the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors in Paris.
Levels of lending, in which property companies represented about 10 per cent of total loan exposure to UK residents, did not present a ‘major’ supervisory anxiety, he said.
But the Bank had been monitoring the situation closely and there had to be ‘room for debate’ about whether there would be sufficient demand for office space in the early 1990s for the supply coming on stream.
Special attention, he added, had to be paid to highly geared developers, especially those with ‘excessive’ specialisation in particular markets and localities.
Comparison with the early 1970s, when a number of secondary banks nearly failed as a result of their over-exposure to falling property values, were not appropriate, however.
‘The distribution of lending today is very different,’ he said.
It was spread across a wider range of banks, especially the ‘large London branches of strongly capitalised foreign banks’.
His comments had an immediate impact on the City, where analysts have grown increasingly anxious in recent weeks about the risk that asset values may fall in the face of oversupply and forced sales of buildings.
Shares in development based companies were particularly hard hit.
Concern centres on the likely shortage of buyers for projects funded on short-term development finance from the banks.
‘What worries us most is where the takeout will come from,’ John Atkins of Phillips & Drew said.
‘The institutions were net disinvestors in property in the second quarter of this year — they sold more than they bought.
So who is going to buy all these buildings once they are finished?’
A spokeswoman for Barclays Bank stressed that British banks had already cut back their lending in response to earlier warnings.
‘The growth in lending in the year to August by Committee of Scottish and London Clearing Banks was only 27 per cent, and for Barclays it was only 10 per cent ,’ she said.
In 1980 British banks accounted for 80 per cent of company debt.
The figure has fallen to less than 60 per cent as overseas banks have become keen lenders.
Chrysler in European car plant talks with Mitsubishi
By MICHAEL HARRISON, Industrial Editor
CHRYSLER, America's third largest car maker, and Mitsubishi of Japan are discussing plans to set up vehicle manufacturing plants in Europe.
The negotiations form part of Chrysler's strategy to increase dramatically its presence in Continental markets following its complete withdrawal from European car manufacture in 1978.
Robert Miller, Chrysler's chief financial officer, said in London yesterday that the two companies were ‘exploring the possibility for joint European ventures’.
He declined, however, to specify what type of vehicle production was being considered and said the discussions were still at a preliminary stage.
Mitsubishi is expected to be the next Japanese company to begin car manufacture in Europe following in the footsteps of Nissan, Toyota and Honda.
The Japanese car manufacturer has a strong presence, however, in four-wheel drive utility vehicles and minivans — an area where Chrysler is also dominant.
Chrysler and Mitsubishi have already set up a $1bn (£653m) car plant in Illinois which has a capacity of 250,000 vehicles a year.
It is currently making sports cars.
Chrysler also has a 12 per cent stake in Mitsubishi.
Chrysler has already announced that it is teaming up with Renault of France to build a $400m to $500m plant in Europe to produce the JJ -a four-wheel drive Jeep-type vehicle.
The favoured location is Spain.
The plant, which will manufacture around 50,000 vehicles a year, will begin operations in 1992.
The company is also examining the possibility of starting minivan production in Europe and Mr Miller said Chrysler had spoken to potential partners.
Chrysler's aim is to increase European sales to 100,000 a year over the next few years — a plan almost certain to involve right-hand drive vehicles for the UK.
Since it took the decision to re-enter the European market three years ago, annual sales have risen to 50,000 on the Continent.
Its earlier foray into Europe ended in the sale to the French car group Peugeot of all its European manufacturing sites.
‘Now we are selling 50,000 vehicles it gives us encouragement that European consumers will forget the past and give us another chance,’ said Mr Miller.
Failed Manchester United bid draws reprimand from Panel
By FRANK KANE, Chief City Reporter
THE TAKEOVER Panel has rapped Michael Knighton on the knuckles for his failure to see his £20m bid for Manchester United football club through.
The 37-year-old property developer pulled out of the bid, despite having a funding package in place and agreement to buy a controlling stake from the chairman, Martin Edwards, last Wednesday.
A Panel statement criticised him for a breach of General Principle 3 of the Takeover Code, which requires that a bidder should ‘only announce an offer after the most careful and responsible consideration.’
When Mr Knighton announced his bid, the Panel says, he did not have any independent corporate finance advisers, nor lawyers advising him.
Details are emerging of the final stages of the talks which led to the collapse of the bid on Tuesday night.
Sources close to the talks say he ‘decided that the people backing him did not have the interests of the club at heart’.
The backers are understood to have included Owen Oyston, the media entrepreneur, as well as a Middle Eastern businessman.
The hostility of United directors to his backers persuaded Mr Knighton that he could never hope to reconcile them to his ownership of the club.
Insiders also say the presence of his wife at the meetings contributed to his decision to pull out.
The bid attracted intense media attention, most of it critical of Mr Knighton, an Isle of Man tax exile who became a millionaire through property dealings in Yorkshire and Scotland.
‘He wanted to develop his business on a private basis, and if he came into the glare of publicity as owner of Manchester United he would not be able to do that,’ one of the negotiators said.
WH Smith drops case against ex-directors
By JASON NISSE, Financial Reporter
WH SMITH has dropped its legal action against five directors it dismissed in August from Our Price Music, the record retailing chain it took over three years ago.
WH Smith took out an injunction against the five after it discovered what it says was a plot to launch a music chain to rival Our Price.
The five, who comprise the four founding directors of Our Price and a senior executive, have agreed to pay WH Smith's costs and WH Smith has dropped its claim for damages.
This is despite WH Smith's assertion that their actions damaged the ongoing business of Our Price.
In addition Gary Nesbitt, who was the non-executive deputy chairman, and Michael Isaacs, who was the development director, have agreed to a non-competition agreement, which last for two years in Mr Nesbitt's case and 18 months in Mr Isaacs'.
This restriction, however, merely limits Mr Nesbitt, who is chairman of the casino company Crockford's, and Mr Isaacs from conspiring together to start a rival record chain.
Dr Kevin Hawkins, the head of WH Smith's corporate public relations, said the agreement would not stop either taking a job with a rival chain.
BSB Datavision starts service
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
BRITISH Satellite Broadcasting has launched into the market for satellite communications, in spite of delays in the arrival of its television service.
BSB Datavision was one of six companies to be awarded a specialised satellite service operator (SSSO) licence last year.
This enables it to send video, audio and data from any point in the UK, via satellite, to closed groups of users.
Initial trials are beginning with the Press Association, which will send news and pictures via satellite to six customers.
BSB is also believed to be talking to Ford in the UK about providing communications with its dealers and to the Financial Times about a business service for large companies.
Datavision will use the BSB satellite and the same transmission technology, known as DMAC, but has opted to have the reception equipment made by different manufacturers.
While the parent television company has experienced serious delays with the supply of a vital set of electronic chips made by ITT, Datavision will be using chips made by Philips of the Netherlands and Plessey of the UK.
The Datavision business is expected to make about £5m next year, but then to escalate sharply.
The six SSSO licencees are negotiating with the Department of Trade and Industry to make changes.
Currently only one-way transmission is allowed, but they want two-way communications and the ability to transmit to recievers in Europe.
If these relaxations are approved, the market could be worth as much as £450m a year.
Patrick Scott, managing director of BSB Datavision, said: ‘I hope I am in the embarrassing situation of earning more than BSB.’
BA plan for UAL collapses
By LARRY BLACK and GAIL COUNSELL
BRITISH Airways last night faced the collapse of its planned £465m deal to buy into America's United Airlines.
The consortium behind the $7bn management buyout, in which BA would have a 15 per cent stake, admitted yesterday that it had been unable to complete its part of the financing.
The news prompted a 196.70 fall in the Dow Jones index, which closed at 2,563.11, the second biggest fall in Wall Street's history.
In a statement, British Airways said it believed that the finance for the deal would be raised in the near future, but that its £320m fund raising issue would go ahead regardless.
‘The issue is underwritten,’ said a company spokesman, ‘and what's happened in America will not affect British Airways’independent finance raising, which will extend our equity base irrespective of the UAE deal.’
British Airways has always insisted that it would continue with its convertible bond issue, which closes on Tuesday morning, regardless of whether the UAE deal goes through.
However, Wall Street's collapse raises spectres of a repeat of the 1987 stock market crash, in which lead and sub underwriters were obliged to take up shares at prices well below those quoted in the market.
Airline Acquisition Corp, the management and pilot group that had agreed to pay $300 a share for United, announced at 2.54pm New York time that its agent banks, Chase Manhattan and Citibank, had found insufficient interest in the issue because of‘adverse changes in the market for this transaction’.
Rumours in the market said that Japanese banks which had initially indicated a willingness to put up some of the necessary funds, were behind the problems.
A statement said the group would submit a revised proposal for senior financing for the deal ‘in the near term’.
UAL said that it had been advised by AAC that syndication of the financing would be possible on revised terms.
Before trading was suspended, shares in United — America's second-largest airline — had fallen $5.50.
Delta lost $7.75 by the close, and US Air $3.75.
A spate of airline buyouts, which has touched every major US carrier during the last six months, has come in for growing criticism because of the heavy debt it loads on the companies.
Speculative investors have watched the deals closely for signs of financial trouble and potential government intervention.
‘These deals have slowly been finding out that they just can't get financing,’ said William Lefebvre, a market analyst with New York's Advest group.
‘Now the whole LBO market is suspect.’
The United deal, if it had won US Transportation Department approval, would have made the airline the largest employee-owned corporation in America.
The United pilots' union had attempted unsuccessfully to finance a similar bid a year ago when the airline was trading at less than half the final sale price.
Despite objections from United's machinists' union, the participation of management, and BA's equity contribution, were considered to be ample assurance to potential investors in Airline Acquisition's junk bonds.
The junk bond market has been in trouble since Canadian developer Robert Campeau ran into trouble meeting payments on his debt in Allied and Federated stores last month.
Earlier this week, the Ramada hotels group was forced to withdraw a crucial $400m junk-bond offering because of continued skittishness about high-risk debt.
Unlike the October 1987 crash, when the Dow average fell more than 500 points, Friday's retreat was concentrated on takeover stocks that have surged in recent months.
‘It was a full-fledged Friday 13th rout, but it was no crash,’ said AP Moore, research director at Argus Research.
But many analysts predicted a further slide when world markets open on Monday, as investors who heard Friday's news too late pull out of takeover portfolios.