

Where East Germans conquer fear: A hunger strike and crowded services in the Gethsemane Church in East Berlin focus opposition to the rigidities of Communist orthodoxy
By ANDREW BROWN
IN A LITTER of sleeping bags on the floor of the Gethsemane Church in East Berlin, Irene Schwidurski, who had not taken any solid food for four days, was trying to explain her reasons to a Western journalist, with the help of a pocket dictionary.
She was, she explained, absolutely opposed to Gewalt -‘power’.
No, he objected, surely she meant ‘violence’: she was committed to non-violence.
An appeal to the dictionary supplied both meanings.
And suddenly the dispute seemed unimportant: in East Germany, might is violence.
That is the large reason why she is there, with about 25 other people waiting quietly to one side of the altar in the church which has become the place in the city where freedom most nearly is.
The proximate cause is more simple.
The hunger strike was started on 4 October by a woman called Angela Kunze, who is, she says, a physiotherapist, part-time circus clown and student of theology: ‘With three jobs together, I can work.’
That was before the running street-battles of the weekend, when a demonstration around the church was broken up by a police riot which lasted five hours.
Irene Schwidurski missed all those, since for many years she has refused to observe the major public holidays of the GDR, 1 May and 7 October, the date the state was founded.
In line with this principle, she ignored the Gorbachev visit and went to the cinema to watch a film that had been banned for 20 years, since it deals with the Russian invasion of 1945.
When she emerged, Rosa Luxemburg Platz was full of police, with lorries and water-cannon, who cordoned off the broad cobbled street that runs out of the town centre to the church.
The underground was still working, and brought her near the church, where she could see the crowd and the candles outside.
The young policemen in the cordon were polite, she said, but an older officer told her to get off home in obscene terms.
She pushed through the cordon anyway, and stayed in church until 3am, through all the worst of the police violence.
It was then that she read Angela Kunze's manifesto, written in blue on a long ribbon of paper above her head where she rests against the wall: ‘I am fasting to cleanse myself of fear and hopelessness, hate and violence, impatience and the lust for novelty.
‘I am fasting because I see no other way to express my protest against the ways in which our politicians brazenly keep up appearances and celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the state as their victory.
‘I am fasting because, unlike our state media, I am worried about the great number of people who have left our country.
‘I am fasting to live in solidarity with all who suffer and are persecuted because they have committed themselves to social justice.
‘I am fasting in the hope that others will take part, for an hour or for days, and that we will show our personal commitment to this country by limiting our material needs.’
This is high-minded and perhaps romantic, but so is the opposition: so are the large things that they want, like freedom and justice.
It is worth noting that there are few narrow political aims involved, and that repeated reference is made to ‘our country’: East Germany.
This is not a movement for reunification.
Nor is it exactly a movement for westernisation.
There is a strong streak of greenery, both as a policy and as a political style.
The side walls of the church are covered in documents.
There are blurred photographs of the weekend fighting: since totalitarianism needs power over history, these too are subversive.
There are various manifestos: many of the hunger strikers have put up their own, alongside Angela Kunze's.
One woman's reasons include the memory of a friend ‘murdered while trying to cross the frontier’.
All these look, to Western eyes, childish as well as amateurish.
The paper is coarse and absorbent; little is even typewritten; the predominant style is Blue Peter make-your-own-revolution: large lettering and primary colours.
The most professional is a leaflet expressing solidarity from Poland.
Above, on a page torn from an exercise book, is a handwritten question: ‘Where was our solidarity with Poland under martial law?’
But coming in from the shabby streets outside, which smell of coal and cement dust and Wartburg exhausts, the effect is of life and excitement.
One of the New Forum posters shows a well-drawn man addressing a largely faceless crowd, one of whom is holding up a placard that reads ‘Keep it short’.
The slogan on top is ‘Stop the monologue’.
Not the least power of a totalitarian state is the power to bore the people out of their right minds.
In this sense, the unpredictability of all that happens in the church is a necessary precondition of freedom.
The services at six in the evening seem unstructured.
They are certainly unpredictable.
There was mime and a resolutely modern organ piece one evening, between announcements and prayers.
Hardly anyone in the packed congregations of about 1,500 people seemed to know either the hymns or the prayers.
Bishop Forck of Berlin-Brandenburg gave an account of his negotiations with the Mayor of Berlin at the beginning of the week.
They had spoken for an hour and 45 minutes, and one of the bishop's assistants is setting up a programme of regular meetings between the local party and the opposition.
There is still an abyss or several to be crossed, but the bishop was applauded with vast intensity as he told how he had demanded the release of the 150 people reckoned to have been arrested during the street fighting, and had been told that complaints of police brutality would be investigated if the names of the victims were submitted in writing to the authorities.
Pastor Hans Simon preached on the unlikely text that the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
Yet as he developed this, the government emerged as the Pharisees, weighing down the people with unjust laws, and the right claimed by Jesus to satisfy his disciples' hunger became the right of East Germans to satisfy their hunger for truth.
Again, he was interrupted repeatedly with applause, but this was a crowd which does not cheer.
They only clap, with extraordinary vigour.
All through the service, and all day and night, people come and go, moving intently along the walls, listening and reading everything.
Some stop to talk to the hunger strikers.
Irene Schwidurski said: ‘They come and tell us their stories of the weekend; or they come because of what they saw of it on (Western) TV.
And they come because they want to be rid of their fear: it gives them a completely new feeling of life to overcome their fear and come here.’
Outside, the police are no longer present in uniformed strength.
There is still a great deal of fear about.
This is a city where people move away in a marked manner when you open a notebook, and turn their faces from a camera.
Only the plain-clothes thugs of the security police, who can easily be told by their well-fed oafishness, their training shoes and anoraks, go out of their way to move close in and stare down at anyone writing.
The church steps are lined with candles, burning all the time, so that now they rise from a layer of wax four inches high.
The plain-clothes goons lounge in the lamplight below, and above them, children work patiently through the evenings, tending this rampart of candles against the wind.
Pinball barons chance it with Japanese MPs
From DAVID POWERS in Tokyo
THE LATEST joke in Tokyo is that the leader of the Socialist Party, Takako Doi, slipped on a pachinko ball.
She is nursing a chipped elbow and an image that has been dented by allegations of party members taking kickbacks from the barons of pachinko, a form of pinball which is a national passion.
Ms Doi is an avowed addict of what might be described as watching hundreds of tiny steel balls clatter through a maze of pins on a vertical board.
Pachinko is a £3.8bn-a-year industry which has a Svengali-like hold over a quarter of the adult population.
Some admit they like it because the noise of hundreds of machines helps numb the mind after a hard day at work.
It numbed the mind of one woman so much recently that she left her baby to suffocate inside her car while hoping to hit the jackpot, a bucketful of balls, which can be exchanged for jars of coffee or pairs of tights.
It also has connections with the Yakuza, Japan's equivalent of the Mafia.
Most of the country's 15,000 parlours are run by Japan's Korean minority, who have been denied the right to Japanese citizenship.
As with all good scandals, it is a complicated story.
Chapter One begins with allegations printed in one of the more respectable weekly magazines that do their best to ruin the reputation of everyone in the public eye.
It alleged the industry had paid off several Socialist MPs to block legislation in parliament that would have laid pachinko parlours more open to the scrutiny of the tax authorities.
With Ms Doi's passion for pachinko and the industry's reputation for large-scale tax evasion — both public knowledge -who could have asked for more?
A federation of recreation industry unions compiled a list of more than 100 MPs from ruling and opposition parties who allegedly received huge sums of money from pachinko barons for the past five years.
Chapter Two seemed even better.
Newspaper journalists came up with the information that the pachinko barons had been just as liberal with their cash as the Recruit corporation had been with political donations and cheap shares not long before.
As in the Recruit scandal, the only party to be left out were the Communists, and the lion's share of the money went to the the ruling Liberal Democrat Party.
The Chief Cabinet Secretary, Mayumi Moriyama, ordered all cabinet members yesterday to search campaign fund records for any contributions from an industry notorious for tax evasion and links with organised crime.
So far at least two cabinet members have confirmed acceptance of campaign contributions from the pachinko industry.
The next chapter saw the Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, being questioned in parliament about the £2,000 he is alleged to have received.
It was not for nothing that he was chosen as Mr Squeaky Clean after the sexual and financial aberrations of his two predecessors.
The most exciting admissions the opposition could squeeze out of him were ‘Yes, I have played pachinko’ and ‘Yes, in some respects, I like it.’
The Liberal Democrats are such past masters at riding out scandals that they are remaining calm, simply instructing all cabinet members to report within a week whether they have received any donations from the pachinko industry.
The Socialists, though, are not taking it lying down.
They have issued an eight-page statement, which exonerates their members and puts the knife into all other parties.
‘It's an anti-Socialist plot,’ said the party's secretary-general, Tsuruo Yamaguchi, threatening to take the magazine to court.
He admitted the party and individual MPs received a total of nearly £38,000, but insisted it was all legal and there had never been any attempt to favour the pachinko industry in parliament.
He went on to allege that the Liberal Democrats had received 15 times as much in donations, but refrained from naming names.
That will no doubt be done by the press, clearly bored at not having had a good scandal to get its teeth into for all of two months.
A soldier in Tiananmen Square shoos away a teacher and her class from the Monument to the People's Heroes before a ceremony marking the foundation of a Communist youth group
From DAVID POWERS in Tokyo
A soldier in Tiananmen Square shoos away a teacher and her class from the Monument to the People's Heroes before a ceremony marking the foundation of a Communist youth group 
Gandhi steps up counter-attack in scandals war
From TONY ALLEN-MILLS in New Delhi
THE INDIAN government tried yesterday to deflect attention from the Bofors corruption scandal by linking one of the fiercest opposition critics of Rajiv Gandhi, the Prime Minister, with shady financial dealing.
This coincided with newspaper reports purporting to detail the financial arrangements by which millions of dollars were siphoned from the Bofors howitzer contract and allegedly paid to senior Indian officials.
The revelations, which are seriously embarrassing Mr Gandhi's Congress (I) Party, were accompanied by documents apparently leaked to the Indian press by Swedish sources.
They provided more circumstantial evidence that, despite official denials in Stockholm and New Delhi, big bribes were paid to companies controlled by Indian agents.
But the reports still fell short of conclusively identifying the ultimate recipients of the money.
Faced with the prospect of a stream of disclosures as the general election approaches, Mr Gandhi's advisers have apparently concluded that their best defence is also to attack the opposition with the corruption stick.
The leader of the Janata Dal party, VP Singh, has found himself and his family under scrutiny in recent weeks over highly suspect allegations that his son controlled a secret bank-account in the Caribbean island of St Kitts.
The allegations that Mr Singh, a former Congress (I) finance minister, had stashed millions of dollars in a numbered St Kitts account, were made in August in the Arab Times of Kuwait, not previously known for its scoops about India.
It said the account was controlled by Mr Singh's son Ajeya, a New York-based accountant.
To many, the report smacked of an attempted smear by Congress (I) 's dirty-tricks department.
Ajeya Singh returned to India and tried to refute the allegations, pointing out numerous flaws in the report, and offered his passport as evidence that he had not been in St Kitts when he was supposed to have signed documents opening the account with the now-defunct bank, the First Trust Corporation.
He also said he had never been to St Kitts.
Despite this, VP Singh's enemies kept the issue alive with the help of George Maclean, a former managing director of First Trust.
Mr Maclean, who had fled St Kitts leaving a pile of debts, surfaced in Canada, claiming that the account had existed.
When challenged by Mr Singh, Mr Maclean obliged the Janata Dal leader's enemies by suggesting that Ajeya Singh was a liar.
Mr Maclean's reliability as a bank manager can be judged from his admission that he was not very good at mathematics, hence the mistakes in calculating interest on Mr Singh's alleged account.
It has been reported from St Kitts that several of Mr Maclean's former co-directors are wanted on drugs charges.
Although the affair stinks of a set-up, the government has been able to manipulate the publicity to deflect some of the heat from the Bofors affair.
Allegations of Swedish corruption have been countered with suggestions of Caribbean fraud.
Ajeya Singh, who voluntarily provided documentation of his personal finances, is under official investigation.
At this early stage of the Indian election campaign, the debate is not over who is most suited to run the country, but which politician is the least bent.
The Week in Review: Foreign News
By FIONA LENEY
ONLY three weeks into his term, South Africa's President, FW de Klerk, took what may turn out to be a milestone decision and announced the unconditional release of all but one of the black activists jailed more than 20 years ago in the Rivonia treason trial.
Even more extraordinary was the fact that Nelson Mandela, the sixth and most eminent member of the group, appeared to have negotiated the terms of the release of his colleagues, who are expected to be freed this weekend.
Although Pretoria said the release of Mr Mandela himself was not on the agenda, that decision appears to be his own.
Mr Mandela is thought to want trusted lieutenants, such as Walter Sisulu, to ensure everything is in place before he leaves jail to reassume the reins of the ANC leadership.
Mr de Klerk's announcement is being seen as recognition finally that the South African government will have to deal with the black majority through the leadership of the ANC if civil war is not to wipe the republic off the face of Africa.
Mr de Klerk's statement was also interpreted as a favour to Margaret Thatcher, who is facing increased pressure for sanctions against South Africa at the Commonwealth summit next week.
He failed, however, to get the rapturous reception he may have expected from his chief apologist on the international scene.
Rumours that Britain would ask for anti-apartheid sanctions to be relaxed were quashed, although the Prime Minister offered some encouragement by calling the release ‘a major step in the right direction’.
Hungary appeared to take a step in the right direction when its rulers voted to transmute the old Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party into a new, reformist-led Socialist Party — and in effect divorced the party from the state.
No one was quite sure whether this was a good idea, however, as some of the old party's members refused to recognise the new party, though they hedged their bets by saying they might consider applying for membership.
The new party published a list of past mistakes, including the Communist Party's forcible suppression of the opposition in 1948, and a list of proposed remedies, headed by the creation of a multi-party system.
But while their leaders considered these lofty goals, the party's bureaucrats had more immediate problems on their hands — the prospect of unemployment.
Now that the party can no longer call on state finances, it will have to streamline its bureaucracy, and has already decided to hand back to the nation all superfluous assets, including the party's holiday homes, hotels…and its headquarters.
The East German leadership at last showed some reaction to the enormous vote of no confidence expressed by its citizens over the past weeks.
The Politburo issued a statement regretting for the first time the mass exodus to the West.
It even admitted that there were ‘problems’— a slight euphemism, given the tens of thousands of people who had attended mass protests up and down the country — and hinted that the government might be to blame.
Although the move was hailed as sensational at first sight, the vagueness of the language used to promise ‘travel opportunities’ and ‘media that are close to life’failed to convince observers that the leadership had significantly softened its attitude.
Few expect change while Erich Honecker remains leader.
Meanwhile, China, East Germany's biggest ally, had to step up patrols along its border with Hong Kong after creating, to some extent, its own refugee problem.
In a fit of pique, Peking suspended an agreement with Hong Kong to take back Chinese economic refugees who cross into the colony illegally.
The dispute was triggered by Hong Kong's decision to allow a top Chinese swimmer, Yang Yang, who had sought political asylum, to travel to the United States.
China had demanded that he be returned home.
The residents of the Soviet town of Voronezh experienced a rather more exotic kind of refugee.
According to Tass, no less, the town was terrorised by visitors from outer space — small-headed hominoids about 12ft tall who landed their flying saucer in the local park and then went walkabout.
Tass quoted eminent local scientists as confirming the incident.
Perhaps even the outer galaxy has its own Erich Honecker.
History stalks the Kremlin: Khrushchev fell 25 years ago, and the parallels with today are stark.
But, Rupert Cornwell in Moscow argues, Mikhail Gorbachev is stronger
From RUPERT CORNWELL in Moscow
IT WAS one of those days which news editors will remember on their death-beds.
A wafer-thin election victory returned the British Labour Party to power after 13 years.
China exploded its first nuclear device.
And, exactly a quarter of a century ago today, Nikita Khrushchev fell.
As glasnost has its way, and Khrushchev's ‘rehabilitation’ proceeds apace, the occasion has not gone unnoticed.
And there is plenty of food for thought.
For one thing, the memoirs of several surviving actors in the drama have appeared with compelling new details of the intrigue.
Far more pertinently, the parallels with what is happening now scream at anyone with the slightest sense of history.
Khrushchev's was the first and only involuntary departure of an established Kremlin leader.
But the problems and discontent of today far outstrip the grumblings heard in 1964.
Could history repeat itself?
The superficial similarities might make a lesser man than Mikhail Gorbachev tremble.
Take, for example, an article this week in the Ogonyok magazine by Alexei Adzhubey.
A former editor of Izvestia, who was at the Central Committee plenum of 1964 which ‘accepted’ the resignation of his father-in-law on the grounds of age and health, Mr Adzhubey is perfectly placed to recall the ‘stifling atmosphere’in the Politburo court at the time.
Then as now, he says, basic goods suddenly disappeared from the shops.
This ‘artificial deficit’ vanished almost as soon as Khrushchev had departed.
He writes that while the state plan of the day was ‘coming apart at the seams’, Khrushchev was toying with radical reform that would reshape the Stalinist economy, and pondering sweeping changes in the constitution of 1936.
Shades indeed of Mr Gorbachev today.
It was all too much for Khrushchev's colleagues — notably Leonid Brezhnev, unequivocally identified as organizer of the coup, and Mikhail Suslov, in charge of ideology in those years, but also Yuri Andropov, a Central Committee secretary in 1964 who 18 years later would succeed Brezhnev as the Soviet leader.
Gennady Voronov, another Politburo member of 1964, says that the plot was in progress for a year, although he was not in the know.
But a few days before Khrushchev was summoned back to Moscow from the Black Sea for his political execution, Mr Voronov received an unexpected invitation to go hunting with Brezhnev.
‘Andropov was there too, and on the drive back to Moscow we talked about what was going to happen.
Andropov produced a list of names with crosses against them, and I understood I was practically the last Presidium member who had not been ‘sworn in’.
Andropov added that if Khrushchev resisted, he would produce documents showing the latter's signature on the warrants of many arrested during the 1935-37 purges.’
In the event, the appointed victim went tearfully, but quietly.
Two months ago Pyotr Shelest, the former Ukrainian party leader who was also in the Presidium, gave Moscow News a moving, if possibly self-serving account of the moments after Khrushchev had been informed of his fate.
‘It was the worst ordeal of my life.
Nikita Sergeyevich asked to be allowed to say a few words to the Central Committee plenum that would be held immediately afterwards.
Brezhnev and Suslov said no.
Nikita Sergeyevich started to cry, tears rolled down his cheeks.
‘If it is so, then I get what I deserve…
Write a resignation application for me, and I'll sign it.’
... it was hard to look at him.
Even now I see Khrushchev's face in tears.
I'll remember it at my death hour.’
So could something similar happen now?
The short answer, almost certainly, is no.
For one thing, the Politburo reshuffle last month has strengthened him.
The instigators of a palace coup would have to take into account Mr Gorbachev's other role as the elected president of the Supreme Soviet, a parliament becoming more influential by the week.
The risk would be, at least, constitutional conflict: at worst the ‘civil war’ to which Mr Gorbachev himself has referred, however dismissively, in recent months.
Ordinary citizens, moreover, now dare speak out, while the party's standing is the lowest in 70 years.
Any plotters would have to mount little short of a full-scale coup, involving probably the army and certainly the KGB.
Finally, at 58 Mr Gorbachev is still at the height of his powers.
Read Mr Adzhubey and you sense a Khrushchev who, at 70, knew that his end was near.
Mr Gorbachev, you feel, is only starting.
Touch of glasnost as East Germany frees protesters
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
EAST GERMANY'S leaders yesterday released most of the demonstrators arrested last Saturday, and let a whiff of glasnost into the state-controlled press as part of their new conciliatory approach.
In Bonn meanwhile, the government announced that East Germany had agreed to let 600 of its refugees in Bonn's embassy in Warsaw go to the West.
East Germany had agreed to give them papers allowing them to go to the country of their choice, and they were expected to leave Poland ‘in the very near future’.
People could hardly believe their eyes when they opened their newspapers yesterday morning: alongside the ritual party propaganda there was genuine criticism and complaints.
The Communist youth paper, Junge Welt, printed a complaint by show-business personalities that colleagues had been arrested, harassed or forbidden to appear for defying orders not to read out an appeal for reforms during their performances.
A writer in the Berliner Zeitung said the authorities' failure to respond to complaints had created a feeling of insecurity.
Even the official television news broadcast comments by a building worker that people need ‘a little’ more freedom and the shops should have ‘a little ’more in them.
This sudden glasnost, unthinkable a week ago, was evidently the result of the Politburo statement on Wednesday calling for discussion of the country's problems and for media that were ‘close to life’.
However, party guidelines circulating in East Berlin forbade any attacks on the socialist state or the leading role of the Communist Party.
They also made it clear that the party fears that New Forum and other opposition groups could turn into mass movements.
New Forum tried to take the Politburo up on its offer to talk, and again demanded legal status so that it would not constantly be accused of subversion.
Erich Honecker, the party leader, spoke about the country's problems for the first time in an address to party leaders, but simply echoed the Politburo statement.
He flatly rejected talks with the opposition, saying: ‘We don't need suggestions for the improvement of socialism that are really intended to cause its demise.’
It is not known how many of the people arrested in last Saturday's protests on the night of East Germany's 40th anniversary have been freed.
About 150 are estimated to be still in jail.
The announcement yesterday said 11 people, mostly with criminal records, were being held on charges of arson, looting and violence.
Wolfgang Vogel, the lawyer who negotiated deals for East Germans who took refuge in West German missions in the East bloc, had earlier appealed to the government to free the demonstrators and hundreds of people jailed for trying to escape through Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
It was indefensible to keep the latter in jail while thousands of others who had succeeded in escaping had been allowed out to the West, he said.
PRAGUE — Czechoslovakia has deported 400 East Germans who entered the country illegally over the past week to try to reach the West, Reuter reports.
The official Svobodnoe Slovo newspaper said 50 more East Germans were taking refuge in the West German embassy in Prague.
‘Their departure will be subject to bilateral negotiations between the GDR and West Germany,’ it said.
Left and right warn of Polish ‘tragedy’
From EDWARD STEEN in Vienna
ALFRED MIODOWICZ, the ex-Politburo member and Communist OPZZ trade union leader, yesterday stood in the rain with 150 protesters outside the Sejm (parliament) in Warsaw.
His complaints against the economic policies of the new Solidarity-led government are much the same as those of Lech Walesa, the Solidarity union leader.
He talked of ‘a tragic situation’; Mr Walesa more outspokenly of mounting popular anger and the danger of civil war.
At issue yesterday — the Sejm deputies prudently decided to adjourn their debate until Monday — as the first spoonful of the bitter economic medicine announced this week to restore a market economy ‘in the swiftest possible way’.
In an attack on inflation heading for 1,000 per cent by year-end, he government proposes to limit automatic wage indexation.
The formula involves 100 per cent indexation (falling to 80 per cent) minus increases already awarded.
This means trying to claw back the pay rises extracted by workers since deregulation of food prices on 1 August: butter has since then gone up 1,000 per cent, meat by 700 per cent .
‘If we were to go for full indexation,’ said Jacek Kuron, the Labour Minister, ‘there would be a mountain of money on the market leading to enormous price increases, with all the dangers that implies, especially for the poor.’
Wage increases, he said, had often exceeded price increases.
Standing up for pensioners has rarely been popular except among pensioners.
The OPZZ presented a petition to the Sejm demanding equal indexation for all.
It was backed by a group of mothers whom OPZZ leaders described as tearful.
The small Democratic Party, Solidarity's coalition, has already said it will not vote for the indexation plan.
What is peculiarly difficult for Solidarity is that, as a trade union its power base is identical with that of the OPZZ, namely the museums of Socialist gigantism, from the Nowa Huta steelworks to the shipyards on the Baltic.
According to finance minister Leszek Balcerowicz, architect of the new economic plan, between 10 and 20 per cent of the 7m-strong Polish workforce stand to lose their jobs through cutting inefficient industries as well as reducing the army and police.
Outspoken Czech feels the pressure
By EDWARD LUCAS
PRAGUE — An influential Czechoslovak economist, whose criticisms of the country's stagnation have achieved cult status, returned from the Soviet Union to find his department dissolved and himself under threat of dismissal, writes Edward Lucas.
Milos Zeman, in an article in the popular monthly Technicky Magazin, directly attacked the country's hardline Communist rulers for their refusal to accept change, saying that their leadership had turned Czechoslovakia into a backward country.
He amplified his views in a broadcast on state television.
Because his article appeared in an official magazine, it could be legally photocopied and circulated, and this, with foreign radio broadcasts, has made his critique even more widely known.
Mr Zeman, a former member of the Communist Party, said yesterday that he regarded the current leadership as ‘anti-socialist, counter-revolutionary, and right-wing’.
Mr Zeman expects to become unemployed soon as a result of the sudden, unexplained decision to close his forecasting department in the economics institute where he works, but he denies that he is a martyr in the reformist cause.
‘The benefit is higher than the cost,’ he said.
‘My paper is known by practically all the adult population in Czechoslovakia.’
Mr Zeman was sharply attacked in the official news media in the days following the publication of his views, which he followed up with an article in the most important samizdat newspaper, Lidove Noviny.
In another move to silence criticism, police on Thursday detained the paper's editor, Rudolf Zeman.
Grey Wolf shoots transsexual star
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
(First Edition) FOR YEARS, Bulent Ersoy has been a source of confusion to music-loving Turkish Muslims.
They adore her as the queen of their traditional music, and then revile her, with equal enthusiasm, as a moral obscenity.
The singer, herself, has made a fortune out of the insatiable popular curiosity to watch her perform: leggy, tall and unfailingly feminine, with the controversial husk in her voice.
Until 6 six years ago she was a man.
Since then, after a series of well-publicised operations, to the consternation of her fans among the fundamentalists, she has been a woman -Turkey's first and most famous transsexual.
Several times in the past, there have been attempts to murder her.
Jagged bottles, hurled at her, in the dusk of an Istanbul night club, injured but did not kill her.
Early yesterday morning, a 27-year-old Muslim radical tried again.
She had just started her act in the southern city of Adana when Haci Tepe, a member of the ‘Grey Wolves’, an extremist right-wing paramilitary group, demanded she sing an old nationalist song.
She refused, and so he shot her.
Doctors say she may survive: ‘We were very surprised at the strength of her body, after all the…well you know what I mean,’ said one.
The gunman, now in police custody, is repentant.
He maintains he did not want to shoot her, but that he was angry with her and was also agitated by a huge bar bill, and as well as by being put in a particularly smokey corner of the night club.
‘She can't die,’ said the nightclub owner miserably.
‘She stands for so much.
You see, she is so Turkish.’
Antarctic leak
Foreign News Page 12
Extreme penalty
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
NICOSIA (Reuter)— Three men were beheaded and then crucified in public in the Saudi capital, Riyadh.
Warning that a similar fate would befall other convicted killers, the interior ministry said the three, two brothers and a relative, had killed three people and wounded a policeman.
Pinochet's police
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
COYHAIQUE, Chile (AFP)— President Pinochet said he has decided to abolish the secret police which he established 16 years ago, shortly after coming to power.
The organisation has frequently been accused of torturing and killing opponents of the regime.
Data glasnost
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
MOSCOW — Huge amounts of computerised information held in Soviet data bases are to be made available for the first time to Western research, it was agreed at a conference for Western and Eastern scientists here, writes Justin Arundale.
Student attack
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
SEOUL (AP)— South Korean students swinging iron bars and hurling home-made bombs broke into the residence of the US ambassador, Donald Gregg, to protest at US pressure on Seoul to open up its agricultural markets.
The students were captured by police after half-an-hour.
Mr Gregg was not injured in the attack.
PM resigns
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
OSLO (Reuter)— The Norwegian Prime Minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, resigned as head of a minority Labour government.
The head of a centre- right coalition, Jan Syse, will become prime minister on Monday.
Warsaw bound
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
BONN (Reuter)— The West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, will visit Poland next month, the first Western leader to meet the Solidarity Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki.
Mr Kohl is expected to offer Poland a credit package worth at least £645m.
Drug war support
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
BOGOTA (Reuter)— Francois Mitterrand, winding up a four-day Latin American tour, expressed Europe's support for Colombia's fight against cocaine barons.
‘It seemed to me necessary to bring the testimony of our solidarity for the courage and determination of Colombia to fight a danger that extends beyond the borders of this country,’ Mr Mitterrand told President Virgilio Barco.
Gaddafi to visit Egypt
From TIM KELSEY in Ankara
CAIRO (Reuter)— Libya's leader, Muammar Gaddafi, will visit Egypt tomorrow for the first time in 16 years and hold talks with President Hosni Mubarak, Egyptian presidential sources said.
Relations between Egypt and Libya have been erratic since Colonel Gaddafi seized power 20 years ago, and he has not been to Egypt since the 1973 Arab-Israeli war.
Libya and Egypt fought a brief border war in 1977.
‘Wolf’ shoots transsexual
By TIM KELSEY
ISTANBUL — Turkey's first, and most famous, transsexual has narrowly escaped the latest attempt to kill her, writes Tim Kelsey.
For years, Bulent Ersoy, a night-club singer, has been a source of confusion to Turkish Muslims.
They adore her as the queen of their traditional music, and then revile her, with equal enthusiasm, as a moral obscenity.
Early yesterday morning in a nightclub in Adana, a member of an extremist right-wing paramilitary group, the ‘Grey Wolves’, demanded she sing an old nationalist song.
She refused, and so he shot her.
Doctors, expressing surprise at her robust physical condition, believe she will survive.
China fury at British base move
By KEVIN HAMLIN
HONG KONG — China reacted angrily yesterday to Hong Kong's decision to move a centrally-located British naval base to an outlying island, a switch apparently designed to undercut any plans China had for a high-profile military presence after 1997, writes Kevin Hamlin.
Although China wanted the naval base retained, Chief Secretary Sir David Ford announced that by 1992 it would be moved from its central site to make way for land reclamation.
Peking's top official in Hong Kong, Xu Jiatun, said the decision was ‘not worthy of consideration’.
Dona Carmen joins battle for Socialism
From TIM MCGIRK in Cadiz
IN CADIZ, a province of fighting bulls, sherry vineyards and cork forests, a strange electoral clash is shaping up, between a man with the biggest mouth in Spanish politics and the Prime Minister's wife.
The mouth belongs to Pedro Pacheco, the brash mayor of Jerez and a leader of the regional Andalucian Party, which is challenging the ruling Socialists on their own territory.
His foe is Carmen Romero, wife of the Socialist Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez, and perceived by most Spaniards as far more forthright and honest than her husband.
The Socialists are so rattled by the prospect of losing at least three of the seven Cadiz parliamentary seats to Mr Pacheco that they coaxed Dona Carmen into leaving the Moncloa palace and joining the fray.
Mr Pacheco's speciality is the crude insult.
He has attacked the Spanish justice system as ‘a crude farce’ and has insulted the pampered pop-star son of one of the wealthy sherry families, which was accustomed to destroying any politician it pleased in Jerez.
Lately, Mr Pacheco has gone further.
He suggested the acid-tongued Deputy Premier, Alfonso Guerra, does humiliating and unprintable things with other men.
Half a century ago Mr Guerra, a fellow Andalucian, would have fought a duel over this remark, but he is happy, come the 29 October elections, to crush Mr Pacheco's party into the ash-white earth of Jerez.
Apart from the insults, and setting up a Formula I race-circuit in Jerez, Mr Pacheco's record of social change is unremarkable.
But many of the Andalucian farm workers who voted for the Socialists in 1982 and 1986 are turning to Mr Pacheco's party to voice their discontent.
Unemployment has risen in Cadiz province above 30 per cent, nearly twice the national average.
Worse still, the Socialists, who campaigned to end amigismo — in which the local mayor and his cronies hand out jobs and contracts to friends and families — have embraced this custom with gusto.
In Alcala de los Gazules, a white village in the cork forests of Cadiz, Manolo Jimenez, an unemployed mason, said: ‘You need a Socialist Party card to get work.
It also helps if you play good football.
Our mayor is crazy about football.
We don't have any factories or co-ops here in Alcala, but we've got a marvellous football field.
It cost millions.
‘The mayor also gives jobs to people from other villages if they're good football players.
I'm no good at football, and I haven't had a steady job since last March,’ he said glumly.
He belongs to the General Workers' Union (UGT), which has quarrelled with the Socialist Party.
Mrs Gonzalez, wearing proletarian earrings made of screws and miniature spanners, arrived in Alcala de los Gazules on Tuesday afternoon, the second stop on the campaign.
Her speeches were so dull and rambling that her nervous advisers tried to stop newsmen from recording them.
According to one columnist, Carmen Rigalt, her inexperience does not matter: ‘Carmen is the smile of the regime.’
Not only is she pretty; she has a reputation for being more of a Socialist than her husband and far more level-headed than he about the trappings of prime ministerial power.
Spaniards respect her for keeping her schoolteacher's job for as long as possible.
She refuses to be ornamental and will not go with her husband on state trips that do not interest her.
She was also instrumental in nudging him into giving 25 per cent of the positions in the Socialist Party to women.
Mrs Gonzalez has also tried to mend the fratricidal split between her husband and Nicolas Redondo, leader of the UGT union, of which she is still a member.
Women admire her.
At Alcala's adult education centre, one toothless old woman in slippers sang her a flamenco lament about a lovely but strong-headed girl from the next village who was stabbed seven times by her jealous husband.
Did she have Mr Gonzalez in mind?
Lebanese cling to remains of accord
From JONATHAN WRIGHT of Reuters
TAIF, Saudi Arabia — Lebanese members of parliament clutched at the threads of a peace plan yesterday after a brief period when agreement to end 14 years of civil war seemed within their grasp.
But conflicting demands by Muslim and Christian deputies confounded an apparent breakthrough the previous day.
Sixty-two MPs, equally divided between Christians and Muslims, have been in this Saudi resort for the past two weeks examining a ‘National Reconciliation Charter’ drafted by Arab League mediators as the basis for a permanent peace.
It answers Muslim demands for more political power and offers the Christians promises that Syrian troops will pull out of western Lebanon within two years of the reforms taking place.
But although the deputies said they clinched an agreement on the charter on Thursday morning it began to collapse when Lebanese leaders, including the Christian army commander, Michel Aoun, and the Druze leader, Walid Jumblatt, criticised it.
More than 820 people have died in and around Beirut in battles between General Aoun's forces and Syrian and Syrian-backed Muslim militias since mid-March, after the general's declaration of a ‘war of liberation’ against the occupying Syrians.
An Arab League-sponsored ceasefire has been in force since 23 September.
Muslim deputies here said they were optimistic that a working group of senior deputies could agree on the reforms, which give the Muslims equal representation in parliament and transfer executive powers from the Christian president to a cabinet led by a Sunni Muslim prime minister.
Britain will seek something new at Commonwealth summit
By JOHN BULLOCH, Diplomatic Editor
THE HEADING is innocuous enough: Executive Session 3, Reports of Special Committees, presented by Joe Clarke, the Foreign Minister of Canada, with Kenneth Kaunda, President of Zambia in the chair and Bob Hawke, Prime Minister of Australia, to speak.
So reads the order of business for the Commonwealth Heads of Government at their meeting in Kuala Lumpur next Thursday.
But despite its bland style, it hides a time bomb for Britain, for the reports are on southern Africa.
British officials say they believe this conference will not be obsessed with South Africa, as previous meetings have been.
The election of FW de Klerk as president is a sign of progress, they say, and the imminent release of Walter Sisulu and the apparent movement towards negotiations are signs of a new atmosphere.
Britain wants to encourage movement, not to stifle it, and any talk of sanctions would be bound to have a bad effect.
Yet even the British acknowledge that there are individuals and countries ‘wedded to sanctions’, and according to Commonwealth officials, Britain may well again find itself in a minority of one when the subject is debated.
Many Commonwealth leaders believe the movement in South Africa is the result of pressure already applied, and that only by turning the screw can the world be sure that there will be no turning back.
African leaders who recognise that it may be difficult to impose any further sanctions believe they have found the way forward.
They want to see financial pressure applied, to ensure South Africa cannot roll over its debt or raise new capital.
Britain argues this would result in an impoverished country, prey to all the economic ills which have beset other African states.
Whatever the discussion's outcome Margaret Thatcher will not yield, so that the Commonwealth may again be forced to take decisions from which Britain will dissent.
Attending her seventh meeting of this odd club, the British Prime Minister is unlikely to shrink from going it alone.
Britain is looking for something new from this conference.
The environment, the battle against drugs, and measures to combat terrorism will be high on the agenda if the British have their way.
Yet even here there are minefields, for the report of a group of Commonwealth experts is likely to be the basis for the discussion on the environment, and its main recommendation is that the developed countries should foot the bill for the under-developed to adopt environment-friendly means of production.
Freedom flight for Mandela's comrades
From JOHN CARLIN in Soweto
SIX OF the long-term political prisoners whose release the government announced this week, including Walter Sisulu, the former ANC secretary, were flown up from Cape Town to Johannesburg under guard yesterday morning and transferred to Diepkloof prison in Soweto, according to the South African Press Association.
They were expected finally to be freed either late last night or, more likely, this weekend.
Amid much rumour and mystery, the consequence of a complete news black-out by the authorities on the circumstances of the pending releases, it was not possible to obtain independent confirmation of the report.
The authorities showed less reticence in dealing with a group of black youths who gathered outside the Sisulu home in Soweto yesterday evening to sing and dance in celebration of the ANC leader's imminent freedom.
Two lorries crammed with riot policemen arrived and fired tear-gas canisters, rapidly dispersing the small crowd, which included news photographers.
A seven-year-old child was reportedly hit by one of the canisters and taken, injured in the leg, to hospital.
The incident appeared likely to diminish the chances of the prisoners being freed last night.
Piling on the confusion, Ramish Vassen, a Cape Town lawyer representing three of the prisoners, said he went yesterday to Pollsmoor prison, where they have been kept in recent years, to deliver a suit for one of his clients, Elias Motosaledi.
He did not see any of the prisoners but was led to believe they were still inside.
One of the prison warders, he said, had asked him if he knew when the men were to be released.
Reporters spent the day scurrying around in far from dignified fashion but not even the foreign television networks, with the vast logistical operations they run, were able to establish any sightings or obtain any hard information.
Why the authorities were being so apparently perverse, it was possible only to speculate.
One line of thought was that the government wished to dampen as far as possible the spirits of anti-apartheid demonstrators who are planning marches all over the country today in celebration of the releases, which have been proclaimed ‘a great victory for the people’.
One happy participant in the march planned in Johannesburg will be Mr Sisulu's wife, Albertina, who, in the one thankfully concrete news development of the day, had her restriction orders lifted by the police yesterday morning.
She had been restricted on account of her political activities as co-president of the United Democratic Front (UDF) from leaving her house at night, from taking part in public meetings and from making public statements of any kind.
‘This is wonderful,’ Mrs Sisulu said.
‘The whole time since I heard that Walter would be released unconditionally I have been wondering how things will work with him being allowed out at night and to talk to whoever he wishes and me sitting at home in the evenings, gagged.’
Mrs Sisulu had a short meeting at her home yesterday with Winnie Mandela, who said afterwards that her husband, Nelson Mandela, would not be freed this year.
He would ‘refuse to be released into a South Africa where the ANC is banned’, she said.
He would also not leave jail into the state of emergency.
ANC man warns of false optimism
By RICHARD DOWDEN, Africa Editor
THE African National Congress has warned against false optimism over South Africa created by the new presidency of FW de Klerk and his decision to release key political prisoners.
Thabo Mbeki, the ANC foreign affairs spokesman, said in London yesterday: ‘FW de Klerk has decided to shift the defensive line on which PW Botha stood.
He is shifting the defensive line without changing the central objective.’
Mr Mbeki said the importance of recent victories should be recognised, but Mr de Klerk had no choice but to make concessions.
‘FW de Klerk and the National Party went to the electorate on an apartheid platform which was very clearly and consistently stated…
‘He said Mr de Klerk wanted to produce a race federation and co-opt the ANC and Nelson Mandela to legitimise it.
Reiterating the ANC's willingness to negotiate with the South African government, he said the time was not right for the ANC to abandon violence: ‘The struggle inside South Africa and outside South Africa must continue.’
Mr Mbeki was speaking at a meeting of the South Africa Coalition, a broad grouping of British organisations trying to change British policy over South Africa.
‘In this country you are faced with a stubborn and self-assured lady who sees it as one of her tasks to protect the regime,’ Mr Mbeki said.
Abortion is Bush's unwinnable war
From PETER PRINGLE in Washington
PRESIDENT George Bush as much as admitted yesterday that he is in a political bind over the abortion issue.
As a pro-abortion mood sweeps the country, he may have to modify his stance.
Gains made this week by abortion-rights groups in the Florida legislature, in governors' races in New Jersey and Virginia, and in the House of Representatives have weighted the balance markedly toward the pro-abortion forces.
The House passed a bill on Wednesday that would provide abortion funds for poor women who become pregnant as a result of rape or incest, funding which Mr Bush is against.
But the measure seems likely to pass Congress.
If Mr Bush vetoes the measure, he risks losing abortion-rights voters who supported him for other reasons, and if he changes his firm anti-abortion stance he runs the potentially greater risk of losing his hard-core right-wing support.
At a press conference yesterday, he was asked whether he is willing to negotiate or accept a compromise on the House measure.
He admitted he wanted to see if there was ‘room for flexible…language (in the bill) which may be able to avoid a veto on my part’.
The Democratic leadership in Congress has pushed him hard on the issue.
The House Speaker, Tom Foley, and the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, have urged him to reconsider his stance — even though they concede they do not have the votes to override a veto.
In a joint statement they said Mr Bush ‘holds it in his power to deny the right of choice to the poorest, most vulnerable American women’.
Free rein for FBI ‘snatch’ squads
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
THE Justice Department admitted yesterday that it had granted the FBI authority to ‘override’ international law in order to seize fugitives from US justice living abroad without first obtaining the consent of the country where they were sheltering.
Responding to a report in the Los Angeles Times yesterday, Justice Department officials confirmed that the policy had been in place since 21 June.
It could have important implications for American efforts to arrest drug dealers, terrorists and the Panamanian leader, Manuel Noriega, for prosecution in the US.
Within the administration the new line is reportedly known as ‘the President's snatch policy’.
A legal opinion requested by the Attorney-General, Richard Thornburgh, effected the change in June, but it had been kept secret since then.
According to the Los Angeles Times, the opinion is entitled: ‘Authority of the FBI to override customary or other international law in the course of extra-territorial law-enforcement activities.’
Justice Department officials declined to discuss the precise content of the opinion or the rationale behind it.
A former Justice Department prosecutor, Lawrence Barcella, said that the policy risked offending otherwise friendly countries, which might even bring kidnapping charges against the FBI.
The ‘snatch policy’ overturns a Carter administration edict, to which it is diametrically opposed.
When the FBI then proposed to kidnap a fugitive US financier, Robert Vesco, from the Bahamas, the Justice Department produced a legal opinion blocking the plan.
The opinion stated: ‘US agents have no law-enforcement authority in another nation unless it is the product of that nation's consent…in the current international climate, this country can ill afford an operation that would permit others to argue that the United States does not respect international law.’
Since 1984 the Justice Department has had authority to prosecute terrorists who attack Americans abroad, but the FBI has had to request permission from the host countries to return them to the US.
Only one terrorist, Fawaz Yunis, has been arrested under the 1984 law and the FBI lured him into international waters to make the arrest.
There was speculation yesterday that the new policy was tailored for the Noriega case.
The ruling would appear to permit the FBI to go into Panama and kidnap General Noriega, but when reporters asked President Bush yesterday morning if that was the case, he said: ‘I'm embarrassed to say I don't know what (the answer) is.’
UK urges Savimbi to keep the peace
By JOHN BULLOCH
JONAS SAVIMBI, the Unita leader, was pressed yesterday to abide by ‘the letter and spirit’ of the agreement reached in June with the Angolan government which should have ended fighting in that country, writes John Bulloch.
John Major, the Foreign Secretary, said the withdrawal of the Cubans from Angola and the Namibian settlement were an opportunity to end the fighting.
The Blackpool meeting was the first between Mr Savimbi and a British minister, underlining the importance Britain attaches to persuading Mr Savimbi to return to the conference table.
The Unita leader indicated that he was ready to do so, and suggested a meeting in Libreville within the next month.
Mr Savimbi is meeting President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire in Paris on Monday, and yesterday the Angolan Foreign Minister, Pedro de Castro van Dunem, hurried there to put his side of the argument to the Zairean mediator.
Officials say it is because the two sides have different versions of what was decided at the previous negotiations that the ceasefire has broken down.
Angola wants Mr Savimbi to go into voluntary exile while elections are held, perhaps to return later, but his supporters say there was no such agreement.
It seemed yesterday that the conflicting ideas would be sorted out by President Mobutu, and that a political settlement was in sight.
One indication of that was that at the request of the British, both sides agreed to stop the radio propaganda campaigns they have been waging against each other.
Comedians, not crime, preoccupy New York voters
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York
THE 24 HOURS preceding President George Bush's stop in New York last night on behalf of Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican candidate for mayor, were among the bloodiest the city has seen.
For Mr Giuliani, however, for whom crime is a main campaign theme, the night in which 11 people were killed did little to boost his chances of winning next month's election.
As he has been discovering, the issues which excite New Yorkers are not rising levels of crime, poverty and the deteriorating quality of life.
Yesterday's newspapers were consumed not with Mr Bush's campaign stop for Mr Giuliani, but with the position of David Dinkins, the Democratic candidate, on security for the state of Israel, and Woody Allen's defence of the comedian Jackie Mason.
Mr Allen said Mr Mason was joking when he called Mr Dinkins ‘a fancy schvartze with a moustache’ and that Jews would only vote for him out of guilt.
Yesterday's newspaper columns on the election were devoted to Mr Dinkins' promises to defend Jewish interests in the same way that Mayor Ed Koch did for the past 12 years.
In a front-page headline, the New York Post proclaimed ‘Woody Allen Backs Jackie Mason’.
Mr Allen was tactless enough to offer his opinion while standing beside Mr Dinkins.
The coverage given to Mr Allen's remarks must have been particularly galling to Mr Giuliani's backers in the Republican party who have been unable to make crime an issue in the race.
Last year Mr Bush came from 17 points behind at the polls when a skilful advertising campaign persuaded voters that Michael Dukakis, the Liberal governor of Massachusetts, was soft on crime.
More people than ever are leaving New York before they get killed, raped or mugged.
There were 1,019 murders in the first seven months of 1989, 1 per cent below the same period last year, which eventually reached a record 1,896.
Still, the Giuliani campaign theme of ‘crime, crack and corruption’ is apparently failing to ignite voter interest.
Mr Bush described Mr Giuliani as ‘America's greatest crime fighter’, and the evidence of the anarchy on the streets was on the television news for all to see.
On Wednesday night a 52-year-old Baptist minister was shot dead by robbers in the vestibule of his Bedford Stuyvesant church.
Six blocks away a 52-year-old doorman who tried to protect himself with an ice pick was killed by a teenager with an automatic handgun.
In Times Square an off-duty law enforcement officer felt a knife against his throat as he went to catch a train home at 11.15pm.
The mugger, who probably thought he was accosting a tourist, said ‘don't move’.
The agent pulled out a gun and shot him dead.
Mr Giuliani has been unable to focus voters' attention on the fact that Mr Dinkins once went several years without paying his taxes, or that he is a product of a corrupt Democratic machine.
Mr Dinkins has stayed in the headlines by pandering to Jewish sensibilities, and by removing from his campaign a volunteer who once read an antisemitic poem on the radio and praised it.