

Court Circular
By SALLY TAMPLIN
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 13 October: The Queen was represented by Mr Michael Bevan (Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Cambridgeshire) at the Memorial Service for Colonel Geoffrey Hurrell (formerly Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Cambridgeshire) which was held in Ely Cathedral this afternoon.
13 October: The Prince Edward attended an evening of greyhound racing at Kingsmead Stadium, Canterbury, in support of the Royal Marines School of Music Disaster Fund.
His Royal Highness, attended by Major William McLean, travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Her Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight and was attended by the Hon Mrs Legge-Bourke.
Her Royal Highness travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Viscountess Campden and Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN were in attendance.
The Princess of Wales, President, The Printers' Charitable Corporation, attended the Corporation's annual dinner at the Guildhall, EC2.
Mrs Max Pike and Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN were in attendance.
13 October: Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, President, The Gardeners' Royal Benevolent Society, was present this morning at the Society's Council Meeting at Rayner Court, Henfield, West Sussex.
Her Royal Highness subsequently had luncheon at Red Oaks, the home for retired gardeners at Henfield.
Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, attended by Mrs Michael Harvey, travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
The Duke of Gloucester, as President of the British Consultant's Bureau left Oporto today at the conclusion of His Royal Highness's visit to Portugal.
The Duke of Gloucester, attended by Major Nicholas Barne, travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester and The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester were represented by Mr James Crowden at the Memorial Service for Colonel Geoffrey Hurrell which was held in Ely Cathedral this afternoon.
YORK HOUSE 13 October: The Duke of Kent, as Vice Chairman of the British Overseas Trade Board, this morning visited Colman's of Norwich and, later, visited Norwich City College of Further and Higher Education, Norfolk.
His Royal Highness was attended by Mr Andrew Palmer and Captain the Honourable Christopher Knollys.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh visit Malaysia, and will be present in Kuala Lumpur for the Opening Stages of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
The Princess Royal, President, British Olympic Association, today attends its Annual General Meeting at the Midland Hotel, Manchester; and tomorrow attends a Variety Show in aid of the Army Benevolent Fund at the Palace Theatre, Manchester.
Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, Air Chief Commandant, WRAF, today attends a Service to mark the 50th Anniversary of the WAAF and the 40th Anniversary of the reforming of the WRAF, at St Clement Danes Church, Strand, London WC2.
Faith and Reason: Why God suffers but is unchanged: In the fifth article in a series on God's mutability, Canon Roy Porter argues that the idea that God suffers can exist side by side with the idea that He is unchanging
By CANON ROY PORTER
IN THE recent report of the Church of England's Doctrine Commission, We Believe in God, the doctrine of divine impassibility, that God cannot suffer, is described as ‘the most venerable theological position’ and so it has generally been when Christians have endeavoured to think or speak about the nature of their God.
Yet, in the preface to that report, the Chairman, the Bishop of Salisbury, states that as the result of the Commission's deliberations, ‘belief in an impassible God is discarded’ and many contemporary theologians would wholeheartedly echo this.
So can the traditional view any longer be maintained, especially perhaps in view of the picture of God that is found in the Bible?
It is important to realise that divine impassibility is an aspect of God's immutability, that God is utter perfection and completely self-sufficient and therefore cannot be subject to change.
He is not subject to any action from without, action which could compel him to change His attitudes or behaviour.
Now suffering, in the proper sense, is caused precisely by external factors affecting us, physical conditions or the actions of other human beings which afflict or constrain us.
It is because God is not subject to such things that He may be said not to suffer, at least in the way human beings do.
Belief in the impassibility of God, it is worth noting, was developed in the early Christian centuries against the background of popular religious belief in the world of that day, where gods were no more than human beings on a large scale, subject to the same contingencies, passions, frustrations and feelings of pain or pleasure that determine human nature.
The God of the Bible and the Church was to be wholly free from all these.
But, it may be objected, what of God's relationship with His creation and the men and women He has made?
God in no way needs the world and He did not need to make it: creation is the expression of His pure outgoing love and indeed traditional Christian teaching has held that one day this present world will come to an end but God will still be the same God.
But this implies that the world is an entity other than God and God has given it freedom and thus the possibility of ‘going wrong’, of producing evil, sin, pain and suffering, whatever explanation we may try to give of how such things have come about — at least they are only too obvious in the world we know.
Yet because God is love and creation is a manifestation of His love, He continues to love the world and wills to ‘put right’ whatever has gone wrong.
But does this not mean that God has to be affected by what happens in the world and that the challenges and frustrations which the world's freedom continually presents to Him force ever new responses from Him, so that He is continually changing?
As the Doctrine Commission puts it, ‘He exposes Himself to being acted upon and, in that sense, being compelled to change.’
Is not this how we see God revealed in the record of Himself in the Bible?
And does not the fact that God is love mean that when His creation suffers He suffers too?
Above all, does not the cross show that this is how God always acts in and towards the world, eternally vulnerable to the worst of pain and suffering which it manifests?
Now, as John Bowker has pointed out in the first article in this series, ‘to say that God is not affected by His creatures is not to say that He takes no interest in them’, nor that, seen from our viewpoint as creatures in time and space, God cannot do one thing at one moment and something apparently quite different the next.
It is inevitable and right that if we are to make God real for ourselves we must, to a considerable degree, speak of Him in human terms, which is what the Bible does when it speaks of Him as repenting, changing His mind, being provoked or made angry or sorrowful.
But we must never forget the inadequacy of all human language before the mystery of God's essential being, of God as God.
What is important is that God always acts towards us with an outbreak of invariable love, the expression of His unchanging nature.
Love which was forced on God would not be divine love at all.
Further, it is noticeable that those who speak of a ‘suffering God’ tend to employ rather different language when they speak of ‘God in action’, as the report of the Doctrine Commission illustrates.
It talks of God ‘taking upon Himself the suffering of the world’, of God being ‘involved’ or ‘in’our suffering.
None of these expressions implies of itself that God as God suffers as we do, still less, as is suggested in Margaret Spufford's quotation from The Man on a Donkey, in her book Celebration that He renders Himself ‘powerless against the free and evil wills of men’.
For when God freely wills to take on Himself the world's suffering, He does so in order to absorb it, to transform it and to overcome it by the positive power of His eternal and unchanging love.
It is here, one feels, that Margaret Spufford is not wholly consistent.
On the one hand, she finds it true that ‘the definition of ‘Almighty’ means that there is no evil out of which good cannot be brought', while on the same page she writes that, ‘if those theologies who assert that God is in total control of His creation are right, I cannot worship Him’.
But a God who can bring good out of the worst of evils is wholly in control.
The creation may groan and travail in pain but it cannot escape the destiny that God has eternally willed for it.
Such is what the traditional doctrines of divine omnipotence, preservation and providence are really saying.
Lastly, it is a serious over-simplification to claim that Christ on the cross shows that God as God, God in His essential being, must be held to suffer and suffer repeatedly and continuously.
This is to ignore the question, from the Christian standpoint, of the relationship of the divine and human natures in Jesus and the character of the involvement of the other two persons of the trinity in the Incarnation — difficult problems, no doubt, but not to be set aside in the search for truth and understanding.
Theologians have generally found it possible to hold together belief in the fulness of God in Christ and belief in the unchangeable perfection of the divine nature.
We need the latter for the ultimate goal of human existence is the vision of God, the mystic's vision, where there is not pain or suffering or mutability, but only unchanging, radiant and joyful perfection.
Obituary: John Denison
By ROBIN MACHELL
John Denison, architect, born Bradford 1936, married Frances Attrill (two sons; two daughters), died Sheffield 4 October 1989.
IN THE design- and style-conscious Eighties, John Denison was an architect who did not court publicity or revel in the limelight.
He was more interested in his art than the polemics of his profession.
In the past 15 years Denison's work has had a direct influence on the conservation movement in the North of England.
His buildings were never precious or timid, and avoided the excesses of some recent schemes which have been presented as wearing the conservation mantle.
Always pioneering, his work in Leeds helped shape the direction of development within the City.
His first important conservation scheme in Leeds was for the conversion of St Paul's House, a Moorish-style Victorian warehouse in Park Square, which he designed while an Associate at Booth Shaw and Partners in 1970.
This conversion was a benchmark for the conservation movement both locally and nationally.
It proved to planners and developers that modern, desirable office accommodation could be provided in existing buildings.
It is a local landmark which received national and international recognition and helped turn the tide against the thoughtless demolition of the Sixties.
Still with Booth Shaw, Denison produced the radical proposal for flats for single people in the heart of the city centre.
The site was a rambling and derelict pub, the Royal Hotel, which was originally a Georgian coaching inn.
Denison's use of glass-fibre mouldings, a technique previously employed at St Paul's House to replace the original stucco facade, was an innovative solution which created some debate among purists at the time.
He also insisted on the re-use of bar fittings discovered during demolition, and these now grace the offices of the Housing Association which occupy part of the site.
During this project the landlord of The Whip, a once notorious hostelry, was concerned that the vibration of the adjacent building operation would affect the quality of his beer.
Denison gladly agreed to sample the ale daily.
In 1984 Denison set up his own practice, Denison Peters Limited, to work on the first big project on the Leeds riverside, a housing scheme of part converted corn chandlers and part newly built flats.
This scheme, which was the first which opened up the riverside in Leeds, an area which up to this time had been ignored and declining for 100 years, led the way for the mass of development which has since followed.
Denison was often consulted by the Civic Trust, Victorian Society, Save Britain's Heritage and the local building preservation trusts.
His advice was always solid and practical.
He died as the result of a fall while surveying the interior of St Barnabas' Church in Sheffield.
He brought to friendship, as to his work, perceptiveness, integrity and above all enjoyment.
Obituary: Sir Henry Ware
By DEREK RIPPENGAL
HENRY WARE was a notable Government lawyer.
He was Treasury Solicitor — the head of the government legal service — from 1971 to 1975, and in his career in the Treasury Solicitor's Office he was involved in the setting up of the intricate Prices and Incomes Acts of the 1960s and the formation of the new departments of Environment and Trade and Industry.
The Treasury Solicitor's office provides legal advice and conveyancing and litigation services to a wide range of Government departments and Henry Ware's career in the office, until he became head of it, was entirely on the advisory side.
Over the years he was involved in a variety of fields from Transport to Defence.
A modest man, he was inclined to self-deprecation but had a quick, sharp mind of considerable penetration, together with a robust common sense.
He also had an unerring instinct, when faced with awkward legal problems, of finding solutions to them which would work in practice.
These qualities were all evident when he took charge of the task of preparing the instructions for the drafting of the Prices and Incomes Acts of the mid-Sixties and he made a notable contribution to those formidably difficult exercises.
Ware qualified as a solicitor after Marlborough and St John's College, Oxford, and entered the Treasury Solicitor's Office shortly before the war.
He returned there in 1945 after serving with the Royal Artillery throughout the war.
It was the office in which, apart from a space of three years with the Independent Television Authority, he spent his entire career.
Ware took over the post of Treasury Solicitor at a difficult time.
The setting-up of the large departments of Environment and Trade and Industry in 1970 had led to an enquiry into the provision of Government legal services.
This was conducted by Sir Edmund Compton and as a result of his report the Treasury Solicitor's office lost a considerable amount of its advisory work (which it has since regained) at about the time Ware became Treasury Solicitor in 1971.
At the same time, however, the Compton Report recommended the establishment of central machinery for securing more movement of lawyers between departments.
A Central Management Committee was set up for the Government legal service and, as senior Government lawyer, it fell to Ware to be chairman of this and to become head of the parallel Legal Career Service.
He thus became the key figure in implementing the changes in the Government legal service arising out of the Compton Report.
This role he discharged with great success and it was probably the most notable feature of his time as Treasury Solicitor.
Ware was a shy man, given to covering his shyness with a good deal of banter.
But underneath there was a remarkably warm and kind heart.
He shared with his wife Harriet a passion for fly-fishing and gardening and he made no secret of the fact that his years of retirement, when they were able to fish and garden to the full, were the happiest of his life.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 15
Obituary: The Rev Keith Elliott VC
By JULIA STUART
‘WELL DONE, thou good and faithful servant’ was the text for one of the more memorable sermons preached by the Rev Keith Elliott VC.
Keith Elliott's sermon, delivered in 1948, was a tribute to his battered bicycle which served as his transport during his curacy at All Saints' Parish, Palmerston North.
But the text could serve equally as a tribute to the man himself.
Sergeant Elliott won the Victoria Cross on the battlefield of Ruweisat Ridge in July 1942.
There he led a small group of men from the 22nd NZ Battalion to rescue an injured officer, in the process silencing five machine-guns and an anti-tank weapon and taking 130 prisoners.
Already wounded in the chest during an earlier rapid dash away from Rommel's tanks, Elliott suffered three leg wounds in action.
His VC was presented to him in the Western Desert by Montgomery, and he returned to New Zealand in 1943 after active service in Greece, Crete and North Africa.
Farming was Keith Elliott's original career.
Born of a farming family in Apiti, in the rural Manawatu, he trained at Feilding Agricultural High School and started work as a ‘cow cocky’, dairy farming in the northern Wairarapa.
In his tribute at the funeral in Wellington on Thursday, the Right Rev Hapai Winiata, Assistant Bishop of Wellington, described how that made Keith Elliott a man who worked with people.
‘You never got any of the big jobs, Keith,’ said Bishop Hapai, addressing the deceased in Maori style.
‘You got appointments among your people.
You understood them.’
As a priest in the pastorate of Wainui-a-rua, Keith Elliott had tremendous influence upon Maori people in the Wanganui and Taihape area.
A mission he ran there ‘began me on my journey to St John's Theological College,’ Bishop Hapai recalled.
‘We called Keith ‘the hunataway’, like the dogs that round up the sheep.
He didn't sit around.
He got out and did the Lord's work.
And he was deeply loved by the Maori people.’
He loved them in return.
He found that way of living very much to his liking, but regretted never having the opportunity to learn the Maori language before he began his ministry.
After his death, the Maori honoured him with a lying-in-state at Pipitea Marae, near Wellington Cathedral, and a karanga (lament) by two kuia (older women) who remained with the casket throughout the ceremonies.
Fund-raising was one of Keith Elliott's talents.
A new church in his last parish of Karori West; the local bowling club; Te Omanga Hospice (where he died); sports clubs…all benefited from his ability to encourage others' generosity.
The week before he died, he reckoned he had raised over $100,000 in his lifetime.
Twice he worked for the Wellington City Mission, among the lost and lonely people of the inner city.
He was chaplain to Waikune Prison during his time in the Maori pastorates, and welfare officer to the Fire Service in Wellington during his retirement.
The overflowing congregation at his funeral was evidence of the range of people he touched; politicians, military, Maori people, clergy, welfare workers.
His casket, carried from the Cathedral on the shoulders of infantrymen, was covered by a Maori cloak, on which was placed a sword and a soldier's ‘lemon-squeezer’ hat.
As Bishop Winiata said, they were farewelling a legend — a man who got things done, a man who was prepared to lay down his life for his friends.
Anniversaries
By JULIA STUART
On this day: the Battle of Hastings was fought, 1066; Mary, Queen of Scots was tried, 1586; Marie Antoinette was tried, 1793; bread riots took place in Hyde Park, 1855; Oxford degrees were first conferred on women, 192050-pence coins were issued to replace the 10-shilling note, 1969.
Today is the Feast Day of St Angadriama, St Burchard of Wurzburg, St Callixtus I, pope, St Dominic Lauricatus, St Justus of Lyons, St Manacca and St Manechildis.
Deaths: Mata Hari (Margaretha Geertruida Zelle), executed for espionage 1917; Hermann Goering, Nazi leader, committed suicide 1946.
On this day: the new calendar, as promulgated by Pope Gregory XIII, came into force in Italy and Spain, and 5 October became 15 October, 1582.