

Fixtures, fittings and fallow deer
By MARTIN BAKER
PRIORS MESNE, at Aylburton in the Forest of Dean, has an unusual addition to the normal list of potential fixtures and fittings that come with a property for sale — 110 red and fallow deer.
The current owners farm the two herds on the estate on a commercial basis -though sentimentalists need not worry, as the animals are reared for breeding purposes rather than the dinner table.
Although they intend taking some of the animals with them, the rest will probably remain with the estate.
The main property, which was built in 1880 and stands in about 60 acres of parkland, has nine bedrooms.
It is for sale together with a coach house with two flats, a courtyard and outbuildings, through Knight Frank & Rutley (0285 659771) for £650,000; the deer, however, come extra.
As a guide, Christopher Cornell of KF&R's Cirencester office points out that a top quality red deer stag is worth around £2-3,000, a hind about £400-500.
Fallow deer, he says, are less pricey — a buck will fetch around £4-500, a doe about £80-90.
L'ESPARCETTE, is a new Swiss development aimed at well-heeled skiiers.
It consists of 11 two- and three-bedroom apartments in Villars, a mountain resort in the Vaudois Alps, about an hour-and-a-half drive from Geneva.
The properties, all of which have balconies or terraces, range from £173,000 to £262,000.
The selling agent, Ellis (01-706 0844), says it can arrange a Swiss mortgage to finance up to 60 per cent of the purchase price of the property — but remember that if you borrow in Swiss francs and the pound falls against the Swiss currency, the amount and cost of your mortgage could rise.
Property Update: Swap shop
By MARTIN BAKER
THE Property Exchange, a new company publishing a national directory of people who want to swap homes rather than sell them (if the properties have different values, one party pays the other the difference) says that so far most people are looking for smaller homes.
‘It's split about 70/30 between people who want to trade down and those who want a more expensive place,’ says founder Phillip Nunn.
‘The main reason for a lot is that they are in trouble because of higher mortgage rates.’
The company then enters details of your property, and what sort of exchange -price, location and so on— you are looking for, in its computer database.
The advantages of an exchange rather than a sale, says Mr Nunn (who set up the business after he successfully swapped his own home), are: no chain of buyers and sellers to fall through, stamp duty is payable only on any difference in price between the two properties, and agents' fees are less.
Around two thirds of Mr Nunn's ‘exchangers’ are looking for a nearby property.
Details on 0273 608311.
Property Update: Basement plans
By MARTIN BAKER
THE Traditional Housing Bureau has sunk to new depths in its latest piece of research.
According to its study, seven out of 10 British buyers want a revival of basements and cellars.
More than two thirds of 1,344 respondents considered a basement a desirable feature, with a third considering them very desirable.
The bureau observes that housebuilders ignore such market demands at their peril and points out that basements serve a useful ecological purpose.
‘With housing land becoming increasingly scarce, building into the ground must become an even more attractive proposition,’ the bureau says.
Property Update: Dockland dreams
By MARTIN BAKER
BRAVE souls thinking of buying in London's Docklands should get hold of a new free guide from the London Docklands Development Corporation.
Although the glossy articles provide a relentlessly positive approach to an area with more than its fair share of disadvantages, the guide is packed with useful practical information on, for example, restaurants, wine bars, developments and estate agents.
Property Update: In arrears
By MARTIN BAKER
WHILE the number of mortgage defaulters is rising in Britain, it is falling in the United States.
According to the US Mortgage Bankers' Association, the number of homeowners more than 30 days behind in their repayments fell in the second quarter of the year to its lowest level in 10 years.
Mortgage ‘delinquency’ rates fell to 4.52 per cent in the second quarter of 1989 from 4.62 per cent in the first quarter, marking the fourth straight quarter in which the figure has fallen.
America produces much better statistics on mortgage arrears than Britain.
Figures for the first half of the year from the Building Societies Association showed that only around 54,360 people were in arrears with their mortgages.
This is a 20 per cent rise on the same period last year but still a tiny 0.7 per cent of the 7.6m mortgage loans.
But the BSA counts only repayments more than six months in arrears, compared with one month in the United States.
Worse still, the banks refuse to produce any arrears figures at all.
Experts estimate that more than 350,000 people — or 4 per cent of British borrowers — are likely to be a month or more behind with their repayments.
Property Update: Franc speaking
By MARTIN BAKER
THE FRENCH have been shifting their money from the stock market into Paris property, according to Donnelle Higbee, who runs Hampton's Paris office.
She estimates prices have risen in the French capital by 25-30 per cent a year since 1985.
In prestige arrondissements of Paris, such as the 6th, 7th, 16th, Neuilly and Le Marais — the equivalent of London's Kensington, Chelsea or Knightsbridge — you can expect to pay £200,000-£400,000 for a good two- or three-bedroom flat, she says.
On the rental side, a three-bedroom flat in such an area will cost around 25,000 francs (£2,500) a month.
For cheaper up-and-coming areas, she advises buyers to look around the Bastille and Le Valois Perret, where prices work out at £20-£40 a square metre — about £100,000 for a typical two-bedroom flat.
If you are going to buy in France, remember that cultural differences can have a big impact.
The French seem more nervous about buying garden flats, for example, than the British, so these can often be proportionately cheaper.
Flats at the top of older buildings without lifts are also less expensive for those healthy enough to cope with walking up six floors.
Property Update: Hopeful Hart
By MARTIN BAKER
A Gloucestershire publican is pinning his hopes for moving on a part-exchange deal.
Martin Cocks owns the Red Hart (right) at Awre, situated on the banks of the Severn in Gloucestershire.
He is so frustrated by the dearth of buyers for his pub, which is partly sixteenth-century with a 26-seat restaurant, that he has declared he will take a buyer's property in part-exchange and then rent it out until the market improves.
Forward Planning: Enhance your appealing prospects: Ruth Richards on how to object to council decisions
By RUTH RICHARDS
MORE THAN four out of five people who apply for planning permission get it.
Objections by neighbours and others are often dealt with not by scrapping a proposal altogether, but by amendments agreed between the applicant and the council which meet most, if not all, concerns.
But sometimes applications are refused.
If the proposal is yours, you may feel aggrieved.
Alternatively, if you are an objector, any amendments may still leave you feeling dissatisfied.
In such cases what can you do?
Appeals: If planning permission is refused, the person who applied for it can ask the Department of the Environment to reconsider the decision.
However, this must be done within six months of planning permission being refused.
An appeal can also be made if the council takes more than eight weeks to come to a decision — this is called an appeal against non-determination.
A planning inspector will be appointed by the DoE to deal with the appeal.
He or she will hear evidence from the council, the applicant, neighbours and local groups.
The inspector will then make a recommendation — though this is occasionally ignored by the DoE.
The recent fuss over whether to build a new town at Foxley Wood in Hampshire, for example, was a case where the then Secretary of State, Nicholas Ridley, intended to ignore the inspector's advice to reject an appeal by the potential developers.
Appeals can be decided either through a public inquiry or by written representations.
Written representations — which are what they sound like — are the usual route for the small developments usually proposed by house-owners.
The council, applicant and any interested parties are invited to write to the inspector giving their objections or support for the proposed development.
The decision can take four or five months.
At present if either the applicant or the council (though not objectors) insist, a public inquiry must be held.
However, the Government has proposed changing this so that the final decision would be up to the DoE.
The council is obliged to inform anyone who made observations on a planning application, if there is subsequently an appeal by written representations.
If there is a public inquiry the council has to put up a site notice.
A public inquiry is usually employed, however, only if the appeal involves a very large or highly contentious development.
The evidence will be given to the inspector in person and witnesses can be cross-examined.
Neighbours and other third parties are allowed to speak at a public inquiry — though they usually appear last.
In both cases a site visit will usually be made by the inspector, so he or she can see the property, usually accompanied by the appellant and the council.
Neighbours may also attend by asking the inspector in advance — it is a good idea to include this request when you write to the inspector outlining your objections.
Normally, developers paying a barrister to represent them at an inquiry must pick up the tab.
But if the DoE decides that the council has acted unreasonably, the developer may claim costs back from the council.
Equally, if the developer acted unreasonably, the council and third parties may be able to claim their costs from the developer.
The courts: Very occasionally a decision by the council or, on appeal, by the DoE can be challenged in the courts through a judicial review.
But this is only available where the council or inspector has either misinterpreted the law or not followed the proper procedures.
A High Court hearing can be very expensive as barristers usually have to be used — anything from £10,000 upwards.
Also, the person asking for the review has to agree that if they lose they will pay the other side's costs.
Injunctions: If a neighbour gets planning permission to build something that you feel is grossly unreasonable, you may be able to protect your rights by obtaining an injunction.
If you suspect, for example, that your neighbour intends to build on your land, or if your windows are going to be blocked so that no light can get through, or if an unreasonable nuisance is going to be caused, then your last hope may be to go to the courts and ask for an injunction.
These are usually temporary measures which can be obtained quite swiftly and will involve the court directing the developer not to carry out the development until the court has had an opportunity to consider the dispute in detail.
Ombudsman: Third parties — neighbours et al— cannot appeal to the DoE if they disagree with a planning decision.
However, if the council has not acted properly it may be possible to get the Local Government Ombudsman to investigate whether there has been maladministration.
This would include, for example, insufficient consultation.
The Ombudsman cannot rescind planning permission but can insist that the council gives an apology, and possibly a small amount of compensation.
Enforcement: If someone builds without planning permission, the council may take enforcement action against the owner or occupier of the property.
You can appeal against an enforcement notice on a number of grounds.
The procedures are basically the same as for an ordinary appeal but you will have to pay a fee — usually about £38.
If the appeal is lost you will have to take the steps required in the enforcement notice.
This may mean demolishing the building or returning it to its original use.
If these steps are not taken, the council can take the offender to the magistrates' court and a fine of up to £2,000 may be payable — and the fine may be repeated on a continuing basis if the notice is still not complied with.
Neighbours cannot take enforcement action on their own behalf, but they can lobby the council.
The Department of the Environment produces free booklets on planning permission, enforcement, appeals and compulsory purchase.
These are available from the Planning Inspectorate, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol BS2 9DJ or your local planning department.
While we wait for the pendulum to swing: Gail Counsell warns that house prices could take years to recover after the latest rise in interest rates
By GAIL COUNSELL
BAD NEWS for anyone wanting to move: you will probably have to wait two years for a substantial recovery in the housing market.
The latest round of interest rate rises has postponed for another six months the earliest date the pendulum can be expected to swing back.
The end, rather than the beginning, of 1991 seems to be the choice of many pundits.
But there is better news for the gloomies who thought that the North was destined forever to remain the hunting ground of wealthy southerners.
While the environmental attractions of moving out may remain as strong as ever, the financial advantage from the fact that southern prices boomed first has largely disappeared.
The old relationship between prices in the London area and elsewhere appears to be reasserting itself.
More of that anon.
But first, if you were hoping for a swift end to the depression in the housing market, think again.
Until recently most pundits expected the market to improve in the spring of 1991 after stagnating next year.
They said 1990 would be fairly gloomy, with little increase in the number of houses being sold (currently sales are running at about a third of the level of the last few years) and no movement in prices throughout the UK.
But because interest rates were expected to drop gradually over the coming 12 months, the view was that by early 1991 confidence would have returned, volumes picked up and prices started to lift — even if only by the inflation rate.
The latest shift has prompted a rethink, not only because rates have risen but because chances of them falling significantly have receded probably until the spring.
That does not mean plummeting house prices — the old adage about most people simply refusing to move rather than sell their house for less than they paid for it remains as true as ever.
Rather, it looks as if we will have to wait until the end of 1991 before we get any dramatic improvement.
‘The market is so bad now that it won't get any worse, at least in the South,’ said Richard Roberts, an economist with Barclays Bank.
‘It will go on being like it is for longer.’
Many estate agents were whistling to keep up their confidence this week, claiming that people were already used to the idea of higher mortgage rates and that the latest increase would make little difference.
But Gary Marsh, head of research with the Halifax, the UK's biggest building society, says it is inevitable that the modest improvement seen in the market over the last couple of months — especially in the South, where sellers have started to adjust to more realistic levels — will be damaged and the date of its recovery put back.
‘I think we are going to see that slight pick-up disappear.
There will probably be a lull over the winter, followed by a resurgence of activity next spring.
Nevertheless, the market is going to remain very depressed throughout next year and I see the recovery shifting to late, rather than early, 1991.’
Moreover, he says that the present level of interest rates may mean that instead of prices stagnating next year they could fall by around 10 per cent.
(While so far there have been some falls in prices, basically in the South, the national price picture has remained positive.)
All this has to be put in perspective.
In the last 20 years there have been three major price booms — 1972/73, 1979/80 and the most recent from 1985 to 1988.
Each time house prices rose rapidly, by substantially more than inflation.
Then inflation started to accelerate and house prices fell back.
In each case, London led the way, but was the first into recession, which meant in the long run that the relationship between the value of property in different areas was maintained.
The tax incentives behind housing, the fact that house price increases have made people feel that property is a ‘sure bet’ and the lack of a rented sector, however, have combined to ensure that property has out-performed many other sorts of investment.
In the last three years, for example, property prices have risen by 68.5 per cent , while the FT All Share Index has risen by only 52.1 per cent .
Add in the tax payable on share gains, and the comparison looks even worse.
Before you cheer up too much, though, there is an important difference.
It is much more difficult to get at property profits than at share profits — everyone has to live somewhere.
It is also a lot easier to ‘shop around’ among different shares.
Which brings us back to the Southern Effect.
For the last few years, increasing numbers of southern owners have been capitalising on the relative strength of property in the South.
Because southern prices rose faster than those in the regions in the mid-1980s, for instance, by last year an average house in Yorkshire and Humberside, which in 1983 had been worth 69 per cent of a similar one in London, was worth only 40 per cent of one in the capital.
Remember how southerners, aided by improved transport links, piled into Yorkshire and East Anglia, realising they could buy a country mansion for the price of a Knightsbridge broom cupboard or a Surrey dovecot?
The theory was, though, that once the boom ended the traditional relationship between prices in the South-east and other regions would reassert itself.
This appears to be exactly what has happened.
Prices have continued to rise in the North, but to stagnate and fall in the South.
A house in Yorkshire and Humberside now costs 55 per cent of one in London — exactly the same as in 1969.
And the chances are that by the time the market picks up again in 1991 we will be back to the 1983 figure.
The same is true for East Anglia — in 1969 average prices in the region were 69.4 per cent of those in Greater London: currently the figure is 69.8.
Mr Marsh said: ‘There is only one real exception, and that is Northern Ireland.’
A combination of the Troubles, economic decline and net emigration means that the average property in Northern Ireland, which 20 years ago cost 63 per cent of one in London, now costs only 36 per cent.
As the financial edge has disappeared, so have the buyers.
Tim Blenkin, of the York office of agents Jackson-Stops & Staff, says that sales of up-market properties — in the £200,000-plus bracket — to southern-based buyers have halved from more than 50 per cent of his firm's sales last year to about 25 per cent.
One important factor, he suspects, is that the market in the South-east is so depressed that southern buyers simply cannot sell their own homes in order to move.
There is one significant caveat to all of this.
While the prices of average properties have followed the normal pattern, there does seem to have been a shift in the relative values of ‘up-market’ or ‘prime’properties.
As the rich, after 10 years of Conservative government, have become proportionately wealthier, the houses they want to buy have become more sought after.
('Prime' does not simply mean ‘expensive’— it refers to the more desirable types of property within each group, whether quaint country cottages, Georgian rectories or large estates.)
According to the buyers' guide produced by estate agents Savills, who specialise in such properties, the price of prime properties in Yorkshire has risen by more than 130 per cent over the last three years.
In contrast, the price of ‘average’ properties, those on which the Halifax has lent mortgages, has risen by only about 85 per cent.
With most agents in agreement that the top end of the market has held up better than the bottom end, this widening differential between the values of prime and mass-market housing is likely to increase.