

Racing: Heights to hasten Cauthen's pursuit
By JOHN KARTER, Racing Correspondent
ASCOT racegoers should keep the champagne temporarily on ice while warming up with a Scotch and American this afternoon, when Willie Carson and Steve Cauthen may dominate the last Flat meeting of the season at the Berkshire course.
The championship may be a two-man affair, but the numbers game does not tell the whole story and Carson is riding with as much inspiration and dash as either of the younger men.
The effervescent Scot should consolidate third position in the table by booting home Gallant Hope (3.0) and Somethingdifferent (3.35).
By his flamboyant standards, this has been a disappointingly low-key year for Snow Bride's trainer, Henry Cecil.
True, Old Vic has carried off the French and Irish Derbys, but Michelozzo's success in the substitute St Leger has been his only major English strike.
That could change on a technicality if, as seems likely, Aliysa is disqualified from first place in the Oaks for having traces of camphor in her system.
Snow Bride, who finished three-lengths second to Aliysa, would then be declared the winner and she should consolidate her enormous value as a broodmare by taking today's Princess Royal Stakes.
On her best form she is a cut above the rest, but Carson's mount, Princess Sobieska, could be a dangerous rival.
Cauthen could have a banker in the opening event in Golan Heights.
This handsome son of the Derby winner Shirley Heights looked a first-rate prospect when cantering home at Haydock.
Western Wolf, on whom Cauthen won over the course last month, should follow up, but faces several threatening rivals, notably Single.
Cauthen's prolific American contemporary, Cash Asmussen, will miss four booked rides at Ascot as he pulled muscles in his neck when falling from his mount who crossed his legs at the start of the last race at Maisons-Laffitte yesterday.
He was taken to hospital for an x-ray examination.
Carson gets on famously with another veteran of the racing game, Gallant Hope, and the seven-year-old, who is back to his right trip and ground, could be the solution to a devilish-looking Bovis Handicap.
The Cornwallis Stakes also has the look of a bookmakers' benefit, but the rugged Somethingdifferent, who ran so well behind Welney in a high-class event at Newbury, could be hard to contain.
Luca Cumani's promising colt, Montendre (next best 3.15), got even closer to Welney at Yarmouth and has since won easily at Brighton.
Despite the presence of the unbeaten Daarik, Montendre looks the best bet at York.
Cumani has a chance of taking the big sprint on the Knavesmire with Khaydara, but she has not run since June and will be hard pressed to hold Runun (3.45), who was the convincing winner of a valuable Ascot handicap on his last outing.
Half an hour later, Baldomero (4.15), who chased home Runun at Ascot, should underline the merit of the form.
Racing: Sheikh has triple aim
By JOHN KARTER
‘TOMORROW the world’ may be the case for Sheikh Mohammed this weekend when his horses seek global domination in big races in the United States, France and Italy, writes John Karter.
Warrshan, the most expensive yearling of his generation but a flop in the Derby, carries the Sheikh's colours in the $500,000 Oak Tree Invitational at Santa Anita in California late tonight.
Great Communicator and Pay The Butler, winners of the Breeders' Cup Turf and the Japan Cup, are among his opponents.
This will be Warrshan's last race for Michael Stoute, who saddles the Sheikh's Shaadi for his swansong in Longchamp's Prix de la Foret tomorrow in which Gold Seam also represents Britain.
Reprimand is the Sheikh's standard bearer in Italy tomorrow in the valuable Premio Vittorio di Capua in Rome.
First Person
By KEN JONES
SOME time ago, but not so far back that it can be dismissed as incidental, a belligerent centre-half, who needed very little encouragement in such nefarious matters, was instructed to discover how fast the visiting centre-forward could limp.
When committing himself enthusiastically to an undeniably outrageous tactic, this brave and noble warrior not only left his mark on the opposition but touched significantly upon a dilemma that threatens to develop into an insurmountable and perhaps crucifying problem for Bobby Robson, the temporarily reprieved England manager.
From evidence available this week, by which I mean the remarkable feats of sharp reflex and well-practised agility Peter Shilton performed against Poland in a crucial World Cup qualifying tie in Chorzow, England ought not to embark for Italy next summer without first packing trench tools and barbed wire, while giving some serious attention to the laying of mines in their penalty area.
Even if Shilton, inevitably cautious in his 41st year, is now most likely to be found out by teasing centres (never mind the ‘hand of God’, he should have been quicker, more positively to the ball than Diego Maradona in Mexico four years ago), his reliable and spectacular shot-stopping in Poland emphasised glaring inadequacies stemming from the grossly misguided philosophy that continues to gain ground in the Football League.
The emphasis on athleticism, power play, sustained long-ball assaults, blitzkrieg, has bred a proliferation of muscular but blunderingly naive defenders who appear to be alarmingly, untidily vulnerable when required to cope with more subtle forms of attack; show them dribblers, runners with the ball or an incisive exchange of sharp passes, and panic sets in.
This was certainly true of England last Wednesday, their back line in such stark disarray, so frequently outsmarted and embarrassingly wrongfooted by intelligently applied Polish speed and trickery that but for Shilton's alertness and determined auxiliary support from midfield they would have been overwhelmed.
It has to be admitted that this was observed from long range, an unsatisfactory two-dimensional experience but nevertheless valuable as a guide to England's immediate potential.
Much of what we saw related discouragingly to familiar bad habits, a thought that occurred, not for the first time, to George Cohen, who for the benefit of younger readers made a notable contribution to the history of English football when turning out in the 1966 World Cup final.
As a young professional with Fulham some 30 and more years ago, he prospered hugely from advice offered in no uncertain terms by Joe Bacuzzi, a redoubtable professional of the old school and a firm believer in the unassailable principle that full-backs who cannot defend should seek alternative employment.
‘You couldn't buy what I learned from Joe,’ Cohen said, ‘and it makes you wonder about the people who are teaching them now.
I see wide attackers being allowed to come inside for shots, centre-backs who do not appear to have a clue about positional play and plenty of evidence to suggest that we are no longer producing defenders with the ability and confidence to cope on their own.’
As English football has a proud record of defensive authority — Warney Cresswell, Wilf Copping, Eddie Hapgood, Stan Cullis, Billy Wright, Neil Franklin, Bobby Moore and Ray Wilson are illustrious names that spring immediately to mind — Cohen's testimony amounts to a penetrating indictment of prevailing doctrine.
For all that England are the only European nation not to concede a goal in the qualifying tournament, it is no exaggeration to suggest they have never been so ill-equipped for the persistent rigours of a World Cup.
Football has always been played at both ends, a fact made significant by Robson's assertion that England were forced to fight a rearguard action in Chorzow.
Had they managed this comfortably, without laying claim to the truth, more could be expected of them.
The truth is that Shilton remains central to their cause, a man in early middle age, heroic but not infallible and therefore symbolising the extent of their aspirations.
Baseball: Clark's hits as Giant of swing: Richard Weekes reports from San Francisco as the opening skirmish looms in baseball's battle of Bay Bridge
By RICHARD WEEKES
IT IS open season for bombast in northern California.
All week the phoney war has raged as the populations of San Francisco and Oakland have, under licence of sport, declared their allegiance to one of two baseball teams who tonight march out on to a field to contest the title of world champions.
While the rest of America has to make do with a fridge full of beer and a chair at screen-side, the two participating cities are permitted a temporary suspension of reason for this the first Bay Bridge Series.
Already the mayors at either end of the Bridge, Art Agnos (Giants) and Lionel Wilson (Athletics), have taken time out from civic duties to place ritual side bets with each other on the outcome.
And last Monday Dr Harold Varmus let it be known that the thrill of winning the Nobel Prize for Medicine in the morning was as nothing compared with being at Candlestick Park in the evening to see the Giants take the National League pennant for the first time in 27 years.
Who knows, if things get really out of hand, maybe the warring crack gangs of Oakland's ghettos may be moved to declare a truce for the duration.
Yet whatever the prospects of peace on the city's streets, the battle set to be staged in Oakland's Coliseum in games one and two of the World Series have already been fought over long and hard in bar rooms and news rooms on either side of the Bay.
How will you stop Rickey Henderson stealing bases on you the way he did against Toronto, Roger Craig, the Giants' manager, is constantly asked.
To which the great shambling John Wayne figure replies: ‘By stopping him getting on base in the first place.’
That's what the Blue Jays said, too.
And then there is the hypothesis put to the A's Tony La Russa, the lawyer-manager and quiet ringmaster of what can be a wild Oakland circus troupe: ‘What do you do if Will Clark (the Giants big-hitting first baseman) comes to the plate with the bases loaded?’
To which the reply is: ‘Make sure we don't load the bases if Clark is due up.’
What is certain is that Oakland start their second consecutive World Series as firm favourites, their combination of power (Jose Canseco and Mark McGuire), pitching (Dave Stewart and Mike Moore), defence (Mike Gallego and Carney Lansford) and speed commonly seen as too strong for a San Francisco side carrying several half-fit pitchers and vulnerable defensively to Henderson's base stealing.
Yet Oakland were also supposed to wipe the floor with Los Angeles a year ago.
Then they were a single out away from going one game up in Dodger Stadium — only for Kirk Gibson to turn the Series on its head with a home run at the last moment.
And when the time came for the A's big bats to show their muscle, they froze like rabbits in the spotlight of Orel Hershiser's fastball.
There is no obvious Hershiser figures in the Giants' pitching ranks this time, but in Clark they do have a man — like Gibson — in the mood to burn Oakland with the bat.
Will ‘The Thrill’ Clark, possessed, according to experienced observers, of the sweetest swing in baseball, came of age during the National League Championship series against the Chicago Cubs.
Yet the list of play-off records he set — .650 batting average, 13 hits, 24 total bases — fails to convey the full magnitude of his achievement, coming in as he often did at moments of unbelievable pressure, and usually delivering the vital hit.
Clark insists that he enjoys the responsibility of having the rest of the team looking to him to save the day.
‘If you don't want to come up there with the bases loaded, hang ‘em up.
You don't belong in the game,’ he says.
‘That's what baseball is all about.’
He showed what he is all about in the eighth inning of game five against the Cubs at Candlestick.
The Giants were leading the series 3-1 and wanted desperately to avoid returning to Wrigley Field for a sixth game.
The score was 1-1 when Clark came to bat, the bases were loaded and Mitch Williams, the Cubs' best relief pitcher, was on the mound.
After conceding two quick strikes, Clark fouled off four pitches in a row before blasting the next into centre field.
Two runs scored, and the Giants were in the World Series.
The 25-year-old from New Orleans spent much of the season in the shadow of Kevin Mitchell, the man he followed in the Giants' batting line-up and the leader in home runs and RBIs in the majors.
When Mitchell cooled off in September, Clark came into his own, to the delight of his manager.
‘People talk about athletes who can rise to the occasion, about Joe Montana and Michael Jordan,’ Craig said.
‘Let me tell you, there's no one better than Will Clark.
He's in a class by himself.’
Dave Stewart, who will open the Series as Oakland's starting pitcher tonight, knows how hard it is to shut Clark down.
‘He bats for average and for power,’ Stewart said.
‘It's a combination pitchers hate.
If you go in their with no plan at all, he's going to beat you.’
It may all come down to Clark if Oakland are to be kept at bay.
Glossary of popular terms Ball: called by the umpire when a pitch misses the strike zone.
Strike: called when a pitch enters the strike zone — an imaginary rectangle above home plate, roughly from the batter's shoulders to his knees.
A batter is out after three strikes.
Out: each team has three outs per innings.
Single:(also known as base hit) when a batter hits the ball in fair territory and reaches first base without being thrown out.
Thus a double is two bases, a triple three.
Walk: if the pitcher throws four balls before a third strike, the batter is automatically ‘walked’ to the first base.
Four to follow in this year's World Series RICK REUSCHEL (Giants) Age: 40 Position: Starting pitcher (right-handed) At 240lb and proportioned like a darts player, ‘Big Daddy’ is proof that you don't need to be a super-athlete to succeed.
Keeps bouncing back: dumped by the Chicago Cubs in 1985 after injury, but was reprieved by Pittsburgh; lasted a mere 18 pitches against the Cubs in game two of the NL play-offs but came back to win the decisive game five.
Makes up in subtlety and control what he lacks in speed of delivery.
KEVIN MITCHELL (Giants) Age: 27 Position: left fielder Misspent youth running with a San Diego street gang called Pierules.
It was only after he took two bullets in the thigh and wrist and a shotgun blast in the back, and his brother was murdered by rival gangs that he channelled his aggression into baseball.
Credits his grandmother with turning him around.
Began this season at record home-run pace, slowed later on but still finished first in majors for home runs (47) and RBIs (125).
Position: closing relief pitcher (right-handed).
His job is like that of a matador brought on to pitch final one or two innings when Oakland have the lead and need to kill off any opposition rally.
Relies mostly on fastballs and the slider.
Claims his long battle with alcoholism has helped him deal with pressure of late innings.
Admits, though, that he stayed in the clubhouse for the first six innings of a game ‘because I don't want anyone to see me sweat’.
Best base stealer in the game, Henderson has a high opinion of himself, and thrives on psychological warfare on the basepaths to unnerve opponents, a strategy that worked against Toronto in the AL play-offs.
Yet Henderson is also fully capable of hitting home runs if he cannot get on base.
Against a slow-moving catcher like the Giants' Terry Kennedy in the World Series, Henderson is expected to make hay.
Rugby League: Injury blight offers NZ hope
By PAUL WILSON
ONE SOURCE of solace to the so far disappointing New Zealand tourists, who have a last chance at Leeds tomorrow to silence the doubters prior to the first Test next Saturday, must be the rate at which Great Britain's best players are falling by the wayside.
Before the Kiwis arrived Britain had lost Ellery Hanley and Garry Schofield, two of their most experienced and feared performers.
Yesterday they lost two more in Joe Lydon and Tony Myler, ruled out with hamstring and back injuries respectively at Malcolm Reilly's preliminary squad session.
Among Britain's backs only Andy Gregory has been capped more than his former colleagues at Widnes, and the Wigan scrum half himself makes a comeback from injury against Barrow tomorrow, his fitness still in doubt.
The withdrawals of Lydon and Myler bring a squad call-up for Darryl Powell, who could become Sheffield Eagles' first international.
Powell only has a remote chance of playing, for Reilly's squad has retained its shape and strength.
Britain only have this weekend to worry about, and Widnes and Wigan, with nine squad members between them, should not be extended by the visits of Wakefield and Barrow.
The hamstring pull which put Lydon out of the Test series was sustained in the closing minutes of a 50-4 win over Chorley.
Bradford's Yorkshire Cup semi-final replay against Halifax, if it is half as good as the first game at Thrum Hall, will be the most keenly contested of tomorrow's fixtures.
David Hobbs and Kelvin Skerrett are the potential Test players in the home pack.
Dick Fairbank, the Halifax forward, had his five-match suspension quashed last night.
This afternoon, Mike Gregory leads Warrington against Oldham in the Lancashire Cup final.
Oldham surprised St Helens and Wigan en route to Knowsley Road, and possess in Tony Barrow a coach with intimate knowledge of Warrington's strengths and weaknesses.
But Warrington achieved an emphatic win over Widnes with a highly disciplined performance.
Discipline was a failing during Barrow's years at Warrington, but there are signs that Brian Johnson has aggression under control and is about to tap the club's potential.
The Yorkshire Cup semi-final replay between Castleford and Featherstone will be played at Castleford on 22 October.
Squash: Australian revenge is complete
From RICHARD EATON in Singapore
ENGLAND'S hopes of reaching the semi-finals of the world team championships remain high, despite a 3-0 drubbing from Australia in the last round-robin match here yesterday.
The Australians magnificently took revenge for their defeat last time when they had the bronze medal taken away from them, but England were happy to learn that they have a last-eight encounter today with Sweden.
‘We will have the psychological edge over them,’ Jonah Barrington, the coach, said, even though he had seen Del Harris, Bryan Beeson and Jason Nicolle fail to purloin even a single game between them against their rampaging opponents.
Barrington, nevertheless, has some good reasons for believing it.
It was the best Australian performance so far, by a long way.
They set out to peak for this particular match, both to erase from their minds the upset in London two years ago and to prove they could manage a good performance after several indifferent ones.
It also proved that they can come close to relieving Pakistan of the world title, provided they can peak again on Tuesday.
Only Harris, who played a fine third game against Chris Dittmar, the World Open finalist, provided much joy.
Four times the England No. 1 had game points, and had he secured one of them, it could have become interesting.
Instead, he lost 9-1, 9-0, 10-9, and all three encounters were over in little more than two hours.
But today is another day.
Australia now play Canada in the quarter-finals, while Pakistan, for whom Jahangir Khan has thundered his way through five matches with the loss of only 25 points, meet Egypt.
New Zealand, silver medal-winners last time, may not find it easy against the improving Finland.
Scotland's last hopes of pipping Canada for a quarter-final place ended with the 3-0 defeat to Sweden.
Hockey: Leicester need Nevill's goals
By BILL COLWILL
LEAGUE competition returns this weekend after a disjointed start to the season.
In the Typhoo Women's National League, the leaders, Ealing, visit Leicester.
Leicester could only manage a goalless draw midweek with Sutton Coldfield and will be keen to return to winning form.
Both sides have quality strikers able to turn a game.
Mary Nevill, a front runner for Great Britain and England, will be the threat in Leicester's attack while Ealing will be relying on their England under-21 striker, Mandy Langridge, the leading goalscorer in the league.
The opening salvoes will take place today in most of the regional leagues.
(the giant Peroni South League swings into action next week).
In Wales, the Premier League gets under way with Whitchurch hoping to repeat their success of last season.
The return to his old club of Andy Gowman, from Harborne, will greatly strengthen Cardiff's challenge, where he will team up again with Tim Percival to form a powerful combination.
Southgate and Hounslow flex their muscles in the Heineken Trophy match at Reading today, while the other Poundstretcher National League sides are in action tomorrow.
Havant, the leaders, who travel to Chigwell to take on Old Loughtonians, will be without their left-half, Alan Cave, with a leg injury, with the likelihood that Steve Lawson will deputise.
The Old Boys will hope that their captain, England international Julian Halls, who has been plagued with injuries since the summer, comes through a second XI game today without problems; if so, he is likely to be in the squad.
Teddington's 20-year-old captain, Jason Laslett, will be looking to secure the club's first points of the season at home to Harborne, who include 19-year-old Walid Abdo, from Penarth, for the first time, but will be without Denys Shortt.
Snooker: Fisher becomes a fisher of men
By CATHY GIBB
DESPITE the riches on offer in the men's game, the prize for the winner of the women's World Championship, which starts tomorrow, will be a miserly £3,500.
The tournament, which runs for six days at Pontin's Holiday Club, in Brixham, south Devon, has 70 competitors taking part.
Pontin's, for the second consecutive year, have agreed to stage and sponsor the championship, assisting the women's game, which desperately needs the financial input and widespread television coverage enjoyed at present only by the men's game.
There is no physical strength involved in snooker, but Allison Fisher, the No. 1 seed and three-times world champion, possesses the skill and concentration which enables her to regain form after unexpected defeats.
Although she has again failed to earn her professional ticket, and with it the right to compete against the men, but she has defeated Mike Hallett in an exhibition match this year and has gained ample experience competing in Barry Hearn's Matchroom League.
On form, there is no one in the women's game who can compete with Fisher.
Last Sunday, in the Bristol Open, in Solihull, which Fisher went on to win, she scored 116 — the highest break achieved by a female player.
But, like all professionals, Fisher is prone to the odd upset.
Her close rivals, Stacey Hillyard, the No. 2 seed, and Ann Marie Farren, the No. 3 seed, have both defeated Fisher in previous competitions.
Hillyard, from Dorset, in 1984, when aged 14, became the youngest player, to win the world title, after defeating Fisher in the semi-finals — a result which she repeated in 1987, only to lose 5-1 in the final to the then 15-year-old Farren.
Farren, who beat Fisher 3-2 in last August's Hellerman Deutsch Classic, has since suffered some unexpected defeats, winning only the Pontin's Women's Bowl, this May.
Basketball: Lee case unsettling for Rams
By DUNCAN HOOPER
ERNEST LEE faces a fine and possible suspension this weekend after becoming unwittingly enmeshed in the red tape which is also likely to bring punishment on Derby Rams.
The American has become the Carlsberg League club's leading scorer since joining them this season.
But he should not have played since 1 October, when temporary clearance from the English Basket Ball Association expired.
The Association, which has responsibility for licensing players, and the League told Derby that Lee was ineligible.
The club's original application to the American authorities for his transfer had to be resubmitted and clearance has not yet arrived.
Martin Shaw, the Derby director who represents his club on the League management board, said: ‘The existing rules allow for flexibility in dealing with a case where the player clearly has done nothing wrong himself.’
David Clarke, the League administrator, added: ‘The Association is being inflexible and unhelpful.’
Since the start of the month, Lee has played in two League matches, including a 105-83 win at London Docklands.
Derby's action in disregarding Lee's ineligibility may force the League to order a rematch or award the game to London.
Lee's case is now on the agenda for today's competitions committee meeting in London.
The Week in Review: Sport
By DUNCAN HOOPER
SUNDAY: Michael Kinane, Ireland's champion jockey, wins the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp on the British-trained 19-1 outsider, Carroll House, a day after partnering The Caretaker to victory in the Cartier Million, Europe's most valuable race.
MONDAY: With ominous power, the All Blacks beat British Columbia 48-3 the day before arriving to start their United Kingdom tour.
Amid claims and counter-claims, friends of Michael Knighton, the aspiring Manchester United chairman, report he is close to arranging a deal to salvage his attempted take-over.
The San Francisco Giants beat Chicago Cubs in the National League Championship play-off to join Oakland Athletics, American League conquerors of Toronto Blue Jays, in baseball's World Series.
TUESDAY: As England's senior footballers marshall their resources in Chorzow, Steve Bull scores twice as the Under-21s beat their Polish counterparts 3-1.
WEDNESDAY: A point-winning string of saves from Peter Shilton against Poland takes England into next year's World Cup finals.
With one point needed from their last two games Scotland lose 3-0 in France.
The Republic of Ireland beat Northern Ireland 3-0, but Hungary's draw with Spain means Jack Charlton's team must wait for the arithmetic to be resolved.
Knighton and the United chief executive, Martin Edwards, tear up their take-over contract ‘in the interests of the club’.
THURSDAY: Herschel Walker, the running back who rushed more than 1,500 yards for the Dallas Cowboys in 1988, is traded to the Minnesota Vikings for five players and up to seven draft picks.
FRIDAY: UEFA halve the two-season ban imposed on Ajax for the crowd trouble against Austria Vienna last month.
In golf's World Matchplay Championship quarter-finals at Wentworth, Seve Ballesteros beats the American, Chip Beck, 9 and 8, but Nick Faldo is taken to the 38th hole by South Africa's David Frost before winning a sudden-death play-off.
Triathlon: Ironman Scott will galvanise the field
From GORDON RILEY in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii
THIS MORNING at 7am, 1,250 pairs of arms will churn the warm blue water of the Pacific into foam as the competitors set off on the first, swimming stage of the 11th Ironman Triathlon on and around the little resort of Kailua-Kona here.
The Hawaii Ironman is the original and ultimate triathlon, where the swim is through 2.4 miles of ocean, and is immediately followed by a 112-mile cycle ride up on the black lava fields, where by mid-morning the temperature will be over 100 degrees.
The ride will take the top competitors less than five hours, but the race will still not be over, as there is still a full marathon to be run.
Dave Scott, then, must be a specially galvanised sort of Ironman, having won the event six times, and holding the course record of 8hr 28min 37sec, a time he predicts will be shattered today.
To push him towards a record, Scott will be challenged by Mark Allen, six-times winner of the Nice Triathlon, plus Mike Pigg, Ken Glah and Scott Tinley, while the top European will probably be Rob Barel, from The Netherlands.
The women's champion, Paula Newby-Fraser, from Zimbabwe, who set a course record of 9hr 1min 1sec last year, is in good shape, having won at Nice in May.
Her opposition, drawn mainly from north America, includes Britain's Sarah Springman.
Springman, 32, was seventh last year.
She is in good form and hoping to break the 10-hour barrier today, having already done so in the European Ironman in August, where she took an individual bronze and a team gold medal.
Rowing: Redgrave in Serpentine test
By HUGH MATHESON
FIVE nations compete on the Serpentine this weekend in a six-event accumulator for a possible £5,000.
The Serpentine Regatta, in its third year, is an indicator of rowing's future, a sprint event at a venue easily accessible for the public.
The international regatta on Sunday afternoon is an ingenious test of rowing skill and versatility, where a maximum of nine oarsmen must be deployed among six events, with no individual competing in more than three races.
West Germany, in the event for the first time, bring four world champions to Hyde Park to take on a British team that has six silver and bronze medallists from the recent World Championships, as well as squads from Italy, the Soviet Union and France.
Steve Redgrave twice an Olympic gold medallist, will race for Britain in the single sculls, the coxless pair and the eight.
Because the Serpentine course is only 500 metres long, a quarter of the normal international competition distance, success is dependent on an explosive start and high technical skill.
High winds and borrowed equipment have in the past two years reduced some events to water-borne stock-car racing, with Olympic champions disappearing in a welter of spray and shame.
Today's racing centres on the national dragon boat championship, with 1,400 competitors, the winners to represent Britain in Hong Kong next year.
Ice Hockey: Pandas punish Wasps
From STEVE PINDER in Rotterdam
DURHAM WASPS' dream of becoming the first British League team to win a European game abroad ended in a 10-1 defeat here last night after Robert Herckerrath had opened the scoring for Gunco Pandas of Rotterdam in the second minute.
Pressed back over their own blue line, Wasps rallied around their minder, Frank Killen, and held out for another two minutes before Herckerrath added a second as three of the Wasps sat out penalties in the box.
Pandas then took a turn in their penalty box but — despite fierce shots from their captain, Paul Smith — Durham were unable to capitalise on the power play and, with two minutes of the period left, Bert Hille's slapshot made it 3-0.
The second period was much the same story, Ron Barteling and Robert Nerckenrath making it 5-0 in four minutes.
Jamie Richmond added another on the stroke of half time and Gert Jan Vreevurg brought the score up to 7-0 with a slapshot from the point.
For Wasps, there was no chance of making a recovery — even though their duck was eventually broken when Rick Brevant passed to Robert Forbes with 13 minutes remaining — Pandas running on to complete a comfortable victory with three goals in 90 seconds.
Golf: Beck is burned in the ‘crucible of humiliation’
From TIM GLOVER at Wentworth
SANDY LYLE conducted another exercise in self-immolation while Chip Beck discovered that his gunpowder was damp and useless but at least the American left a legacy after his first visit to the Suntory World Matchplay Championship.
After losing to Ronan Rafferty by one hole in the quarter-finals, Lyle remarked: ‘I'm over the moon.
I've never felt better.’
Beck was overwhelmed 9 and 8 by Seve Ballesteros and his response was somewhat more original: ‘Every good man is tested in the crucible of humiliation.
I think that is where I have been today.’
But then Beck majored in journalism at the University of Georgia.
While Beck's adventures were cut short, Nick Faldo, beaten by Lyle in last year's final, went into overtime against David Frost of South Africa before coming through on the 38th hole.
In a match made in heaven, if not the sponsors' dreams, Faldo will play Ballesteros in the semi-finals today and Rafferty will meet Ian Woosnam.
On the prospect of facing Ballesteros, Faldo, who did not get a degree in journalism, remarked: ‘With all the time he's had off this afternoon I hope Carmen will have worn him out.
I hope she gives him a right going over.’
Carmen Ballesteros, for one, would probably love to know exactly what he meant by that.
Faldo, who has never won this championship, went into lunch one hole down against Frost who had a 66 to a 67.
The scores were transposed in the afternoon although Faldo appeared to have matters in hand from the 35th.
Up to then he had never been in front — he was three down with 11 holes to play — but he went one up at the 17th the second time around.
He did not hit a crisp drive but recovered with an excellent three wood which enabled him to secure a birdie four to Frost's par.
After hammering another three wood on to the green at the 36th, Faldo's position seemed impregnable.
However, he left his first putt five feet short and missed that to take a five to Frost's four.
Both had pars at the 37th -their third visit of the day to the first hole — and the end came at the short second where Faldo hit a seven-iron to three feet to break the deadlock with a two to a three.
Ballesteros, who has won the title four times, opened up with a 66 and enjoyed a comfortable lunch, sitting on a cushion of a five-hole lead.
Beck, who had defeated Aki Ohmachi of Japan 8 and 6 in the first round, was heading for an even bigger defeat.
He lost five of the first seven holes in the afternoon and was in danger of going into the record books as Wentworth's bloodiest casualty.
An 18-foot putt on the 26th by the American meant that Dale Hayes, beaten 11 and 9 by Tom Watson in 1978, was left holding that particular nettle.
‘I must have got out of the wrong side of the bed,’ Beck said.
‘I don't want to take anything away from Seve.
He played a lot of great shots but I felt I beat myself.
I hit it all over the place.
It's the craziest thing.
I will learn from this.
It will make me a stronger man.’
Before the match Beck had said he hoped Ballesteros would be at his best and his wish was granted.
The Spaniard had only one bogey — at the 13th — and was nine under par when the match reached its premature conclusion.
Lyle, who lives on the estate here, will be able to watch Faldo, his fellow Wentworth member, on television today.
Lyle was three up after 22 holes against Rafferty but then once again went through the crucible of humiliation.
There were several watersheds.
At the 28th hole, the 10th, Lyle was five feet from the flag off the tee and the Irishman missed the green.
Rafferty chipped in from 20 yards, Lyle missed.
Lyle one up.
At the next they were all square when Lyle missed from three feet.
A birdie two at the 32nd gave Rafferty the lead and he went two up at the 34th where Lyle, disturbed mid-swing by the clicking of a camera, pulled his tee shot into the trees on the left.
He attempted to escape by hitting a nine-iron left-handed but succeeded in only moving the ball a couple of inches.
He conceded the hole and although he won the 35th two fours at the last saw Rafferty home.
Woosnam reached his third successive semi-final with a 3 and 2 victory over Olazabal after the Spaniard held a one-hole lead in the morning.
Woosnam was so dissatisfied with his putting that he missed lunch and spent an hour on the practice green.
Olazabal should have emulated him for in the afternoon he proceeded to miss a string of short putts.
Woosnam piled on the agony with four successive birdies.
Golf: Feherty to spin himself a cocoon
From TIM GLOVER at Wentworth
DAVID FEHERTY missed four short putts in the BMW tournament, in Munich yesterday, but still leads the field by six strokes.
The 31-year-old Ulsterman had another fine run of birdies on the new course to record a 66 for a remarkable 16-under-par, two-round total of 128.
Only Sandy Lyle, who was 17 under in the 1983 Swiss Open, has bettered that half-way score on the PGA tour.
With Kent's Peter Mitchell, who had a 67, far behind in second, Feherty now is going ‘to put on the blinkers’.
He said: ‘It's lonely being a long way ahead so you have to get youself into a cocoon to protect yourself from the thoughts that can trouble your mind.’
Feherty made an ideal start by sinking a 65-foot putt for a birdie at his opening hole, the 10th.
He also birdied the 11th, but then dropped his only shot of the round at the 12th, after playing a poor bunker shot and missing from 15 feet.
He also missed three from inside six feet.
Davis Love III, the American, slipped from second place with a one-over-par 73 for 138, and another American, Mark Calcavecchia, missed the cut for the second successive tournament.
Golf: Davies' investment in excellence
By JOHN BOLTON
LAURA DAVIES produced a marvellous exhibition for those loyal supporters who opted for Stoke Poges rather than nearby Wentworth, with a round of 64 in the second round of the Laing Charity Classic yesterday.
With a 10-under-par halfway aggregate of 136, the former British and United States Open champion moves into today's third round one stroke ahead of Susan Moon, with Spain's Xonia Wunsch one stroke further adrift.
A £19.95 investment in a Blackjack putter is the catalyst which has brought about a change in fortune for Davies.
Yesterday, she took only 28 putts as she equalled the course record.
‘I had been playing well since I returned from America, but the putts have just not dropped.
I holed a good putt for a birdie at the first hole and that set me up,’ she said.
This was the first of the eight birdies Davies gathered, the best of all being her three at the 315-yard 13th hole, where she drove the green.
A wedge approach to three feet produced an eagle three at the ninth, while her solitary lapse was the four she made at the short 16th.
Moon had set the target early in the day.
In her opening round of 67 on Thursday, the American made fours at each of the five long holes, and it was the same par fives which served her well yesterday.
Without a tour success since 1980, Moon had 35 putts in yesterday's 70, such was the consistency of her play through the green.
Moon birdied four of the par fives, three-putted the seventh and completed her round with only her second single putt of the day to save par at the 18th.
Rugby Union: That old Black magic ready to cast its spell
By STEVE BALE, Rugby Union Correspondent
IT TAKES about five minutes in New Zealand to comprehend why the All Blacks are the best.
Everyone — from the woman who stamps your passport, through the taxi driver, to the hotel receptionist — talks constantly and instinctively about rugby.
To these people, Black is beautiful.
Put another way, the All Blacks have the whole nation behind them, and even Wales cannot quite claim that.
So when they run out to kick off their tour against Cardiff at the Arms Park this afternoon, around three million souls (a population not much bigger than that of the Principality) will be with them in spirit.
For these superlative players it is a position of great privilege, but also intense pressure.
‘The expectation of the New Zealand public is very high,’ Wayne Shelford, the All Blacks captain, said.
‘They expect us to win by a reasonable margin nowadays.’
Thus, through the effect of public opinion, do his team's standards have to be set higher and higher.
To the Welsh, this has a familiar ring.
When Wales were successful in the Seventies (and even then they could not beat the Blacks), mere victory was not enough; it had to be done with panache and by a heap of points to satisfy the demands of a voracious populace.
The fall, when it came with the Eighties, was from a great height.
In New Zealand's case, ‘if’ rather than‘when’is a better word to use when considering the possibility of a fall.
Their three-year run of 17 Test wins equals the All Black record, and it takes no great clairvoyant skill to predict that this will be broken against Wales on 4 November and extended against Ireland a fortnight later.
If it is true that some of them are not quite what they were — and even this grasped-at straw is no more than speculation — we may rest assured that the successor generation brought on tour to breathe down their necks will be as good if not better.
‘We have too much competition within the side for there to be any complacency,’ Shelford said.
This is the comment of an All Black thought to be under as much threat as any, in his case from the Auckland No. 8 Zinzan Brooke (whose christian name, incidentally, is English not Maori).
That Shelford has a few doubters to disprove is cold comfort to Cardiff, who have had an unconvincing start to the season and whose main hope is to catch the tourists either cold or rusty after a lay-off which for most has lasted all of a fortnight.
Even Alan Phillips, the former Wales hooker who became Cardiff coach this season, concedes that now is not the moment for his players.
‘If they have a bit of jet-lag or anything that's going wrong we have the chance to get among them early on,’ he said.
‘The only problem is it's about a year too soon for us.
But we've got a young side at Cardiff now and it's good for them to play against these players, to see that they're only human beings after all.’
Neither jet-lag nor anything going wrong has been evident at the tourists' training, which has been comfortably the most impressive seen in Cardiff since…well, since the last time the All Blacks were there in 1980.
Then, at today's venue, they beat Wales 23-3 (a margin greeted with horror by the Welsh at the time) and Cardiff 16-9.
Yesterday produced the tour's first injury scare of any note.
John Kirwan, the wing who has scored 25 tries in 30 Tests, missed training with an inflamed Achilles tendon but is firmly expected to play.
(Steve Ford, who will mark Kirwan, is part of a family double; brother Phil plays for Leeds against the NZ rugby league tourists tomorrow.)
Cardiff's concern, as it will be for everyone else the All Blacks play in their seven matches in Wales, five in Ireland and one in England, is that the tourists match the mood of their public back home.
They beat everyone in sight — and still yearn to do better.
To take a memorable example, even after thrashing Wales 52-3, 10 tries to nil, in Christchurch last year they were thoroughly dissatisfied with themselves.
Things have not changed: as Cardiff are about to find, these All Blacks are at once an irresistible force and immovable object.
0p3 0p3 Cardiff: M Rayer; C Thomas, M Ring, G John, S Ford; D Evans, A Booth; J Whitefoot, I Watkins, D Young, H Stone, M Rowley, T Crothers, M Edwards, R Collins.
Football: UEFA halves Ajax ban to a year
By JOE LOVEJOY
AJAX, disqualified from European competition for two years after their fans had caused the abandonment of a UEFA Cup tie, had the punishment halved on appeal yesterday.
The Dutch club were banned when misbehaviour by their supporters, who threw missiles on to the pitch, felling the opposition goalkeeper with a metal spike, brought a premature end to the first-round match at home to Austria Vienna last month.
UEFA awarded the Austrians a 3-0 win, and a second-round place.
After considering Ajax's appeal, UEFA reduced their suspension from two years to one.
The Football Association was also preoccupied with disciplinary matters yesterday, fining Peter Reid £1,000 and suspending the Queen's Park Rangers midfielder for two matches, banning Arsenal's Gus Caesar for three and summoning Wimbledon's manager, Bobby Gould, and Ray Wallace of Southampton, to appear before them on Thursday to answer unrelated charges of bringing the game into disrepute.
Reid was found to have made ‘foul comments’ to the referee, George Tyson, at the end of QPR's match against Manchester City on 9 September, while Caesar's punishment follows his sending-off during Arsenal's pre-season friendly against Independiente in the United States.
A UEFA tribunal yesterday set the fee for Michael Laudrup's transfer from Juventus to Barcelona at £1.2m.
Because of their players' League commitments in England, the Republic of Ireland have cancelled their friendly international against Yugoslavia on 14 December.
Sport in Short: Windsurfing
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Tennis
By JOE LOVEJOY
BORIS BECKER has pulled out of a third tournament, the Tokyo Grand , which begins on Monday, because of a nagging knee injury.He hopes to be fit to defend his Masters title at the end of next month and has begun light training.
Sport in Short: Squash
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Speedway
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Sailing
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Rugby Union
By JOE LOVEJOY
ALAIN GALLO, a former player with the French club Agen, has made claims that team-mates were being paid as long as 10 years ago.
In a letter published yesterday in the French sports paper L'Equipe, Gallo alleges that leading players today earn up to £600 a month, plus expenses.
‘All those involved in French rugby are businessmen,’ Gallo said.
Sport in Short: Rugby League
By JOE LOVEJOY
CHRIS BURTON, Featherstone's former Great Britain forward, has been suspended for five matches by the Rugby League disciplinary committee after being sent off for a head tackle in Featherstone's home championship defeat by Leeds last Sunday.
Sport in Short: Motor Racing
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Judo
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Ice Skating
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Gymnastics
By JOE LOVEJOY
ADRIANA DUFFY, the 18-year-old American gymnast, broke her neck in Stuttgart yesterday while training on a vaulting horse for the World Championships which begin tomorrow..
Sport in Short: Golf
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Football
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Equestrianism
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Cricket
By JOE LOVEJOY
VIV RICHARDS showed his renewed appetite for the game with a fine all-round performance as West Indies beat India by five wickets in the opening Sharjah Cup match yesterday.
He ran out two batsmen, took two wickets with his off-spin and helped West Indies recover from 31 for 3 with a quick 34.
RODNEY ONTONG, 33, the former Glamorgan captain, who had to retire from the game after a car crash, is to sue the county for damages in his benefit year.
The crash happened as Ontong, a Glamorgan player for 15 seasons, and Steve Barwick, his team-mate, were on the way to a Championship game in Essex 14 months ago.
Sport in Short: Boxing
Weekend Sport Page 59
Sport in Short: Athletics
Weekend Sport Page 59
Rugby Union: Park to face the Bath backlash: Barrie Fairall on today's rugby union action
By BARRIE FAIRALL
COURAGE is the keyword this weekend, even among the nit-pickers who may have noted that the league sponsors' official directory lists today's third series of matches as having been played in midweek on 4 October.
Surely some mistake?
But there is no mistaking the fact that the First Division door has been left ajar.
This was due entirely to the ferocious efforts of Gloucester, no lovers of Bath, whose idea of a welcome last month was to treat their visitors rather like a doormat.
Indeed, there was a lot of ‘shoe’ put about at Kingsholm, and the end product was unfortunate to say the least.
Gareth Chilcott — popularised as the Oddjob of English rugby during the first World Cup in Australia in 1987, but affectionately referred to as ‘Coochie’ in these parts — was sent off for punching, and 14 men of Bath succumbed to Gloucester's 15.
‘A great win,’ Mike Hamlin, Gloucester's affable and capable captain, said with a broad grin.
In Hamlin's opinion, the crucial thing about the result was that others would be grateful to Gloucester for knocking the champions down a peg or two.
‘It's opened up the league,’ Hamlin said, ‘and we may not be the only ones to benefit.’
The England B stand-off has a point, although the benefits may not be all that lasting.
Rosslyn Park, for example, are first in line to experience the probable backlash of that defeat when they set foot on the Recreation Ground this afternoon.
Park — like Gloucester, Bristol and Saracens — are unbeaten in the league so far.
‘Don't be surprised if we get a good result,’ Colin Horgan, a spokesman for the club, said yesterday.
Brave words, but Horgan will be able to put some distance between himself and the pitch.
Out there, it will be hard and uncompromising stuff as Bath seek a return to the winning habit on the afternoon that Stuart Barnes has chosen to return.
The captain and stand-off has taken time out to recover fully from a pre-season hand injury, and Bath will be grateful of his guidance.
Gloucester, in the meantime, descend on Wasps, who, having lost out at Harlequins, have shored up their pack with their England props, Jeff Probyn and Paul Rendall.
Rugby Union: Wallabies enjoy the festivities
By NICK CAIN
Australia, shorn of some 12 Test players due to unavailability, stopped off in Canada on the way to their eight-match engagement in France to join in British Columbian rugby's centenary celebrations.
They also put in a visit to Edmonton where, last weekend, their dirt-trackers beat the North American Wolverines (non-BC Canadians, plus two Americans) 24-6.
British Columbia, who fielded only five of the players that tackled the All Blacks, have acquitted themselves admirably in a four-day period that has seen them take on the might of the two Antipodean giants.
The locals, inspired by three superb long-range penalties from their full back, had the satisfaction of raising the roof with their one try of the game.
But there was no fairy-tale ending as Bob Dwyer's men set about party-pooping in serious fashion when the experienced half-back combination of Nick Farr-Jones and Michael Lynagh began to click, each scoring a try.
Dwyer said: ‘I think we can develop into a handy side given another three or four games.
All our boys ran and handled well and the forwards looked quite tight.
There's a lot of talent among these youngsters and we expect a lot of them.’
But for all Dwyer's optimism, this was just the sort of loose game in which the Wallabies excel and, although they have undoubted talent, the youngsters are going to find things considerably tighter in France.
Cricket: Stewart's sun set to shine brightly
From MARTIN JOHNSON in New Delhi
ENGLAND'S second warm-up match for the Nehru Trophy may not have been the biggest event here yesterday (of the 100 or so people who turned up, about a dozen were neither sponsors nor members of the Delhi constabulary), but it did, by happy chance, provide near-perfect practice for their opening group match against Sri Lanka tomorrow.
The opposition thoughtfully provided a batting line-up of stroke-playing dashers, and bowlers that could easily have been selected at random from a passing Delhi omnibus.
As this is more than a fair reflection of Sri Lanka's strengths and weaknesses, it was all very accommodating.
England won comfortably enough, as indeed they ought to have done against a team containing 10 players whose ages ranged between 16 and 21, and one -Madan Lal — who lays claim to being 38, despite the strong suspicion that (were he as famous as Nehru) the Centenary Trophy could just as easily have been named after him.
However, the Sri Lankans are always dangerous floaters in events such as these.
With four teams to qualify from six for the semi-finals, they are 100-1 on to finish last, but if any of the others has a bowling off-day against them, it could well be thank you and goodbye.
England twice beat them easily enough in the World Cup (by 138 runs and eight wickets), but in the opening match of that competition, Pakistan only succeeded in defending 267 against them by 15 runs.
England's batsmen looked in decent enough form yesterday on a shirt-front pitch, nor does the heat appear to be causing them undue distress.
But then again this is the one form of cricket they are reasonably competent at.
Since the advent of Micky Stewart as team manager, England have won 29 of their 43 one-dayers (one tied), and three of 29 Test matches.
Whether this lopsided record and Stewart's stewardship is more than just coincidental will be a matter for the Test and County Cricket Board to discuss when his contract comes up again next April.
Wayne Larkins (123 in the first practice game) retired again, this time on 55, which left Graham Gooch (90 off 95 balls and unbothered by anyone resembling an Alderman) to enjoy the rare experience just lately of batting with more than one partner.
Allan Lamb and Alec Stewart also made half-centuries, and the manager's son could well play tomorrow whether England pick Jack Russell to keep wicket or not.
There is certainly the prospect of Stewart, a slow starter but a class player when set, rivalling Robert Bailey for the No. 3 batting spot in the Caribbean.
England's one fitness doubt tomorrow concerns Phillip DeFreitas, who was resting a sore elbow yesterday, but otherwise their major problem is whether to play both their spinners.
Eddie Hemmings is already inked in, but Nick Cook — still trying to puzzle out why he has been brought here but overlooked in favour of Keith Medlycott for the West Indies — may end up as one of the drinks carriers.
Not an unimportant role in a place as hot as this, but not quite the one he has in mind.
Nasser Hussain may get in on the strength of his fielding.
If DeFreitas is out and Lamb remains unable to throw the ball properly, England's outfield would have a Madame Tussaud's look about it, which is also a point in favour of David Capel above Derek Pringle.
Capel's presence here, though, does not mean that England — and Micky Stewart in particular— have shed their doubts about his ability to contain, and there was no evidence yesterday that Capel has yet acquired the mental capacity to try to bore people out in one-day cricket.
The local team's reply to England's 334 for 4 was a not unimpressive 221 for 3, with a trio of schoolboy prodigies ('We could produce them like this on better pitches,’ Stewart said) in their line-up.
Vinod Kambli (aged 18) and Sachin Tendulkar (17) appear destined for full Test careers, although yesterday's partnership of nought was 644 runs fewer than the one they shared in a schools game two years ago.
Football: Brazil scratch seven-year itch: Paddy Agnew in Rome on a match which many Italian fans would like to see repeated in the 1990 World Cup final
By PADDY AGNEW
ITALY play Brazil in Bologna this afternoon in a game that one section of the Italian press, with typical enthusiasm, has christened ‘The Friendly of the Century’.
Hyperbole, perhaps, but this meeting of two of world football's traditionally strongest sides should none the less prove highly informative.
Not only does Italy-Brazil represent many people's ideal coupling for next summer's World Cup final in Rome but this afternoon's game also marks the first occasion the two countries have met since that afternoon seven years ago in Spain when the Italians dismissed Falcao, Zico, Junior et al, 3-2 on their way to winning the 1982 World Cup.
Times have changed since then.
As Brazil's midfield dynamo, Dunga, of Fiorentina, says with a wry grin: ‘Brazil 1989 wouldn't have lost that game to Italy in 1982.
Today, we might play less spectacular soccer.
But we get results.’
Since taking over as Brazil's manager on 6 January, Sebastiano Lazaroni has attempted to pull off a transformation that has hitherto seemed impossible in Brazilian football.
He has tried to ‘stiffen’ the side defensively, to teach the virtues of match-long disciplined marking without stifling his players' natural creative talents.
With the South American championship trophy on the sideboard and the side safely through to next summer's World Cup finals, it would seem that the Lazaroni system has worked pretty well so far.
Against Italy, Lazaroni is keen to experience a foretaste of the atmosphere that he and his side can expect next summer.
Key figures in the new-look Brazilian team are the goalkeeper, Taffarel, the libero, Galvao, the midfield ball winners, Dunga and Alemao, and the strikers, Bebeto and, of course, Careca.
When asked to assess the opposition, manager Lazaroni replied diplomatically that he fears no single Italian player, rather he fears the whole side.
Lazaroni's opposite number, Azeglio Vicini, can call on an almost full-strength squad for a game in which he hopes Italy will prove his assertion that the side has made significant progress since being defeated by the Soviet Union in last summer's European Championship semi-final.
Walter Zenga in goal, Franco Baresi the libero, and Gianluca Vialli in attack, will carry the brunt of the responsibility today.
Most Italian eyes, however, will be focussed on ‘wonder boy’ Roberto Baggio, of Fiorentina.
A good performance from Baggio today would probably guarantee his place in Vicini's World Cup side.
Football: McLean in looting mission: Don Lindsay on today's Scottish programme
By DON LINDSAY
AS THE title of his admirable autobiography — Jousting with Giants — admits, Jim McLean has always enjoyed taking on the Scottish game's major forces.
Dundee United have been the corner shop competing with the hypermarkets of Glasgow, and business has been brisk with pockets of profitability.
Another trip to the Ibrox superstore beckons for McLean this afternoon, and the United manager would dearly love to sneak out by the tradesmen's entrance after slipping the points into his travelling bag, leaving Rangers to balance the books in a highly competitive Premier Division.
The Tayside men hold an advantage of a single point over their well-heeled Glaswegian rivals, and they traditionally fare well on visits to Govan.
Indeed, McLean was the first manager to inflict a home League defeat on Graeme Souness after his immersion into Ibrox life.
There is brighter news for the Rangers boss on the selection front.
Chris Woods has been added to Souness's squad along with Mark Walters and John Brown, although both Fergusons, Ian and Derek, will be absent.
Only five points cover the entire Division, and top encounters bottom at Dens Park.
Dundee, who languish in the basement, and Celtic, the leaders, are the two highest-scoring teams, although neither has a defence which would intimidate opponents.
Celtic are likely to be without the last Parkhead man to score, Joe Miller, injured playing for the Scotland Under-21s in midweek.
A genuine and pleasant surprise has been the development of Motherwell, previously forced to carry the banner of the most boring team in the League.
Tommy McLean, the Fir Park boss, was responsible for a shrewd piece of business which saw his old Rangers colleague Davie Cooper join the Steelmen to add dashes of invention and experience.
Cooper's contribution has galvanised the club, and they now have the same points as Celtic and Aberdeen, with a visit to second-placed Hibernian in prospect this afternoon.
Football: Team news
By DON LINDSAY
ARSENAL v MAN CITY Marwood is ready to return for the champions after proving his fitness in the reserves on Thursday.
Allen and McNab are fit again, but will be restricted to the bench by City, who will not change the team that has scored 12 in winning their last three games.
CHARLTON v TOTTENHAM Charlton, beaten in their last four League games without scoring, include Achampong, the former Fulham striker, in place of the injured Mortimer.
Peake is fit to return in midfield.
Spurs' squad of 14 includes Garland, 19, a forward yet to appear in the League, and Butters, recovered from injury.
COVENTRY v NOTTM FOREST Coventry are without Drinkell, their record signing, who has pulled a thigh muscle, but Kilcline, McGrath and Gynn are all available again.
Hodge, who injured a hamstring training with England, is fit to return for Forest.
DERBY v CRYSTAL PALACE Derby, still without Cross (knee), are likely to retain the team who beat Cambridge 5-0 in the Littlewoods Cup.
Palace, with seven points from their last three games, again use midfielder Thomas in central defence in place of the injured O'Reilly, and are expected to recall Pemberton at right-back at Shaw's expense.
EVERTON v MILLWALL McCall, who injured an ankle with Scotland Under-21s, is doubtful for Everton, who introduce Keown in defence in place of the injured Ratcliffe.
Tony Cottee reappears in a 14-man squad.
Millwall also choose from 14, with Briley, Coleman and McLeary hoping to start.
LUTON v ASTON VILLA Nielsen, Villa's Danish defender, will start for the first time if McGrath fails to recover from the hamstring injury which kept him out of the Republic of Ireland team in midweek.
Williams returns to the Luton midfield, six weeks after a cartilage operation, in place of the suspended Kennedy, and Rodger is set for his League debut at centre-half.
MAN UTD v SHEFF WED Ince has recovered from a groin strain and United are unchanged for Ron Atkinson's return to Old Trafford.
Wednesday will be unchanged after their 8-0 drubbing of Aldershot in the Littlewoods Cup — provided Palmer shakes off a knee injury.
NORWICH v CHELSEA Norwich, unbeaten but yet to win at home, are unchanged for the seventh match in succession.
Chelsea include defenders Hall and Cundy, 19, in a squad of 15.
QPR v SOUTHAMPTON Rangers are unchanged, but Trevor Francis delays his choice of substitute.
Southampton, already deprived of Forrest and Ray Wallace by injury and suspension, hope Horne, their Welsh international midfielder, will recover from a groin strain in time to deputise at right-back.
WIMBLEDON v LIVERPOOL Wimbledon are unchanged, which means Lawrie Sanchez has to be content with a substitute's role.
Liverpool give John Barnes only an even-money chance of recovering from his hamstring strain.
Ian Rush (groin) is also doubtful.
ELSEWHERE: Sunderland may be without Agboola (hamstring) at Leeds, who hope to recall Hendrie in place of Williams…
West Ham are without Gale and Brady for their visit to Second Division leaders Sheffield United.
Judo: Hughes makes light of her load
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
‘THEY keep on writing you off — but they're wrong,’ beamed a delighted Roy Inman, the women's team manager, as Ann Hughes, Britain's top lightweight, stepped off the mat having won her semi-final at the World Championships here yesterday.
She could not, however, carry off the gold medal, losing the final to the title holder, Cathy Arnaud of France, the European champion who, at 26, is at her fighting peak.
Hughes, aged29, has a remarkable record going back to the first women's World Championships in 1980 including a world gold in 1986, world bronze in 1987 and two European titles.
Yet she was not one of the women tipped to reach the finals here.
She comfortably made her semi-final, where she met the Canadian, Nathalie Gosselin.
At the half-way point, Gosselin attacked with a poor hip throw, Hughes nimbly stepped off it and managed a pick-up for yuko (five points).
Although there was still two minutes to go, the Liverpool-born fighter was too experienced to be drawn into a mistake.
In the final Arnaud was too strong, and threw Hughes twice, taking her backwards for a koka (three points) and then with a shoulder throw for yuko.
In her first fight, she armlocked Jaana Utrainen (Finland) and followed with two decision wins against the Australian Angela Deacon and the more problematic Kate Donahoe of the United States.
The British Judo Association has already begun to make use of her vast experience.
Hughes took the British junior team to Austria earlier this year, and the BJA has agreed to employ her as a part-time coach when she retires after the Commonwealth Games.
Roy Stone, the 22-year-old lightweight from Middlesex in his first major international, did well to take Bertalan Hajtos, Hungary's 1986 European champion, to a decision.
Motor Racing: Ferrari abandon Mansell appeals
From PHILIP NICKSAN in Belgrade
FERRARI yesterday decided to drop its appeals against the £32,000 fine and ban imposed on Nigel Mansell following his failure to stop after being disqualified from the Portuguese Grand Prix, writes Maurice Hamilton.
The Portuguese authorities had promised to hear Ferrari's appeal against the fine next Wednesday, after which the FIA, the international automobile federation, was due to reach a decision on Ferrari's appeal over Mansell's ban from the Spanish Grand Prix which was staged on 1 October.
Ferrari, while still convinced their arguments against the sanctions were valid, but mindful of the tradition they represent, said they wished to ‘remove any disturbing elements from Formula One racing’ during the final two races of the season in Japan and Australia.
Apart from clearing Mansell's name if they upheld the appeal, the FIA tribunal would be of little further use to either the Englishman or his team.
The FIA said last week that the results of the Spanish Grand Prix would remain, regardless of the outcome of any appeal.
Ferrari's decision places Mansell in a dilemma.
He announced on the eve of the Spanish Grand Prix that he would contemplate retirement ‘sooner rather than later’ if the ban was not lifted.
Athletics: Making of Superman II: Daley Thompson's air of invincibility was undermined by a fear of the knife.
Now a knee operation could restore his athletic powers.
Neil Wilson reports
By NEIL WILSON
Thompson's career — the Daley record 1976 Olympic Games (Montreal) 18th 1977 European Juniors, 1st 1978 Commonwealth Games (Edmonton) lst European Championships (Prague) 2nd 1980 Olympic Games (Moscow) 1st World record (Gotzis) 8,648 pts 1982 World record (Gotzis) 8,730 pts European Championships (Athens) lst World record 8,774 Commonwealth Games, Brisbane, lst 1983 World Championships (Helsinki) lst 1984 Olympic Games (Los Angeles) lst World record 8,847 1986 Commonwealth Games (Edinburgh) lst European Championships (Stuttgart) lst 1987 World Championships (Rome) 9th 1988 Olympic Games (Seoul) 4th It has not been a good year for the class of ‘76.
David Moorcroft called it a day, and Steve Ovett cried in public and was urged to.
That leaves Daley Thompson as the sole survivor of the British men's team at the Montreal Olympics still at the top.
Will he be the next to go?
The question was given pertinence suddenly last month when Thompson, citing a knee injury, withdrew from a decathlon in France after only five events, already then 300 points behind the leader.
Was age catching up on him as well?
Every year or so since ‘76 found Thompson in some far-flung place, emerging from the fictional telephone box to do his Superman act and beat the world, or Europe or the Commonwealth, the great all-rounder, Victor Ludorum.
Britain took him for granted.
Recently, though, the trick has not worked.
He turned up without fail but there was an ordinariness about him.
Ninth in the world championships in Rome, fourth at the Olympic Games in Seoul.
Was Clark Kent a newspaperman after all?
Or perhaps the phone boxes were all vandalised.
We never knew because he never said, never offered mitigating circumstances.
‘If you start, you're fit,’ he would say.
But he was not, and he knew it.
For the past three or four years, that finely-tuned body, that running, jumping and throwing machine, was flawed.
Behind his left knee-cap, a growth of calcium on his patellar tendon prevented the smooth working of the joint, a cartilage was chipped and fragments floated in the joint.
Thompson did not know the details then because he did not want to.
Doctors and physiotherapists were never allowed close enough to examine him.
‘I've never been one for doctors, and hospitals were for visiting other people,’ he said.
‘The thought of being in one for a week and unconscious for half a day wouldn't have appealed to me very much.
Not that I gave it serious thought.
I was always flippant about it.’
Those who trained with him, the ‘old crowd’, they knew.
‘They could see I was taking it easier on some of the sessions and they told me so.
But I've never been the world's best listener.
Mine's a strange mentality, an invincible mentality.
I think I can do anything, one leg, no legs, one arm tied behind my back.
Whatever it takes.’
The rest of the world was kept in ignorance.
What concern is it of theirs?
Thompson has never done what he does for anybody but himself.
He admits it.
Even Frank Dick, the coach close enough to him to be the one he ultimately asked to be with him for his operation, did not have an inkling until the competition in France that Thompson had not high-jumped in training all year.
For Thompson, living with the knee became a way of life.
He won the Commonwealth and European titles, married and became a father in the time he lived with his particular pain.
‘Yes, about five years, but then I didn't at first have anything to judge my pain against.
I never felt stiff after training even before I was 27.
So whatever I felt, I'd think other people had worse.
‘Only in the last three years did it get in the way of anything and I wasn't able to do any bounding (a vital exercise in training) or, in the end, any high jumping.’
So why did he not sort it out three years ago?
‘I was busy three years ago.
And two years ago, and last year.
There was always something going on.
I couldn't afford the time.
Well, I could have but then I always think I can do anything, don't I?
Even when I'm injured I think I can do it regardless.
The mentality that got me where I was, then held me back.’
Did it really not come down to a fear of the knife?
‘If I'm honest, yes.
Nothing else.
I can't think of another reason.
I have a very low threshold for pain.
I imagined the operation would be excrutiating.’
Dick and the nurses told him that, even after the pre-med, they had to chase him round the ward to get him to remove his shorts.
‘The silly thing is that it wasn't painful, not at all.
A headache would be worse.
And the pain I've had for three years was far worse.
It's a bit stiff still but I've had the stitches out and still no pain.’
In the end, the decathlon in France convinced him.
‘I knew I wasn't going great but I thought I'd score 8,200-8,300.
My training had started to get better at the back end of the summer.
I thought, ‘same as usual, a bit of inspiration and desire and it'll come right’.'
Among the world's best decathletes, he wanted to ‘make a short, sharp statement’.
He laughs at that now.
‘I made that all right, didn't I?
I couldn't do it.
Or, at least, it was very difficult.
It had never hurt before in anything but high jump but this time it hurt long jumping.
I started sweating when they called out the bloke ahead of me in the high jump.
I knew it was going to hurt.’
He managed only 1.91 metres (his best is 2.14), went through the motions in the final event of the first day, and quit.
The next morning, a Sunday, he agreed to Dick's suggestion to see a West German doctor, had tests done the following Wednesday and was referred to Zurich for an operation a week later.
‘They said I'd just got 50-60 years wear out of the knee in 15 years.’
Why the acceptance finally that there was no other way?
‘The doctor said it would never get better by itself and could lead to arthritis.
That was the thing.
In the end it wasn't just for me but for those I wanted to share my life with.
I couldn't face having kids and not being able to kick a football to them.’
This week, two weeks after the operation, he was limping well at his home in West London.
He had been round 18 holes at Wentworth, if only on a buggy, and spent an hour in the weights room working on his upper body.
In two weeks he will go to Germany for rehabilitation, and, by his doctor's ‘most optimistic expections’, could be training as hard as he was in July by the end of December.
That makes a defence of his Commonwealth Games title unlikely.
His left thigh, his jumping take-off leg, which was always an inch and a half thicker than the right, is now two and a half inches thinner.
He is under 13 stone in weight for the first time since his teens.
He will not go only to compete.
‘That's one thing Baron de Coubertin and I don't agree on.’
But he thinks a score of 8,300 would be enough to win, compared to his world record of 8,847, so he will not rule it out.
‘It'd be great to be there but I'm not that fussed.
I'm not planning to try so hard for it that I might break down.’
The future is too precious, at least the three years of European and world championships ending in the Barcelona Olympics in 1992, his fifth Games.
His 34th birthday will be during the Games, as his 18th was during Montreal.
‘When I started I was always in a hurry, wanting to get it done, to get up there.
Then I had four or five years when I was there.
I could relax, enjoy it.
Now I'm in a hurry again.’
If he retires then, it will only be from the public arena.
‘In 10 years, it won't be Crystal Palace but it may be Southern League, Division Seven.’
Certainly nobody will tell him the moment to go.
‘What right do people have to tell anybody they can't do something they like?
I get enjoyment out of a challenge.
OK, so they'll come a time when I'm not challenging the world record.
But it seems a shame not to challenge yourself because other people say you're not as good as you used to be.
So what?
‘I keep hearing people say they don't want to see Ovett running 3:58 because they want to remember him running 3:48.
Would they stop a great painter painting just because his eyes were going and his brushwork wasn't as good?
Maybe he enjoys it.
Perhaps I wouldn't want to do it before an audience but then I've never performed for others.
I've always done it because I have a good time doing it.
I'll think of stopping when I'm not.’
Does he regret now avoiding the operation all those years ago, before he failed to scale his own Olympian heights in Rome and Seoul?
‘If I'd done it then, perhaps I wouldn't have been fit to go to the Olympics and worlds, and I'd hate to be sitting here now thinking I could have won.
I'd rather know I came fourth and ninth.’
But does he not wonder what might have been had he been fit?
‘No, I know exactly.
Nobody would have beaten me.
I still don't think there is anybody out there better than me.
Not yet.
Perhaps not born yet.’
Fishing Lines: The staring eyes have it for a longer life
By KEITH ELLIOTT
THIS HAS been a very good week for fishermen and a very bad week for Findus, Bird's Eye and all the other producers of frozen peas and pizzas.
It hasn't been much of a week for my wife either; she now sees little prospect of winning back even a beefburger space in the deep freeze.
On the other hand, I've been as happy as a turkey in January, and all because of a story I spotted in a medical magazine, stating that regular lashings of oily fish cut sharply your chances of having a heart attack.
Tests show that eating lots of fibre or switching to polyunsaturated fats has about as much chance of prolonging your life as wearing a wig, but a kipper two or three times a week will have your life assurance rep collecting the premiums for ever.
Now one thing the Elliott household is not short of is oily fish.
Opening the deep freeze is like standing on stage at the Palladium: there are that many eyes staring out at you.
All four racks are crammed with fish as oily as a politician's smile.
There are eels, mackerel, salmon and trout.
There are even a few herrings for good measure.
(I didn't catch these because they are rarely taken on rod and line, but herrings make excellent bait for skate and pike.
You never know when you're going to need a herring).
There are quite a few other fish too; in fact, there are enough different species to make a show that would rival the daily display at Harrods.
Working from the top, there are a couple of skate wings, a few flounders, dabs and plaice, and a last bit of turbot.
Then there are the codling; wonderful eating and nothing like that tasteless stuff you buy with a crispy brown skin.
The third drawer is for big fish; a decent sea trout, a hefty cod, a couple of salmon.
We're always well off for salmon and trout because my friend Chris the Stuffer keeps us liberally supplied.
He's probably the country's top taxidermist, and he's sick to the gills with eating salmon.
He got so fed up with it that he even tried a salmon shepherd's pie to make it more interesting.
Even his cat won't touch it now.
When most people bring their catch of a lifetime to him, they don't realise that he just wants the skin, not the flesh.
(One of the few times we missed out was with a 200lb sturgeon caught in the North Sea.
We were looking forward to gorging ourselves, but the buyer was a restaurateur and his chef had skinned it so cleanly that there wasn't enough flesh for a sandwich).
On to the bottom shelf.
Still a few sea bass here, though they're so delicious that they hardly have time to freeze.
A few eels, caught in the sea rather than in the local river; plenty of mackerel, a chunk of monkfish, and some roach for pike deadbaits.
As you can see, there's not a lot of room for ice cream, crispy pancakes or TV dinners.
In fact, it's standing room only even for fish fingers.
This has been a source of some less than harmonious comments from my beloved.
She feels that I should take my cod and coalfish, garfish and grayling, salmon and sole and even the shark steaks, and install them in the old deep freeze in the garage.
The trouble is, that's impossible.
You see, Chris the Stuffer's deep freezes are so full that a while back, I promised him I would take the overflow.
So that one is now full of fish too.
I have not always found it easy to counter my wife's complaints that frozen peas have to be eaten the same day.
She has even suggested that a little less fishing might deplete the shoals enough to squeeze in a few vegetables.
But this new research has given me just the ammunition I need.
All I have to do is tell her that our cold stores are full of life-saving health foods, without which I would be keeling over and clutching my left ventricle.
The children, as long as they learn to whinge less about the bones, are all set to become nonagenarians.
The springer spaniels, who gulp down what the children leave, will probably outlive next door's parrot.
And I can go fishing to my heart's content.
Letter From Singapore: Touchstones lost in a State of constant repair
By RICHARD EATON
THEY have shut down Raffles for repairs.
Sipping a Sling does not have the same flavour of nostalgia when you are not sitting in the old hotel with the arches and verandahs imagining you are Somerset Maugham.
To provide a polite reminder that the country was started by Englishmen they took the Queen to a hostel called Raffles Hall and Westin Stamfords, another hotel.
This week was her first state visit here in 17 years.
She arrived in blue and white silk and wore floral dresses and a more natural smile than usual.
She was given a decent welcome by the crowd at the Ang Mo Kio town centre.
Of course, President Wee made most of the right remarks to relax her.
How lucky they were to have the English language, for instance, plus the system of law and public administration.
Wouldn't have happened without Sir Stamford Raffles and all that.
The PM, Mr Lee, expressed a slightly different view.
The Commonwealth would remain relevant, he said, and little pleases the Queen more than that.
But a few locals regretted her presence, and Lee Kuan Yew knows it.
In future, he said, ‘there won't be the same reference points, the same vocabulary, the same diction, the same touchstones’.
Ah well, they are refurbishing plenty of other things besides the buildings and the language.
They are planning a 100 per cent digital phone system that will enable voice images and data to be carried on the line.
It will be linked to videophones, picture mail, teletext and home banking.
Is British Telecom itemising the bills back there yet?
There's a ‘Speak Mandarin' campaign on too.
Plus a powerful empathy with the plight of the peoples of Hong Kong.
The poor Chinese footballers understandably got a coolish reception in their World Cup qualifying tournament here, especially as they spoilt the script by winning their opening match.
What almost everyone is waiting for is the showdown between North and South Korea on Monday.
Nearly 40 years ago these two were trading bullets over the river Potong-Gang, and sometimes it is not far short of hostilities when they trade shots on the pitch.
There have been some serious ructions when they have played table tennis, with rows and cheating and shouting matches.
But with football it is going to be different.
Or so says the North Korean delegation leader, Li Han Bok.
‘There will be no problem.
We are of the same blood, the same language,’ he says.
‘And the same nation.’
Trouble is, as many people know, the South Koreans do not completely agree with the last bit.
Couldn't say who will win.
A draw would probably be the best result.
The South Koreans are rated because they made it to the last World Cup finals, but personally I will always think of the North Koreans in ‘66.
Remember Ayresome Park and that centre forward, what was his name, Pak Doo Ik?
Knee-high to a gnat but it made no difference.
Couldn't stop him.
The North Koreans whupped the Italians, and actually caused a debate on football in the Italian Parliament.
Then they led the Portuguese 3-0 at half-time until the great Eusebio galvanised them into action.
They've got another World Championship here, too, at the moment, the squash.
A Pakistani called Jansher Khan is the champion, and they will not give him his prize money because he walked out of the official dinner.
The other Khan, Jahangir, is the more popular one.
He once went five and a half years unbeaten and he is still as modest as a mouse.
He said he's pleased that Pakistan has decided to come back into the Commonwealth.
I reckon the Queen would like him.
Sports Diary: Quotes of the Week
By RICHARD EATON
It was a night for men and we had a lot of men out there.
Bobby Robson in Poland.
Throughout all of this Manchester United has been kicked around like a football.
Bobby Charlton on the take-over saga.
Whatever it brings, one day my son can turn round and say ‘My dad managed Real Madrid’.
John Toshack.
Don't ask me if it was a good game — it would be like asking a surgeon if it was a good operation.
They didn't exactly have three girls at centre-back either.
Howard Wilkinson, Leeds manager, on criticism of team's performance at West Ham.
I've been trying to be a footballer, and that isn't me.
I got a bit carried away with the Wogan show and all that.
Vinny Jones.
Soccer star cut off my kitty's privates.
The People headline.
Player involved in alleged cat castration was a Leeds reserve.
We are not concerned with any bridges being built in South Africa so much as ensuring that our own are not destroyed.
Clive Rowlands, Welsh Rugby Union president, on severing of South Africa links.
I have torn Wales from my heart.
My wonderful memories are now sour.
The Welsh will crawl in future.
Dr Danie Craven, SA board president.
I was very lucky I was caught.
Ben Johnson, supporting crackdown on steroid use.
They're not really bookies these days, they're just debt collectors.
Jack Ramsden, husband of racehorse trainer Lynda.
Sports Diary: Cricket for John McCarthy
By RICHARD EATON
THE FRIENDS of John McCarthy have been reminding the Foreign Office that the British Government is the only government without a single success in efforts to achieve the release of any of its hostages.
Bearing in mind the England team's attempts to break out, cricket must have seemed an appropriate fund-raising event, and a knock-out competition among teams from the media will be played this weekend at North Middlesex CC, Park Road, Hornsey, London.
Sports Diary: Football: Wednesday night out
By RICHARD EATON
CONNOISSEURS of the bizarre will recall the night Sheffield Wednesday players spent on wintry moorland, one of their ex-commando trainer's ploys to get them out of the Third Division.
But how many know whether the expedition worked?
Howard Holmes does, and it is included in Owls Trivia (£2.80, from Sheffield Trivia, 286 Meadowhead, S8 7UH).
A companion volume, Blades Trivia (surely the club's entire history?), asks how Leeds United's hopes of a win went up in smoke when Steve Cammack scored a late equaliser on April Fools' Day 1975.
The sponsors' firework display, timed to start on the final whistle, went off early, and during the distraction Cammack scored.
As for Wednesday, they descended from the company of sheep to beat the might of Chester 2-0.
Sports Diary: Athletics: Mind your language
By RICHARD EATON
AMAZING what the Tyneside air can do.
In the case of Primo Nebiolo, the mere fact of being in Gateshead suddenly seemed to give the president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation a fluency in the English language he had not erstwhile possessed.
Nebiolo was being stalked by World In Action, anxious to interview the Italian about the alleged disappearance of large sums of money from athletics.
He was conversing merrily in English at a reception during the European Cup meeting, but several weeks later in Rome when confronted by the television team he seemed to lose his linguistic powers.
Various requests were made for Granada to give up their film of the Gateshead meeting, but it will be included in their report on Nebiolo — and the Princess Royal's attempt next week to unseat him as chairman of the Association of Summer Olympic Federations — to be broadcast on Monday at 8.30 on ITV.
Sports Diary: American Football: The rude awakening
By RICHARD EATON
HER contacts book was known to be extensive, but who would have thought Cynthia Payne's network stretched to Austin, Texas.
Yet there was Lynn Amedee, an American football coach, resigning following disclosure of his £11,690 ‘personal services’ contract.
Since Amedee's contributions to the world's most butch game are made as an ‘offensive co-ordinator’, the spectre is raised of some extremely rude sessions down Ambleside Avenue.
Not so; ‘personal services’ in the obfuscating vocabulary of grid-iron means…well, nobody quite knows.
Amedee was employed in the college football system, which exists primarily to raise revenue for academe and players for professional teams.
Contradictions in a system which expects players to concentrate on football, yet not be paid (unless you count scholarships?) are causing increasing problems.
‘I can't say what I'll do until I find out what it all means,’ one official said.
Could be some time.
Sports Diary: Football: Dress rehearsal suited to Italy
By RICHARD EATON
NOW that England and Scotland are getting ready for the World Cup finals, the question on the lips of two rejoicing nations is: ‘What will the lads wear for the big date in Italy?’
Not since Lady Di qualified for the Big Match has the fashion world been as tremulous about the chosen design.
Will Bryan Robson, Roy Aitken and the boys come down the catwalk in gathered sleeves, button-down collars, funny geometric patches of colour, or even power-dressing shoulder pads?
And will the sartorially-conscious supporter have to pay for a new wardrobe in which to battle the carabinieri?
The present England shirt costs about £24.99 for a full-sized fan, but the little number that saw us through (and its red going-away alternative) is beginning to reek from all those coach trips, nights spent in railway stations and sweaty terrace pens.
Football couturiers are critical of the rather plebian collar, the shirt's tailored lines, and the overall failure of a style designed in 1986 to reflect today's less structured look.
There could also be a pot of money in a change for the manufacturers.
Umbro have the England and Scotland teams on contract until 1994, and are entitled to introduce a new look at least once.
‘I don't think the question of a change is one we'd like to answer at the moment,’ a Football Association spokesman said.
‘We're not planning a change in the near future, but how you define the near future is another matter.’
A spokesman for Umbro said: ‘We'll have to have a think about it.’
One thought they might ponder is to consult the supporters through programmes and fanzines about whether their teams should affect the latest Viscosuisse fabrics cut along more ample lines (thus disguising the ample Paul Gascoigne?).
The supporters will have enough familiarisation to do in Italy without struggling to recognise their team's kit.
One Roman eating place, at least, is sure to fill the fans with wonder.
It is a hamburger chain called Willys.
Sports Diary: Lookalike: Robin Smith /Chewbacca
By RICHARD EATON
THE empire's bat strikes.
Chris Patrick, from Hertford, reckons the force of England's batting has been with Chewbacca, the South African at Hampshire, who bears resemblance to Robin Smith, grunting goody in Star Wars.
‘Or could they be, in any way, related?’