

Departures: Palin the globe-trotter
By FRANK BARRETT
ON THE fae of things, Michael Palin seems an unlikely double for the archetypal stiff upperlipped phlegmatic Englsihman Phileas Fogg, hero of Jules Verne's Around the World in Eighty Days.
Palin, ex-Python star — most recently appearing as Ken in A Fish Called Wanda — was invited by BBC 2 to tread in Fogg's footsteps by recreating the fictional journey.
(Alan Whicker, it seems, was first choice: Palin makes an interesting substitute given the wicked Python parody of Whicker Island: a place full of Alan Whickers endlessly interviewing each other.)
It's hard to imagine Mr Fogg, for example, ever having been a train-spotter: if there was any train-spotting to be done, Mr Fogg would have despatched his loyal French manservant Passepartout to do it on his behalf.
Yet young Palin, who grew up in Sheffield, was an enthusiastic train spotter, neatly underlining each newly spotted locomotive in his Ian Allan book.
‘I didn't cross them out — that would have been too much like defacing the book,’ he says.
And while he has travelled a lot since the success of Monty Python, as a child his family holidays were spent in the unadventurous climes of Southwold and East Anglia (recalled in his TV play East of Ipswich).
He travelled far, however, in his imagination.
‘I'd been everywhere in books: I read a lot about exotic places.
And I went to church every Sunday where we used to have missionaries who would come and tell tales about how they built churches in jungle clearings with lions gnawing at their legs.’
Until the series idea came up, had he ever read Around the World in Eighty Days?
‘I'm not sure whether I'd read the book or the ‘Classics Illustrated’ edition.’
(Classics Illustrated were comic book versions of great literature: David Copperfield, for example, condensed to 80 pages of finely drawn comic strip.)
He has no illusions about why he was chosen for the Fogg job: ‘They thought I was someone who wouldn't mind the suffering involved — and someone who was cheap.
they were wrong on the second point at least.’
Palin may not have travelled much as a young man, but he has now made up for lost time.
‘When I ever have a week off, I try and visit a new city in Europe.’
His most recent summer holidays were spent with his two sons walking in the central Pyrenees: ‘It was quite gruelling.’
He has plans now to buy a property in Venice: ‘I love the palce so much: a five-room apartment there costs about the same as studio flat in Tufnell Park.’
His great ambition, however, is to write a ‘real’ travel book in the Colin thubron or Paul Theroux style.
What he has in mind seems curiously like the Ripping Yarns TV series in which he and Terry Jones sent up the boy's adventure story with tales like ‘Across the Andes by Frog’.
In fact, his ‘book of the series’ is a very good read, although he fears that as a TV-linked publication it is unlikely to get serious reveiws.
He is still smarting from a put-down in the magazine City Limits which condemned his Around the World in Eighty Days as an exercise in ‘male back-slapping imperialism’.
One thing he has discovered since his global circumnavigation, is that it's a big conversation killer.
‘At parties, if people ask what you've been doing and you tell them that you've just been around the world, it stops the conversationd ead.’
One good reason, if you need one, for not going around the world.
Waiting games with Rembrandt and Vermeer: Brian Cathcart learns how to take it easy on a trip to The Hague, our last Channel Hop
By BRIAN CATHCART
MANANA should be a Dutch word.
As a rule in the Netherlands, it is the customers, not the waiters, who do the waiting.
For a country that has grown rich doing business, service in restaurants and cafes can be astonishingly slow, and catching the waiter's eye is about as easy as catching sunstroke on a North Sea beach.
There is no point in complaining; they may try to mollify you in their irritatingly good English, but they will not have a clue what you are so anxious about.
This is a country where people are not in a hurry.
So try to be Mediterranean about it.
Take it easy.
Sip your drink, don't gulp it.
Eke out the little pleasures.
The beer, for example, is rather good, so is the coffee.
Notice the strange way in which the table is covered by a carpet while the floor is bare, as in the best Vermeers.
Enjoy the warmth: outside it is almost certainly blowing razor blades from the Steppes.
Relax: you are on holiday.
This is the appropriate mood for The Hague, a town so bourgeois it makes Amsterdam seem rough and ready.
It has the reputation of a Dutch Bonn, a provincial place of exile for civil servants, where nothing more exciting than Dutch politics ever happens.
This is unfair, for it is a historic city and once in a while something does happen.
In 1672, for example, the Dutch Cromwell, de Witt, was torn limb from limb in the street by a frenzied mob, and in 1986 I was beaten up in a bar.
Such excitements are rare; The Hague has a few clubs and theatres and it will soon have its own ballet company, but for the most part the Hagenaars, as the residents are known, spend their evenings at home and retire at a respectable hour.
What the city has to offer the weekend visitor is first-class art, a variety of shops and bars, a little seaside air and some good food to fill the evenings.
It also has that quintessentially Dutch quality: smallness.
For a place with a population of half a million or so it is a handy size.
Most distances are walkable and the rest an easy tram ride.
Start at the Mauritshuis.
Small enough for a coach party to whip through in half an hour, but good enough to occupy the more patient visitor for an afternoon or more, the princely town house stands beside a broad pond in the heart of the city.
Its collection is from the cream of Dutch art, rivalling the Rijksmuseum's in quality if not quantity.
It has three Vermeers (only 30 exist), notably Head of a Girl and View of Delft (to Proust, the most beautiful painting in the world), a dozen jolly Steens, full of lasciviousness and coded morality, a dozen or more great Rembrandts, and Paulus Potter's huge Young Bull.
These are the products of an age when the Dutch were the richest people in the world — the Japanese of their time — and they expressed their wealth by painting, not scenes of classical grandeur, but homes and streets, faces and families.
The Mauritshuis galleries are made to match: comfortably sized rooms that let your eyes do the work, not your feet.
Beside the Mauritshuis is the Binnenhof, the homely Dutch Palace of Westminster.
Its cobbled courtyard and centrepiece — the thirteenth-century Knights' Hall — are open to the public.
On the far side, a narrow arch leads to the main shopping streets: Grote Markt, Spuistraat and the classy Noordeinde.
Dutch department stores tend to be disappointing — De Bijenkorf ('The Beehive') is the best — for this is another sphere of Dutch life in which smallness wins.
Antiques, art and bric-a-brac are strong points.
Somewhere along the way, call into a cheese shop and buy some sliced Gouda to sustain you; ask for something old and it will come hard, dry, salty and orange — a prince among cheeses and a revelation to anyone who thought Dutch cheese was that yellow soap they sell in wax balls.
To the north and west of the Binnenhof is the statelier part of The Hague.
Fine town houses of the eighteenth century, some of them now embassies, give way slowly to the more compact residences of the nineteenth, then to the woods and then the seaside suburb of Scheveningen.
Take the tram.
A century ago Scheveningen was a place of painters as much as of fishermen, and not far off the tram route you can still see exactly what the artists saw.
Down a little tunnel at the Mesdag museum, up a flight of stairs, and you are standing atop a dune looking at an enormous 360-degree panorama painted in 1881.
Bathing huts, a steam engine, cavalry on manoeuvre and beached fishing boats: it must have been lovely.
Today, thanks to overcrowding and overdevelopment, it is a bit of a nightmare in season, but on a bright day there is still no better place to eat chips with mayonnaise.
For exercise and air, go for a walk on the dunes.
The dikes get all the credit for keeping the water out, but most of the work is done by the natural wall of sand facing the sea.
The dunes are carefully conserved — the Dutch government boasts an inspectorate of dunes — and criss-crossed with paths.
When you get back to your starting point, reward yourself with a cocktail in the Kurhaus, an enormous hotel with a magnificent salon like something out of Death in Venice.
On the far side of The Hague, another 10-minute tram ride away, is Delft, the picture-postcard Dutch canal town.
Canal tours, blue-and-white china, narrow streets — if it were not also a university town it would be merely beautiful.
The students give it liveliness: motorbikes in the market square and a bit of noise in the bars.
Back in The Hague there is still enough art for the most voracious appetite, at the Prince Willem gallery and the Gemeentemuseum.
Andrew Carnegie's Peace Palace, filled with the gifts of the nations, is open for tours, and the woods where Hitler launched his V2s against London are there to be walked.
Or you might be better sitting down and ordering yourself a drink: the waiter may be gone some time.
Fact File Hook of Holland Ferries: Sealink (0233 47047) has two sailings a day in each direction from Harwich to the Hook, crossing time around seven hours; a 53-hour return for a car and two adults costs from £77.
Rotterdam Ferries: North Sea Ferries (0482 77177) has a daily sailing from Hull to Rotterdam: crossing time 14 hours.
A short break to The Hague, including a night's hotel accommodation and two nights on board ship, costs from £84 per person, not including car.
The Hague About 12 miles from the Hook of Holland.
Restaurants: Dutch cuisine is rich and creamy and comes in large portions; pork does not dominate as it does in West Germany.
Le Gentilhomme (464664) on the Noordeinde may sound French but is not.
Luden (601733) on Frederikstraat is stylish, Frenchified and rather good.
Trias (651175) on Het Plein is good value.
Don't forget Indonesian: Raden Ajoe (644592), Kantjil (654398) or the family-run Soeboer (883737).
It is best to book.
Vlissingen Ferries: Olau Line (0795 666666) operates two sailings a day from Sheerness to Vlissingen: crossing time is from seven hours.
A 53-hour return for a 4.5m car and two adults costs from £80.
Travel Update: Travel Top 10
By BRIAN CATHCART
Britain's 10 biggest tour operators, according to the number of holidays they are licensed to sell in the year ending March 1990: 1.
Thomson Holidays: Holidays 3.6 million.
Organisation also includes Horizon (511,000 holidays); Sky Tours (348,000) and Portland Holidays (323,000).
Each of these companies, if listed separately, would be in the top 10 biggest list in their own right.
2.
Intasun Holidays: Holidays 2.2 million.
International Leisure Group organisation also includes Select Holidays and Lancaster.
3.
Falcon Holidays: Holidays 896,000.
Falcon is the main operator of the Owners Abroad group which includes Tjaereborg.
Travel Update: Operatic packages
By BRIAN CATHCART
MGP (0825 84891) is offering a choice of weekend packages to see Luciano Pavarotti, the Italian opera singer, in concert in Munich, Frankfurt or Cologne.
Prices start at £199 for a weekend in Cologne including return flights, accommodation and a concert ticket.
Travel Update: Britrail sale
By BRIAN CATHCART
BRITISH Rail has launched a winter sale, with cut-price deals on long-distance Saver tickets.
A London to Edinburgh Saver, for example, has been reduced from £59 to £53.
Until 31 March, passengers travelling Standard (second) class can buy two sleeper tickets for the price of one: the offer applies to all services except those wholly within Scotland.
During the same period, the cost of putting a car on the train is cut to £19 single, £20 return.
Winter Motorail services operate from London to Aberdeen, Inverness and Penzance overnight and from London to Carlisle in the daytime.
The London to Edinburgh route has both day and night services.
Drivers and their passengers will pay normal fares, including Saver fares.
Railcard holders will be able to get further reductions of up to a third: children pay a flat fare of £1 single.
The Young Persons Railcard, valid for anyone aged between 16 and 24 — or for any full-time student -normally costs £15.
Until 4 November it is available for £10.
It provides discounts of up to one third on most fares and a 50 per cent discount on the Network Card for travel in London and the South-east.
The Weekend First scheme, which offers First class at a small supplement to Saver-class fares, has also been extended.
The £3 supplementary charge now applies to the whole journey, rather than to each train taken.
Available on Saturdays, Sundays and bank holidays, the concession is available on most InterCity trains in and out of London.
Look for special ‘Weekend First’ window labels and pay the supplement on the train.
Seat reservations cost no extra if you book in advance.
Travel Update: Planes to Spain
By BRIAN CATHCART
IF you book and pay for two Iberia (01-437 5622)‘Moneysaver’ tickets to Spain before 27 October, you will get a £25 discount on the second ticket.
The tickets must be for travel between 30 October and 14 December and between 2 January and 8 February.
The Moneysaver tickets are for travel from Heathrow, Manchester and Birmingham airports to a choice of 14 Spanish destinations.
For example, a Heathrow to Seville Moneysaver return costs from £97 to £209 per person, depending on departure date.
Travel Update: Sites of LA
By BRIAN CATHCART
ARCHITECTURAL Tours (01-267 6497) offers a 10-day tour to Los Angeles, ‘the architectural Mecca of the Western world’, to visit many of the buildings including those by Frank Lloyd Wright, Frank Gehry, Ray and Charles Eames, M Schindler, art galleries and museums — as well as the opportunity to visit several architects' practices.
The tour, from 14 to 23 November, costs £897 including return flight, transfers, accommodation (at the Biltmore Hotel and Westlake Plaza) and architectural guide.
Travel Update: Ephesus death
By BRIAN CATHCART
THE parents of 20-year-old Howard Ross-Bain, who died after he was hit by a car near the ruins of Ephesus in Turkey between 2pm and 4.30pm on Tuesday 16 August, wish to hear from any witnesses to the accident.
A visit to the Minotaur's lair: Poppy Holden is captivated by the layers of life on the island of Crete
By POPPY HOLDEN
THE WAITER in the Calypso bar at Chania carries a smiling blond baby on one hip, and my Cretan breakfast in one hand.
For about £2 there are tomatoes, olives, bread, cheese, a sausage, a boiled egg, a nectarine, and a bowl of yoghurt, honey and sultanas, orange juice and mountain herb tea.
All is fresh, local and utterly delicious.
The tea is made of malotira and, I'm sure, peppermint.
This herb has tiny leaves here, and is furiously strong: I made tea from some herbs I picked, put in a generous sprig of peppermint, and spat out the result in shock.
At the north-western tip of the island I picked malotira, on the long empty golden beach of Phalasarna, thinking from its exotic perfume that I was gathering the famous dittany of Crete which grows nowhere else but on this island.
I then bought some dittany in the fine, covered, nineteenth-century market.
Dittany when dried is greyer than malotira, although the leaves are similarly furry like so much of the vegetation, which needs to conserve moisture in the hot atmosphere, and the tea made from it has a muskier, more soothing quality.
In a nearby workshop a goldsmith is making earrings of long, dull-faceted Afghan lapis lazuli and old Indian gold beads.
There's a lot of lapis here, together with some very fine turquoise, coral and amber.
None of it is local stone: there is a tradition, perhaps connected with the Venetians or, later, the Turks, who successively occupied Crete till the late nineteenth century, of importing these stones and making jewellery.
The beauty in both cheap and expensive artefacts is remarkable: even in a shop that aims low, the most cynically tawdry confections of perspex and metal have charm and grace.
You can get anything made here.
In our Venetian palace the furniture and marble floors were made to measure in open-fronted workshops in the surrounding streets.
A few doors away I watched for half an hour through a film of sunlit flour motes as a small, soft mass of dough was miraculously spun and flung out to cover six-foot squares of sacking by two whirling, wizened old men.
A symbiotically mute pair then sectioned each of these into eight translucent oblongs, flouring them and stacking them delicately to sell on to the baklava and bougatsa makers round the corner.
Chania's visitors have a vast store of good, although not first-quality, leatherware to choose from.
The hide is uncoloured and is much better than you will find in Cairo, though not as supple as Florentine work.
You can buy a large well-sewn satchel-briefcase for £20, and a good strong pair of women's sandals for £4.
These are all stamped out with a huge press and dies like pastry cutters, in a dark vault in our street, by an old man who cuts from one skin first the back of a large rucksack, then a couple of handbag sides, and eventually bits of miniature hanging purses, like a thrifty housewife making tarts.
I happened upon the tannery when I walked east along the coast towards the beginning of the Akrotiri peninsula.
The impact of tourism stops pretty soon outside the medieval walls of the town, and the dwellings are like those of any impoverished fishing village in Cornwall, Sicily or Provence: low, simple buildings containing no more than the most primitive necessities, but opening on to the turquoise bay, with the Venetian walls on the western side and red cliffs to the east.
Walk on round to those cliffs and you come to what seem like utterly derelict sheds hanging on the edge of the precipice, stinking of goat: these are stacked with piles of skins for tanning, which goes on below in Brobdingnagian wooden barrels and enormous concrete troughs.
The extreme poverty of the whole concern is pathetic, and I wished I'd paid more for the things I bought so as to make life easier for these tanners who look just about ready to give up.
The energy and devotion given to making a living are remarkable.
On Sunday at 11pm, Mrs Biky's basement cavern was still humming with the sound of her sewing machine as she turned out ladies' dresses and blouses.
She's been working flat out every day since I came; from at least 8.30am till way past my bedtime.
To hire a car would be a mistake if you want to enjoy the White Mountains, which extend over the western end of the island, from immediately behind Chania and the north coast road to the edge of the south coast.
The roads are terrifyingly steep and on the map look like coils of intestines, which translated into reality become dizzying sets of hairpin bends, too narrow for two vehicles to pass in comfort at any speed.
The buses are cheap and excellent, the drivers are virtuosi, and cars give way to them, so it makes sense to use this facility and relax.
Having seen photographs of ancient Cretan coins portraying a labyrinth or maze, I was longing to see whether any trace of it survives at Knossos, a three-and-a-half-hour bus ride east along the coast road, just past Heraklion.
Here is the 3,500-year-old site where Minos, king of Crete, incarcerated the Minotaur — his dangerous half-man half-bull stepson.
Athenian youths had to be sent every three years to assuage the monster, and when Theseus, prince of Athens, grew old enough, he demanded to go and try to slay it.
Minos's daughter Ariadne fell in love with him and gave him a ball of string to unwind on his way to the creature's lair at the centre of the maze.
All he had to do was wind it up again to find the way out.
Theseus slew the Minotaur and with Ariadne set sail for home, stopping at Naxos, where, after a night of love, he slipped away at dawn without her.
There are lots of wonderful musical settings of her grief and rage at this point, notably one by Monteverdi.
I took a bus there, but found it hard to tell what the place might have been like.
Sir Arthur Evans bought the hill of ruins in 1900 and ‘reconstructed’ part of it according to his idea of what might have been.
The result is heavily dependent on the use of reinforced concrete, and although it looks impressive, it doesn't feel right.
If the pillars are really in the proper places, there is not a stone on the site long enough to act as a lintel, and to provide a basis for the stone-built superstructures which at present sit on Evans' concrete and iron supports.
There's now no trace of a labyrinth, though some shapes echo part of that on the coins.
It's tempting to wonder if Evans obliterated parts of it: certainly at least one seemingly obvious doorway has been walled up.
The hill feels peaceful in spite of tourists: it's surrounded by fragrant pine trees and deafeningly noisy with cicadas.
Even if I haven't seen the labyrinth, at least I've smelt and heard Ariadne's home landscape.
Back in Chania, the Calypso bar is filling with elderly Cretan men who click a lot: worry-beads clatter through their fiddling fingers, and they smack down counters on backgammon boards with ferocious violence.
An old gentleman enters, in a traditional blue and black costume, with knee-length white boots many times repainted.
His stumpy, yellowed silver moustache rides proudly over his camel-like sneer as he strides to the back of the bar, probably to renegotiate his olive and yoghurt contracts with the owner.
The waiter says this man used to live here until 15 years ago, and the bright boats bobbing on the undulating water of the main harbour would have been at his front door.
The five bells of the cathedral ring out a weirdly charming peal: perhaps some of the bells come from the foundry next door to the nineteenth-century cathedral.
The foundry operates in a former Turkish bathhouse roofed with nine ventilated domes, where, in deep gloom lit only from the dome vents, two teenage boys and an old woman produce all sizes of bells and ecclesiastical brassware.
FACT FILE Flights: Thomson is operating charter flights to Crete on Thursdays and Sundays until the end of November: seats booked through Vivair (01-636 5466), for example, cost from around £190 return.
Books: There are several excellent guides to Crete.
The Landscapes of Eastern Crete and Landscapes of Western Crete (Sunflower Books, £5.95 each) have good maps and plenty of interesting ideas for walks and car tours.
Also useful are The Rough Guide to Crete (Harrap-Columbus, £4.95), The Blue Guide to Crete (Black, £7.95) and Groc's Candid Guide to Crete (APP, £7.95).
Fly high on a wing and a prayer: Simon Calder gives 10 commandments for making the most of US unlimited airpasses
By SIMON CALDER
THE airpass holder who whinged to the Dallas check-in clerk that she had spent all day standing by for a flight out of one of America's less attractive airports was gently chastised.
‘Look lady, for what other people pay for a one-way ticket to Chicago, you can travel anywhere Delta flies for a month.’
Two of the largest US airlines, Delta and Northwest, offer the air bargain of the year: unlimited travel on their domestic networks for 30 days for $399, about £8 a day.
My itinerary was unambitious compared with those of some of my fellow standbys.
Judging by the number of young Germans I encountered, wanderlust has gone haywire.
They seem driven by a Teutonic determination to rack up as many airline meals as possible.
Just as Inter-railers traditionally take overnight express trains to get a night's sleep, so small teams of Germans are roaming North America, checking the schedules carefully for flights with catering or overnight trips which save on accommodation.
I took a meagre 22 flights.
Even so, at the official fares my trip would have cost more than $4,500.
Don't make firm plans: Your ticket bears a warning that you are ‘subject to removal if a confirmed passenger arrives before actual flight departure’.
This happens.
Your cousin in Chicago will not thank you if he spends hours waiting at the world's busiest airport while you're supernumerary in San Jose.
Once you've paid your $399, you are a ‘non-revenue passenger’, worth nothing to the airline.
You come to fear and loathe reserved passengers who turn up after the flight is supposed to have left, squeezing out standbys.
Given the forces of fate ranged against the standby passenger, the statistics of my trip were encouraging.
Of 22 chosen flights, I failed to get on only six and was carried on one of the next two flights.
You can minimise disappointment by calling the airline (toll-free) to check availability, and by being ready to switch at the last moment to a different, less popular destination.
Acquire a free spirit: You are at the mercy of check-in staff, late passengers and air-traffic control.
A party of Mormons making a pilgrimage to Salt Lake City or a hydraulics problem on a 737 can thwart the most carefully laid plans.
Go where the airline, if not the mood, will take you.
Be prepared to fly from A to B via Z: Delta's network is based on hubs, whereby waves of flights arrive simultaneously in Atlanta or Cincinatti, and take off an hour or so later.
This enables efficient connections, although airpass passengers are obliged to go on standby for each leg.
One consequence of this hub-and-spoke system is the maddening inability to fly direct between seemingly obvious routes.
Delta has no services from New York to Washington DC, so you have to go via Cincinatti.
To cover the 395 miles between Boston and Buffalo (for Niagara Falls), I was obliged to fly via Atlanta: a total distance of nearly 1,700 miles.
Take carry-on baggage only: If you register to travel on a flight, your bags will get on even if you don't.
At one stage my trousers were safely in San Diego while I was still in shorts in Albuquerque.
Travel alone: One person can travel faster than two.
I have found a seat on flights from way down in the ‘relegation zone’ on standby lists, simply because there was one space left and the couples above my name loyally refused to split up.
(The Cincinatti Corollary, as it is known, is to stay in the departure lounge until the aircraft leaves.
I was told one flight was full, and left the gate to mooch around the newsstands.
Later I found out that a standby wife had got halfway down the aisle before turning back, remorseful at abandoning her husband, leaving one empty seat — my seat, I brooded, as I waited for the next flight.)
Assume every flight will be late: British Rail is a model of good time-keeping in comparison with US airlines.
The shortest Delta flight is 21 miles between Miami and Fort Lauderdale; the longest is 2,212 from Orlando to Los Angeles.
Most were about 15 minutes late, some more than an hour.
Think small: Take full advantage of the small airlines affiliated to big carriers and open to airpass passengers.
Delta's partners hop around many of the more interesting parts of the USA, such as the Florida Keys or the national parks of the Rockies.
These 16-seat aircraft almost put the fun back in flying.
Being buffeted around the sky at 10,000 feet with an engine just inches from your ear is not the most comfortable way to fly, but it is more interesting than an anonymous 767.
Watch the weather: Every US newspaper devotes copious space to weather forecasts.
Thunderstorms will scupper the airline's schedules, and hence yours.
And if Portland is colder and wetter than Palm Beach, change your route and head for Florida.
Give up smoking: You can smoke only on flights of more than two hours, and soon smoking will be banned on all domestic flights.
Northwest bans smoking entirely within North America.
Most US airports ban smoking except in designated areas, usually far from the departure gate.
Don't overlook ground arrangements: Airports such as Washington National, a 50p subway ride from downtown, are rare.
Surface links between American airports and the cities they are supposed to serve are usually dire.
It is easy to spend more on taxi fares from airports than your airpass cost.
For example, Memphis airport is a $20 cab ride from the city.
There is no no bus service.
You solve this one by taking the Holiday Inn airport bus, buying a drink there to salve your conscience, and crossing the street to pick up a local bus.
You could follow my example and hitchhike out of Miami airport, but only if you're prepared to risk being picked up by a religious maniac, or dropped off in an impenetrable jungle of freeways close to the cocaine-dealing centre of America, or both.
FACT FILE Flights: Only Delta and Northwest offer unlimited travel airpasses.
Each costs $399 (about £250) and must be bought outside the USA.
You have to produce a return transatlantic ticket and your passport both when buying the airpass and when checking in for each flight.
Northwest is strongest in the Midwest and allows you to fly in and out of Canada.
Delta is good for the South and South-west and has a more interesting selection of commuter airlines.
If you are prepared to take fewer flights and welcome the security of confirmed flights, a fixed-route airpass may be best.
The regional airpasses offered by America West (01-839 9381) and USAir (0800-777333) are particularly good value.
Rail: Travellers with a fear of flying or an abhorrence of airline meals may prefer a 45-day unlimited rail pass, available from Amtrak (2 Cinnamon Row, Plantation Wharf, London SW11 3TW: 01-978 5222) for only $299 (about £185).
But American trains are infrequent and the network is patchy.
The giant, the witch and the weed: Legends cling to the dramatic coastal path of north Antrim, says John Forte
By JOHN FORTE
ALONG the north Antrim coastal path, you can admire the work of a giant, see the place where a witch turned a king's daughters into swans and sample the local delicacy, dulce, which resembles burnt tagliatelle but is in fact dried seaweed.
This is Ireland.
Not the Ireland beloved of the tourists who fill the pubs of the south-west, but the neglected northern coast, where a walker can sample some of Western Europe's most dramatic coastline, indulge in legends without recourse to a leprechaun, and on occasions enjoy the trip without bumping into a non-resident.
The path we followed is only a short section of the 560-mile Ulster Way, which takes in most of the province and requires a good three weeks to complete, but this section of the coastal path can be completed in a couple of days, though longer is highly recommended.
Probably the best place to start is Murlough Bay, reached by one of those narrow, winding roads that unnervingly dips out of sight so you wonder whether it continues or not.
The bay is a beautiful and tranquil enclave on a generally rugged coast.
Sea pinks cling to the lichen-covered rocks and huge beech trees, carved into oblique shapes by the wind, stand defiantly along the length of the bay and, to the south, on the slopes of Greenanmore where the kings of Dalriada had their summer residence.
The ruins of an ancient church stand near the pebble beach, which you may have to share with cows coming down for a paddle.
The water was a touch chilly for us to join in.
Just beyond the church is a track which leads back out of the bay and on towards the soaring cliffs of Fair Head.
From here, on a clear day, you can see right across the Moyle channel to Scotland, less than 13 miles away.
No wonder this part of Ireland felt a closer allegiance to Scotland than to the rest of Ireland over so many centuries.
Standing on these dramatic cliffs, the legends of the area seem quite plausible.
Below us is the spot where King Lir's second wife, a witch naturally, turned his two daughters into swans.
They swam for centuries in the sea below the cliffs, until the ringing of the first Christian bell changed them back into children and they drowned.
To get down to Ballycastle from here you have to return to the road, but before reaching the town you pass the well-preserved ruins of the Franciscan Bonamargy Friary, dating from about 1500.
It contains the massive coffins of several MacDonnell chiefs, a colourful family inextricably linked with this part of Antrim.
Ballycastle is one of the more attractive seaside towns, managing to avoid the excesses of other resorts, and there are no end of guest-houses if you want to break your walk or use the town as a base.
My English travelling companion was game to try the dulse seaweed, which is a speciality in Ballycastle, so I went into a little shop on the seafront.
‘Folk aren't eating it like they used to, owing to the radioactivity from Sellafield,’ the shopkeeper said.
He said that radioactivity from ‘across the water’ accumulated in the seaweed.
We also passed over the other Ballycastle delicacy, the rock-hard ‘yellow-man’, sweet as honeycomb, on account of dental rather than radioactive decay.
Further along, near the harbour, is a memorial to Marconi, who with his assistant, George Kemp, proved that wireless telegraphy was feasible by transmitting signals between Ballycastle and nearby Rathlin Island in 1898.
The walk follows a winding road out of Ballycastle for a short while, but it is worth branching off at the sign for Kinbane Castle.
Built by Colla MacDonnell in the sixteenth century, it clings to a narrow promontory, and although there is not much left of the castle itself, its magnificent position is worth the long haul back up the cliff path.
A couple of miles further on is the Carrick-a-rede rope bridge which, according to the tourist blurb, is ‘a tourist must — one of the famous things-to-do in Ireland’.
It is certainly popular, but is only a ‘must’ for those happy with a bouncy bridge of wooden planks held together with rope suspended 80 feet above the sea.
The bridge provides a link to a small island for the salmon fishermen and is erected in May and dismantled in September.
Nearby, the National Trust has an information centre, and there is a camping site.
From Ballintoy harbour, the path winds round the bottom of the cliffs to Whitepark Bay, a beautiful, curved sandy beach where oyster-catchers are common and fulmar petrels nest on the surrounding cliffs.
At the western end of the bay a few houses and Ireland's smallest church, measuring 12ft by 6ft, make up the picturesque hamlet of Partbraddan.
From here the path is grassy and it is an easy walk to the ruins of Dunseverick Castle, which in prehistoric times marked the northern end of Ireland's oldest road, from where the Celts crossed to and from Scotland.
Although only fragments remain, Dunseverick manages not to be outdone in the legend stakes; Conal Caernach who lived here is said to have witnessed the crucifixion of Christ while serving in the Roman army.
After Dunseverick, the path hugs the clifftop contours of Benbane Head.
This section is one of the most dramatic, weaving in and out of sheltered coves and exposed headlands.
As an appetiser to the spectacle approaching, the rocks begin to take on an unusually geometric shape, until on turning the jagged headland of Part na Spanaigh, the astonishing site of 40,000 mostly hexagonal stone columns comes into view.
The Giant's Causeway is hard to believe until you are standing on it.
Unlike most of the sights before, you are unlikely to be standing alone and I noticed that other visitors wandered round in disbelieving silence.
Maybe they were looking for traces of cement which would give the game away, but the excellent visitors' centre explains that building materials such as cement were not available when the giant, Finn McCool, built the causeway.
The visitors' centre also describes the pride of the Spanish Armada, the galleon Girona, which was wrecked off this coast in 1588 with the loss of over 1,000 lives.
Some of the magnificent treasure from the ship is now on display in the Ulster Museum in Belfast.
The walk's last leg follows the embankment of the world's first electric road-railway, which used to take Victorian tourists from Portrush to the Giant's Causeway but now covers only the easy descent into Portballintrae.
With Bushmills distillery just up the road, this is an apt place to celebrate the end of a great walk.
Or perhaps, bearing in mind some of the coastal path's legends and sights, it is a good place to start.
Fact File Flights: British Airways and British Midland operate seven flights a day from Heathrow to Belfast International Airport; for example BA early saver return £85 (01-897 4000).
Also flights from other major airports throughout the UK.
Car Hire: All major car hire companies at airport.
Accommodation: A choice of hotels, guest-houses, self-catering apartments and camping sites.
Guest-house prices from around £18/double.
Self-catering from £150 per week in high season.
Useful information: To tackle the Ulster Way, contact The Sports Council in Belfast (0232 381222).
The Oul' Lammas Fair in Ballycastle (28-9 August) is Ireland's oldest large fair, when you can dance in the streets at night.
Skiing: America versus the Alps: Transatlantic attractions of the Rocky Mountain heights
By CHRIS GILL
THIS MAY or may not turn out to be the winter when serious numbers of British skiiers forsake the Alps for the Rockies.
Nigel Lawson's achievements on exchange and interest rates could be the deciding factor.
Keen skiers are motivated to consider the transatlantic option by the notion that paying a bit more for their holiday and enduring a longer journey may cut out the uncertainty about snow conditions that hangs over European skiing.
The American question is inescapable.
If you pick up a handful of ordinary package brochures, America will be there: Crystal, Inghams, Intasun, Neilson and Thomson all have new or expanded American programmes.
My qualification for writing about skiing in the USA is unusual: I have never done it.
So I cannot claim to be an expert, but I have been considering spending my own money on America this year.
My deliberations (drawing on reports to The Good Skiing Guide) may sharpen the issues for others.
Snow apart, the main attractions of American skiing seem clear.
Like most American enterprises, ski resorts are run with an eagerness to please that is virtually unknown in Europe.
Ski patrols, lift attendants and restaurant staff are uniformly cheerful and helpful.
Runs are routinely groomed to standards that you find in Europe only when fundamental snow conditions are near perfection.
Information abounds — piste maps are dispensed beside lift queues, weather forecasts are posted everywhere and broadcast incessantly.
Other plus-points are civilised lift queues; efficient use of the lifts' capacity (four-seaters always carrying four skiers); good child-care facilities; accommodation which really can accommodate the advertised number of occupants; and ski instruction which is enthusiastic, fun and conducted by native English-speakers.
If your skiing is normally ruined by disrespect for British queueing principles or by surly shepherds doing winter duty as lift attendants, these matters will weigh heavily.
But for many people (me included) most are peripheral to holiday enjoyment.
On the other side, there are drawbacks.
The first is that the US ski areas are no match in scale or mountain drama for those of the Alps.
The Rocky Mountains have no shortage of rocky mountains, but the ones open to skiers are rounded, wooded hills.
With the conspicuous exception of Jackson Hole (in Wyoming), few ski areas reach more than 1,000m above resort level — a run-of-the-mill vertical drop in Europe, where 1,500m vertical is common and 2,000m not difficult to find.
In length of runs, equally, the Rockies are overshadowed by the 10km, 15km and 20km set-pieces of the Alps.
And the great piste-bashers' adventures of Europe — the Trois Vallees, Sella Ronda, Portes du Soleil — are not matched.
More important in some eyes is the difficulty of access.
Total journey time to a Rockies resort can exceed 24 hours if your itinerary involves connecting flights.
When combined with the need to acclimatise to life at 3,000m (at Breckenridge or Copper Mountain, for example), the after-effects of a journey like this can eat into precious holiday time.
Seekers after Alpine charm may or may not be content with the neo-Tyrolean style of Vail; they may or may not adapt to the Wild West clapboard houses of resuscitated mining towns such as Breckenridge.
But they will certainly be disappointed by the style of Rockies skiing above valley level.
Lunch on the mountain is the norm in many areas, but in most it is consumed in cafeterias designed more for efficiency than atmosphere, and even these are not immune from crowding.
(An additional consideration is that alcohol is often rationed on safety grounds, which many skiers of my acquaintance would judge to be an unjustifiable infringement of their liberty.)
And what about cost?
A package price of £700 for a fortnight is typical.
If I want to share the room with only one other person, rather than the three the brochure presumes, that will add around £300.
Like most packages to the States, it provides only the room (some also provide breakfast, but few provide other meals).
From The Good Skiing Guide reports I estimate that for those with a taste for Cabernet-Sauvignon, a budget of £30 a day would not be extravagant, adding another £400.
Lift pass £200.
Total, excluding tuition and equipment, £1,600.
For that I could have three separate weeks in Alpine chalets.
So where does this leave us or, more precisely, me?
Back where I started, with concerns about snow.
The Rockies are touted as having guaranteed snow.
In fact, of course, they offer no such thing: there have been lean years there, and even lean patches last winter.
So what we are talking about is probabilities, and unquantified ones at that.
With the mortgage payments in mind, I think I'll give the Alps one more chance.
Skiing Update: Feel the burn
By CHRIS GILL
VIDEO recording as an aid to skiing tuition is a well established idea and apparently a powerful one.
Powder Byrne, which offers off-piste skiing courses as add-ons to its hotel and chalet holidays in the Swiss Alps, is a confirmed user, and has hit on the bright idea of recycling some of last winter's footage as a low-key promotional device.
The unspoken message of the video they lend you is that you start the week head-planting in the snow and finish it bouncing imperturbably down virgin slopes.
The video is low on information, but high on evocation of the Alpine experience.
For more details contact Powder Byrne (01-223 0601).
Skiing Update: Trial smiles
By CHRIS GILL
THOSE who yearn for the smiling helpfulness of American skiing, but whose credit limits do not permit access to it, can console themselves with the news that the French resort of Les Arcs is launching a campaign to distinguish itself from competing resorts by encouraging staff to be unfailingly polite.
Before long, the famous pouting Gallic shrug may be but a fond memory.