

Public Reactions to the Media
Media analysts have generally concluded that British newspapers were highly partisan while British broadcasting was not.
We have argued that even broadcasting was biased towards the right wing and, separately, towards the government of the day.
But how did the public react?
If the bias we have detected in broadcasting was not obvious to media specialists we can hardly expect that it would have been obvious to the general public.
Even the much greater bias in the press may have seemed less obvious to them.
After all, they choose to buy their own newspapers and may be bound, psychologically, to defend their own chosen paper even if they accept that other people's papers are biased.
PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS OF MEDIA BIAS
In fact, our panel survey shows that public perceptions of media bias mirror expert opinion remarkably closely.
About a quarter thought the BBC was biased in its treatment of the Conservative government; rather less felt it was biased in its treatment of other parties.
Only one elector in seven thought ITV was biased in its treatment of the Conservatives and, again, rather less felt it was biased in its treatment of other parties.
In terms of the total percentage who alleged bias on television, those who actually watched BBC or ITV news were slightly more inclined to allege bias (Table 6.1).
(For corroborative figures see McGregor, Svennevig, and Ledger, 1989; Gunter, Svennevig, and Wober, 1986, p.82.)
Many of these perceptions of bias cancelled out however.
Some people alleged a bias towards the Conservatives, while others alleged a bias against the Conservatives, for example.
On balance, the public felt that bias on both channels favoured the Conservative party and the Conservative party alone.
perceptions of net bias on ITV were very small indeed, the numbers who  detected an anti-Conservative bias almost (but not quite) equalling those who saw a pro-Conservative bias.
Opinion was also divided about BBC bias but rather more people detected a pro-Conservative, anti-Labour bias on the BBC than on ITV.
Both BBC viewers and those who did not watch the BBC were agreed on balance that it was biased towards the Conservatives though those who actually watched it were more evenly divided on the direction of BBC bias than those who did not (Table 6.1 again).
(For corroborative figures see IBA, 1987, p. 17.)
In sharp contrast, three quarters of all newspaper readers said that the papers they had read on the day of the interview were biased in their coverage of the Conservative and Labour parties, though less than half said their papers gave biased coverage of the Alliance.
(For earlier findings on public perceptions of press bias see Kellner and Worcester, 1982; Butler and Stokes, 1969.)
The direction of bias varied from paper to paper.
Roughly four-fifths of Sun, Express, Mail , and Telegraph readers said their paper was biased towards the Conservatives, while a similar number of Mirror readers said their paper was biased against the Conservatives.
Somewhat fewer readers of the Star and the Guardian saw a Conservative versus Labour bias in their papers though, on balance, they thought the Star was pro-Conservative and the Guardian anti-Conservative.
A substantial minority of all paper readers, 42 per cent, thought their paper was biased in its treatment of the Alliance; and most of those who did detect bias thought their paper was biased against the Alliance.
Guardian readers were exceptional, however.
Over half the Guardian's readers thought the paper was biased towards the Alliance, while a mere 5 per cent thought it was biased against (Table 6.2).
WHO ALLEGED MEDIA BIAS?
Overall, readers of highbrow papers were less likely to allege bias in their own paper than readers of middlebrow or lowbrow papers but the differences were surprisingly small.
In the first fortnight of the campaign readers of highbrow and lowbrow papers detected the same amount of bias in coverage of the Conservatives and the Alliance, though highbrow readers found less bias in coverage of Labour.
As the campaign drew to a close, however, readers of lowbrow papers detected significantly more bias.
Readers of right-wing papers were well aware of their papers' pro-Conservative and anti-Labour bias though less unanimous about their papers' anti-Alliance bias.
Conversely those who read left-wing papers were largely agreed that they were anti-Conservative and pro-Labour but more divided on whether they had an anti-Alliance bias.
perceptions of both total and net bias increased during the campaign.
Readers of right-wing papers became more aware of their pro-Conservative, anti-Labour bias while readers of left-wing papers became more aware of their anti-Conservative, pro-Labour bias (Table 6.3).
Age, education, ideology, even strength of partisanship, had little influence over whether or not people perceived bias on television or in their papers.
Detection of bias was also unrelated to motivations for following the campaign or interest in politics during the campaign.
However, those who had expressed a general interest in politics during the parliamentary mid-term were more likely to see bias on the television and in their papers early in the campaign.
Towards the end of the campaign perceptions of bias became more widespread (Table 6.4).
Partisanship and allegations of bias 
The direction of alleged bias was related in a complex way to the critics' own partisanship.
people tended to see television as biased against their own party while they thought their paper was biased towards their own party.
They asserted, rather than denied, the bias in their own preferred papers.
No doubt they chose their paper partly with that bias in mind.
The correlation between being Conservative and alleging anti-Conservative bias on the BBC rose from 24 per cent in the first fortnight of the campaign to 32 per cent in the second.
There were almost identical correlations (and trends in correlations) between being Labour and alleging anti-Labour bias on the BBC.
And the same general pattern applied, in a much weaker form, to allegations about ITV.
By contrast, the correlation between being Conservative and alleging pro -Conservative bias in the respondent's own paper rose from 28 per cent in the first fortnight of the campaign to 39 per cent in the second.
The correlation between allegations of bias and newspapers' actual partisanship (as defined in the footnote to Table 6.5) was twice as strong, however.
perceptions of newspaper bias depended more on the partisanship of the paper being read than on the partisanship of the reader who read it.
(Table 6.5).
By a majority of 51 per cent at the start of the campaign, rising to 58 per cent at the end, Conservative partisans claimed that their paper was biased towards the Conservative party.
A smaller majority of Labour partisans asserted that their papers had a pro-Labour bias (22 per cent rising to 32 per cent).
Alliance partisans admitted that they read anti-Alliance papers but they claimed their papers were less pro-Conservative than Conservative partisans' papers and less pro-Labour than Labour partisans' papers (Table 6.6).
In complete contrast Conservative and Labour partisans claimed that television news, particularly BBC news, was biased against their party.
By the end of the campaign a majority of 12 per cent amongst Conservatives claimed the BBC was anti-Conservative and even more claimed it was pro-Labour.
At the same time a majority of 23 per cent of Labour partisans claimed the BBC was pro-Conservative and anti-Labour.
Labour partisans also claimed the BBC was anti-Alliance (Table 6.7).
We have to be careful to compare like with like when comparing different elements of the media.
Conservative and Labour partisans who disagreed so strongly about bias on the BBC were all viewing the same source.
But Conservative and Labour partisans who disagreed about the bias in their daily papers were reading different papers.
It is difficult to compare the perceptions of Labour and Conservative identifiers who read the same paper since the numbers in our sample who read any one paper were low and tended to be drawn predominantly from one party or another.
A breakdown is possible only for large-circulation papers like the Sun and the Mirror .
Amongst Mirror readers, there was no difference between Labour and Conservative identifiers in their perception of the Mirror's anti-Conservative bias, though Conservative Mirror readers were somewhat less likely to detect a pro-Labour bias.
Amongst Sun readers, there was little difference between Labour and Conservative identifiers in their perceptions of its anti-Labour, pro-Conservative bias.
Both Labour and Conservative   Sun readers increasingly alleged pro-Conservative bias in the Sun as the campaign drew to a close.
Another approach is to group together the readers of various right-wing papers and contrast them with readers of left-wing papers.
We can look at the relationship between perceptions of paper bias and the electors' own partisanship amongst ‘readers of right-wing papers’, though it has to be remembered that different Voters are Evaluating different individual papers.
Despite that problem, the results clearly confirm our conclusion that paper readers did not react against the partisanship of their papers, they gloried in it.
Conservatives who read right-wing papers saw more pro-Conservative bias in these papers than Labour identifiers who read the same set of right-wing papers.
Labour identifiers who read left-wing papers saw more pro-Labour bias in these papers than Conservatives who read the same set of papers (Table 6.8).
In partisan terms, people reacted against television news, alleging antagonistic bias; but they reacted Very differently towards the press.
Ultimately, of course, those who find press bias offensive can change their newspaper, but the BBC is collective property and ‘exit’ is an inappropriate response.
PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS OF MEDIA USEFULNESS
In the week after the election we asked our panel to look back Over the whole campaign and tell us how useful they had found television, the press, and other sources for:(1) helping decide what party leaders and personalities were really like;(2) keeping them informed about the issues; and (3) helping them decide    how to vote.
We asked respondents to assess the usefulness of each source for each purpose by giving it a ‘mark out of ten’.
Across nine sources and three purposes the Average mark awarded was 5.1, almost exactly half marks.
‘Television generally’ scored best with an average of 6.0, closely followed by BBC-TV news at 5.7 and ITV news at 5.5.
Newspapers were not far behind with an Average score of 5.3. party Election Broadcasts on TV and  radio scored 5.1.
BBC Radio news scored 5.0 and Commercial Radio news 4.4. party leaflets came bottom with 4.0 while conversations with family, friends, and acquaintances scored 4.8, which was better than party leaflets or Commercial Radio but worse than the press or television.
Gunter, Svennevig and Wober (1986, p. 100), in their study of the 1983 election, also found that the public rated television the most useful, followed by the press, and then by personal conversations and radio news.
personal conversations are not independent of media news, however, since their content often consists of a review of information and opinion originally derived from the press or television.
(See McLeod et al .,
1979, for some empirical evidence on the content of personal conversations.)
Taking the nine sources together, they scored best on informing electors about the issues (5.7), slightly less well on informing them about personalities (5.4), and Very much worse on helping them decide how to Vote (4.1).
Every one of the nine sources was rated best for information on the issues and worst for helping people decide how to vote.
Moreover, the spread of scores was greatest on issue-information and least on vote-guidance.
Comparing television with the press, for example, the public rated television a full 1.0 marks better than the press for providing issue-information, and 0.7 marks better on providing leader-information, but only 0.3 marks better for helping viewers and readers decide how to vote (Table 6.9).
In Chapter 4 we recalled the well-established view that the British electorate came to rely more on television than the press from the late 1950s or early 1960s onwards.
Our present findings qualify that conclusion.
They suggest that in 1987 British electors relied much more heavily on television than the press for information, but only a little more for vote-guidance.
There is some corroboration for our conclusion in previous research, however: at the 1983 election Gunter, Svennevig and Wober (1986, p. 119) found that ‘whilst television clearly emerged from among various sources of information about politics as the major source, it seemed to be   relatively less important in the decision-making process of which way to vote’.
It may be a surprise to find that television enjoyed its greatest competitive advantage on issue-information.
Surely television is the medium for getting to know personalities, but the press is the medium for a detailed understanding of the issues?
Surely the detailed issue coverage in the Guardian and The Times must be superior to the necessarily brief and superficial coverage of issues on television? perhaps that is so; but Very few British newspaper readers read papers like the Guardian and The Times ; most read tabloids such as the Sun , the Star , the Mirror , the Express , or the Mail .
Against that competition it is not altogether surprising that British newspaper readers found better issue coverage on British television.
Our image of the typical newspaper reader in Britain has to be that of someone reading a tabloid, not a highbrow quality paper.
WHO FOUND THE MEDIA USEFUL?
Some people found the media more useful than others.
We used multiple regressions to gauge the influence upon media usefulness-ratings of: political interest and discussion, different motivations for following the campaign, social and political background factors, perceptions of bias, and the intellectual weight of the press.
ln addition we used voters' degree of preference for their first-choice party (over their second choice) as yet another potential influence upon their ratings of the media's usefulness.
The main influences on usefulness-ratings were people's interest in politics and their motivations for following the campaign.
Their degree of preference for one party Over others had an important influence upon the usefulness-ratings they gave the media for helping them decide how to Vote (those with clear preferences found the media less useful for that purpose) but had little or no influence on other aspects of usefulness-ratings.
Surprisingly, perceptions of bias never had a significant impact on usefulness-ratings.
The factors influencing ratings given to television for providing information on personalities and issues were almost identical to each other.
for both purposes, television scored significantly  higher amongst those who found politics interesting at the end of the campaign, amongst information-seekers, and amongst those who read lowbrow tabloids.
With minor variations the same factors influenced their ratings of both BBC and ITV.
But the factors influencing ratings given to television for helping people decide how to Vote were different.
Once again, motivations were a key factor but it was vote-guidance seekers, not information seekers, who now rated television most highly.
Since that showed a degree of consistency in attitudes, it was not entirely unexpected.
More surprising was the relationship with political interest.
Television scored best on helping people decide how to Vote if they found politics interesting during the campaign but had lacked a general interest in politics in the mid-term.
Television therefore helped make up the minds of those who were newly interested in politics, or unusually interested in politics, interested in the election campaign but not very interested in politics more generally.
Ratings of radio news were less predictable than ratings of television but they too were influenced by recent political interest, motivations for following the campaign, and degree of party preference.
Once again, perceptions of bias had no influence.
Similar factors explain newspaper ratings also.
Those who found politics interesting in the campaign but had not been interested in politics a year earlier gave the press high ratings for helping them decide how to vote.
Vote-guidance seekers found both the press and television specially useful for making up their mind how to vote.
But information seekers did not rate the press, unlike television, particularly highly for providing information.
Conversely, reinforcement seekers found the press, unlike television, specially useful, at least for providing information about personalities.
The most surprising influence on press ratings is, however, the one that is not there.
Multiple regression analysis suggests that readers did not find the highbrow press significantly more useful than the lowbrow press for any purpose: reading a highbrow paper had no influence in the multiple regressions for newspaper ‘usefulness’(Table 6.10).
Those who read highbrow papers found their papers no more useful for helping them decide how to vote or for revealing politicians' personalities, and only a little more useful for   explaining political issues.
Reading the highbrow press clearly made readers somewhat disdainful towards television news and party Election Broadcasts, but not much more enthusiastic about the press.
Of course, different kinds of people read different papers.
Those who read the highbrow press would probably have found the lowbrow tabloids woefully inadequate, but those who read the tabloids would probably have found the highbrow press too complex, long-winded, repetitious, waffling, and boring to be useful.
Our survey shows that highbrow readers rated their papers no more useful for them than the lowbrow papers were for their readers (Table 6.11).
By comparing the usefulness-ratings each respondent gave to television and the press we can see how many people found television more useful than the press, how many found the press more useful than television, and how many found them equally useful.
Given that usefulness was rated on an eleven-point scale   (0 to 10) we might expect that relatively few would rate television and the press exactly equal.
Alternatively, we might feel that people who took care to give different media sources exactly the same rating on an eleven-point scale were indicating quite strongly that they found them equally useful.
By a majority of 56 per cent to 22 per cent, citizens found television more useful than the press for providing issue-information (a further 22 per cent found them equally useful).
By a smaller majority of 48 per cent to 30 per cent, they found tele-Vision more useful than the press for providing information about party leaders (with 22 per cent , once again , rating the two sources equally useful).
But on helping them decide how to vote, opinion was much more evenly divided: 36 per cent preferred television, 24 per cent the press, and a remarkable 40 per cent said the two sources were equally useful (Table 6.12).
For providing issue-information, persistent readers of the Sun or Star preferred television to the press by 67 per cent to 12 per cent: a majority of 55 per cent .
Sun/Star readers' preference for   television as a source of issue-information was just as great as that of people who did not read any paper regularly.
Next came Mirror readers, who preferred television to the press by a majority of 35 per cent, and Express/Mail readers, who preferred television by a majority of 25 per cent .
Telegraph/Times readers were more ambivalent, however, and our small sample of Guardian readers preferred the press by a big majority.
On balance, people also preferred television rather than the press as a source of information about political leaders.
But despite its video pictorial qualities, and its much vaunted ‘personal’ contact with party leaders, television's advantage over the press in giving information about leaders was less than its advantage on issue-information.
Perhaps television was just too obsequious towards leaders to be revealing.
Overall a majority of 34 per cent preferred television for issue-information, while a majority of only 18 per cent preferred television for information about leaders.
Those who did not read a particular paper regularly, and those who read the Sun or Star , showed a clear preference for television on leader-information; but readers of other papers were divided on whether the press or television was best.
When it came to deciding how to Vote however, the most frequent response was that television and the press were equally useful.
people who were not regular paper readers relied more on television, while Guardian readers relied more on the press; but a plurality of every other paper's readers said they found press and television equally useful.
So amongst tabloid readers generally, but especially amongst Sun/Star readers, there was a dramatic difference between their overwhelming preference for television as a source of information and their reliance upon both press and television for helping them decide how to vote.
We might have expected that people would give particularly low ratings to sources they described as biased but there was little evidence of any such reaction.
Most people thought their newspapers were biased and very few thought ITV news was biased.
Yet newspapers and PEBs scored only marginally lower than ITV news on usefulness.
More thought BBC-TV news was biased yet it scored marginally higher than ITV news on all three aspects of usefulness.
At the individual level, too, those who perceived bias on television news rated it only very slightly less useful than those who did not, while those who perceived bias in their papers rated their papers slightly more useful than those who did not (Table 6.13).
perceptions of media bias never proved statistically significant in any of our multiple regressions predicting usefulness-ratings.
WHO FOUND ALTERNATIVES TO MASS MEDIA NEWS USEFUL?
Party Election Broadcasts (PEBs) at election-time and the equivalent Party Political Broadcasts (PPBs) at non-election times are one method by which broadcasting attempts to achieve balance and impartiality between the parties.
The parties themselves control the content.
In one sense they are the British equivalent of political advertising on American television ‘but they differ from such advertising in three very important ways: first, PFB broadcasting is free (although the parties have to bear at least some of the production costs — indeed, all of the production costs if they wish to use private production facilities); second, the number of PEB broadcasts is fixed by agreement between broadcasters and the parties to reflect (roughly) the current popular standing of the parties (in 1987 Labour, the Liberal-SDP Alliance, and the Conservatives got exactly equal time for PEBs while other parties received very much less); third, the broadcasters have insisted, against the politicians’ wishes, that PEBs be short programmes typically ten minutes long, rather than high-impact adverts of perhaps twenty or thirty seconds' duration.
While the politicians see PEBs as a device for party propaganda, the  broadcasters see PEBs as a platform for parties to inform the electorate by stating their case rather than chanting their slogans.
Our panel rated PEBs much lower than the press or television news for providing information on issues, but similar to the press for providing information on leaders, and close behind the press and television news for helping them decide how to vote.
Wober (1989a) presents evidence to suggest that electors find mid-term PPBs, especially opposition PPBs, much more useful than PEBs during the campaign.
During the final campaign, voters hardly need such contrived devices as PEBs to find out about the issues and personalities in party debate ‘but during the mid-term there is so much concentration on government actions and personalities that PPBs play a much more significant role in publicizing opposition policies and personalities.
At all times, electors find PPBs or PEBs very much more useful than party leaflets.
The most predictable usefulness ratings were those for PEBs.
Those with a recent interest in politics, who found the election interesting but did not have a general interest in politics at other times, gave PEBs high ratings for usefulness on leaders, issues, and voting choice.
The same people also found party leaflets particularly useful.
Lowbrow tabloid readers gave PEBs high ratings for all three purposes.
Reinforcement seekers gave PEBs high ratings for providing information about party leaders while vote-guidance seekers gave both PEBs and party leaflets high ratings on issues and voting choice.
Young voters found party leaflets more useful than older voters (Table 6.14).
Those who found the election campaign interesting gave personal conversations high ratings for all purposes.
Information seekers found personal conversations useful for gaining information about leaders and issues.
Vote-guidance seekers, and those who lacked strong preferences, found personal conversations useful in helping them decide how to vote.
people who discussed politics more during the campaign gave personal conversations a somewhat higher rating for providing information on the issues, but not for other purposes.
Indeed, frequency of discussion had remarkably little influence on usefulness-ratings for personal conversations, less influence than motivations, for example.
Clearly, quantity did not necessarily imply quality (Table 6.15).
CONCLUSIONS
Academic analysts are unanimous that the British press is highly partisan, even if it is less so than it was in the last century and even though proprietors are strongly profit-motivated.
It seems to have become more stridently partisan in the 1970s and 1980s than it was in the 1960s.
Three-quarters of all newspaper readers in our panel agreed that the papers they had read on the day of the interview were biased in their coverage of the Conservative and Labour parties, though less than half said their papers gave biased coverage of the Alliance.
Tabloid readers were more likely to allege bias than highbrow readers, particularly in the closing stages of the campaign, though differences between them were initially quite small.
On balance, newspaper readers agreed with academic analysts about the direction of bias.
In contrast, political scientists have usually claimed that television news is unbiased (though sociologists have been more sceptical).
Our content analysis of television during the election campaign seems to suggest that television was biased towards the right wing and, separately, towards the government of the day.
Our survey panel shows that about a quarter of the electorate thought BBC-TV news was biased in its treatment of the Conservative government, though rather less felt it was biased in its treatment of other parties.
Only one in seven thought ITV news was biased in its treatment of the Conservatives and, again, rather less felt it was biased in its treatment of other parties.
On balance, people felt the bias on both channels favoured the Conservative party and the Conservative party alone.
Age, education, ideology, even strength of partisanship, had little influence on perceptions of bias on television or in the press.
perceptions of bias were also unrelated to motivations for following the campaign or interest in politics during the campaign itself.
However, those who had expressed a more general interest in politics during the parliamentary mid-term were more likely to allege bias on television and in their papers during the campaign.
The direction of alleged bias was influenced in a complex way by the critics’ own partisanship.
People tended to see television as biased against their own party while they thought their paper was biased towards their own party.
No doubt they chose their  paper partly with that bias in mind while they felt that television bias was being inflicted upon them against their will.
The correlation between being Conservative and alleging anti -Conservative bias on BBC-TV rose from 24 per cent in the first fortnight of the campaign to 32 per cent in the second.
By contrast, the correlation between voters being Conservative and alleging pro -Conservative bias in their newspaper rose from 28 per cent in the first fortnight of the campaign to 39 per cent in the second.
perceptions of newspaper bias depended more, however, on the partisanship of the paper being read than on the partisanship of the reader who read it.
None the less, Conservatives who read right-wing papers saw more pro-Conservative bias in these papers than Labour identifiers who read the same set of right-wing papers.
We might have expected that those who alleged bias on television or in their paper would be reluctant to describe that source as useful but there was little evidence of any such reaction.
Voters' assessments of media usefulness varied more with their political interest, and in a complex way.
Television, newspapers, PEBs, party leaflets, and personal conversations were all most useful in helping people decide how to vote if they found politics interesting during the campaign but had lacked a more general interest in politics in the mid-term.
The media helped to make up the minds of those who were newly interested in politics, or unusually interested in politics, interested in the election but not very interested in politics generally.
People rated television the most useful source of information about party leaders and political issues, and the most helpful source for making up their minds how to vote.
BBC-TV news scored best, followed by ITV news, newspapers, PEBs, personal conversations ‘and lastly radio news.
(For most listeners, radio news was not the high-quality, in-depth BBC Radio 4 news, but BBC Radios 1 and 2 news inserts, or Commercial Radio news.)
Every one of these nine sources was rated better for providing information than for helping people decide how to vote.
Although the public preferred television to the press for all purposes, they preferred television most of all for providing information about the issues.
For deciding how to vote, however, only a small plurality preferred television and 40 per cent of voters said they found television and the press equally useful.
Readers of the tabloid press overwhelmingly preferred television rather than the press as an information source but, like other voters, they had a relatively slight preference for television rather than the press for helping them decide how to vote.
Surprisingly, readers of the highbrow press found their papers scarcely any more useful than readers of the lowbrow press.
Reading the highbrow press made people somewhat disdainful towards television, but no more enthusiastic about the press.
Conversely, the reason why readers of the lowbrow press had such strong preferences for television news was not that they were particularly dissatisified with their papers but that they were particularly enthusiastic about the quality of television.
Media Influence on Perceptions of Politics 
The apparently simple question ‘Does the media influence voters?’ is too general to be meaningful.
At the very least it prompts the response ‘What elements of the media?
What influence?’
We need to distinguish between different media sources ‘and also between the media's ability to inform and its ability to persuade.
Different elements of the media perform different functions.
From what we know about their audience and their content, we would expect major differences between the influence of television and the influence of the press, and major differences also between the influence of highbrow and lowbrow sources.
If they have any influence at all, different media sources should influence their audiences in different ways.
THE EXPECTED INFLUENCE OF TELEVISION
Television news has three significant characteristics that affect its ability to influence the electorate.
First, it is pervasive.
Nearly everyone watches television news regularly.
Second, it is relatively undifferentiated.
Three-Quarters of the 1987 electorate said they regularly watched both BBC-TV and ITV news.
In addition, our analysis of television news content showed that BBC. and ITV news are very similar anyway.
Third, it is relatively unbiased.
Despite our finding that television news is biased, there is no doubt that it is less biased than the press, and that such bias as there is on television is in the same direction on both BBC and ITV.
Given those characteristics we should not expect BBC and ITV viewers to be influenced in different ways.
Whatever influence television news has on voters, it would be likely to affect all, or nearly all voters.
It would not affect different audiences in different ways.
If we seek evidence of television's influence, we  should correlate general trends in public opinion with trends in the content of television news.
Moreover, despite its failings, British television is still very much an information medium rather than a propaganda medium.
So we should expect it to have a stronger influence on public information and perceptions than on public attitudes and choices.
THE EXPECTED INFLUENCE OF THE PRESS
The press is entirely different.
First, it is not so pervasive.
Second, it is highly differentiated.
While most people regularly watch both BBC and ITV news, few read more than one morning newspaper.
Indeed there are so many newspapers in contrast to the two television networks, that relatively few voters (as a percentage) read even the best-selling paper.
In addition, analyses of press coverage show that their content varies enormously.
Third, the press is partisan, biased, and proud of it.
The press always has been a medium of propaganda as well as a medium of information.
Particular papers vary in the degree to which they emphasize propaganda rather than information, and this emphasis also varies through time.
In the final 1987 election campaign the press became more partisan and its emphasis on propaganda increased.
The tabloids in particular carried relatively little in-depth information but a lot of propaganda.
So we should expect readers of different papers to be influenced in different directions depending upon the content of their own particular papers.
We should expect the mass-selling tabloid press to have a stronger influence on public attitudes and choices than on public information and perceptions.
Highbrow papers might be more like television, primarily affecting their readers’ information and perceptions.
PERCEPTIONS AND ATTITUDES
At first it seems that we can draw a sharp distinction between perceptions and attitudes.
Attitudes involve preferences, choices, evaluations, approval, or disapproval, while perceptions do not.
Perceptions are simply a vision of political realities.
Whether people like or dislike what they see is a matter of attitudes, not  perceptions.
Perceptions need not be strictly accurate.
Different people may have different perceptions of politics.
Some may be more aware, more knowledgeable, than others.
Some may be misinformed because they misread their newspaper, or because their paper prints inaccurate information, or even because they do not believe what is printed in their paper.
Perceptions are not the same thing as knowledge, but they are what the holder of the perception believes to be knowledge.
Perceptions contain no element of approval or disapproval though they may trigger a reaction in terms of approval.
When someone notices the Chancellor's announcement of a tax cut that is a perception; when they approve or disapprove, that is an attitude.
Unfortunately this clear conceptual distinction between perceptions and attitudes is unrealistic.
In practice there is a continuum ranging from pure value-free perceptions at one end to pure choice at the other.
Towards the pure perception end of the spectrum is awareness of opinion polls, awareness of local constituency candidates, awareness of campaign activities by party leaders, and awareness of the parties' campaign themes.
At the other extreme, the pure choice end of the spectrum, are explicit statements of choice, preference, approval, or disapproval: which party people think is best on economic matters for themselves and their families, for Britain as a whole, or for the unemployed; their evaluations of how well each party has handled issues like unemployment, inflation, defence, health, education, and social services; how warm they feel towards parties and their leaders; whether the parties should change their leaders or their policies, or both; and, last but not least, voting preferences.
In the middle of the spectrum, however, are perceptions with more than a hint of approval or disapproval implicit in them: perceptions of each party's electoral chances; perceptions of whether national economic performance and prospects are improving or declining; and images of the parties and party leaders.
It is not at all obvious whether viewing party leaders as ‘energetic’ or ‘decisive’is a perception or an attitude.
To a foreign correspondent covering the British election for a foreign audience, whether a party leader appears energetic or decisive is simply a matter of objective reporting: a perception.
To British voters, especially those who identify strongly with a political party, ‘energetic’ or ‘decisive’probably imply approval: for them, images are at the margin between perceptions and attitudes.
Media influence on perceptions is likely to depend upon whether they are at the pure perception end of the spectrum or at the margin between perceptions and attitudes.
Sheer information can be boosted Quickly by a media blitz, or by individuals' personal information-gathering resources — their education, their interest and involvement with politics, and their use of information-rich highbrow news sources.
By contrast, perceptions that verge on being attitudes are likely to be more resistant to change and more dependent upon individuals' partisan backgrounds — their pre-existing sense of party identification, and their use of partisan news sources such as right-wing (or leftwing) papers.
This chapter uses two techniques to investigate media influence.
To assess the impact of pervasive and consensual television news we can correlate trends in television news content and trends in overall public perceptions.
To assess the impact of more differentiated media sources we can look for differences between their different audiences: differences between readers of highbrow or lowbrow papers, for example, or between readers of right-wing and left-wing papers.
THE IMPACT OF A CHANGING TELEVISION CONSENSUS
Our analysis of television news content in Chapter 4 showed that controversy reached a peak on television in the third week of the campaign.
Both BBC-TV and ITV, both early and main evening news, all followed the same trend: they all screened more presentation than controversy until the third week; then they screened between two and four times as much controversy as presentation in the third week, before reverting to more presentation at the end of the campaign.
On television the campaign very clearly reached a climax in the third week (25–9 May).
But all that controversy on television failed to excite the public.
The frequency of political discussions rose sharply between the pre-campaign week and the final campaign, but then it continued to rise steadily throughout the campaign to peak at the very end.
The number of voters who found what was happening in politics ‘very interesting’ dropped sharply between our pre-campaign  week (when Thatcher was in Moscow and Kinnock newly returned from Washington) and the campaign itself.
During the final campaign interest sagged, if anything, though there was really very little trend.
So the tremendous burst of controversy in the third week of television's campaign coverage failed to stimulate either grass-roots discussion or public interest.
ln that respect television had no influence (Table 7.1).
One of the classic findings of media research in British election campaigns is Trenaman and McQuail's (1961) assertion that ‘the evidence strongly suggests that people think about what they are told…but at no level do they think what they are told’.
This is usually called the ‘agenda-setting function of the media’.
(The term ‘agenda-setting’ was popularized by McCombs and Shaw, 1972; Shaw and McCombs, 1977; though the idea had been around since at least Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet, 1944.
For a producers' rather than a consumers' perspective on agendasetting see Hetherington, 1985; Blumler and Gurevitch, 1986; Blumler, Gurevitch, and Nossiter, 1986 and 1989.)
This agenda-setting thesis is very plausible and usually treated as an established law of social science in introductory textbooks, though much more sceptically in research reports.
But, as McQuail (1987, pp. 275–6) himself has recently pointed out, most of the accumulated evidence is inconclusive and the media-dominated agenda-setting hypothesis has ‘the status of a plausible but unproven idea’.
Studies by McLeod, Becker, and Byrnes (1974) and Iyengar and Kinder (1987), for example, suggest that the media set the agenda for only a part of their audience: those highly reliant on a particular news source, those low in political involvement and information, and those who are relatively inattentive to the news generally — in short , those who are marginal to politics.
How did the trends in television's news agenda compare with trends in the electorate's agenda in 1987?
Chapter 4 showed that television's issue agenda was generally biased towards security issues when compared with the electorate's own agenda.
But perhaps television edged closer to the public, or the public edged closer to television, as the campaign progressed?
Unemployment came top of the list of issues that the public thought the parties ‘should be’ talking about (see Table 7.2).
Throughout the first two weeks of the campaign almost twothirds of our panel cited unemployment as the ‘main issue’ that should be discussed but it got little coverage on television news.
In the first week of the campaign over half our panel felt Labour was addressing the issue, but under one-third thought that about the Alliance and only one-fifth about the Conservative party.
According to our panel all three parties, including Labour, seemed to drift away from the issue as the campaign progressed.
So neither television nor the parties moved closer to the electorate on unemployment: they moved away from the electorate, increasingly avoiding an issue the public wanted to discuss.
Did the electorate follow the parties and the media?
Our panel gave more weight to unemployment throughout the final campaign than they had done in the Pre-Campaign wave.
They never wavered in describing the issue as extremely important for their voting decision: 64 per cent called it extremely important in the first week and 63 per cent in the last.
On the other hand, when television coverage of unemployment almost ceased in the third week, public demand for political debate on the issue also dropped slightly, from 66 per cent to 56 per cent, and it remained at this new lower level thereafter.
So on unemployment there is some evidence of a slight tendency for the public to follow the lead of the parties and the media but it was a very slight adjustment of public attitudes.
Inflation was the scourge of the mid-1970s but not the mid-1980s.
Throughout the campaign less than 3 per cent of voters said it was the main issue that should be discussed.
Very few television news items, less than 1 per cent, focused on inflation.
Labour and the Alliance seemed to ignore the issue.
At the start of the campaign people thought it was the main issue being stressed by the Conservatives, but they soon changed their minds.
On inflation, the Conservative Party seemed to fall into line with television, the other parties, and the public.
Health, education, and social services were issues that came second only to unemployment in terms of public priorities.
In terms of professed influence on their voting decisions, people rated them far more important even than unemployment.
Yet television paid relatively little attention to them.
Fully 77 per cent of our panel throughout the campaign rated these issues as ‘extremely important’ for their voting choice, but television news gave them less coverage than defence, though more than unemployment and inflation.
On these issues the parties moved towards the concerns of the electorate.
At the start only 14 per cent of our panel reported Labour stressing these issues, but the figure rose to 20 per cent in the fourth week and 32 per cent in the fifth as Labour sought to divert attention away from defence and to move on from unemployment, which directly affected only a small minority, to  education and especially the National Health Service, which directly affected the vast majority of the electorate.
According to our panel, the Alliance also switched towards a greater emphasis on health, education, and social services.
The number of voters who cited social issues as their top priority ‘or who claimed such issues were ‘extremely important’ to their voting decision, hardly varied at all throughout the campaign.
So on health, education, and social services there is no evidence that the public followed an agenda laid down by television or the parties.
Quite the opposite.
The enormous importance people attached to these issues seems eventually to have encouraged the parties to address them though it failed to encourage very much television coverage.
On social issues the public's agenda influenced the party agenda if not the television agenda.
During our Pre-Campaign Wave in March defence was the main issue on television, the main issue stressed by the Conservative Party, and second only to unemployment as Labour's main issue.
It could hardly have been otherwise when Thatcher and Kinnock were visiting Moscow and Washington to discuss Britain's defence policy.
None the less, even in that week only 39 per cent of the electorate rated it ‘extremely important’ and a mere 7 per cent said it was the main issue that ‘should be’discussed by the parties.
In the first week of the campaign only 5 per cent of television's election news focused on defence, only 3 per cent of the electorate thought the parties were stressing the issue, and only 3 per cent wished them to do so.
The importance attached to every other issue rose sharply when the campaign opened but the importance attached to defence hardly changed.
But in the second week television coverage of defence doubled to 12 per cent, and in the third week it doubled again to 26 per cent before almost disappearing from the bulletins in the fourth and fifth weeks.
The number of voters who felt the Conservative Party was stressing defence as its main theme rose from 3 per cent in the first week to 39 per cent in the third and 46 per cent by the end of the campaign.
By the third week around 17 per cent thought Labour and the Alliance were also concentrating on defence.
If party rhetoric and television coverage ever set the public's agenda, they should have done so on defence.
The switch from  almost ignoring the issue in the first week to so much concentration in the third should have had some effect upon the public.
And it did.
But how much?
The number of voters citing defence as the main issue they wished to see discussed by the parties rose from 3 per cent at the start of the campaign to only 11 per cent in the third week and then stabilized at that level.
The number who cited defence as ‘extremely important’ for their voting decision rose from 42 per cent at the start to only 49 per cent in the third week and then it also stabilized at that level.
So we can Quantify the agenda-setting power of television and the parties during the campaign.
By their enormous concentration on defence they raised the issue by just 8 per cent in terms of public priorities and by just 7 per cent in terms of electoral significance.
It took an enormous amount of television coverage to produce only a small change in the public agenda (Table 7.2).
Towards the end of the campaign television focused more upon the two-party Labour versus Conservative battle and public expectations about Alliance performance declined.
Did television   marginalize the Alliance and thereby contribute to its failure?
Television certainly did marginalize the Alliance, but there is no evidence that the bias in television coverage influenced the expectations of the electorate.
Indeed the expectations of the electorate closely followed their awareness of opinion poll findings and ran ahead of the trends in television bias.
In the first week of the campaign only 44 per cent of the public felt Labour was a clear second in the opinion polls and as many as 19 per cent said the Alliance was running second.
But perceptions that the Alliance was running second in the polls collapsed in the second week; and voters' assessment of Alliance chances of winning a majority or even holding the balance of power dropped sharply in the third week; while television's sharp switch to focus on the two-Party Labour versus Conservative battle occurred in the fourth week.
This time sequence is conclusive.
Television bias was not the cause of declining expectations of Alliance success: it was a consequence of declining expectations amongst both journalists and the public at large(Table 7.3).
Relative coverage of Labour and Conservative was always biased towards the Conservative government but the degree of bias increased sharply (it tripled) in the fourth week of the campaign.
Yet public perceptions of Conservative chances of victory sank to a minimum in that fourth week and assessments of Labour chances reached a peak then.
(Though Conservative chances were always rated much higher than Labour's.)
Once again the weight of television coverage had no effect on party credibility (though the nature of the coverage may have done so).
Public perceptions of party unity increased between our Pre-Campaign Wave and the start of the final campaign.
During the pre-campaign week we recorded no items on television news which positively projected the image of party unity.
These rather artificial news items were very much the product of the final  election campaign.
In public perceptions the gap between Conservative unity and Labour unity narrowed sharply in the first few days of the campaign and again at the end, but actually increased very slightly in the third week.
That trend matches the trend in television projections of party unity, which were more favourable to Labour at the start and end of the campaign, but more favourable to the Conservatives in the middle, especially so in the third week.
This does seem to be an area in which television coverage influenced public perceptions (Table 7.4).
There was a precipitous decline in television's projection of the Conservative Party's overall credibility in the fourth week of the campaign, a week that included the infamous ‘wobbly Thursday’(see Chapter 4, Table 4.16, for details).
But although it clearly had dramatic effects on the nerves of Conservative Central Office there is no evidence of any major shift in voting intentions at that time.
Adverse contextualizing comments on television news did not set an anti-Conservative bandwagon rolling in the electorate, despite the fears of Conservative strategists.
NON-CONSENSUAL INFLUENCES ON POLITICAL PERCEPTIONS
So far we have looked at the consensual influence of television: at influences that varied from time to time but affected all or most  citizens at any one time.
Now we turn to non-consensual influences, differentiated influences, factors that affected some individuals but not others, or that affected different individuals in different ways.
Such factors include their own personal characteristics, their social and political background, which newspapers they read, how much television news they watched, whether they watched television news on a particular day, and even whether they watched BBC or ITV on a particular day.
We can use multiple regression analysis to discover the relative influence of these factors on perceptions.
For consistency, we use a standard predictive scheme based upon thirty-five predictors representing the influences set out in the general model of media influence described in Chapter 1.
These are:
1.
Whether the individual identified with the Conservative party, Labour, or the Alliance in the Pre-Campaign Wave.
2.
Whether they claimed to be left-wing, right-wing, or neither at that time.
3.
Their age, education, and strength of partisanship at that time.
4.
Their interest in politics at four different times: the mid-term (early summer 1986), the pre-campaign week (March 1987), and the first and second fortnights of the final campaign.
The first of these measured generalized interest in politics, the others measured interest in politics at particular times.
5.
Their levels of political discussion in the pre-campaign week, the first fortnight, and the second fortnight of the campaign.
6.
Whether they were motivated to follow the campaign for reinforcement, vote-guidance, information, or excitement.
Motivations were measured in the second fortnight of the campaign, but the question wording was not time-specific (see Chapter 2).
7.
Whether they read a highbrow paper at each of four time points: the mid-term, the pre-campaign week, the first and second fortnights of the campaign.
8.
Whether they read a right-wing paper at each of these four time-points.
9.
The number of TV news programmes they watched regularly (asked in the Pre-Campaign Wave).
10.
Whether they listened to Radio 4 news regularly (asked in the Pre-Campaign Wave).
11.
Whether they watched BBC-TV news regularly (asked in the pre-Campaign Wave), and whether they had watched BBC-TV news on the day or day before the interview (in the first and second fortnight of the campaign).
12.
As (11) for ITV news.
Note, however, that over three-quarters of those who watched ITV news at any time had also watched BBC-TV news on the same day; and over 90 per cent of those who watched ITV news regularly also watched BBC-TV news regularly.
Approximately, therefore, ITV news viewers were a subset of BBC-TV news viewers, not an alternative audience.
Watching ITV news meant, in practice, watching more TV news.
It is a long list, but the SPSSX stepwise procedure seldom selected more than a few predictors as having a significant influence upon perceptions.
However, it is important to recall the full list, in order to emphasize the factors that did not influence perceptions.
Whether people noticed the publication of opinion polls, whether they noticed local and national politicians, whether they noticed campaign themes — these seem relatively pure perceptions.
No doubt a few treated awareness as implied approval, but for most people that did not seem to be so.
Perceptions of opinion polls changed dramatically during the campaign.
In the pre-campaign week only 56 per cent had seen a recent opinion poll but this rose to 72 per cent in the first fortnight of the campaign and 77 per cent in the second.
What they saw also changed.
At all times, almost everyone who had seen a poll noticed that the Conservatives were top, but perceptions of which party was in second place varied sharply.
In the Pre-Campaign Wave a majority of those who had seen a poll thought the Alliance was second.
The percentage who had seen Labour in second place rose from a mere 13 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave to 78 per cent in the first fortnight and 95 per cent in the second.
Who noticed the opinion polls?
Awareness of opinion polls was most predictable in the Pre-Campaign Wave and became steadily less predictable as the election approached and awareness became more widespread.
Before the campaign opened the key influence on poll awareness was generalized interest in politics, but as the campaign drew to an end media use became   more important, especially viewing BBC-TV news (Table 7.5).
These findings broadly echo those of Gunter, Svennevig, and Wober (1986, pp.98–9), whose study of the 1983 election campaign showed that ‘objectively measured knowledge was significantly correlated with interest in political discussion programmes both on radio and television, but with only one news-consumption variable — claimed viewing of television news’(italics added).
In our analysis of the 1987 campaign we have distinguished more  clearly between personal factors such as political interest and mobilizing factors such as television viewing; and we have detected a strong trend in the balance of influence between these two influences.
In the Pre-Campaign Wave there was a 41 per cent difference in awareness of polls between those with a high and low interest in politics.
Following J. S. Coleman's terminology we can say that ‘the effect of political interest on awareness of opinion polls was 41 per cent’ in the pre-Campaign Wave.
But this effect had declined to only 22 per cent by the last fortnight of the campaign.
Similarly, readers of lowbrow papers were relatively ill-informed about polls before the campaign but caught up on highbrow readers later: the effect of reading a highbrow paper declined from 33 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave to only 15 per cent in the closing stages of the campaign.
By contrast, the difference between those who did and did not watch BBC-TV widened: so the effect of television viewing rose from 12 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave to 20 per cent in the last fortnight of the campaign.
Thus, as the election approached, the basis of public awareness of opinion polls shifted from more personal factors like political interest or choice of paper, to more impersonal mobilizing factors like television news.
The kinds of people who were most aware of public opinion polls in the closing stages of the campaign were very different from the kinds of people who were most aware of them in the mid-term (Table 7.6).
At the start of the campaign, constituency candidates were almost invisible to the electorate: very few electors claimed to have heard anything about them.
Candidates became steadily more visible day by day throughout the campaign, however.
Taking the first fortnight as a whole, four-fifths of voters had heard nothing about their local Conservative, Labour, and Alliance candidates but that figure dropped to little more than half in the second fortnight.
So the election produced an enormous increase in at least minimal awareness of local candidates.
Those who were more interested in politics and used more highbrow news sources tended to acquire more information about local candidates, and party supporters acquired more information about their own party's candidate, but none of these patterns was very strong or consistent.
Information about local candidates was fairly haphazard.
We asked our panel whether they had, ‘in the last few days, noticed anything in particular that Mrs Thatcher has said or done’; and similar questions about Kinnock, Steel, Owen, and ‘other’(unspecified) Conservative, Labour, and Alliance leaders.
By those measures of visibility, national politicians were much more visible than local candidates from the start.
Indeed, Kinnock and Thatcher were more visible in our pre-campaign week, when both were on highly publicized foreign tours, than they   were during the campaign itself.
Their degree of visibility was also more predictable than the visibility of local candidates, though their visibility became less predictable as the election approached.
Before the campaign opened those who were particularly interested in politics were very much more aware of Thatcher's and Kinnock's recent activities.
By the end of the campaign that was no longer so true.
Awareness of Thatcher and Kinnock was spread much more evenly throughout the electorate, and in so far as it did vary it was particularly high amongst those who had recently watched television news or had recently discussed the campaign (Table 7.7).
In the pre-campaign week, the effect of political interest on public awareness of Thatcher and Kinnock was 36 per cent and 45 per cent, respectively; but by the last fortnight of the campaign its effect had fallen to 17 per cent and 20 per cent respectively.
The effect of reading a highbrow paper on public awareness of Kinnock dropped from 28 per cent to a mere 5 per cent as the election approached.
Meanwhile, the effect of television viewing on public awareness of Thatcher's activities rose from 12 per cent to 20 per cent(Table 7.8).
Such short-term ‘closure of the knowledge gap’ was noted by Blumler and McQuail (1968).
Robinson (1972) found that, in America, the ‘knowledge gap’ was greater amongst those who relied on the press and smaller amongst those who relied upon television.
So there are precedents for both our finding that knowledge spread through the electorate as the election approached and that television played a particular role in that process.
Somewhat in contrast to these findings about Thatcher and Kinnock, the visibility of all ‘other’ Conservative and Labour politicians (taken in each case as a collective, unspecified ‘other’) became more predictable as the election approached.
With secondrank politicians, interest in politics continued to be a strong   predictor of their visibility, although the impact of television viewing also increased (Table 7.9).
Indeed, instead of declining, the effect of political interest on awareness of ‘other’ Conservative politicians actually rose from 32 per cent to 37 per cent between the Pre-Campaign Wave and the end of the campaign, and its effect on awareness of ‘other’Labour politicians declined only from 38 per cent to 34 per cent.
Overall, there remained a roughly constant difference between the interested and the uninterested.
At the same time the effect of television viewing on public awareness of ‘other’ Conservatives rose from 11 per cent to 25 per cent while its effect on public awareness of ‘other’Labour politicians rose from 6 per cent to 18 per cent(Table 7.10).
The influence of television on second-rank politicians' visibility is confirmed by a more detailed trend analysis.
When people said they had noticed a Labour or Conservative politician other than Thatcher or Kinnock we asked them who had caught their attention.
Denis Healey was noticed by 24 per cent in the pre-Campaign Wave when he accompanied Kinnock on his visit to President Reagan.
During the campaign itself Healey was noticed by only about 12 per cent on average but that concealed some sharp variations: 28 per cent noticed him in the last two days of the campaign, immediately after a spectacular on-screen row with TV-am presenter Ann Diamond.
Throughout the campaign we asked what people thought were the main issues being stressed by each of the parties.
There were dramatic trends in public perceptions of, for example, the  Conservative Party's emphasis on defence.
We have already related those trends to the content of television news.
During the pre-Campaign Wave, visits by Thatcher to Moscow and Kinnock to Washington naturally led to intense television coverage of defence issues.
At that time both parties were clearly giving top priority to defence.
When the campaign opened, it was not immediately obvious which particular issues the parties would choose to stress; but by the middle of the campaign it was clear that the Conservatives were focusing on defence issues where    their policy was so much more popular than Labour's, if only because it seemed so much simpler to explain.
The public perceived enormous Conservative stress on defence in the Pre-Campaign Wave and again in the latter half of the campaign, but much less in the first half of the campaign.
None the less, despite these general trends in perceptions there were always some voters who felt the Conservatives were not stressing defence, just as there were always others who felt the Conservatives were stressing defence.
Those who were particularly interested in politics or discussed politics, read highbrow papers or watched television news, were a little more likely to be able to name some issues (any issues!) as the main themes being stressed by the parties, but the level of predictability was low.
When it came to selecting particular issues, it was difficult to predict who would name a particular issue.
Depending upon the date of the interview we could predict quite well whether people would name defence as the Conservatives' main campaign theme, but it was the date of the interview rather than the personal characteristics of the interviewee that mattered.
By the end of the campaign, political interest, watching BBC-TV news, and a Labour  identity made people somewhat more inclined to name defence as the Conservative Party's main theme, however; and those who had frequent discussions about politics developed a particularly clear perception of the Conservatives' focus on defence issues (Table 7.11).
THE INFLUENCE OF PARTISANSHIP ON PERCEPTIONS
Perceptions of party chances were obviously influenced by opinion poll findings.
Perceptions of Britain's economic performance and prospects were obviously influenced by objective economic factors and by government manipulation of economic statistics.
None the less there remained deep personal prejudices that affected perceptions of both.
Wishful thinking made political partisans more optimistic about their own party's prospects and more inclined to forecast their opponents' defeat.
It made government supporters more optimistic about the economy and opposition supporters more pessimistic.
Opinion polls are more or less inaccurate measures of voting intentions.
A succession of published polls typically produces a stream of more or less contradictory results.
In part that may reflect real changes in public opinion but to a large extent it merely reflects sampling and other administrative errors.
So if perceptions of party chances vary sharply with a succession of contradictory polls, it indicates that these perceptions are influenced by the published figures rather than by actual political preferences.
people probably realize that their own circle of acquaintances is too narrow to provide a reasonable basis for estimating party chances and so they must rely on a combination of personal contacts, media comments, and especially published opinion polls.
We have already noted the correlation between overall trends in perceptions of opinion polls and trends in perceptions of party prospects (see Table 7.3).
At any one time there were wide differences of opinion about party chances however.
Some of those differences were relatively unpredictable.
It was always fairly difficult to predict differences of opinion about Conservative and Alliance chances.
In the precampaign week, Conservative voters were more optimistic about Conservative chances, Labour voters about Labour chances, and Alliance voters about Alliance chances; but the partisan influence   on perceptions of Conservative and Alliance chances was much smaller than on perceptions of Labour chances.
As the election approached, perceptions about party chances became more homogeneous and the predictability of different perceptions of Conservative and Alliance chances sank to a very low level: most voters thought that the Conservatives' chances were good and that Alliance chances were poor.
Only a small and fairly random subset of voters disagreed.
Perceptions of Labour chances remained more predictable, though they also became rather more homogeneous as the campaign came to an end.
On the evidence of our multiple regression analysis, partisanship exerted a consistently powerful influence on perceptions of Labour chances and by the end of the campaign it was the only remaining significant influence.
In the precampaign week, other influences were also detectable: those who followed the campaign for excitement rated Labour chances highly; those who read right-wing papers or were themselves right-wing, those who watched BBC-TV news, and those who discussed politics a lot did not rate Labour chances highly.
Some of these influences carried forward into the first fortnight of the campaign, though they faded towards the end.
There seem to be three broad influences at work here: a partisan influence, which was the most powerful and consistent, plus information-based and propaganda-based influences, which declined as the election approached.
By the time of the election, even those with poor or biased information sources had enough accurate information to form the same judgement as those with better information sources.
Only their own personal prejudices remained to influence their perceptions in one direction or another (Table 7.12).
Labour partisans were consistently very much more optimistic than Conservatives about the Labour Party's chances of victory; Alliance partisans had intermediate views on Labour chances, though they were inclined to the Conservative viewpoint in the pre-Campaign Wave, but slightly more inclined to the Labour viewpoint by the end of the campaign.
It is hardly surprising that political partisans claimed (at least) to be optimistic about their party's chances.
But the trend analyses also confirm that press partisanship had a smaller but clear influence on perceptions amongst both Labour and Conservative identifiers.
By the end of   the campaign, Labour identifiers were 41 per cent more optimistic than Conservative supporters about Labour's chances.
At the same time, Labour identifiers who read right-wing papers were 10 per cent less optimistic than Labour identifiers who did not; while Conservatives who read right-wing papers were similarly less optimistic about Labour's chances than Conservatives who did not read right-wing papers (Table 7.13).
Long-term trends suggest that economic optimism was highly volatile.
It peaked in the election years of 1983 and 1987 and even the collapse of optimism over the period 1978–80 was halted and temporarily reversed at the 1979 election (The Economist , 1990, p. 34).
Our own surveys confirm a strong switch towards optimism between our Mid-Term Wave in 1986 and our Pre-Campaign Wave in March 1987, but over the relatively short period from our Pre-Campaign Wave to the end of the campaign overall trends in economic perceptions were small.
We asked our panel about their perceptions of the past year and the next year, about the economic trends affecting the country and the economic trends affecting their family.
On balance the electorate was, and remained, strongly optimistic about the future for Britain and their family, strongly optimistic about Britain's performance in the past year, and optimistic (but much less so) about their own family's circumstances over the past year.
Our survey showed that there were strong partisan influences on switches in economic perceptions over the winter of 1986–7 (see Miller et al .,
1990, ch. 4) and partisan influences continued to influence the development of economic perceptions during the campaign itself.
Economic perceptions were fairly predictable in the Pre-Campaign Wave and became more so towards the end of the campaign.
Partisan influences were strong and became stronger as the election approached.
Perceptions of Britain's economic performance were more predictable than those of family circumstances,; and perceptions of the past were more predictable than expectations for the future.
Age influenced perceptions of family   circumstances (the older were more pessimistic than the young) but not perceptions of Britain's performance.
Conversely, reading a right-wing paper had much more influence upon perceptions of Britain's performance than on perceptions of family circumstances.
Remarkably, variables such as education and political discussion had relatively little influence on economic perceptions.
The better educated were slightly more optimistic about the past (not the future, though) in the pre-campaign week but even this slight effect disappeared during the campaign.
So, apart from age making people personally pessimistic about their own circumstances, economic perceptions were primarily influenced by a combination of personal political prejudice (partisanship) and biased information sources (right-wing or left-wing papers)(Table 7.14).
A trend analysis confirms these regression findings.
There was always an enormous difference between the economic perceptions of those who initially had Conservative and Labour preferences, especially those who described themselves as party ‘supporters’.
The difference was largest when their focus was on Britain (not themselves) last year (not next year).
Irrespective of the focus, however, the difference widened as the election approached.
Because a majority of Conservative supporters were economic optimists and a majority of Labour supporters were economic pessimists, the difference between net optimism amongst Conservative and Labour supporters exceeded 100 per cent: it was 105 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave, rising to 121 per cent by the end of the campaign.
Amongst party identifiers as a whole, the difference between Conservative and Labour optimism rose from 93 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave to 108 per cent by the end of the campaign.
Compared to this enormous influence of personal prejudice the influence of the media on economic perceptions was small but none the less significant.
Amongst Labour partisans in particular the influence of the media more than doubled towards the end of the campaign, as Labour readers of right-wing papers switched from pessimism to optimism.
The effect of reading a right-wing paper was to make Labour identifiers 12 per cent more optimistic in the Pre-Campaign Wave, and fully 30 per cent more optimistic by the end of the campaign (Table 7.15).
CONCLUSIONS
There can be no simple answer to the apparently simple question ‘Does the media influence voters?’
We need to distinguish between different elements of the media, and between the media's ability to inform and its ability to persuade.
In this chapter we have looked at influences on public perceptions of politics, not at influences upon attitudes.
From what we already knew about its audiences and programme content, we expected that television would have a stronger influence on public information and perceptions than on public attitudes and choices; while the press, particularly the mass-selling tabloids, would have a stronger influence on public attitudes and choices than on public information and perceptions.
Television news was pervasive, undifferentiated, and relatively unbiased.
It proved immensely effective at communicating party campaign themes to the electorate, but in the short span of an election campaign it had only a small influence on the public's issue-agenda.
The ebb and flow of controversy in television news items did not produce corresponding trends in public  interest and discussion.
Television's failure to publicize the unemployment issue was matched by only a small decline in public concern about the issue while enormous public interest in health, education and social services preceded television's switch towards those issues.
The most obvious test of television's ability to set the public agenda was provided by its massive shift of emphasis on to defence in the third week of the campaign.
That was matched by a similarly dramatic increase in public perceptions that the party debate had now focused on defence, but by only a small increase in the public's own concern about the issue.
While small influences in the short term may add up to large influences in the longer term we must conclude that, within an election campaign, television could influence but not dictate the public agenda.
However, it could dictate public perceptions of the parties' agenda.
Television coverage had surprisingly little impact on trends in party credibility.
Public perceptions that the election was increasingly a two-horse race matched trends in published opinion polls but preceded television's switch towards marginalizing the Alliance by focusing on two-party controversy.
Except in so far as they publicized opinion poll findings, television projections of party credibility did not dictate public perceptions.
In contrast to television, the press was highly differentiated: different papers reached very different audiences with very different messages.
While the pervasiveness and uniformity of television news made it unlikely that it would influence different people in different ways, the press seemed likely to influence different readers in very different ways.
Since political bias was so much a characteristic of the press we might expect its influence to be more apparent in terms of attitudes than perceptions, however.
We looked at variations in perceptions across the electorate to see whether television, the press, or both had any influence.
In general, the less objective the perception and the more it was influenced by partisan factors, the greater the influence of the press and the less the influence of television.
Public awareness of opinion polls was most predictable in the Pre-Campaign Wave and became steadily less predictable as the election approached and awareness spread throughout the electorate.
Before the campaign opened the key influence on poll awareness was a generalized interest in politics, but as the  campaign drew to an end television viewing became more important.
Before the campaign there was a 41 per cent difference in awareness of polls between those with high and low levels of interest in politics; but this declined to 22 per cent by the end of the campaign.
Readers of lowbrow papers were relatively ill informed about polls before the campaign but caught up with highbrow readers later.
Conversely the difference between those who did and did not watch television widened.
As the election approached, the basis of awareness shifted from more personal resources like political interest or choice of paper, to more impersonal mobilizing factors like television news.
The kinds of people who were aware of public opinion polls in the closing stages of the campaign were very different from the kinds of people who followed them in the mid-term.
Before the campaign opened those with a strong interest in politics were very much more aware of Thatcher's and Kinnock's recent activities.
By the end of the campaign that was no longer so true: awareness of Thatcher and Kinnock had spread much more evenly through the electorate and in so far as it did vary it was particularly high amongst those who had recently watched television news or discussed the campaign.
The difference between Kinnock's visibility to those with high and low levels of political interest dropped from 45 per cent before the campaign to 20 per cent at the end of the campaign; the difference between his visibility to highbrow and lowbrow paper readers dropped from 28 per cent to a mere 5 per cent; but over the same period the difference between his visibility amongst viewers and nonviewers of television news actually rose slightly.
Once again this shows a switch from personal resources to media mobilization.
Somewhat in contrast to these findings about Thatcher and Kinnock, the visibility of all ‘other’ Conservative and Labour politicians, taken in each case as a collective ‘other’, became more predictable as the election approached.
With these second-rank politicians, interest in politics continued to be a strong predictor of their visibility although the impact of television viewing also increased.
Those who were interested in politics or discussed politics, read highbrow papers or watched television news, were a little more likely to be able to name some issues as the main themes being stressed by the parties.
When it came to naming particular  issues, however, it was difficult to predict who would name which issue.
Whether people named defence as the Conservatives' main campaign theme depended a great deal upon the date of the interview and rather less upon their personal characteristics or even their pattern of media use.
This was a clear case of television influencing the electorate as a whole.
None the less those who engaged in frequent political discussions became particularly aware of the Conservative Party's stress on defence.
We also looked at some perceptions which had attitudinal overtones.
The conceptual distinction between perceptions and attitudes is clear; but perceptions of party chances or the state of the economy imply an element of approval or disapproval when articulated by the electorate.
(They are purely objective perceptions when articulated by political scientists or professional economists, of course.)
These perceptions were influenced in varying degrees, though not completely determined, by partisan loyalties.
As the election approached, perceptions about party chances of victory became more homogeneous: most voters thought Conservative chances were good and Alliance chances were poor.
Perceptions of Labour chances remained more predictable, though they too became rather more homogeneous as the campaign came to an end.
There were three broad influences on perceptions of Labour chances: a ‘wishful thinking’(partisan) influence, which was the most powerful and consistent (Labour supporters rated their party's chances highly); a pure information-based influence (discussion, education, television viewing all lowered expectations of a Labour victory), which declined as the election approached; and a propaganda-based influence (reading rightwing papers also lowered expectations of a Labour victory), which also declined as the election approached.
By the time of the election, even those with poor or biased information sources had enough accurate information to form the same judgement as those with better information sources.
Only their own personal prejudices remained to influence their perceptions in one direction or another.
Economic perceptions were also influenced, very strongly, by partisanship, especially when the focus was on Britain (not the voters themselves) and on the preceding year (not the forthcoming year.
Irrespective of the focus, however partisan influences on economic perceptions increased as the election approached.
Compared to the influence of personal partisan prejudice the influence of the media on economic perceptions was small but it also increased towards the end of the campaign, especially amongst Labour readers of right-wing papers.
Media Influence on Political Attitudes and Votes 
PARTY AND LEADER IMAGES
Images of parties and party leaders are at the margin between perceptions and attitudes.
We asked our panel to rate each of the parties on four scales: being united, having convincing policies, being likely to keep their promises, and being moderate.
All of these images have overtones of approval as well as objective, factual perception.
Similarly we asked the panel to rate the four party leaders, Thatcher, Kinnock, Steel, and Owen, on twelve more personal scales: being decisive, trustworthy, energetic, willing to listen, well informed, caring, a good leader of a team, tough, likeable, and standing up for Britain ‘s interests against the European Community, the USA, and the USSR.
Ratings consisted of ‘marks out of ten’ for how well the image label applied.
Factor analysis of these images indicated just one general factor underlying image scores for Kinnock, Steel, and Owen, but two general factors underlying scores for Thatcher.
One grouped her images on being trustworthy, caring, likeable, and willing to listen, while the second grouped her images on being energetic, decisive, well informed, and tough.
But irrespective of whether there was one general factor or two, it was clear that these general factors only explained a part of the variation in images of parties and leaders.
Each of the individual images had a substantial component of uniqueness.
We investigated both the common and the unique elements of these various images.
For an overview we took each party's average score across the four party images, and each leader's average score across the twelve leader images.
That approximated a factor analysis and is conceptually easier to explain.
We also multiplied average scores by ten to eliminate decimal points, and turn them into percentages.
In the pre-campaign week, average Conservative and Alliance images were 10 per cent higher than Labour's but the gap was halved by the second fortnight of the campaign.
Thatcher scored 8 per cent higher than the other leaders in the Pre-Campaign Wave, but by the end of the campaign all four leaders enjoyed very similar scores.
Kinnock improved his score most, while Thatcher's actually declined.
Labour's rating on being united increased by 14 per cent though other aspects of its image improved by very much smaller amounts.
Kinnock improved his image most on being energetic and decisive but actually lost ground on being able to stand up to the USSR, reflecting perhaps the consequences of his ‘dad's army’ interview with David Frost.
Thatcher strengthened her image on being decisive but lost ground on being energetic.
At any one time, it was relatively easy to predict which electors would give parties and leaders high ratings.
Ratings for the Conservative Party and for Thatcher were the most predictable, ratings for the Alliance and its leaders the least predictable.
In addition, ratings for the two main parties and their leaders became more predictable as the election approached while those for the Alliance and its leaders became less predictable.
In other words, perceptions of the Labour and Conservative Parties and their leaders became more polarized as the election approached, while perceptions of the Alliance and its leaders became more homogeneous.
Thus by the last fortnight of the campaign, our regressions explained 59 per cent of the variation in Thatcher images but only 11 per cent of the variation in Alliance images (Tables 8.1, 8.2, 8.3).
As we might expect, partisanship was a major influence upon image ratings.
Indeed it was the major influence on Conservative and Labour, Thatcher and Kinnock, and even Alliance images.
But surprisingly perhaps, it was not the major influence on David Steel's image; and David Owen's image was influenced more by Labour partisanship than by Alliance partisanship: the hostility of Labour partisans towards Owen exceeded even the affection of Alliance partisans for him (Table 8.3).
Much less obviously, age proved a significant predictor of party and leader images.
It was the main influence on Steel's image and a major influence on most other images, especially those of Owen and the Alliance but also those of Kinnock and   Thatcher.
Older people were much more likely to give high ratings to politicians of all kinds and, to a lesser extent, to parties of all kinds.
Finally, media use had widespread effects.
Reading a rightwing rather than a left-wing paper improved images of Thatcher and the Conservative Party, and damaged images of Kinnock and the Labour Party, though it had little or no influence on images of the Alliance and its leaders.
Watching television had a much smaller effect and, like age, it had a positive effect upon images of all the parties and all the leaders.
Regression analyses suggest the influence of the press increased towards the end of the campaign.
Trend analyses confirm the overwhelming impact of partisanship and the small, but increasing impact of the press.
Thatcher's image ratings were 25 per cent higher amongst Conservative identifiers than amongst Labour identifiers in the Pre-Campaign Wave and became 30 per cent higher by the end of the campaign.
Kinnock's image rating was 15 per cent lower amongst Conservative identifiers in the Pre-Campaign Wave and 18 per cent lower by the end of the campaign (Table 8.4).
Reading a right-wing rather than a left-wing paper made Labour identifiers 6 per cent more favourable to Thatcher and 6 per cent less favourable to Kinnock by the end of the campaign though the effects were smaller before that.
A right-wing paper made Alliance identifiers 3 per cent less favourable to Kinnock and 8 per cent more favourable to Thatcher by the end of the campaign, and once again there was some evidence of a trend.
Press effects on Conservative identifiers were smaller.
Clearly party and leader images were dominated by personal partisan prejudice and that domination increased towards the end of the campaign.
None the less, there is evidence that the press had a small influence (Table 8.5).
Each aspect of party and leader images varied in a different way, some more predictably than others.
Opinion on certain aspects of party and leader images was more polarized, on others more homogeneous; and different aspects of images were subject to different influences.
Images of unity were less influenced by partisanship and media bias, and less predictable overall, than other aspects of   party images.
Thatcher's image of being tough and decisive was the least predictable — not, of course, because these two labels seemed inappropriate but because there was such general agreement that they were appropriate.
Few voters gave her low ratings for being tough or decisive, and they were an unpredictable few.
In sharp contrast, opinion was more divided on whether she was   trustworthy, caring, or willing to listen: Conservatives were inclined to give her high marks on these matters while others were not.
Age was the main influence upon all politicians' ratings for being energetic.
Older people were much more impressed by politicians' energy than were younger people.
Partisanship took second place when it had an influence at all, and often it did not.
Press bias (that is, reading a right-wing or left-wing paper) had a relatively large influence upon Thatcher's image of being willing to listen, caring, and likeable.
On all these ‘softer’ virtues, readers of right-wing papers gave Thatcher high marks, while readers of left-wing papers did not (even when we take account of people's own partisanship, as the regression analysis does automatically).
Reading right-wing papers also made people more inclined to believe the Conservative Party had convincing policies and was likely to keep its promises, that Kinnock was neither decisive, nor trustworthy, nor a good leader of a team, and especially that he could not be relied upon to stand up for British interests against the USSR.
Thus, reading right-wing papers had most effect upon increasing Thatcher's ratings on the ‘soft’ virtues and depressing Kinnock's ratings on the ‘hard’virtues — that is, on those aspects of each politician's image where they were generally considered to be at their weakest.
The press did not reverse general perceptions of party leaders: it sharpened and reinforced images they already had.
A bad press highlighted what were generally agreed to be a politician's weak points; a good press encouraged people to give politicians even higher ratings on their generally acknowledged strengths.
Defence policy and relationships with the Soviet Union played an unusually large part in political debate in 1987.
During our Pre-Campaign Wave Thatcher's visit to Moscow and Kinnock's   to Washington drew attention to the issue.
In the final campaign, Conservative propaganda focused on defence and Kinnock himself provided a target for attack in a TV-am interview with David Frost in which, his opponents alleged, he advocated a strategy of guerrilla war as an alternative to nuclear weapons.
On being able to stand up to the USSR, Thatcher scored 80 per cent in the precampaign week, easing to 79 per cent in the last fortnight of the campaign.
Kinnock scored only 61 per cent in the pre-campaign week — the same as his average score across all image aspects.
By the end of the campaign, his average image score had risen to 65 but his score on standing up to the USSR had dropped to 56.
By the end of the campaign it was the weakest aspect of his image.
Scores on this image (standing up to the USSR) were never very predictable for any politician.
Partisanship was the main influence on Thatcher's and Kinnock's scores but not Steel's or Owen's; and even for Thatcher and Kinnock the partisan influence was weaker than on other aspects of their image.
Reading a rightwing paper never had any significant effect on this aspect of Thatcher's image and only a small effect on Kinnock's image in the Pre-Campaign Wave, though its influence grew steadily thereafter: in the first fortnight of the campaign press bias was a little more influential than anything except partisanship and in the second fortnight it was far more influential than anything except partisanship (Table 8.6).
As the campaign developed Kinnock's image as a man who would stand up to the USSR declined throughout the electorate, even amongst Labour supporters, though it declined slightly more amongst Conservative supporters.
Amongst both Labour   and Conservative identifiers, it declined twice as much if they read a right-wing paper.
The decline was never great, but it has to be judged against the fact that his general image was improving sharply (Table 8.7).
EXPLICIT ATTITUDES
Questions about perceptions were framed in terms of awareness rather than approval, though the partisan nature of the answers often betrayed a lack of objectivity.
We found that television had a large effect on those political perceptions which had little or no attitudinal content.
But on political perceptions where there were elements of approval or disapproval media effects were  much smaller, and it was the press, rather than television, which had more impact.
We turn now to influences on attitudes and votes.
Attitude questions explicitly sought statements of choice, preference, approval, or disapproval.
Given our findings on perceptions we should expect the press to have more influence than television on attitudes.
Whether its influence was large or small remains to be seen.
We sought to measure attitudes in several ways.
We asked respondents to give each party a mark out of ten for its handling of four issues: unemployment, inflation, defence, and a composite ‘health, education, and social services’.
We also asked them to name the party they thought best on economic matters for themselves and their families, for Britain as a whole, and for the unemployed.
We asked for thermometer ratings (out of 100) for how warm people felt towards parties and their leaders.
After the election, we asked whether the parties should change their leaders, their policies, or both.
In addition, we asked about voting preferences.
In the Pre-Campaign Wave and the two Campaign Waves we asked electors to give each party a mark out of ten for how inclined they were to vote for it.
After the election we asked which way they had actually voted.
Total system approval 
Where we asked for marks out of ten, or thermometer ratings out of a hundred, we can use relative scores for different parties to construct measures of preference.
But we can also add the scores for all three parties (Conservative, Labour, Alliance) in order to get a measure of total system approval .
One person might give the Conservative Party the highest of three high scores, another might give it the highest of three low scores.
Both would thereby indicate a preference for the Conservative Party but their attitudes would not be the same.
Not surprisingly, total system approval proved much less predictable than relative preference.
None the less, variations in levels of total system approval were not entirely random.
The most powerful and consistent influence on total approval was political interest.
Those who found the events of the  campaign interesting very consistently recorded higher levels of total approval.
At the same time there was some evidence that those who had a more general interest in politics, as distinct from those who found the campaign interesting (a distinction we have already found significant in other contexts), were likely to record lower levels of total approval.
Media influence was small but consistent.
Despite complex controls for various aspects of political interest and for other influences, those who watched a lot of television news, especially on BBC-TV, showed higher levels of total approval.
So did older people.
Those with high levels of education were hard to please: they showed particularly low levels of total system approval.
Conservatives and right-wingers were more satisfied with the parties, Labour identifiers and left-wingers less satisfied.
All of these findings remained broadly similar irrespective of whether we analysed total warmth towards parties and party leaders, total ratings for the parties' performance on issues, or total inclinations towards voting for all three leading parties (Table 8.8).
Relative preference 
Suppose someone gives marks C, L, and A to the Conservatives, Labour, and Alliance for their handling of the unemployment issue, where each of C, L, and A is a mark out of ten.
Their measure of total approval for the parties on unemployment is thus (C+L+A).
We can calculate their relative preference for the Conservatives on the unemployment issue as C/ (C+L+A), that is, as the mark given to the Conservatives expressed as a proportion of the total mark given to all three parties (or multiplied by 100 to transform it from a proportion into a percentage).
Regression analyses of such relative preferences show:
1.
Relative preferences for the Alliance were much less predictable than for Labour or Conservative.
2.
Relative preferences for Labour and Conservative tended to be inversely related.
3.
Media influences on relative preferences for the Alliance were always weak and usually insignificant.
4.
Media influences on relative preferences for Conservative and Labour were always significant, usually similar in magnitude but opposite in sign.
So we can simplify the analysis of relative preferences by focusing on the electorate's relative preference for the Conservatives rather than Labour, that is on (C — L) /(C+L+A).
Naturally, Conservative identifiers gave relatively high marks to the Conservative Party, Labour identifiers to Labour, and Alliance identifiers to the Alliance.
Voters' ideological self-placement on a left-right scale also tended to predict their relative preferences for the Conservative or Labour Parties.
It would be very surprising if partisanship and ideology did not affect relative preferences in this way, but it is essential to control for partisanship and ideology before investigating other, less obvious influences.
Even with stringent controls for partisanship and ideology, multiple regression analyses show that the press had a significant influence on preferences.
Those who read right-wing papers proved significantly more satisfied with the Conservative Party's  handling of major issues, even when we controlled for their party identification and ideological self-placement.
Indeed, the ideological leanings of readers' papers had more impact than their own ideology.
The press had a substantial influence on their choice of the best party on economic matters, both for themselves and for Britain as a whole; and, indeed, on their assessments of overall party performance across the full range of economic, defence, and social issues (Table 8.9).
More detailed analysis suggests the press was more successful at influencing assessments of party performance on unemployment than on other issues.
It had a particularly strong influence amongst Labour identifiers, especially towards the end of the campaign.
Amongst Labour identifiers, the effect of reading a right-wing paper on their relative preference for the Conservatives on unemployment was 13 per cent in the Pre-Campaign Wave, rising to 19 per cent by the second half of the campaign (Table 8.10).
The press also had a moderately strong influence on public feelings of warmth towards parties and their leaders.
Once again, the ideological leanings of readers' papers were more influential than their own ideological leanings, though less than their partisanship (Table 8.11) Once again , the press had a   particularly strong influence on Labour identifiers; and its influence increased at the end of the campaign (Table 8.12).
Pre-campaign party identification exercised a particularly strong influence on voting preferences throughout the campaign and on final voting choices in the election itself.
None the less, the press still showed a moderately powerful influence on voting even when we controlled for voters' initial partisanship and ideology (Table 8.13) It had most effect upon those who were initially undecided or were Alliance identifiers.
Amongst those who were Conservative or Labour before the campaign, press bias had about a 6 per cent effect; amongst those who originally had an Alliance preference it had a 23 per cent effect; while amongst those who were originally undecided it had a 28 per cent effect — measuring all these effects in terms of the Conservative lead over Labour (Table 8.14).
After the election we asked whether each of the parties should now change its leaders, its policy, or both.
Most voters agreed that changes were needed in the Alliance and a large majority felt changes (at least in policy) were also needed in the Labour Party, but views were split almost exactly half-and-half on whether the  
Conservatives should change anything after this, their third electoral victory.
Naturally Conservative identifiers were least inclined to advocate changes in the Conservative Party, but so were readers of right-wing papers and, to a lesser extent, readers of highbrow papers (Table 8.15).
THE LONGER TERM
A year before their landslide victory in the election of June 1987 the Conservatives lagged behind Labour in the opinion polls.
Most of the swing to the Conservatives between the summer of 1986 and the summer of 1987 occurred during the winter of 1986–7, and there was relatively little swing in the last few months before the election.
What part did the media play in that year-long process?
Since we do not have a year-long content analysis of the media we cannot investigate the influence of a changing media consensus but we can analyse the differential effects of different elements of the media.
To what extent did persistently reading different papers or regularly watching different television channels make a difference to swings in political preferences?
for this longer-term analysis we have taken those panel members who were interviewed in the Mid-Term Wave (April-May 1986), the Pre-Campaign Wave (March-April 1987), and the Post-Election Wave (June 1987).
We have restricted the analysis to the   772 people who were interviewed in all three waves.
We have classified newspaper readers by their persistent choice of papertype.
We divide newspapers into six types:.
1.
no paper
2. the Express or the Mail 
3. the Mirror 
4. the Sun or the Star 
5. the Telegraph, The Times , or the Financial Times 
6. the Guardian and classify voters as ‘persistent’ readers if they were ‘regular’readers of the same paper-type in both the Mid-Term and Pre-Campaign Waves, that is, if they regularly read the same paper-type throughout the year preceding the election.
No one suggests that occasional exposure to the Sun or The Times will have an instant effect upon political opinions.
But persistent exposure to the same paper-type at least three times a week for a whole year may well have some effect, particularly if it is a preelection year when the political temperature usually rises.
With a small sample it is not advisable to carry out the analysis in terms of individual papers since so few respondents read any single paper.
Grouping readers of roughly similar papers together improves the statistical reliability of our results.
No matter how small the sample size, however, it would obscure the analysis to group readers of very different papers, such as the Guardian and the Telegraph , together.
Guardian readers are sufficiently interesting and distinctive that it is worth tolerating the statistical uncertainties caused by our small sample and the Guardian's small readership.
In classifying people as persistent readers, we have allowed them to switch between different individual papers, provided they stayed with the same paper-type.
Once again this is to retain larger numbers in the analysis and maximize the statistical reliability of the conclusions.
Not everyone proved to be a persistent reader of one paper (or even of a group of similar papers) but the majority did.
Just over two-thirds tell into one of our six categories of persistent readers (or persistent non-readers).
Some changed their paper-types, and others were persistent readers of a myriad of papers with individual readerships too small for us to analyse (the Scotsman , the Glasgow Herald , and regional English papers, for example).
Unfortunately our Mid-Term Wave was drawn from the 1986 British Social Attitudes Survey which asked no questions about television viewing or radio listening.
So we have had to classify viewing and listening by respondents' reports of their ‘regular’ behaviour in March 1987.
How long-term those viewing and listening habits were we cannot say.
We have classified them in two ways.
First, we have divided viewers into those who regularly watched BBC-TV news only, those who regularly watched ITV news only, and those who regularly watched both (negligible numbers of voters watched neither).
Second, we have divided voters into those who regularly viewed or listened to any highbrow news programmes such as BBC-TV's Newsnight , ITV's Channel 4 News , or the BBC's Radio 4 news, and those who did not.
In the Mid-Term Wave, a year before the election,Guardian and Mirror readers were strongly Labour;Express ,Mail , and Telegraph readers were strongly Conservative.
Support for the Alliance was weaker amongst readers of the tabloids than readers of the quality press: all perhaps as expected.
Rather more surprisingly perhaps,Sun and Star readers (taken together) were at that time split fairly evenly between Labour and Conservative with the Alliance a fairly close third.
Sun/Star readers were distinctive in other ways.
They were not quite the least well educated: in our panel,Mirror readers had slightly less professional qualifications than even Sun/Star readers, though every other paper's readers (and non-readers) had much more.
But Sun/Star readers were less interested in politics even than Mirror readers; and they were the least likely to tune in to highbrow news programmes such as Newsnight ,Channel 4 News , or Radio 4 news.
Most clearly of all,Sun/Star readers were uniquely uncommitted to party politics.
In the mid-term, fully 70 per cent of Mirror readers not only had a party preference but regarded themselves as party ‘supporters’.
The corresponding  percentage of party ‘supporters’ amongst Guardian readers was 66 per cent, amongst Telegraph etc., readers 62 per cent , and amongst Express/Mail readers 56 per cent .
Amongst Sun/Star readers it was a mere 41 per cent.
So there was a sharp contrast between relatively committed Mirror readers and relatively uncommitted Sun/Star readers despite their similarities in terms of class and education.
It was a contrast with important implications for the future.
Over the following year Mirror readers as well as Guardian and Telegraph readers proved relatively stable in their political preferences.
On election day, in June 1987, 84 per cent of Mirror readers (and only slightly less Guardian and Telegraph/Times/ Financial Times readers) voted for the party they had preferred a year earlier, in the summer of 1986.
But only 64 per cent of Sun/ Star readers did so.
Sun/Star readers were more likely than others to have no preference at all in 1986 (despite voting in 1987), and at the same time, those Sun/Star readers who did have a preference in 1986 were more likely than others to change it during the next year (Table 8.16).
Overall, in this panel, the Conservative lead over Labour increased by 10 per cent between 1986 and election day in 1987.
It increased by 17 per cent amongst Express/Mail readers, and by 34 per cent amongst Sun/Star readers, but by a mere 2 per cent amongst Mirror readers, which suggests the tabloids did influence their readers.
Guardian readers swung primarily from Labour to the Alliance.
Telegraph readers hardly swung at all.
Television viewing had relatively little impact (Table 8.17).
Throughout the electorate the swing to the Conservatives was stronger amongst those who generally had relatively little interest in politics; amongst those who did not tune in to watch highbrow television or radio news; amongst those without professional qualifications; and amongst those who, despite stating a party preference in 1986, none the less denied being party ‘supporters’— we can call them politically ‘uncommitted’— even when they had political preferences.
About half the electorate    were party supporters in 1986, and half uncommitted, by this definition.
The influence of the tabloid press was particularly strong on the uncommitted.
Overall, the Conservative lead increased between 1986 and June 1987 by only 5 per cent amongst party  supporters, but by 18 per cent amongst the uncommitted.
Amongst party supporters it increased by no more than 10 per cent, irrespective of what paper they read.
But amongst uncommitted voters, it increased by 28 per cent amongst Express/Mail readers and 50 per cent amongst Sun/Star readers.
In contrast, there was no drift to the Conservatives amongst uncommitted Mirror readers.
Since Sun/Star readers tended to be uncommitted they were relatively easy to influence.
But that is only part of the explanation for the magnitude of their swing to the Conservatives.
The fact that uncommitted voters who read the Sun or Star swung so much more than other uncommitted voters suggests that these papers were particularly good at influencing their readers.
Swings were highest amongst voters who watched both BBC and ITV news, and amongst those who avoided watching highbrow television news programmes, but the differences between these groups of television viewers were slight.
Once we distinguished between party supporters and uncommitted voters we found no consistent differences between voters with different viewing habits.
Swings were highest amongst those who relied more on television than the press for help in deciding how to vote, rather lower amongst those who relied more on the press, and lowest of all amongst the 40 per cent of the electorate who found television and the press equally useful.
(See Chapter 6 on who found the press and television most useful.)
However, that reflected the fact that readers of highbrow papers were more likely to place their faith in the press, and they were the least likely to change their voting intentions.
Amongst readers of the same paper (or paper-group as defined in Table 8.17) those who said they relied more on the press than on television were more likely to swing in the direction of their paper's partisanship:Sun/Star and Express/ Mail readers who relied more on their papers swung more strongly to the Conservatives than Sun/Star and Express/Mail readers who relied more on television; at the same time,Mirror readers who relied more on their paper swung towards Labour, while Mirror readers who relied more on television swung towards the Conservatives.
While these findings are plausible enough they depend upon very small subsamples of our panel, since we have to categorize voters by their choice of paper and their reliance on the press rather than television while discarding the large numbers who relied equally on both television and the press.
None the less they do seem to confirm our general findings that while television was much more informative than the press, it was much less persuasive — and intentionally so!
Though the highbrow press had the highest level of political content, it also had relatively partisan readers, and more of a mission to inform, less of a mission to persuade.
On issues like unilateralism or the economy, papers like the Guardian and Telegraph did seem to influence their readers as much as the tabloids, but not on the question of voting choice.
Persistent Guardian readers swung strongly towards a more unilateralist position, while Telegraph and Times readers swung in the opposite direction.
The differences between Mirror and Sun/Star readers were in the expected directions but quite small.
Similarly, on swings towards optimism about the state of the economy, the difference between Guardian and Telegraph/Times readers was greater than between Mirror and Sun/Star readers.
Once again, however, differences between voters with different viewing habits were slight (Table 8.18).
CONCLUSIONS
Images of parties and party leaders are right at the margin between perceptions and attitudes.
As we might expect, partisanship was a major influence upon image ratings, and it became an increasingly powerful influence as the election approached.
Apart from partisanship, age also proved significant: older people had a much more favourable image of politicians of all kinds and, to a lesser extent, parties of all kinds.
Right-wing papers improved their readers' images of Thatcher and the Conservative Party, and damaged their readers' images of Kinnock and the Labour Party, though they had little or no influence upon their readers' images of the Alliance and its leaders.
Press influence increased towards the end of the campaign but it remained small compared to the influence of partisanship.
By the end of the campaign, Labour identifiers who read a right-wing paper were 6 per cent more favourable to Thatcher and 6 per cent less favourable to Kinnock than Labour identifiers who did not.
Clearly images of parties and leaders  were dominated by personal partisan prejudice and that domination increased towards the end of the campaign.
None the less, there is evidence that the press had a small additional influence.
Each aspect of leader and party images varied in a different way.
The press had a relatively large influence upon images of Thatcher being willing to listen, caring, and likeable.
Reading right-wing papers had most effect upon improving Thatcher's image on the ‘soft’ virtues and damaging Kinnock's image on the ‘hard’virtues — that is, on those aspects of each politician's image where they were generally considered to be at their weakest.
Political attitudes were very largely determined by partisanship, but not completely.
Even with stringent controls for partisanship and ideology, multiple regression analyses show that the press,but not television , had a significant influence on voters' preferences.
Those who read right-wing papers proved significantly more satisfied with the Conservative Party's handling of major issues, and felt significantly warmer towards Mrs Thatcher and her party.
Indeed, the ideological leanings of readers' papers had more impact than their own ideology (though much less than their partisanship).
The press had a particularly strong influence on the attitudes of Labour identifiers, especially towards the end of the campaign.
A year before their re-election victory the Conservatives lagged behind Labour in the opinion polls.
Most of the swing back to the government occurred during the winter of 1986–7 and there was relatively little swing in the last few months before the election.
We undertook a longer-term analysis, to see what part the media played in the Conservative recovery.
In our panel of voters the Conservative lead over Labour increased by 34 per cent amongst Sun/Star readers but by a mere 2 per cent amongst Mirror readers, which suggests the tabloids were able to influence their readers.
Guardian readers swung primarily from Labour to the Alliance.
Telegraph readers hardly swung at all.
Television viewing had relatively little impact.
The influence of the tabloid press was particularly strong on those voters who denied being party ‘supporters’, even when they had a party preference.
They made up half the electorate.
The Conservative lead increased by 50 per cent amongst politically  uncommitted Sun/Star readers but not at all amongst politically uncommitted Mirror readers.
Since Sun/Star readers as a whole were relatively uncommitted they were relatively easy to influence anyway but, in addition, the tabloids were particularly good at influencing their readers' voting preferences.
Highbrow papers like the Guardian or the Telegraph were able to influence their readers at least as much as the tabloids on issues (like unilateralism or the economy) but not on voting choice.
Political Pluralism and the Media 
Media analysis often arouses controversy, not just about the findings themselves but about their policy implications.
Detailed summaries of this study's findings appear at the end of each chapter.
But so far the conclusions have been empirical rather than moral.
Right or wrong they have simply attempted to state the facts.
But what are their moral implications, if any?
Do our findings justify complacency or urge the need for reform.
By themselves the facts are neutral but in so far as moral views about the proper role of the media are based upon presumptions about facts, our empirical findings are bound to have moral implications.
By way of introduction, this chapter outlines three views about the proper role and status of the media: the Mobilizing Ideal , the Libertarian Ideal , and the Public Service Ideal .
Other authors list a larger number of viewpoints but they seem to be relatively minor variants on these three.
(McQuail, 1987, ch. 5, presents a longer list of ‘ideals’ or ‘moral models’.
There is a rough equivalence between our Libertarian and Public Service Ideals and the ‘Forensic’ and Clinical' models discussed by Wober, 1989b.)
Then we can relate the findings of our 1987 election news study to these three ideals.
This is not an attempt to deal with these ideals in a comprehensive way — no single empirical study could do that — but merely an attempt to see what bearing our factual findings may have upon moral views about the media.
THE MOBILIZING IDEAL
Views differ about the proper relationship between the mass media and society.
When the invention of the printing press first allowed mass production of political pamphlets and newsletters, British governments treated them as ‘seditious libels’ which challenged their sovereign authority and fomented public disorder.
In more recent times the behaviour of British governments has been more restrained and more sophisticated, but their  instincts and suspicions remain.
Conservative leader Stanley Baldwin accused the press of wanting ‘power without responsibility, the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages’.
Ironically, he made the accusation in 1931 shortly before he himself exercised ‘power without responsibility’ as the dominant figure in Ramsay MacDonald's National Coalition government, controlling MacDonald's government without bearing the responsibility of being Prime Minister.
Authoritarians of the left, right, and centre — including right-wing dictators, old-style communists, and post-colonial governments in developing countries — have all of them espoused the Mobilizing Ideal as the proper role for the mass media.
In their view, the media should be firmly subordinated to the state and its primary function should be to encourage whatever the state defines as ‘good’— whether that be national consciousness and personal self-discipline, or socialist egalitarianism, or a relentless drive towards modernization and economic development.
What the media should not do is cause friction and division within society and especially it should not encourage opposition or resistance to government decrees.
It should unite rather than divide, encourage rather than discourage.
Its purpose should be to mobilize support for the policies, personalities, and institutions of the regime.
Modern British governments are intellectually committed to the concepts of limited government and political pluralism, but they retain their old authoritarian instincts.
Even impartiality is not welcome.
During the General Strike of 1926, Winston Churchill accused the BBC of ‘being impartial between the fire and the fire brigade’.
Margaret Thatcher took much the same view about BBC coverage of the Falklands conflict and the troubles in Northern Ireland.
Compared to overtly authoritarian regimes, British governments make relatively little use of suppression and censorship, though they do suppress some information and they do sometimes censor the media, especially on defence and security matters.
More frequently they try to manipulate the media to their advantage by the selective release of carefully timed and adjusted information and by threatening, punishing, and intimidating media staff.
Punishment ranges from denying interviewers access to cabinet ministers to holding down the BBC's licence fee, appointing suitable people to control both BBC  and commercial broadcasting, and stimulating the public to accuse the broadcasters of bias.
It has to be emphasized that, for those who support the Mobilizing Ideal, these authoritarian features of British governments' attitudes and behaviour towards the media are not defects but virtues.
They are evidence of efficient, determined, and forceful government, the alternative to which is drift, lack of authority, and chaos.
Authoritarians do not apologize for the smack of firm government.
THE LIBERATION IDEAL
The American Constitution is based upon the concept of liberty rather than strong, decisive government.
The First Amendment declares that ‘Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech or of the press’.
Whether Congress and the President behave in accordance with the spirit of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights is beside the point.
In England, Milton argued passionately for the freedom of the press and J. S. Mill denounced the ‘peculiar evil of silencing the expression of opinion’.
They were defending the right of the pamphleteer to publish ideas that were unpopular in society or inconvenient for the state.
The essence of this Libertarian Ideal is that people should be free to publish what they wish and free to read or view what they wish.
Some libertarians (though not perhaps Mill himself) hoped that such freedom would have consequent advantages: that it would provide a safety valve for dissent, encourage full expression of both majority and minority opinions, allow truth to drive out error, and provide some check on arbitrary misrule.
But these were merely pious hopes.
There is nothing about mere freedom that can guarantee anything.
Permission is by definition very different from prescription (though not necessarily incompatible with it).
Perhaps those who know the truth will be too lazy or too diffident or too poor to publish while whose who believe in error will be so rich, or well organized, or self-confident that they will control the presses and the television studios and dominate the ‘free market in ideas’.
THE PUBLIC SERVICE IDEAL
Freedom is valuable and is valued by the public as an end in itself, but as a means to an end it has proved a failure.
The fundamental strength of the Libertarian Ideal consists of nothing more than the proud assertion that freedom is an end-product that people value.
Any diminution of freedom reduces the quality of life.
There may be compensations for a loss of freedom but there are no substitutes for it.
On the other hand, arguments that freedom is valuable for something other than itself are seldom convincing.
Usually they are a mixture of wishful thinking and libertarian special pIeading.
As far as British news media are concerned, freedom simply does not perform the tasks that Mill's followers hoped it would.
Information is as vital to a democratic regime as propaganda is to an authoritarian one (Blumler, 1987).
Yet freedom for publishers does not guarantee the adequately informed public required by democratic theory (Newton, 1988c).
In modern Britain, a mere six publishers now account for 80 per cent of all daily, Sunday, and local newspaper sales (Coxall and Robins, 1989, p. 312).
Whale (1977, p. 80) has justified unregulated commercial control of the press by arguing that ‘a newspaper controlled by a commercial group writes inhibitedly about a handful of concerns at most; a paper owned by the state, the effective alternative, would be guarded in its outlook on whole areas of the national life’.
His critique of the alternative is more convincing than his defence of the status quo.
His argument is that newspapers may be inhibited about discussing the commercial interests of their proprietors but otherwise they exercise independent judgement.
In particular there is anecdotal evidence to show that they are willing to expose the faults of other companies, including those that buy advertising space in the paper.
But Whale is wrong.
A newspaper controlled by a conglomerate multinational business is inhibited in discussing large areas of business.
More important, it is inhibited in supporting political causes which clash with the politics of its proprietor.
The largest-selling newspapers in Britain are owned by swashbuckling businessmen who do not hesitate to interfere with the editorial content of their papers and whose personal politics are so well known to all their staff that the proprietors can set the  political tone of their employees' work without crude, direct, and explicit interference.
Journalists and editors know what will please the proprietor and what will displease.
But in addition, despite controlling their staff by maintaining a high personal profile on political issues, proprietors also act directly.
Murdoch prides himself on being a journalist with the skill to edit his papers personally as and when he chooses.
Maxwell does not have the same depth of journalistic background but none the less occasionally issues a signed ‘message from the proprietor’ on the front page of his papers.
As a journalist himself, Hetherington (1985) emphasizes the role of editors as well as proprietors and defends their ‘honest journalism’ and willingness to resist both proprietorial and government pressure.
But even he notes that Maxwell would telephone ‘as often as six times in an evening to staff who were working on political reports’.
He quotes Maxwell himself as boasting ‘I sure as hell have got control and everybody knows it’(Hetherington, 1985, pp. 28–9).
To suggest that press barons only influence their papers on a ‘handful’ of mainly commercial concerns is totally misleading.
Indeed, the motivations of press barons have seldom been purely commercial (Jenkins, 1986).
The primitive concept of the Libertarian Ideal originally asserted the right of individuals and groups to voice (perhaps literally) their opinion in the market-place and to distribute their pamphlets and newsletters to those who passed by.
We have to ask whether today's press or television is the modern equivalent of the speech and the pamphlet or the modern equivalent of the market-place itself.
When technical or commercial factors limit the number of significant publishing organizations to a handful of major companies freedom, variety, and debate may have to be internalized within them.
There simply are not enough competing news organizations to provide adequate variety and debate between them, and the technical or commercial factors that hinder the creation of rival news organizations mean that free speech cannot be guaranteed by open entry into a system of competing news organizations.
Freedom, variety, and debate may have to be provided by open access into existing news products (existing papers, existing television networks) and by variety and debate within these products.
The Public Service Ideal is based upon the realization that the  limited set of existing news sources are no longer pamphlets distributed in the market-place, they are the market-place itself; no longer speakers in a public debate, but the platform on which that debate must take place.
Within Britain, the Libertarian Ideal has traditionally been associated with the press and the Public Service Ideal with broadcasting.
The reason for that is simple.
There appears to be a wide variety of newspapers available to the public (even though appearances deceive), and it has always been possible in principle (if not in practice) to found a new paper.
By contrast, radio and television broadcasting began and remained a monopoly or near monopoly, subject to government licensing and control, until the 1980s.
With the exception of Radio Luxembourg's popular entertainment programmes, few British people ever listened to foreign broadcasts.
This distinction between the press and broadcasting is now much less clear.
Increasingly powerful transmitters, satellite relays, and cable systems have begun to open up the British electorate to a wider variety of broadcast news sources, while business mergers have effectively consolidated control of the press into a very few hands (Newton, 1988a, p. 314; Negrine, 1989, ch. 4).
This has made it a little more possible to contemplate a Libertarian Ideal for television, but even more necessary to consider a Public Service Ideal for the press.
While new technology has reduced the costs of entry into newspaper publishing, its main effect has been to improve the profitability of established press barons.
The range of newspapers read by the bulk of the British electorate has narrowed sharply over the last two decades — in terms of the political partisanship of mass-selling papers, if not in terms of the proliferation of low-circulation titles (Newton, 1988a, p. 320; Tunstall, 1983, p. 12).
Indeed, with the exception of Atlanta's Cable News Network, seen by a very small audience in Britain, even the introduction of new television technology has so far only extended the reach (if not the profitability) of Britain's existing press barons.
Of course, it can be argued that readers get the paper that they want or deserve.
As Whale (1977, p. 84) argues: ‘It is readers who determine the character of newspapers.’
Up to a point that is correct.
If there were a huge demand for a quality left-wing paper then sales of the Guardian would increase sharply and (less  certainly) an enterprising businessman might provide another left-wing alternative.
But people do not buy their paper purely for its politics.
They may choose a paper for its coverage of sports and scandals and then be subjected to its coverage of politics.
Overall, even if they do get the paper they want, it does not follow that they get the political coverage they want.
The Public Service Ideal does not assume, against all the evidence, that a free market will necessarily produce political access, variety, and debate; it insists upon mechanisms which aim directly at these goals rather than relying upon their being achieved as the accidental by-products of mechanisms whose primary function is to achieve quite different goals such as commercial profitability or proprietorial self-indulgence.
So, those who support the Public Service Ideal advocate specific mechanisms designed to ensure that political coverage is wide-ranging, balanced, and impartial, as well as being independent of the state.
Both BBC and IBA structures were based upon this ideal.
Balance is difficult to define in simple terms and requires great sensitivity by journalists if it is to be achieved.
Here we are primarily concerned about balance and impartiality between political parties, but balance between social groups and institutions, or between alternative life-styles, may also be important; so too may balance between rival factions within parties — for example during contests for party leadership, such as the 1990 contest between Heseltine and Thatcher.
Outside government, few argue against the ambitions of the Public Service Ideal, but many argue that its mechanisms are oppressive and therefore support the Libertarian Ideal.
Conversely, few argue against the mechanisms (or lack of them) of the Libertarian Ideal but many reject its consequences.
The Royal Commission on the Press (1977) wanted to ‘transplant the public service rationale of broadcasting to the press, but was opposed to the framework of public regulation that underpins it’(Curran and Seaton, 1985, p. 297).
Libertarians such as Samuel Brittan (1987) argue that regulation is no different from censorship.
Yet while some regulations are equivalent to censorship, others are not.
The real challenge is to devise mechanisms for extending the Public Service Ideal to the British press or to British news media as a whole while minimizing the damage to the Libertarian Ideal.
That clearly requires regulations that are different from censorship.
THE ELECTION CONTEXT: ONCE IN FOUR YEARS
‘The English people think that they are free, but in this belief they are profoundly wrong.
They are free only when they are electing members of parliament.
Once the election has been completed, they revert to a condition of slavery: they are nothing,(Rousseau, quoted by Pulzer, 1975, p. 18).
We need not agree entirely with Rousseau in order to accept his insight that election times are special.
Indeed from the standpoint of a cynical manipulator we could even invert his logic.
In order to enslave the English people, we might argue, it is only necessary to enslave them at election time: once in four years Is enough.
Governments are well aware that a cycle of economic activity can be very advantageous provided it can be synchronized with the electoral cycle, so that booms occur at election times and recessions at non-election times.
Indeed one characteristic of British democracy is that the country is normally ruled by the party that lies second or third in the opinion polls (if we take averages over all months since polls began, giving each month equal weight).
The British system of popular government is thus a system of unpopular government — a consequence of this electoral cycle.
The media implications must be obvious.
Media coverage of politics near to elections is more important than media coverage at non-election times.
Coxall and Robins’(1989, p. 309) apology for a Conservative-dominated press, that ‘it has never shied away from criticising the Conservative Party or a Conservative Government’, is misleading.
The question is not just whether it criticizes the Conservative Party but when it criticizes the Conservative Party.
Political balance cannot be achieved by criticizing one party during the mid-term of a parliament and another at election time.
Indeed that may be a more subtle form of propaganda than a constant barrage of criticism.
By criticizing the Conservative Party mid-term the right-wing press can build up a certain degree of credibility with its readers which it can then use to maximum effect by suspending criticism of the Conservative Party and increasing its attacks on Labour as the election approaches.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the tabloid press stores up suitable material for use in election campaigns.
Editors do think explicitly about timing and they are not motivated merely to be the first to print a ‘scoop’: they keep stories until the  time is ripe.
Old news was certainly presented as new scandal in the 1987 election campaign.
Exactly the opposite seems to happen on television.
As an election approaches, the Libertarian Ideal legitimizes a switch towards more strident press partisanship, while the Public Service Ideal encourages television to be even more careful than usual to maintain balance and impartiality.
The contrast between different elements of the media driven by the competing ideals of liberty and public service increases as the election approaches.
MOBILIZATION: THE FINDINGS
Despite British television's formal commitment to impartiality and balance our content analysis of national television news revealed a significant bias towards the government (Chapter 4).
Though the parties as parties received roughly equal treatment, the government received additional coverage as a government for activities that were ostensibly unconnected with the election campaign.
So because the government therefore got ‘two bites at the cherry’ there was a pro-government bias on television.
This bias was particularly strong during our Pre-Campaign Wave in March when Prime Minister Thatcher visited Moscow but it continued at a reduced level throughout the final campaign.
Only the utterly naïve or the determinedly blind could believe that any government activity near to election time does not have electoral implications.
Martin Harrison (1989, p. 656) accepts that television ‘reporting of routine, uncontroversial activities may well give incumbent governments an inbuilt advantage’ but he rejects the idea of applying the concepts of impartiality and balance to the governing party's total television coverage.
He draws attention to the ‘French approach of dividing time into thirds — one third each to the government, the governing parties and opposition parties’.
That approach, which gives two-thirds of news coverage to the incumbent government, is reasonable, even generous, if viewed in the context of the Mobilizing Ideal which accords priority to established authority.
Equally, it is unreasonable, even unacceptable, in the context of other ideals for the relationship between the media and society.
Harrison and others defend the present system with another argument.
They agree that the government gets extra television  coverage but argue that such coverage is not necessarily favourable.
In 1987 perhaps the Prime Minister's pre-election visit to Moscow and her eve-of-election trip to the Venice summit of Western leaders were favourable to her re-election, but ‘Harold Wilson always asserted that a bad set of trade figures a few days before polling cost him an election, while the effect of being centre-stage during the Iran hostages affair may have been devastating to Jimmy Carter's fortunes’.
That may be true, but in 1987 hostile interviews with Neil Kinnock trying to explain his party's defence policy counted as part of the Labour Party's coverage.
Coverage of all kinds can be both favourable and unfavourable — no matter whether politicians are in government or in opposition — and politicians themselves must bear the prime responsibility for ensuring that when they do get access to the media they present their own case well.
There is no difference between government coverage and party coverage in this respect except that government has more initiative in determining the news, which means that it has more opportunity than the opposition to ensure that its coverage is favourable.
So long as balance is defined in terms of the quantity of party coverage — and not whether it is favourable or unfavourable — then the only justification for awarding the government extra coverage is that the government represents order, stability, and legitimate authority, which the media has a duty to support.
Those who do not approve the Mobilizing Ideal for the media should not approve extra media time for the government, especially near to election time.
Throughout the 1980s leading supporters of the Conservative government, notably Norman Tebbit and his Media Monitoring Unit, alleged left-wing bias on the BBC (Negrine, 1989, p. 123; BBC, 1986).
It is difficult to see that as anything other than an attempt to intimidate the BBC.
Our content analysis of national television news in Chapter 4 suggests that television news was biased both towards the government of the day (through extra coverage of the government) and towards right-wing political viewpoints (through its emphasis on crime, defence, and security).
Our comparison of BBC-TV with ITV in Chapter 5 showed that there was little difference between them.
Our opinion survey in Chapter 6 showed that most voters felt television news on both networks was unbiased; but amongst the minority who felt it  was biased a majority thought it was biased towards the Conservatives and against both Labour and the Alliance.
At the same time a large majority of voters thought that the press was biased, and that it was biased towards the Conservatives, against Labour, and against the Alliance.
Both our content analysis and our survey of public opinion suggest that allegations of anti-Conservative bias on the BBC were wildly off-target.
If Tebbit wished to attack bias as such he should have directed his criticism at the press rather than television.
The media certainly were biased — but towards the Conservative government,not against it; and bias was very much more evident in the press than on television.
But, of course, his attack was very much on-target if he simply wished to attack those elements of the media that were least favourable to his own party and government.
Though television was pro-government and pro-Conservative it was much less so than other elements of the mass media.
Judged against the Mobilizing Ideal, therefore, both BBC-TV and ITV were guilty of failing to show enough enthusiasm for the government of the day.
Would it have been different under a Labour government?
Under a Labour government we might expect television to be somewhat more favourable to the Labour Party.
Labour would then benefit from the extra coverage given to the incumbent government.
But the bias towards defence and security (which have historically been natural right-wing issues) might well persist and offset Labour's advantage as the incumbent government, unless the 1989 Year of Revolutions in Eastern Europe ushers in a new era of world peace and tranquillity.
The 1990 Gulf Crisis suggests that world conflict will unfortunately continue, even though its location may shift.
So under a Labour government, television would probably not be quite so pro-Labour as it was pro-Conservative under a Conservative government.
A Labour government would feel the same need to mobilize support as a Conservative government and Labour politicians in office would probably feel even more disappointed with television than Conservative politicians.
But the enormous contrast between relatively unbiased news on television and extreme pro-Conservative bias in the press would encourage Labour politicians to moderate their criticism of television and concentrate their attack on the press.
LIBERTY AND PUBLIC SERVICE: THE FINDINGS
It is ironic, but perhaps not surprising that the more virulent allegations of media bias have been levelled at the most balanced and impartial element of the media.
Conservative politicians attack the BBC for its alleged left-wing bias (Newton, 1988a, p. 326); academic sociologists attack it for its alleged anti-trade union and pro-right-wing bias (Glasgow University Media Group, 1976, 1980, 1982; Beharrell and Philo, 1977).
Our own content analysis also suggests that British television news has not, in fact, achieved its goal of perfect impartiality in absolute terms.
But in relative terms there can be no doubt that British broadcasting comes close to the Public Service Ideal while the British press comes nowhere near it.
Indeed most of the British press does not seek to do so.
Unlike the American press, where papers serve geographically defined communities, the English press operates on a national scale and serves social groups or campaigning proprietors rather than complete communities.
(The Scottish press is more like the American in this respect.)
That encourages the English press to take a divisive, partisan line.
The British electorate have no illusions about press balance.
Only a small minority of voters in our panel thought that television was biased and they were not agreed upon the direction of that bias.
But a large majority of newspaper readers felt that their own papers were biased.
A majority of readers of every one of the major-selling papers thought their own paper was biased — not just readers of the tabloids but readers of quality papers such as the Telegraph and the Guardian .
We found evidence that the electors exercised a coherent choice amongst the media sources on offer; and that they enjoyed exercising that choice.
There was real choice available in terms of depth and detail, ranging from entertaining but uninformative tabloids to highbrow news sources like the quality papers, Radio 4 news, or television programmes like Newsnight and Channel 4 News .
Highbrow sources were clearly much more attractive to people who were particularly interested in politics.
Younger voters tended towards the tabloid press and Radios 1 and 2.
Highbrow papers and highbrow radio were particularly sought after by the highly educated.
Highbrow television, however, reached the politically interested almost irrespective of their  education level.
These variations in media use suggest that radio and the press provide a choice of detail which matches the demands of different sectors of the public — in keeping with the Libertarian Ideal.
At the same time the audience pattern for highbrow television news seems more in keeping with the Public Service Ideal: reaching out to the interested public irrespective of social background.
There was much less choice in terms of the media's political partisanship.
Only the Guardian amongst the qualities and the Mirror (with its Scottish stable-mate, the Record) amongst the tabloids could be considered even moderately left-wing in 1987.
Even the Guardian had advocated a Conservative victory, albeit with a ‘small majority’, in 1983 (Roberts, 1989, p. 37).
Leftwingers were clearly more attracted to left-wing papers, particularly during the election campaign, but the poverty of partisan choice meant that many left-wing voters read right-wing papers.
The range of available papers, judged by their partisanship, was inadequate for either the Libertarian or Public Service Ideals, though left-wing perspectives were articulated by a small minority of the press.
Choice of television viewing was even more limited partly by the similarity between BBC-TV and ITV, but also by the electorate's tendency to watch both BBC-TV and ITV.
Judged by the Public Service Ideal, television did well, though it fell short of perfection.
Variety existed within television programmes.
Though the news was at least relatively balanced and impartial, the balance was achieved by giving time and attention to a variety of alternative viewpoints, not by suppressing diversity.
None the less, viewers seemed to resent their lack of choice and lack of control over what they saw.
The variety of television news (and current affairs) programmes allowed them to choose the degree of depth and detail they wanted, but not the political viewpoints expressed.
In Britain, unlike some European countries, there is no choice between a right-wing and a left-wing television news channel.
So while television scored well in terms of public service, it scored less well in terms of freedom of choice.
While voters generally thought that television was unbiased and that the press was biased we found that allegations of bias were not synonymous with disapproval.
Partisan viewers tended to see television as being less favourable to their own party than  it appeared to be in the eyes of other viewers.
In other words, general perceptions of bias (or the lack of it) were overlaid by a tendency for viewers to react against television news, alleging that it was biased towards their opponents.
At the same time, partisan readers tended to claim that their newspaper was more favourable to their own party than it appeared to be in the eyes of other readers.
So generally clear perceptions of strong press bias were overlaid by a tendency for readers to claim that their paper was relatively sympathetic to their own political viewpoint.
Right-wing readers of a right-wing paper were more likely than left-wing readers of that same paper to claim that their paper was biased towards the right — though a majority of both left- and right-wing readers typically agreed that their papers were biased and agreed on the direction of that bias.
Instead of reacting against the bias in their chosen paper, readers tended (at the margin) to defend their paper (if it was biased against their party) or even to glory in its bias (if it was biased in favour of their party).
The difference between public responses to perceptions of bias in the press and on television was reflected in the complex relationship between voters' allegations of bias and their ratings of the ‘usefulness’ of the press and television news.
Viewers who alleged bias on television tended to give television news lower marks for ‘usefulness’ than viewers who perceived no bias on television; but readers who alleged bias in their papers tended to give their papers higher marks for ‘usefulness’than readers who perceived no bias in their paper (Chapter 6).
Overall, although readers were well aware that their papers were relatively biased compared to television and although they rated television as much more useful for providing information about issues, they did not rate television much more useful in helping them decide how to vote.
Their perceptions of press bias did not prompt readers to reject press guidance.
It is perhaps significant that there appeared to be more choice of newspaper than of television news.
To the general public, newspapers were visibly different in tone, style, and partisan bias, even though media analysts know that this apparent variety is controlled and constrained by a handful of publishers.
By contrast, television news is produced by only two networks (each broadcasting on two channels) which are constrained by law to offer  remarkably similar products, however balanced, internally varied, and impartial those products might be.
National television news originates — and was seen to originate — from either the newsroom at the BBC's London Television Centre or the newsroom of ITN, which supplies both ITV and Channel 4 news.
Voters who read a stridently left- or right-wing paper are at least exercising some choice, even if their own partisanship is different from that of their paper.
But any bias they detect on television is inflicted upon them by what seems like a television news cartel.
Impartiality can be irritating to viewers as well as to governments — though much less so to viewers.
The Libertarian Ideal is seductive.
Previous studies have repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that voters, particularly those who read lowbrow tabloids, tend to believe the news on television but remain sceptical about what they read in the press (see, for example, Negrine, 1989, p. 3).
Our study confirms that finding but questions its relevance and its implications.
Despite their scepticism, readers said they found the press useful, particularly for guiding their voting decision if not for providing information.
Academics regard bias as a sin, but others may regard it as a virtue.
In the real world of politics the distinction between ‘bias’ and ‘commitment’is not always clear.
Our analyses of voters' information levels and their changing political preferences confirm and even strengthen that finding.
Once personal circumstances were taken into account, people's information levels were influenced primarily by how much television news they watched while their swings of political preferences were influenced primarily by which newspaper they read (Chapters 7 and 8).
Frequent television viewers were significantly more aware of opinion poll findings, more aware of party leaders' activities, more aware of second-rank politicians' activities, and more aware of the parties' campaign themes.
Watching television news also made viewers feel more warmth towards parties and their leaders generally (that is, towards any and all parties) and more inclined to vote (for any and all parties).
At the same time, readers of right-wing papers were significantly more inclined to be optimistic about the economy, had a significantly better image of the Conservative Party and its leader, gave the Conservative Party better ratings for handling issues, felt more  warmth towards the Conservative Party, and swung more strongly towards voting Conservative.
So despite the speculations of sociologists, television did not trivialize the news nor generate alienation and apathy.
Quite the contrary.
It did a particularly good job of informing people about the issues — especially if they were tabloid press readers, who could get relatively little information from the press; and it made electors feel more warmth and commitment to the party system and party leaders generally.
What it did not do was encourage people to discriminate between rival politicians and parties.
That remained much more a function of the press.
Also contrary to the speculations of media sociologists, television not only failed to determine what the electorate thought, it also failed to determine what they thought about , though it did communicate to the electorate what the parties were fighting about.
Television failed to ‘set the public agenda’ in 1987, though it succeeded in ‘communicating the party agenda’.
Television's enormous shift of emphasis on to defence issues in the third week of the campaign correlated with a huge rise in the number of voters who saw defence as the Conservative Party's main campaign theme, but with only a modest rise in the number of who wanted a defence debate.
The switch of news focus clearly had some influence on the public's agenda but a remarkably small one: in terms of television influencing the public's agenda the cause seemed much greater than the effect.
ONCE IN FOUR YEARS: THE FINDINGS
A major theme that ran through our findings was the enormous difference between election and non-election times.
In the midterm between elections interest in politics was much higher amongst highly educated voters and amongst regular readers of the quality press — the Guardian , the Telegraph ,The Times , and similar papers.
But that was no longer true at election time: as the election approached the highly educated became less interested and the less well educated became more interested (Chapter 2).
Those who remained uninterested in politics reacted by avoiding the news during the campaign.
On any day towards the end of the campaign, those who had been very interested in politics just before the campaign opened were one and a half times as likely  to read a paper, and twice as likely to watch both BBC-TV and ITV news, as those with no interest in politics (Chapter 3).
As the election approached, voters' awareness of opinion polls became less dependent upon their interest in politics and on whether they read the highbrow press rather than the tabloids.
Instead it became more dependent upon how frequently they watched television news.
The same was true for the electorate's awareness of party leaders.
Even their awareness of second-rank leaders came to depend more upon television viewing though, in this case, no less upon their interest in politics and their access to the quality press.
Particularly at election time, television reached out and informed sections of the electorate which were usually much less well informed about politics.
Television reached those parts of the electorate that other high-quality news sources could not reach.
Also as the campaign drew to a close, partisan voters alleged more unfavourable bias on television news and more favourable bias in their daily papers.
No doubt both tendencies arose in part because the voters themselves became more strongly partisan at that time; but it also seems likely that television became more strictly impartial (thereby offending both Labour and Conservative partisans more) while the press became more stridently partisan (Chapter 6).
As the election approached readers of right-wing tabloids, particularly those who had had weak or non-existent party preferences in the mid-term, swung heavily towards the Conservatives while other readers did not.
Most of that swing occurred between our Mid-Term Wave of interviews in the early summer of 1986 and our Pre-Campaign Wave in March 1987.
During the final campaign itself swings in voting preferences were relatively small, but the change between the mid-term and election day was large.
Overall television fulfilled its public service role of informing the electorate, and did so particularly well as the election drew closer; while the press fulfilled its self-assigned role as pamphleteers within a libertarian system, and did so with increasing effect as the election drew closer.
PRESCRIPTIONS
Supporters of the Libertarian Ideal must be pleased by the degree of public satisfaction with the press despite public perceptions of press bias.
Indeed they must be pleased by the traces of evidence that suggest that bias in a freely chosen medium such as a newspaper is actually popular with the electorate rather than resented.
Similarly they must be pleased by the traces of evidence that suggest partisan voters find the relative impartiality of television news somewhat irritating.
They will advocate the deregulation of broadcasting and the proliferation of channels.
If they hoped that freedom would automatically bring intellectual variety and competition they must be disappointed with the press and pessimistic about the effects of deregulation on broadcasting, however.
Perhaps, for them, the introduction of a variety of deliberately partisan television channels might be a more attractive if less than perfect solution.
It would give the viewer freedom of choice, even if that freedom was not extended to the broadcasters.
It might require public subsidies to political parties to finance their own newspapers and television stations.
Alternatively, rival parties could be given control of different public television stations: so BBC 1 and Channel 4 might become ‘conservative-right wing’ channels while BBC 2 and ITV become ‘socialist-left wing’channels, which could then compete for an audience.
The situation in some European countries approximates that model.
In Britain the idea of openly partisan broadcasting was pioneered by the Scottish Nationalists' clandestine and illegal Radio Free Scotland in the 1960s and more recently by Southern Sound, who used a discarded former commercial radio band to set up their entirely open and legal Conference Radio FM to cover the 1990 Conservative Party Conference from an unashamedly pro-Conservative viewpoint.
Supporters of the Public Service Ideal will be disappointed by our finding that television news is biased towards the incumbent government, and alarmed by our evidence that the tabloid press has such a powerful influence over its readers at election time.
For them, the solution to the problem of pro-government bias is simple: the broadcasters should treat government and governing party as one and the same, and give it the same coverage as the main opposition party.
The problem of an influential tabloid  press heavily biased towards one particular party is more difficult.
One solution would be to extend regulation to the press to ensure the same kind of impartiality as on television.
The Royal Commission rejected that solution as too oppressive, smacking of government censorship.
However, it would be possible to require all newspapers with a mass circulation (say, for example, half a million copies) to carry, without payment, the equivalent of television's Party Election Broadcasts — that is , pages of free advertising in the same party ratio as PEBs on television.
Sceptics may doubt whether anyone would read it but our survey shows that viewers take PEBs seriously and rate them only slightly less useful than news broadcasts for helping decide how to vote (though much less useful than news broadcasts for providing information).
That would not in any way restrict the paper's right to print whatever it wished in the rest of the paper.
Free and regulated newspaper advertising would also help to reduce the dependence of party politics on large trade union, business, or private donations; and the press could take some satisfaction, if no profit, from their public service contribution to an informed democracy.
Alternatively, the public service rules for television impartiality could be changed to require balance throughout the mass media as a whole.
The press would be left to adopt whatever political positions it wished, but television would be required to adjust its coverage to ensure that television plus the press, taken together, were politically balanced.
So when the press was biased towards the political right, television coverage would redress the balance by leaning to the left.
Conversely, if the press swung heavily to the left, television would have to reorient its coverage and redress the balance by leaning to the right.
(For an extended discussion of alternative approaches to media reform see Curran, 1986.)
These are radical suggestions which may seem impractical; but the status quo may be indefensible.
Satellite television stations under the control of press barons and modelled on the tabloid press may make inaction even more indefensible.
Those who support the Public Service Ideal could accept the combination of a polyarchic press putting forward a multitude of rival viewpoints and an impartial, balanced broadcasting monopoly.
That would produce both balance and variety in the media taken as a  whole.
But by the same logic they cannot accept the combination of a press controlled by a handful of publishers, overwhelmingly biased in one direction, and impartial, balanced broadcasting.
Still less can they accept impartial public broadcasting combined with a biased press and biased satellite television.
If balance is important it cannot be limited to public television.