

The Making Of A Christian Leader
Schooling
CHILDHOOD
The making of Archbishops of Canterbury has been as various as the making of Popes.
Since the reign of Queen Mary in 1558, when the last Plantagenet to be an Archbishop died, they did not include among their number members of the royal family.
It was natural that most of them were educated at Oxford or Cambridge, since until the Victorian age those were the two places for training the clergy of the Church.
From the first Protestant Archbishop Thomas Cranmer under King Henry VIII, all the Protestant Archbishops were educated at Oxford or Cambridge and a majority taught at one of those universities.
For 130 years after 1558 every archbishop had been the head of an Oxford or Cambridge College.
They came from almost every variety of home, from one grandson of a duke to the son of someone who survived on a small-holding.
Several of them were the sons of merchants, some prosperous, some small, two ruined.
In modern times differences appeared.
Six of them during their career were headmasters of great schools, and this never happened before 1829, and was a sign of the rising importance which the nation gave to the teaching profession.
More of them were the sons or grandsons of someone in the Christian ministry.
All the five archbishops before Michael Ramsey were the sons or grandsons of Christian ministers.
Therefore, on historical precedent, in contemplating the origin of a modern archbishop we would expect him to be educated at Oxford or Cambridge; to have a good chance that he taught there; and to be the son or grandson of a Christian minister.
On all three counts Michael Ramsey scored.
Cambridge lay at the heart of his education and his career.
On both his father's side and his mother's side he was the grandson of a Christian minister.
He did even better than that.
On both his father's side and his mother's side he was the great-grandson of a Christian minister.
He was a Cambridge man born and bred.
He lived in the town of  Cambridge for more years of his life than in any other town, and this though he managed during his life to live in nine different towns and in one village.
He was the son of a Cambridge don.
He was sent to his first school there.
He was sent to study at the University of Cambridge.
In his student days he was happy and successful in his undergraduate career.
Always he remained grateful to his college.
Later he became the vicar of a Cambridge parish.
Later still he became for a short time a professor at Cambridge.
His aunt and sister-in-law always lived in Cambridge.
It surprised some that he did not retire to Cambridge.
After his retirement there was no place where he took more delight in an invitation to talk than in one of the Cambridge churches or one of the college chapels.
The place always held affection for him.
In the town, and in the university, he felt at home.
His father's father was a Congregational minister who came from Ireland early in life and ministered in various English chapels.
While he served a flourishing chapel at Dewsbury in Yorkshire, his son, Michael Ramsey's father, won a scholarship in mathematics to Magdalene College, Cambridge, the first generation of the family to go to a university.
He worked hard, which was rare among the undergraduates of Magdalene College in those days, and came out with a high degree in mathematics.
Though the college was very Anglican, he retained all his family's loyalty to the Congregationalist tradition and way of worship.
After a time teaching in a Scottish school, Fettes, the degree got him a fellowship in mathematics at his own college of Magdalene; where he remained the rest of his long life — teaching mathematics, holding various college offices, going every week to Emmanuel Congregational chapel, and becoming after a time one of its deacons or church officers.
He was a good mathematical teacher and he wrote a number of text-books, some of which went on selling into the 198os.
To the outward eye he was austere, even bleak.
Colleagues and pupils thought of him as formidable; a few found him frightening, a few found him affable.
The Master of the College, Arthur Benson, said of him humorously that when roused he would become ‘all eye and moustache’.
But, wrote Michael Ramsey in retrospect — it is his own but —‘he had wit and generosity and there were pupils who had deep affection for him.
I was never consciously frightened of him and felt close to him and was regarded as a favourite child to him in some ways.
Yet I think that at the subconscious and half-conscious levels he was a heavy weight upon me of a perhaps oppressive or repressive kind.
In later life I was made unnecessarily unhappy by my religious divergence from his position.’
In the long view he thought that his father's unbending moral conviction was important in his own life.
On a return visit to Fettes, Arthur Ramsey stayed with one of the housemasters and met the sister Agnes Wilson, who kept house there.
They were married in 19o2.
They lived at first not far from Magdalene College in a house which looked across the river Cam to Midsummer Common.
There the first three children were born — Frank in 1902, Michael two years later (14 November 19o4), and then Bridget, the elder daughter.
His grandfather on the mother's side, that is the father of Agnes Wilson, was the vicar of Horbling in Lincolnshire.
Michael Ramsey was therefore the grandson of a Congregationalist minister on one side and of an Anglican vicar on the other.
He was baptized by his Wilson grandfather at Horbling.
The nurse was an impostor who drugged the baby but was exposed after two days and sacked.
Michael Ramsey's mother was one of nine children and of the brothers two were schoolmasters, two were clergymen, one an organist, and one a doctor.
She studied history at St Hugh's College, Oxford — early days for a woman — and knew Lewis Carroll, and was taught by one of the best teachers then in the historical school at Oxford, a future Master of Balliol, A. L. Smith, upon whom she always looked back with gratitude.
Later she taught English and history at Putney High School, and before marriage published a book about Lamb's Essays of Elia and another book about a play by Browning.
Child of the vicarage, she did not press her Anglicanism against her husband's nonconformity.
They attended the Congregational church regularly and took the children.
During her too short life she never ceased to be Anglican; but she was a Socialist, and a suffragette, and religion for her came to mean, not so much creed or piety, as having a lively social conscience.
She was not a violent demonstrator as a suffragette but she worked hard for the women's vote, and at times vociferously at public meetings.
After the end of the first World War she was active in the co-operative movement and the Labour Party, which was not common for a woman of her background in those early years.
Her son Michael's memory of her had nothing in it that was not good; a woman radiant, friendly, outgoing, understanding.
Politically she was alive.
She brought Socialist thinkers or politicians into the house, like Graham Wallas or Hugh Dalton.
She was a good speaker on public platforms.
It was recorded that when she was speaking in the market-place she was audible by the Senate House.
She paraded round the town in processions for votes for women.
She also had the powerful sense of humour which her children inherited, and could be very amusing in conversation.
She had other gifts which her son Michael inherited.
She could hold the interest of a group of  undergraduates at a tea-party and have a serious exchange of ideas with them.
On Sundays she would invite a group of Magdalene undergraduates to lunch and they would stay till tea; then another group still larger came to tea.
Her younger daughter remembered them clustered round her chair as she talked and, as someone said, ‘toyed with the frayed edges of a bun’.
She took little interest in how she dressed.
One who knew her remembered a very large hole in her stocking.
Her daughter could remember greenish-black wrinkled stockings, and a newspaper report of a speech, ‘Mrs Ramsey — proud to be shabby’.
But her face was interesting and intelligent and attractive.
Her personality was magnetic.
Despite the cook and the housemaid the house gave the impression of being unloved.
The dining-room was full of ugly sepia prints of old masters — mostly angels.
Much of the house was painted dark brown with pale brown walls.
Arthur Ramsey told his daughter that he chose this colour ‘because anyone could throw a coffee-cup at the wall without it showing’.
In the kitchen stood a large bag of coke.
The centre-piece of the dining-room table was a bowl of electric light bulbs.
Despite the hilarious hostess, the house was a bit grim, not only in its décor.
Father was convinced that his wife would not have enough to live on when he died and overworked to get money.
He wrote textbooks, took lodgers, took pupils.
The children saw not much of him because all day he was out at his duties and in the evenings he retired to his study to convert his lectures into books.
They followed him to the study because for economy it was the only fire in the house, but he worked through their conversation and did not join it.
There was a cook and a maid and he could be fierce with them.
He could be stern even with his wife if something went wrong.
He was liable to terrible migraines.
Meal times were felt by the children to be dreary occasions.
He had no real friends and was difficult.
But he had a deep affection for his wife, and she for him.
They had family prayers every day after breakfast led by father.
The young Michael found Emmanuel church austere, and later, when he knew what that meant, puritan.
They sat in the family pew.
He thought the extemporary prayer very long and hard to bear.
The sermons were livelier, for the resident minister Carter was a cultivated man.
Michael's younger sister found him a fidget in church and thought it was fidgeting to excess.
He whiled away the time by contemplating the stained glass lancet windows behind the preacher and the holy table.
They were windows of puritan worthies, including Cromwell and Milton.
He liked the hymns and ever afterwards admired the Congregational hymn book.
The little boy loved toy soldiers and drafted speeches for the commanders-in-chief.
The family had holidays at Perranporth in Cornwall and if the soldiers fell into a rock pool and were drowned, Michael conducted a funeral service for them.
But soon he discovered that politicians were more interesting than colonels so he arranged his soldiers as though they were the House of Commons and made them harangue each other.
About the age of 6 he wrote a book called ‘Ways to the City Bright by the Rev. A. M. Ramsey’.
Notice that at so young an age he knew that ‘the Rev.’ was better than ‘Rev.’But the book was not orthodox in divinity because father locked it up and would not let Michael's sister read it.
When Michael was 5 the family moved house, only half a mile, to a larger house nearer Magdalene College, Howfield beyond Castle Hill.
What the older Michael mostly remembered about this were the games — croquet in which the parents joined the children, tennis, a sort of squash with his brother hitting a tennis ball against a veranda wall, expeditions up the river through the Backs and then up to the village of Grantchester.
The other children found Michael to be very odd, and the girls (two sisters now) resented the oddness.
This was in part due to a disability which was not realized.
He had a physical clumsiness in the management of his hands.
He learnt to eat tidily later than most children, and the mess down his front was hard for the others to bear.
But this was not all.
His younger sister remembered that suddenly he might leave the table with a wild mad look on his face and rush round the garden.
In the night he might be heard running up and down his attic bedroom banging the wall at each end, and keeping other people awake.
The sisters found him a loner, difficult to relate to in a normal friendly way.
The house, nevertheless, had visitors interesting to the children; a couple of famous Congregationalist laymen Frank Salter and Bernard Manning, both of whom were historians and riotous rompers with children; the Reddaway children who lived next door; the daughters of G. G. Coulton the English hammer of Popes; and the friendship between the two sets of children caused Coulton to take an interest in Michael and carry him off to the village church at Coton to see medieval graffiti.
The lodgers in the house were interesting — Indian and Siamese students trying to get into the university.
Michael specially liked the Siamese.
As the children grew, Michael felt himself a backward boy.
This was because of his elder brother Frank, whose academic career was already starred.
Michael had a sense that he pushed along behind a much cleverer creature and could not keep up.
Boys who feel backward grow  backward, even when they are not, for they suffer from the illusion that by nature they cannot solve the problems set to them.
Ramsey was sent to two dames' schools in succession but learnt so little that his parents took him away and for a year he was taught at home by his mother.
This he hated.
His mother was the most important object in his life.
But being taught by her made him squirm.
He told his sister how it was impossible to listen, and how he felt compelled to pull horrible nervous faces all the time.
Then the parents tried the opposite method.
They sent him to the King's College Choir School.
This is situated on the Backs, with only a short walk across to King's College and its great chapel.
It was not necessary for a boy to be musical; in addition to the choirboys there was an ordinary school.
They had day-boys.
Ramsey was one.
The boys who boarded in dormitories despised the boys who slept at home.
They denounced them as ‘mouldy day-bugs’.
For the rest of his life Ramsey treasured with vast amusement that once he was a mouldy day-bug.
Here the boy met the first Anglican priest who interested him in religion.
The chaplain of King's College, whose work was with undergraduates, came to teach divinity to the day-boys, among whom was the little Ramsey, before breakfast on two days in the week.
This was Michael Ramsey's first meeting with Eric Milner-White, whom he later came to regard as one of the big men in his life and whose photograph was on his wall when he died.
When he looked back upon his short time at the Choir School of King's College, it was the meeting with Milner-White which he saw as the memorable gift from the school.
Milner-White was then a charming young man of rather Anglo-Catholic opinions who was beginning to make himself an expert both on stained glass and on ways of English worship and prayer.
Since he was to be the founder of the service of carols and nine lessons, he made a permanent mark on English, and not only English, life and religion.
What the little boys remembered about his class was that he made divinity fun, even though it was before breakfast.
The parents continued to find Ramsey's progress too slow.
They found the system of being a day-boy unsatisfactory.
They had four children and not much income and in those days believed like the rest of the middle class that they could only find a good education for their boy at an independent fee-paying school.
Therefore, if this backward boy was to get a good education, he must somehow be crammed up or taught up to scrape a scholarship at one of the big independent schools where most of the fees would be paid for scholars.
They now tried a boarding-school at Sandroyd in Surrey where one of the two headmasters was the brother of Mrs Ramsey.
Michael was  desperately homesick at first.
The sufferings of the young when first they go away from home and try to hold their own with cruel contemporaries are felt to be very great even when they are not.
It was the occasion of the first letter from Michael Ramsey which is preserved:
Tuesday Evening just after tea.
My dear mother, I never were more utterly miserable.
I have just had Greek before tea; It is horrid.
we did translation, Xenophon, I do not know a word of it I do not think Greek alone makes me miserable, I am always miserable.
I cannot bear it any longer, I am crying now.
I cannot stand it any longer, if someone does not come to me I will give up and be miserable for ever and perhaps go home of my own accord, write or wire to Uncle C. and say you are coming at once pleas darling, and come on Saturday or I will give up altogether and always wretched.
Do not tell any about me nor anyone except father and possibly Frank, write at once if you are going to.
I am too miserable for words.
I beleive that you will take pity and come at once, Your loving son Michael I am just crying like anythinke Come at once never mind anything else I am utterly miserable
His mother came, but she did not take him away, and his Uncle Charlie told him that if he wrote another letter like that he would get a thrashing, so he stayed and coped.
And this school, of which afterwards he could only remember that he was so homesick, must have helped the mind which was alleged to be backward and was not.
For in 1918 he just missed a scholarship to Winchester College; and in those days the scholarship at Winchester was regarded as the crown for the cleverest boys in England.
How to translate Xenophon and ancient Greek military manoé4uvres must have got into his head after all.
In the same year he won a scholarship at Repton not far from Derby.
It was not a scrape.
He was second to the list of scholars.
One of his Wilson uncles became the organist of Ely cathedral.
The boy often went to stay at Ely and at the age of 8 could be observed giving strangers a guided tour.
The visitors could be seen to be bewitched at the learning about the cathedral coming out of such callow lips.
Later he thought that his early affection for Fly cathedral had something to do with his interest in churches and their architecture.
He began to make a collection of brass rubbings.
REPTON
Repton was an Anglo-Saxon town, on the south bank of the River Trent, and was at one time a chief city of the Kingdom of Mercia.
Saxon remains could still be found among the buildings, there is a Saxon crypt to the church, and the setting is hauntingly beautiful.
It was one of the schools that came out of the Reformation, for it was founded during the reign of Queen Mary by a landowner who sat for Derbyshire in Parliament.
Like several such places it was a quiet little charity school until the railways came and boys could travel long distances to school and the Victorian needs of parents turned it over two decades into a modern and reputable independent school.
The school at Repton achieved a record by having as its headmasters two future Archbishops of Canterbury in succession.
William Temple came at the age of 28 and was headmaster from 1911 to 1914.
The Dictionary of National Biography describes this as a pleasant interlude in his life.
He did not think that he judged wisely to accept, because he accepted another job only two years after he was appointed and then had to withdraw because he was found not old enough to be legal.
Everyone remembered him as a big man in all senses but not as a good headmaster except that he liked everyone and everyone liked him and in chapel he was a superlative speaker.
He was succeeded by Geoffrey Fisher, who was 27 when he became headmaster and pulled the school together.
In most of the seventeenth century Archbishops of Canterbury were ex-heads of Cambridge and Oxford colleges.
In all the eighteenth century none of the archbishops held such a post.
In the century from 1862 to 1961 six of the eight archbishops were former headmasters of public schools.
That famous churchman Arnold of Rugby put a stamp upon independent education which helped to produce this consequence.
Reformed universities produced able clergy whom the school could attract to their staffs; and the Victorian parent still wanted to feel that the principal educator of his child was in some way a man of God.
William Temple and Fisher at Repton were among the late manifestations of this feeling.
The pattern, that this was the way archbishops happened, was broken by the steady increase in lay headmasters during the earlier twentieth century.
Although Ramsey himself was to be the person who altered the pattern in archbishops, he was not the cause of the change.
Therefore the little Ramsey, when he arrived at Repton in 1918, met a headmaster destined to play a far more important part in his life than is the fate of most headmasters.
Fisher was quick, affable, capable.
He always saw straight to the point of an argument.
He could remember  who everyone was.
He could be a severe disciplinarian but he was not a rigid man.
Despite the geniality he kept his distance.
The small Ramsey respected Fisher with that derogatory respect which schoolboys attribute to headmasters.
He called Fisher ‘the little snipe’.
Ramsey had no sense of rapport.
But it would be a miracle if a small boy felt rapport with the headmaster of a public school.
He came to regard Fisher as distant, but forceful and rapid and efficient, and later as friendly.
What at school he most admired about Fisher was the teacher of Latin and Greek.
Fisher had zest.
He rushed them along.
He did not delay boringly on points of scholarship.
He bubbled along with enthusiasm and humour.
He made the dead languages into living literature.
The small Ramsey was not happy.
His eye was not swift in pursuit of the ball, his muscles not yet co-ordinated.
He did not like cricket or football.
The school was very good at cricket, Ramsey was not.
He resented the cult of those religions.
He preferred to spend time in the school library.
He liked to work away at Latin or Greek, or to pick books of history or biography off the shelves.
Some afternoons he was forced onto the field and trotted around with boredom.
When there were not games he disappeared into the library and found himself the only person in the building.
He was not a good fielder at cricket.
He would go off into a musing in the outfield.
‘I had a curious strain of not attending to things which failed to grip my interest.’
His father believed that he had a good eye and could have played the game well if he was not liable to slip into a trance and forget that his attention was needed.
These attitudes did not commend themselves to his colleagues.
They regarded him as an oddity.
Boys of 15 are not accustomed to make the lives of odd boys happy.
They believe in conformity.
His trousers usually fell down a bit and he was observed to be always hitching them up by peculiar digs with his elbows.
Even Geoffrey Fisher decided that he was eccentric.
The young society was not drawn to quaintness, or studiousness, or absence of mind in the outfield.
The three schoolmasters upon whom he looked back with gratitude tell something about the boy:(1) a clear-headed Anglo-Catholic priest with a rasp of a voice who taught classics, Henry Balmforth:(2) the librarian Burd, a true classical scholar, and the only master in the school said not to know the name of the captain of cricket:(3) a gentle teacher (Hayward), more expert at moths and butterflies than adolescents.
In his last years at Repton he was happier.
By then he won the right to be an oddity.
He discovered an unexpected gift which won boys' respect.
He found that he could make a speech — that is, he could think on his feet, and not be at a loss for words.
At the school debating society  he won a name; and he quickly discovered a truth never discovered by some undergraduates nor even by some mature debaters, that you cannot speak well unless you care.
At that moment the politics of the world was exciting.
The emotions of a just-ended war, with millions dead, were rampant.
The general election of 1918 brought Lloyd George to renewed power on an unpleasant ticket, Hang the Kaiser.
Ramsey's father and mother were nauseated by the jingoism.
They resented Lloyd George for ousting his predecessor Asquith, whom they admired as a great Liberal prime minister.
In the election of 1918 they could not bear it and both voted for the Labour Party.
Their young son at Repton was stirred.
He turned Asquith into a private hero.
He was excited by Asquith's successes, cast into melancholy by his defeats.
In the school library he hunted out books on politics.
Soon this hero-worship was informed.
He discovered about Liberal politics in Ireland, or Free Trade, or the League of Nations.
And this caused a flaming row at the school debating society.
At the age of 15 this boy was blisteringly opposed to the Allied armies being sent to Russia to fight Bolshevism.
An assistant master with Tory opinions spoke in favour of the need for the armies in Russia.
Ramsey was very rude to him in the debate.
It was not customary for boys at school to attack their masters rudely even in debate.
There followed what Ramsey described as ‘some unpleasantness’.
He had to recite from memory in front of his headmaster fifty Greek lines from the play Medea — a severe punishment, for learning fifty lines of verse in a language imperfectly known would take several hours of spare time.
The severity may have had a cause hidden from the young Ramsey.
just before he arrived at the school Victor Gollancz left its staff, ejected because he tried to rouse boys' minds by heady and daring political argument.
In a war for the nation's life this was held by external authorities to be provocative.
The Gollancz scandal, as the blimps thought of it, was widely known.
Though the war then ended, the headmaster of Repton could not but be wary of political passion expressed by boys.
Gollancz was the notorious thing about Repton in 1918–19.
The small Ramsey knew nothing about this controversy.
Yet he had to spend hours of his time learning Greek iambic verse as a punishment for being rude to a master in a political debate.
This boyish hatred of military interference to put down Communism in Russia had a long consequence.
Ramsey developed a hatred of the chief proponent of interference in Russia, Winston Churchill.
For the rest of Churchill's life, Ramsey distrusted him.
Meanwhile he became a regular speaker at debates.
In his maturity what he remembered of his  style of speaking were purple passages and a rather caustic irony.
But he also remembered that by the time he left school he was ‘a thoroughly political animal’.
He came into battle with the school over the obligation to parade with the Officers Training Corps.
By 1920 the memory of the Great War spoke more loudly than ever.
During the war military training took several hours of the school curriculum and this did not end with the armistice.
To get out of the military training then given at boarding schools needed iron determination and met pressure from schoolmasters and unpopularity among boys.
Ramsey could not say he was a pacifist.
He was nothing but glad that Britain won a war.
He could not say that he had scruples of conscience for not joining in the military training.
When asked by Geoffrey Fisher to explain his reasons, he found that he had difficulty in finding a reason.
He said that he thought it wrong to encourage a military spirit, and that it was contrary to the ideals of disarmament.
He made his headmaster admit that military training was not (strictly speaking) compulsory, armed himself with a letter from his father, and won the contest of wills.
That summer of 1920 he had conversations which affected his mind and may have been decisive indirectly for his future choice of career.
In the summer of 1920, the family went on a sea-side holiday to Hollandon-sea near Clacton.
His elder brother Frank was 17 and revered by Michael who was 15.
Frank, at the age of 16, had already won a scholarship to Trinity College in Cambridge.
But the disparity in intelligence which Michael felt or imagined made no difference to their affection.
They were both ungainly.
Both had huge laughs.
Both were untidy.
Both were thought odd by their contemporaries.
And, already in adolescence, both cared for the things of the mind.
They walked together along the sands, and talked.
Michael had a problem on his mind.
He was the child of a religious father and a more vaguely religious mother.
Yet his closest school-friend, that previous summer term, he found to be an agnostic.
The quarrel between faith and unbelief touched him for the first time and unsettled his mind.
On one of the walks on the beach, he told Frank about his unsettlement.
He discovered to his astonishment that Frank now professed atheism.
Frank said that he did not believe in God; such a belief cannot possibly be proved; the good life is possible without it; and the only faculty to judge is the reason, which tells us to say, we do not know.
This discovery of Frank's atheism was more than a perturbation to Michael.
He was so worried by it that he took it, and his own doubts about faith, to his father.
Arthur Ramsey gave Michael a book by a  scientist (Romanes) who was once an atheist and later became a believer.
When he got back to Cambridge Michael (still a boy of 15) read Romanes.
The book helped him and satisfied his mind for the time.
This debate caused a reaction in the direction opposite to Frank's.
He resolved to practise his religion better.
Accustomed at home to Congregational worship and at school to the Book of Common Prayer, he found that he liked the Common Prayer better.
With father's leave he was confirmed in the Church of England at school.
He was just 16.
Father made no difficulty.
He expected him henceforth to be both a Congregationalist and an Anglican.
Neither father nor son realized that this was the start of a sundering between them.
Geoffrey Fisher prepared him for confirmation.
Afterwards he thought this course of instruction sound and sensible.
At Repton he was already interested in Anglo-Catholicism; perhaps from reaction against father's nonconformity, perhaps from reaction against his headmaster Fisher's common sense.
In the school library he found a bizarre book from the Protestant underworld, Walsh's Secret History of the Oxford Movement (third edition 1898), which pictured Anglo-Catholics as conspirators to promote tyranny, lies, and immorality.
The boy saw through the fanaticism and found that his sense of chivalry was excited.
One of the nastiest pseudo-religious books of the Victorian age helped to condition the impressionable mind of a future Christian leader of the next century.
On top of all this was the constant need to defend his religion against a clever elder brother who was an atheist.
The two brothers had conversation after conversation on the theme of religion, the younger one sticking to his guns.
The elder said that reason dismissed religion.
The younger said that religious experience was too valid to be dismissed by mere reason, that reason was not all of humanity.
The argument went on and on.
The elder was contemptuous when the younger replied to his crushing arguments by the reply, the reason why you think like that is that you don't say your prayers.
Michael's problem was that he saw the glamour in Frank's position: the love of liberty; the excitement in the free pursuit of truth; the shaking off of convention and mere conformity; the feeling that religion was a ‘stuffy valley’ out of which he had grown.
He also had to recognize that his brother was an unselfish person; so that the axiom, ‘only religious people are unselfish’ did not wash.
The argument was a fire in which to test an immature faith.
A school prize was offered for a study of the book Belief in God by Bishop Charles Gore.
When Frank heard that Michael thought of going in for the prize on this set book he was indignant and sent a message to Michael, ‘Who in his senses would read a book by a bishop?’
Where should he go next?
Everyone took it for granted that it must be Oxford or Cambridge.
Fisher saw that this mind was not the grammarian or writer of Greek and Latin prose such as Cambridge liked, but was a meditative, half-philosophical mind, which might be better suited in the Oxford school.
Ramsey's father was determined to have the boy at his own university and if possible at his own college.
The Master of Magdalene, Arthur Benson, encouraged the idea.
In December 1922 Ramsey took the scholarship examination of a group of colleges containing Magdalene and was given the top classical scholarship.
At the time all the family rejoiced with him.
It paid for a lot of education.
Later in life he wondered whether it was the blessing that it seemed.
Though he had won a scholarship, he would never be interested in the niceties of Greek and Latin languages.
He was glad to have the equipment to enable him to read Greek and Latin.
Afterwards it turned out to be indispensable to his career.
But the books which he took from the shelves in those stolen hours in the school library were history and biography and political science.
What he most wanted to know about was not the ancient world but modern politics with its historical background.
He wondered afterwards whether his unlooked-for success in the examination caused him to read the wrong subject at the university.
In old age he used to regret that he did so well in the classical scholarship because it caused him not to read history.
Ramsey went out of his years at school with a sense of contentment which in retrospect he knew to be a veneer.
He pretended to himself that Repton was a gloriously happy time.
He was too much of a nonconformist in his origins, too much of an individualist, at that time too much of an oddity, ever to be really happy in so tight-knit a community as a boarding-school.
Geoffrey Fisher wrote a last school report which in later years became legendary: ‘A boy with plenty of force of character who, in spite of certain uncouthnesses, has done good service on his own lines’.
In this report the mature Ramsey specially valued not only the word uncouth- nesses but also the pointed description of his nonconforming character in the phrase on his own lines.
In September 1923 the Master of Magdalene, Arthur Benson, lunched with the Ramsey family in Cambridge.
It was a few days before Michael Ramsey first became an undergraduate at his college.
The Master recorded in his diary: ‘Michael, a distressing object, so sharp-faced, dull-eyed, spotted’.
Or, a little later, ‘Michael sharp-faced, slightly priggish, friendly’.
Ramsey was still 18 and had not shed the spots of adolescence.
Later in life no one could have called him dull-eyed or sharp-faced.
His adult eyes sparkled with amusement and  vitality.
His mature face was more likely to remind the observer of Friar Tuck's jollity than of Lord Brougham's long pointed nose.
MAGDALENE
Ramsey arrived at the university in October 1923.
He remembered that at his formal entry (matriculation) the praelector of the college gave all the new undergraduates advice on their deportment: ‘If a Fellow asks you to lunch, leave at 2.15 p.m.; unless the general conversation is particularly interesting when you may leave at 2.25 p.m.’
His fellow-undergraduates thought of him as a gangly youth with brown hair.
He had rooms in the beautiful Pepys building, at the end which looked over the River Cam and across the river to some slum-like warehouses.
He found that the rooms next door were occupied by Selwyn Lloyd, whom he discovered to be like himself a strong Liberal and with whom he was therefore soon friends.
He did not find it awkward that his own father was the tutor of the college and so responsible in a double sense for his pastoral care.
Nor did he find it awkward that the tutor's rooms were immediately below his own in the Pepys building.
Evidently he did not expect to give riotous or alcoholic parties at times when the tutor might be in.
The undergraduates found him a leg-puller, and a reveller in political argument.
The chaplain of the college was a pleasant gentleman, his teacher of classics was a worthy pedant, and neither meant much to him.
The person who meant a lot to him was the Master.
Arthur Benson recovered from several years of mental breakdown about two years previously and was in the evening summer of his life.
He wrote beautiful, at times too beautiful prose.
He published at least one book a year; readers who began could not put them down, though at the end of the book they had received nothing.
He kept meditating on the highest ideals and professed weakness to do anything about those ideals.
He observed naughtily, subtly, wittily, passively, on occasion with a feline caress.
He enjoyed well-mannered, good-looking, and well-to-do undergraduates.
Michael Ramsey qualified only under the first of those epithets.
Benson had what Michael Ramsey called ‘romantic favourites’.
But Benson drew out all undergraduates.
He talked to them as equals, criticized their essays, and was liked.
His mind usually stayed at the level of gossip and anecdote but not always.
His diary has been well edited: to read it is like looking into a large egg-shell full of bubbles.
The undergraduates of Magdalene used to say about their Master that he spent the morning doing nothing and spent the afternoon writing about what he had done in the morning.
Ramsey was fascinated by his Master.
He liked him very much, and felt the enchantment, and found it almost a spell.
In his first term he had to write for him an essay on the art of poetry.
Yet he also found in him a warning.
He observed the introspection and its richness of imagination with a certain alarm; Benson looking into himself and finding there, as Ramsey put it, ‘a huge world of fantasy’, which caused him distress and yet conditioned his affection for the human race.
Ramsey realized that it was possible for a mind to inhabit a partly unreal world.
It was pleasant to be quiet in an armchair thinking.
He decided that for him to sit back and imagine, to follow a Bensonian way and be a dilettante among refined ideas, was an actual temptation.
He disliked the notion.
He kept fit at the university by playing a little hockey, in summer tennis, in winter walking and bicycling and going for runs.
Twice he won the Old Boys race at King's College school.
The early interest in church architecture and brasses afforded him destinations for the bicycle.
On these rides, sometimes of many miles, he found things with which Emmanuel Congregational church and Repton school chapel had not made him familiar.
He found Anglo-Catholic country churches.
He was interested in their notice-boards and what they said.
He started to pay attention to the fittings in the chancel and the ornaments.
These empty country churches were not dead or cold to him.
He rode his bicycle like a pilgrim on the quest for a holy city.
Neither the religion of the school chapel, nor the religion of a puritan church, satisfied.
He looked for signs of a faith more supernatural, less conventional, more revolutionary.
His mother was still prominent in the Cambridge Labour Party.
Michael went with her to meetings and joined her when she worked for the Liberal cause because it was the next best thing to Labour.
The freshman soon made a name for himself in debates at the Union, which is the historic Cambridge debating society.
His appearance, that first term, failed to impress everyone as it failed to impress the Master of his college.
He was thick-set, with a moustache.
He spoke with clarity, and humour, and charm, and when he felt strongly, with passion.
He had a curious sing-song voice which was a handicap, but the voice had musical timbre and was attractive.
Some critics thought him sonorous but the word was not uncomplimentary.
He first spoke on the French invasion of the Ruhr.
In March 1925 he beat a Conservative mediocrity in an election for secretary of the Union, in Michaelmas 1925 he was vice-president, in Lent 1926 president.
Ramsey's weight in debates rested upon more than his manner and his fluency and his command of words.
He could be vehement in  denunciation.
On occasion marvellous phrases sprang out of his mouth and enthralled the audience.
On off days he could sound tired, and sometimes excitement carried him away to an excess of length.
He was not the cleverest speaker in the house, a palm which by general consent went to the very Tory Charles Smyth, and the house also contained Patrick Devlin and Selwyn Lloyd and sometimes Rab Butler.
But he was the most persuasive speaker in the house, for he had a cause which he believed in morally.
Patrick Devlin regarded him as the most effective speaker of his time:
He was not clever or epigrammatic in the Union manner and only occasionally witty, but always spoke as though he had something to contribute to the debate.
He projected himself as a man who would be worth listening to.
He spoke weightily — the words deliberately produced and, as it were, laid on the table.
He left behind him the impression — but not as if he had ever meant to say it — that anyone who disagreed with him must really be rather stupid.
In the autumn of 1924 the general election reduced the Liberal Party to a pitiable number of MPs.
Asquith lost his seat.
Whether it was the unsavoury reputation of the government of Lloyd George; or whether it was the division in the party between the followers of Lloyd George and the followers of Asquith; or whether it was the aftermath of universal suffrage and the desire of the working man for a party which he could call his own — it now looked certain that the party division of the country would no longer lie between Liberal and Conservative but in a wider gulf between Conservative and Labour, with the Liberal Party on the sideline.
And since Cambridge University of 1924 was hardly likely to breed recruits for the Labour Party — that took another three years — the young men and women of the university could not do much but move, or move further, towards the Conservative side.
Ramsey believed none of this.
He was sure that the Liberal idea was what the country needed.
He was determined to resurrect the Liberalism of Cambridge, and turn it into a force among junior members of the university.
In what the Liberal idea consisted he was clear.
Whether he would have been able to stick to it if he had ever risen to be national leader of the Liberal Party is not certain.
It had about it the idealism of youth.
But because it was idealistic it was the more persuasive when he preached it to his young contemporaries.
Conservatives and Socialists are committed to dogmas.
Socialism has a dogma that private enterprise is wrong.
Conservatism has a dogma that the State should not intervene.
Only Liberalism is free to use State action where it is needed, to refrain where that is better.
It is the Liberal idea which gives its adherents the freedom to think and enquire, and not  follow a party leader like sheep.
Liberals care passionately for the individual, and for the freedom of the individual.
Here was Socialism putting forward irrelevant theories of class war and wanting to rule the country by a set of theories which had nothing to do with the welfare of the people.
And here was Conservatism, with a do-nothing prime minister in Mr Baldwin, with an out-of-date commitment to maintaining the British Empire in a world where it had ceased to be possible or right to maintain it, so that we spent millions in building a fortress at Singapore while we spent nothing more on housing or education.
Ramsey could grip the house by pouring ridicule into whatever he hated.
He could be scarifying in his abuse of imperialists.
At the end of one debate there was nothing left of either Fascism or Communism when he had finished with them.
But what causes them?
Who will be our upstart Mussolini?
To be an upper class party is to breed malcontents, that is to encourage revolutionaries.
To be a Socialist class party is to encourage revolutionaries and therefore to breed reaction, which is Fascism.
‘Liberalism alone is the great Lady Surgeon of a nation's maladies, and while she is temporarily abed with a broken limb, the nation is the sufferer’(Ramsey in the Gownsman , 6 December 1924).
He electrified the house by vituperating the way the House of Commons behaves.
Members troop into lobbies at the beck of a party leader as though they have no minds to use.
He spoke of the monstrous word Whip to describe the officer who marshals the privates.
He spoke of the way Britain failed to take care of the environment and lamented the creeping of towns and the vanishing of the fields and hedgerows, not so much because of the animals as because of the air and the nature of man and the liberty of the soul.
He had one side of him, in those days, which suspected modern science because of its part in the process of industrialization, and its philistine attitude, as he supposed, to literature.
He bewildered his audience for a moment, and then moved them, when he suddenly turned a political invective about government's neglect of the environment into a lament that one of the sad losses was going to be the poetry of the countryside, the pastorals of a Vergil or a Theocritus.
‘He would be keener’, thought one young observer, ‘upon reviving perishing literature than a perishing political party.
In the Union he was very popular.
A visitor who heard him speak long remembered how the feeling of the meeting rose towards him when he got on his legs.
He could be very funny indeed.
He had a gift of mimicry, and when he made a speech as though he were Asquith or Lloyd George it would raise shouts of laughter.
Once he acted the part of Asquith in some amateur dramatics, and danced round the stage with ‘Lloyd George’, singing most comically a refrain which he wrote himself.
In the eyes of that generation of students he gave Liberalism a magic, a faith in the future.
And he carried that Conservative generation to vote a motion which preferred Liberalism to Conservatism as the better future for the country.
Meanwhile he neglected his classics by engaging as a Liberal campaigner in the elections of 1923 and 1924.
He toured the villages of Cambridgeshire speaking on behalf of the candidates, and spoke in several halls of the town.
At one village he was the only one of the appointed speakers to turn up.
Undismayed, he haled an old man out of the audience, stuck him in the chair, and then spoke himself for an hour and answered all the questions.
At another meeting in the open air he spoke from a cart and was tumbled when a member of the proletariat told the horse to Gee up.
He wrote ‘Michael Ramsey's Monthly Message’ for the Cambridgeshire Liberal Magazine, which thereafter was scattered among the villagers.
The climax was on 10 March 1925.
Asquith came to speak at Cambridge — now as the Earl of Oxford and Asquith.
He brought with him his wife Margot, whom Benson in his diary described as very witch-like.
Ramsey was asked to meet him at dinner in Magdalene before the meeting and to second the vote of thanks in the Guildhall.
At dinner the undergraduate in his second year got on well with the ex-prime minister, which is a mark up to both sides.
There were queues for the meeting, many could not get in, war-songs of the Liberal party were sung, they greeted the speaker with ‘For he's a jolly good fellow’.
A lady chairman, horribly nervous, spent too long introducing Asquith.
Asquith made a speech of forty minutes which Benson described to himself as robust but dull, and which reads dully.
He spoke a message which the country has heard before — that taxation is too heavy, that unemployment (1½ million) is too high, that we spend far too much on armaments and must get disarmament in Europe, that we must stick to Free Trade…
Frank Salter, who was the Liberal candidate for Cambridge borough, made ‘a genial solid’ speech of thanks.
Then Ramsey rose to second the vote of thanks.
The local newspaper called his speech breezy.
It is usually good to speak when the audience is bored.
Ramsey spoke out about his faith for Liberalism and talked eloquently about the freedom of Liberal minds.
He could say sentences which would have been preposterous if they were seen as rhetoric but which he could carry because they were delivered with uproarious humour —‘Liberalism prolonged one's youth, Liberalism did not decay’.
The speech, observed Benson, who thought it remarkable, was ‘rapturously received’ by that huge audience.
Asquith was moved.
He rose to give thanks for the thanks.
He  publicly prophesied from that platform that this young man would one day be the leader of the Liberal Party.
Ramsey afterwards could not remember a word that he had said in his speech.
He only knew that the speech had told and that he raised applause, and that he made some jokes which aroused laughter.
Not long afterwards the Liberal Party invited this undergraduate in his second year to be the party's candidate for the county of Cambridgeshire in the next election.
He went to a meeting with the party caucus.
‘I said that I could not commit myself as my academic time was not yet finished, but I would like to be at their disposal later.’
He had decided that his career would be in politics.
As vice-president of the Union he went to the United States (September-November 1925) as part of a debating team of three, all of whom were later well-known in public life.
The other two were Patrick Devlin and Geoffrey Lloyd.
They went round American universities challenging the debaters.
The moments which both Devlin and Lloyd remembered most clearly were the perils to Ramsey's life.
He had long shown traces of absent-mindedness.
If he thought something interesting, he would desert what he was doing and amble off to meditate on the new idea, muttering to himself as he walked.
When he played tennis with his sister, he would infuriate her by wandering off the court to contemplate.
He scared the passengers when he drove a car, if some bright idea came into his mind.
So now in America his two friends had to rescue him from certain death by yanking him back, as he meditated and was about to walk in front of a fast street-car.
In American universities they poured scorn on the cult of material prosperity.
The new law of prohibition of alcohol afforded them marvellous matter for the pleading of the liberty of men and women against the tyranny of majorities, and they sang or preached several eloquent perorations in praise of freedom.
An agitated old lady addressed Ramsey severely and asked why he did not go back to his own country and do good there instead of stirring up trouble in the United States.
They made a lot of jokes in their speeches, which pleased and shocked the Americans, for it was not then thought right in American debates.
Ramsey's own preferred subjects were literature versus science as making for happiness, modern democracy, and internationalism, in which he denounced American isolationism and had an imaginative picture of the American Middle West as a lot of boors who did not know where Europe was.
The Americans got them to debate the League of Nations.
But Ramsey had an alarming faculty for seeing through his own utterances.
As he waxed into an eloquent period, he would realize the absurdity of his situation or the humbug of his pleading and be  overcome with internal laughter, a laughter so vast that on occasion it left him too weak to go on with the speech.
All three speakers had Celtic blood.
They let Celtic fire run, uninhibitedly.
The result of all this politics — and Ramsey's sense that he might be reading the wrong subject, because his interests were now more modern than ancient — meant that his classics did not go as might be expected of someone who won a scholarship.
In the examination of that June 1925 (Classics Part I) Ramsey's name was to be found in the second class.
His Magdalene friend Selwyn Lloyd was in the same class.
Ramsey turned to study law, which then was regarded as the best training for a future politician.
He started eating dinners at the Inner Temple.
This was a necessity to qualify for a later call to the Bar.
But across this political work came another interest.
A legend was afterwards believed that William Temple converted Ramsey in a mission to the university in February 1926.
The truth was more complex.
The relationship with his brother Frank must not be forgotten.
In private Michael still had to keep his end up against attacks, that to be religious was to be a fool, though less frequently now because Frank travelled abroad and was away much of the time.
Across the road from Magdalene College was the parish church of St Giles.
It was Anglo-Catholic in its way of worship.
Ramsey attended.
Here for the first time he found something of what the pilgrim on his bicycle had sought: ‘the sense of mystery, and awe, and of another world at once far and near…a sense that we were vividly in the presence of the passion of Jesus and also vividly near to heaven, to which the passion mysteriously belonged, so as to be brought from the past to the present’.
His nonconformist origin found it strange, if not reprehensible, that at the main service of the day no one but the priest took the sacrament.
Soon he came to value this practice very much.
It left his mind free for ‘pondering, adoring’.
In 1926 the Anglo-Catholics in Cambridge were strong.
At Little St Mary's was the future stalwart enemy of apartheid, Geoffrey Clayton.
The vicar of St Giles introduced him to the little religious group called the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, and one of those priests, Gordon Day, became a friend of Ramsey and adviser in religion.
At King's was the former teacher of little Ramsey at the choir school, now a member of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, Eric Milner-White.
At Pembroke College was Edward Wynn, one of the kindest dons to grace Cambridge during the twentieth century, and another member of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd.
The author of this memoir, while an undergraduate, once borrowed fourteen books about history from Edward Wynn and, on the way to return them, inadvertently dropped  them all into the River Pem — and so is better placed than anyone to testify how good a man was Edward Wynn.
At the house of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd not far from Magdalene College was one of the remarkable Knox brothers, Wilfred.
He earned an honest penny by teaching the New Testament to a few undergraduates, who needed to be agile to follow his paradoxes and who found themselves hoeing the weeds when they expected to study St Paul's Epistle to the Galatians.
Ramsey invited his Master to lunch and invited Knox to meet him.
Benson was not impressed.
Benson's Diary, 25 May 1925: ‘I'm not wholly at ease with Michael.
Father Wilfred Knox, a nice fellow but with a horrible mirthless titter.
We sparkled with energy, but I struck few sparks.
He is a priest of the Oratory…
I wonder if the Oratory is any good?’
Wilfred Knox's laugh was the highest titter most of his friends ever heard.
But it was a titter far from being mirthless.
He passed his life in a cacophony of amusement at the quaintness of the human race.
This meeting was one of Benson's last meetings with his undergraduate Ramsey.
That 17 June 1925 he died of heart-failure following pleurisy.
He was succeeded as Master of Magdalene by another Eton schoolmaster, A. B. Ramsay.
Slowly Michael Ramsey began to realize that the eternal verities were more important to him than the political excitements.
He started to see that in his opinion more could be done for humanity by Churches than by political parties, even the best of political parties such as he took the Liberal Party to be; or at least that the Churches engaged at a more profound level with the predicament of humanity.
How should he express this feeling?
He tried attending meetings of the Student Christian Movement, and was bored.
He tried the historic evangelical society, the Christian Union, known as CICCU, and was repelled by its insistence that every word of the Bible was historically true.
In spare time — between politics and classics there was little spare time — he began to read a few books of theology.
By the middle of 1925 he had fairly clear convictions about Catholic Christianity.
In his third year (1925–6) he went to private confession for the first time.
For that purpose he went to Edward Wynn.
In February 1926 the religious groups in the university agreed, after much difficulty, upon the common organization of a mission to the university.
The difficulty was that the evangelicals took a low view of the deans and chaplains of colleges, and did not expect that anything run by them would have force and challenge.
The deans and chaplains of colleges were nervous lest the evangelicals bring in a firebrand of a missioner who would repel their undergraduates not only from his  mission but from religion.
The various parties reached agreement at last.
William Temple, the future Archbishop of Canterbury, then Bishop of Manchester, fat, jolly, eloquent, and philosophical, should be the chief missioner and give his talks for a week in the university church, Great St Mary's.
Norwood from London should be the missioner from the nonconformist Churches.
The evangelical group, the CICCU, brought in a Northern Irish missioner, W. P. Nicholson, who was a man of fire.
The mission opened with a meeting at the Guildhall; at which Ramsey, being now president of the Union, was selected to take the chair.
He read the opening prayers from the platform and spoke impressively to the undergraduates about their attitudes to the mission.
Temple's address was fine, Norwood's middling, and Nicholson's embarrassing in the extreme, so that the chairman hastily closed the meeting.
Coming out of the meeting, a lady was heard remarking, ‘Mr Ramsey spoke very nicely but I do think he is young to be Master of a College’; for she thought that he was the new Master of Magdalene whose name was the same except for the spelling.
Nicholson was an Irish presbyterian of one of the more extreme sorts.
He used to be a seaman.
He worked among the poor of the Shankill Road, and later became an evangelist in America.
The time of Irish Civil War after 1919 was a time of hot emotion, of many murders in Belfast, and of religious revival in Northern Ireland.
Nicholson was an important piece of that revival.
Shipyard workers used to march to his services.
He was against tobacco, and against dancing, and against cinemas, and against going to church only once on Sundays.
He was much against theologians.
He was much against choirs in church.
He was much against professors of theology.
There were sensible men who thought him the finest evangelist of his generation.
And if the committee of the CICCU be taxed with bringing in someone who did not fit the undergraduates of a university, it might be replied, first that they were desperate to find someone at short notice, and secondly, was it desirable that a missioner should fit the undergraduates?
The contrast during the week of mission was so extraordinary as to affect Ramsey's life.
In the three places of mission there were on aggregate some 2,500 members of the university every night of the week.
Temple talked rationally and effectively in Great St Mary's and held his audience.
Norwood, despite thoughtfulness and humour, slowly lost adherents to the other two speakers.
In Holy Trinity Church Nicholson abounded in anecdotes, vulgarity, rudeness, emotional appeals, a dogmatism so dogmatic as to frighten.
More and more people went to hear this phenomenon in a university of the crudest fundap 25 mentalism, which horrified some of the dons as a caricature of Christianity.
People who could not bear it walked out.
The speaker offended by gross lapses of taste —‘It is time that old bachelor on the Tiber got married’,—‘Nicodemus was a religious sneak’— and by forceful appeals —‘Will the hypocrites please leave the church?’
— and thirty or forty people walked out.
He was not, commented the journalist from the local paper, ‘perhaps very convincing to men and women eager to find out what Christianity really means’.
Some of the young were moved by Nicholson; he was human and had pathos and they needed dogma.
The university sighed with relief when he went away.
Afterwards it was said that at this mission Temple converted Michael Ramsey to decisive Christianity.
No one who reads the speech of the President of the Union at the inaugural meeting of the mission, before Temple opened his mouth, can suppose that that President needed converting to Christianity.
Later in life Ramsey denied that Temple had this supposed effect upon him.
Nevertheless, effect there was.
Ramsey's friends thought that he was an agnostic and were surprised to see him so prominent at the mission.
Chairman at the inaugural meeting, he attended Temple every night of the week and attended Nicholson once.
That Nicholson evening had consequences.
He was nauseated by the absurdities of the faith propounded and the way it was presented.
The seven evenings under Temple gave him not much new, because he had read Temple.
It was not Temple's oratory which persuaded him, for he thought it ‘rather rotund’.
What persuaded him were two bits of Temple's mind which he could not mistake.
First, Temple confronted the life of the real world in all its complexity.
Secondly, he cared about the intellectual question in religious life.
He looked at the difficulties, with open eyes.
Ramsey ended the week with a conviction that Temple's quiet explanation of a Christian philosophy of life was the right way to expound Christianity in modern society and that the emotional popular mission was the wrong way because it appealed to the wrong emotions.
His experience of Nicholson shocked him.
‘That one evening created in me a deep and lasting dislike of the extreme evangelical style of evangelism.’
Temple had neither converted him, nor given him his vocation.
But, Ramsey put it, his mission ‘certainly helped to clinch matters’.
Throughout his life he never lost the admiration for the mind, character, warmth, and friendliness of Temple.
Into extreme old age he would lecture about Temple's mind in words rendered all the more penetrating by the obvious gratitude which the memory brought.
He wanted to be buried near Temple's remains.
And for the rest of his life he recoiled from the popular mission and missioner.
He so disliked  them that when he became archbishop it complicated his life.
It made him naturally suspicious of Billy Graham, who among popular missioners was as far from William Nicholson as was possible.
In this new mood where religion was more important than politics, he thought he would like to see how the Church went in East London, at that time notorious as a depressed urban area within the national life.
During the Easter vacation he spent a fortnight working in Stepney.
A fortnight is not long.
It was enough.
At the end he knew with certainty that it was not the lawyer, nor the politician, who was the best hope for care in the country, but the Church.
Afterwards he decided that his intense preoccupation with politics and the Liberal Party had not represented his true conviction.
He felt the change to be rather like ‘the shedding of an adolescent enthusiasm,.
The observer is sure that his memory must be wrong.
The Liberal politics were too ardent to be mere intellectual exercise.
We may question whether between the young Liberal Party candidate and the young Christian teacher lay such a gulf as afterwards he fancied.
THE ORDINAND
The best of deciding to be ordained is the knowledge that you dimly see your future and have the courage to embark on an irreversible way and feel that at least you commit yourself to help humanity in its suffering or its moral predicament.
The worst is the complexity of personal relationships that ensues.
Old friends who are not Christians think that you have gone fey.
Old friends who are Christians in moderation think that such talents as you have could be more effective in some other vocation.
Is the man becoming a fanatic?
Why should a future leader of the Liberal Party throw up that possibility in order to be a curate, whose work in popular mythology (and sometimes in reality) consists in having cups of tea with elderly women?
But the tenderest difficulty lies with the family if they disapprove.
His mother had seen how his mind moved.
She half-expected what happened.
His father had not expected anything of the kind and was disappointed.
An eminent nonconformist might well have reservations about a now Anglo-Catholic son seeking holy orders in the Church of England.
But his father was tolerant, and said nothing to stop him.
Ramsey could feel that his resolve had a sufficient consent from his parents.
The worst difficulty came with his brother Frank, whom Ramsey thought to be the cleverest person he knew.
Frank did not conceal his regret.
Ramsey lost neither his sense of humour nor his power of mimicry when he became an ordinand.
For party occasions he delivered a skit sermon called ‘Under the Juniper Tree’ which could reduce his audiences to helpless laughter by its caricature of the most platitudinous and pontificating type of preaching.
Ramsey expected that once the resolution was taken everything in the mind would be peace after doubt.
He discovered that this did not happen.
He found that he was now sensitive to a new series of demands and worries and was liable to be hurt in new ways, and he suffered moments with a sense of futility.
In April 1926 he abandoned the study of law and started to read theology.
This was not easy to do.
Universities dislike students who change courses in the middle of a year.
Cambridge liked undergraduates reading theology to have two years over the work and believed that if they tried to do it in fourteen months they would do it superficially, or else they would be sure to hurt themselves by overwork.
His college must have hesitated before it gave him permission.
But colleges shrink ultimately from stopping a person doing what he is ardent to do and forcing him to do what he is bored to do.
They gave him the leave which he sought.
The result was fourteen months of the hardest work that Michael Ramsey ever knew in his life.
He lived a very retired life; gave up games, and took exercise by occasional short sharp runs; and concentrated.
Never again did he remember going at anything with such concentration.
He made it harder for himself, though much more valuable, by refusing to take short cuts or to mug up the subject from the textbooks: he went to the original sources.
The fear on colleges of ill consequences from overwork in such circumstances was not avoided.
But he found it a very happy time.
He took the theological honours examination, after a preparation of only four terms, in June 1927 and was placed in the first class.
The change to theology brought a new influence into his life: Sir Edwyn Clement Hoskyns, the dean of Corpus Christi College.
The coming together of Ramsey and Hoskyns was inevitable.
The undergraduate was Anglo-Catholic.
The teaching staff of the faculty of divinity was not — with one exception, Hoskyns.
To say that the teaching staff were not Anglo-Catholic is an understatement.
The faculty of divinity at that moment was dominated by a hard intelligence, Professor Bethune-Baker, known to all behind his back as the Bath Bun.
Bethune-Baker was learned and clear-headed in his writing, quick in repartee, astringent as a critic, angered by muddleheadedness in his colleagues, and willing to use sarcasm.
He  dedicated this formidable intellect to eradicating nonsense from the world, especially nonsense in divinity, which was a world where in those days he could find plenty of targets for his scorn.
And in the faculty he was surrounded by several men of substance with much the same opinions though with less hardness in their advocacy.
Since most Christian teachers are kind persons who prefer to avoid controversy when they can, and doodle anxiously during fierce argument at meetings, things tended to go the way of Bethune-Baker; partly because he was devastating, and partly because often he was devastatingly right.
To be of Anglo-Catholic opinions in this group was to be a man apart.
Bethune-Baker regarded Anglo-Catholicism as part of the nonsense which it was his mission to destroy.
Hoskyns, sitting at meetings of the faculty, felt alone.
His sense of isolation was the chief suffering of his life in Cambridge.
It was true that there were other Anglo-Catholics in Cambridge: Ramsey's helpers Milner-White and Edward Wynn, for example.
But intellectually they had no weight.
They taught a little easy history to the weaker students.
It grieved Ramsey all his life that Milner-White of King's, whom he so admired, refused out of diffidence to play any part whatever in the work of theology.
The student needed to hear from the throne of the lecturer something which spoke to his intellectual condition and his religious condition, his mind and his soul, simultaneously.
He found such a person in Hoskyns.
Hoskyns, at this moment aged 43, lectured on the thought and the ethics of the New Testament.
He had studied at Berlin.
‘Hoskyns’, said one of the astringent colleagues who disapproved of him, ‘went to Berlin and they muddled his mind and when he came back he could never get it unmuddled.’
Hoskyns was not a good lecturer.
At least, he lectured in such a way that many in the audience found him impossible to understand.
This was one of the reasons why Bethune-Baker, who thought that everything obscure was woolly, regarded him as useless if not bad for the young.
Students were known to spend their time in his lectures counting up the number of clichés which he used.
A future bishop, Launcelot Fleming, went to the lectures and was enthralled; but the class ran a sweepstake; if Hoskyns said theme it scored one mark, if he said ultimate theme it scored ten marks.
A really good score could reach 100, so there were plenty of numbers to draw.
Every time he said theme or ultimate theme he held up his finger and waggled it in front of his nose.
He seemed to regard the New Testament as a stormy sea in which he was tossed about in a little boat as he explored.
Or he gave them the impression that he wrestled, with limbs contorted, in the effort to seize hold of what truth could be found.
Ramsey found him inspiring.
Hoskyns communicated enthusiasm.
He infected his hearers with the sense that this search after religious truth was of urgent importance to humanity.
He introduced Ramsey to modern German thought.
He showed him the work of Karl Barth, who, though a Swiss, then taught at the Protestant faculty at Münster in North-West Germany, and was the leader of European reaction against the conventional liberal schools of divinity.
Ramsey always remained critical of Hoskyns.
The Christian mind which he revered was then and ever after the mind of William Temple, whom Hoskyns thought to be able but superficial.
Ramsey never doubted that in the formation of his mind Hoskyns was influential, and ever afterwards he was grateful.
‘I learned from him, more vividly than from anyone else, that the study of the New Testament is an exciting adventure, and that while it calls for a rigorous-critical discipline, it is not made less scientific if the student brings to it his own experience of faith.’
We have now the basic ingredients of Michael Ramsey's mind.
A nonconformist origin.
A discovery of Anglo-Catholicism and its devotional power, originally through its fanatical critics, and then fostered by wise friends.
The admiration for the mind and personality of William Temple.
A desire to understand the thought and experience of the apostolic Church.
A suspicion that the normal liberal interpretations of the evidence about the apostolic Church, among the leading English thinkers of the day, were clever and persuasive and yet were open to the charge of superficiality.
An openness of mind to the European religious reaction against liberal Protestantism, represented especially by Karl Barth.
And a belief that the Church (if it could get its message right), more than the lawyers or the economists or the political leaders, was the chief hope for society and the world.
All these constituents needed fusing and moulding into a unity in his mind.
He thought and meditated; filled them out by experience of pastoral care and by writing; and came to such a unity that all his later life he had a coherence of outlook, in thought and devotion and ethic, which was an anchor to the Church of England in difficult days.
Such a fusion and coherence of mind entailed certain rejections.
He rejected fundamentalist ideas of the biblical evidence.
History was history, and minds must be free.
He rejected hot methods of evangelism by mission and believed that quiet rational exposition was the true Christian way even if its results were not spectacular.
He suspected the dominant divinity of shallowness and an undue optimism.
Though deeply Anglo-Catholic he rejected what the world thought of as Anglo-Catholic fuss, a mistaking of the right vestment for the right religion.
The question of questions was at bottom this: the nineteenth century, with its partial proof of evolution and its axiom that miracles do not happen, enabled the chance of historical enquiry into the life and work of Jesus through the testing of ancient documents.
Since the documents are full of the supernatural, the process of enquiry must strip away subsequent accretions.
The historical person was so marvellous, that legends grew round him and then doctrines were organized.
The principal organizer of doctrine was St Paul.
Therefore the process of finding the historical Jesus meant stripping away what St Paul was supposed to have added.
There was a contrast between what Jesus intended and the Church which Paul created.
But by the middle of the twenties, when Ramsey began to study the matter, a new vision appeared.
As the text of the gospels was dissected, there came indeed to appear layers or strata; some bits looked earlier than others; the documents were made up out of a weaving of stories and sayings circulating in the earliest Church and then put together by a single hand or more than one hand.
But what was suddenly seen as extraordinary was that the supernatural, the miraculous, and certain doctrines were just as present in the layers now believed to be the earliest as they were in the layers believed to be later.
The theory of an original simplicity about the good Galilean carpenter Jesus, which was surrounded with supernatural stories and so corrupted and made complicated, began to look far more doubtful; at least, more difficult to get out of any evidence available.
Was it possible that the quest for the historical Jesus, of which Bethune-Baker was a leading representative, was based upon an illusion about the nature of the sources which were used?
Hoskyns believed that these new methods could prove that the alleged contrast between Jesus and Paul was wrong; and that there was an identity between the Jesus who lived in Palestine and the Christ who was the object of the faith of the apostolic Church.
Bethune-Baker and his school supposed that the more you strip the documents of the New Testament the more clarity and simplicity you will find.
This new vision began to prove that the more you strip the documents the more mysterious they are found to be.
So far from all the problems being solved, we seemed to be not far from the beginning of the quest.
This excited Ramsey.
He wondered whether, before ordination, he should stay at Cambridge a little longer to do more advanced work.
By the advice of his college he competed for a college research Fellowship, known as the Charles Kingsley Bye-Fellowship.
The college failed to elect him to the Bye-Fellowship.
They elected a man from jesus College.
Other things being equal among candidates, Magdalene College would take a Magdalene man before a Jesus man.
But things were  not equal.
The jesus man had a first class in history behind him, and a first class with distinction in English Literature behind him, and was president of the university mountaineering club.
In his later life he became for a few months nearly as famous as Ramsey, though in a different context.
For he was Jack Longland; and his name ran across the world after his experiences high on the unclimbed Mount Everest six years later.
Later still he was well known for his work in education.
Ramsey was only a little disappointed at this failure.
Really he wanted to get on with seeking to become a priest.
Everything was happy.
His mind was forming.
His future way was clear.
He was content to do what he would do.
And he was in this mood when disaster struck.
CUDDESDON
A man who spent four heady years as an undergraduate was often advised to go to another place to train for the ministry.
Wise men thought that he should not be too near old haunts and old friends.
And this was not only a Cambridge graduate but a Cambridge resident.
He needed a place of quiet, a good library, and a chapel where the worship was Anglo-Catholic and he would feel at home.
Milner-White recommended ordinands to go to Cuddesdon, his own old college; and so he advised Ramsey.
It stands six miles outside Oxford, in lovely and in those days remote country, with one bus a day.
Neo-Gothic in turrets and corridors and battlements, it was founded by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce of Oxford opposite the front gate of his palace, and then developed by two of the leaders of the Church of England in Queen Victoria's days into the foremost training college of that Catholic tradition.
Ramsey arrived there on 30 July 1927.
He pushed his bicycle up the hill from Wheatley station in the company of another new student who had a strangely similar background: of nonconformist origins, with his father an official of a nonconformist Church; a young man who postponed his own confirmation into the Church of England because his parents might be hurt; and who swung at the university from his very Protestant background into a sense of the devotional stature in Anglo-Catholicism, and into convictions which never left him for the rest of his life; a graduate of Balliol College, by name Austin Farrer.
It is pleasant to think of the two new Cuddesdon students, pushing their bicycles up the hill together from Wheatley station that July day of 1927, and so meeting for the first time.
One would like to know if there was a conversation.
Both of them were already known for silences.
To idealize Cuddesdon has been easy for many.
They came with their  ideals, found idyllic peace in the countryside, where a man could hardly fail to notice God in the quietness; said their prayers in one of the fairest little parish churches in all the land; reacted against, and then threw themselves into the orderliness of quasi-monastic life; and studied what they wanted, and thought about truth.
In all these ways the place was perfectly suited to what Ramsey needed at that moment.
To say prayers in the Catholic way of worship, and feed one's soul on frequent sacraments, and practise a little fasting, and use the sacrament of confession, and study Marcion and the early Church and the Bible, and to have time for quietness and silence and meditation — that was what he looked for at this moment of his life.
He did not get it.
A fortnight after he arrived at Cuddesdon his father set out in the car from Cambridge to Stamford.
He carried with him the minister of the Congregational Church, H. C. Carter, and in the back seat three ladies, Mrs Ramsey, and Mrs Carter, and a Danish friend of Mrs Carter.
They proceeded up the Huntingdon Road at about 20 m.p.h. or sometimes 30 m. p. h., a suitable pace for cars and roads of those days.
At the top of the hill before Godmanchester Mr Ramsey felt uncomfortable with his coat and turned to pull it right.
As he did not look where he was going, the car's near-side wheels started running along the grass.
A telegraph pole was ahead.
Mrs Ramsey and Mr Carter cried, ‘Look out!’
Mr Ramsey swung the wheel over violently to avoid the telegraph pole and the car careered across the road, skidded, hit the grass verge the other side, and overturned.
Carter was thrown clear and escaped serious injury.
The car pinned all the other four.
Mr Ramsey had broken ribs, probably on the steering-wheel.
The Danish lady had a fractured skull and was unconscious but alive.
Mrs Carter only had a broken arm.
And Mrs Ramsey was dead.
She was badly injured about the head and many other bones in her body were smashed.
Arthur Ramsey was found with his injuries and in a state of shock and muttering, ‘It was such a little thing, I was just trying to put my coat right.’
Probably it was hardest for the husband and the two daughters.
Frank did nothing but sit in the house for two days silent and with tears.
But it was very hard for Michael Ramsey.
The resulting turmoil, mental and emotional, ruined (the word is not too strong) his preparation to be a priest, and blotted his memory of Cuddesdon.
He hardly ever spoke about his mother again.
When his father died he burnt all the letters he could find.
He took a fortnight away for the funeral and to visit his father in hospital.
In October he passed the first part of the examination for  ordination, and afterwards could not understand how he passed.
He went back to Cuddesdon for the autumn term, but the mental condition was very adverse.
He was sleepless, and kept suffering from deep depressions.
Other students had always found him eccentric but now they found his behaviour very odd — a lot of muttering to himself, and a total incapacity for the practical things, and sudden disappearances into silences.
He hoped that a New Year's holiday in Belgium would help him but the mental turmoil came back in force.
He dreamed a lot and the dreams were perturbing.
He felt as though he lived in a purposeless world.
He found himself in enormous buildings, with a labyrinth of rooms, and he was lost in the pile.
He wandered from room to room without aim, and without knowing whether he was on the top floor or in the basement, ‘just up and up and on and on and on’.
Sometimes he would be climbing up and down a cliff and he found himself stuck, unable to get higher and unable to climb down and once he was left clinging on a ledge for ever.
He put himself into the hands of a psychiatrist who passed him to another psychiatrist, Leonard Browne.
He visited Leonard Browne three times a week for four months.
Therefore he needed to be in London and could not be in Cuddesdon.
He lived at the settlement for helping London boys, Cambridge House.
He spent the mornings reading, and the afternoons visiting for two charities, one of them a school for the physically handicapped.
Once, in one of his younger sermons (Liverpool, on John 20: 21–2), he gave a hint of what it was like with the psychologist.
His life was wrecked by fear, even by terror.
God was cruel.
Sleep failed.
The doctor probed — the longer memories, the childhood.
Terror of father when very small?
— a fear then forgotten but driven down into the subconscious?
— and yet, when this is recognized, the terror still appears again, in a new and dreadful form; and the memory must be brought to ‘the touch of Jesus’ and so the whole inner man is cleansed.
This became a strong reason to him for the practice of private confession.
You cannot cure yourself.
You cannot forget.
If you do, it will submerge.
You need to bring it to a place where God reaches out into the secret places of the soul.
When he looked back later in life he did not think that this dark night was caused by what happened on the road at Godmanchester.
He thought that its roots reached back, as the doctor thought, into earlier life.
But the historian can hardly doubt the connection.
Here was a student who overworked for more than a year and needed rest; who was already in an emotional condition by the recognition of the highest ideals and their obligation upon him; and then, instead of the rest which he needed, he had to endure the utterly unexpected death, in very  distressing family conditions, of the person in the world to whom he felt nearest.
By Easter 1928 Michael was better.
He was able to manage the May term at Cuddesdon, though he needed still to go three times a week to London to see Browne for treatment.
The students at Cuddesdon still found him very odd, and very unpractical, and very absent-minded, and much given to muttering to himself.
Austin Farrer watched him, and was amused at all the oddities of behaviour.
But Farrer saw other things about him.
First, there was no question of the power of his mind, even if that mind moved eccentrically.
Second, this was not a person who bored everyone by overearnestness.
On the contrary, he had a teasing humour, and a sarcasm which struck hard.
Thirdly, and unexpectedly, he was a champion on the croquet pitch.
Farrer decided that he was a born don.
We have another description of him at this date from a diarist who happened to meet him.
‘A most curious-looking young man with a mobile white face and small red-rimmed eyes; he is said to be very clever as well as deeply religious.
He seemed devoted to his little sister’.
It was 3 March 1928, in the middle of Ramsey's bad time.
Later Ramsey used to mock the complacency of clergymen who said that their training college gave them habits of devotion ‘which they had never lost’.
He attributed no such quality to his disturbed time at Cuddesdon.
Nevertheless Cuddesdon was important to him.
For later he also believed that the motor accident and its consequences could have destroyed his morale but for the tranquil worship of the little Oxfordshire village which for the time was his base.
He did not think much of the lectures.
He resented the inadequacy of the library, in which he worked long hours during such time as he was there.
He regarded the chaplain as a buffoon though a dedicated buffoon.
His intelligence owed nothing to the college.
He felt frustrated academically.
An ancient actor, with an absurd way of talking, taught elocution to the future preachers.
But the place was a port in the storm.
He felt apart; withdrawn; like Newman, feeling there was nothing in the world but God and his soul.
He did not find learning to pray an easy occupation.
Still, he had a sense of movement; as though in the quietness they were seeking some kind of glory.
Two people helped.
The principal of the college was Jimmie Seaton, a plump, cheerful, outgoing little man known as Friar Tuck, who bubbled with amusement and good sense of vitality and who liked people and gardening while he hated committees and pomposity.
The second was the Bishop of Oxford, Tommy Strong; the bishop with the  most sensitive taste and rare learning and musical apprehension of all the bishops' bench.
Ramsey described him as a character, without popular appeal, donnish, with no great interest in his big rural diocese, but full of wisdom and learning, and eager for friendship with young men.
If you walked round the bishop's wood shortly before you left Cuddesdon, you were likely to become aware of an elfin prelate hunting you through the shrubbery like a gaitered satyr; and when he caught up with you he would say breathlessly, ‘If you ever need a bed…(panting)…don't forget I have fifteen spare bedrooms’.
During his time at Cuddesdon something happened to the Church of England, at the national level, which left an indelible mark upon many young ordinands of the time, and certainly upon Michael Ramsey.
In December 1927, while he was in the midst of his darkness, and in june 1928 when he was better, the House of Commons rejected a proposal, carried by large majorities in the Church bodies, for a new prayer book, which was the old prayer book, from the age of King Charles II, modestly revised in a pastoral spirit long after the time when it needed revision.
A majority in the House of Commons fancied that it possessed the training in theology, the experience of ways of worship, and the sensitivity to religious feelings, to tell a Church how it ought to say its prayers.
That the House of Commons, which had its share of agnostics and non-Anglicans, should order the Church how to worship God was an interference by the State in the affairs of the Church, just where those affairs were sacred and touched the conscience.
The manner of the rejection on the floor of the Chamber was unpleasant, with ranting and prejudice flaunted and loud, though it is not certain whether such sickening speeches moved sober MPs.
The rejections, and the manner of the rejections, ensured that for the future the Church would take no notice of what the House of Commons thought about the way in which the Church of England worshipped.
Ramsey was a former nonconformist who had not lost the idea that Churches must be free from entanglement with the State.
He was now a young Anglo-Catholic who acquired the Catholic sense of divine rights in the Church which no State can touch.
He had no idea that he would ever be able to do anything about the predicament.
But he formed the opinion, which he never afterwards lost, that the Church must gain its proper freedom from the State in the care for its own way of worship, if necessary by disestablishment, from which he never thereafter shrank.
Whenever he thought about this in later years, his memory would go back to the Cuddesdon time and the shock of seeing a House of Commons pretending that it knew how people ought to say their prayers.
It was the one time when he doubted William Temple.
Ardent for  liberty, he wanted the bishops to behave fiercely, like Hensley Henson, the Bishop of Durham, and threaten the Commons with disestablishment as the answer to its unconstitutional behaviour.
He expected William Temple to back Henson and was grieved to find that his hero was weak because he refused to stand up and fight.
Later in life he thought that of the two, Henson and Temple, Temple was the statesman on the question.
‘It was rather exasperating that the great and radical William Temple soft-pedalled.
In retrospect I am glad that he did.’
But because he was in the middle of his mental stress he suffered a disaster.
In January 1928 he was invited back to speak at the Cambridge Union, on the motion that the Church of England ought to be disestablished.
In his horror at what happened in the House of Commons, he started to speak in favour of the motion.
But a few minutes after he was launched into the speech he came to a dead stop, stared strangely at the gallery in silence, and could not go on.
He found himself saying, ‘In 1919 the Enabling Act was passed’ and then could not remember what the Enabling Act was; although it was and still in part is the Act which defines the nature of the establishment in England.
So in the middle of his speech he walked straight out of the debate and the Union chamber.
The family worried about it in their different ways.
His father suspected that he had a glass of wine too many at dinner.
His brother said that he had been more excitable lately, and more ineffective, and running up and down more.
Frank was sure that the cause was not physical but was part of the mental unsettlement.
His friends on the Union committee thought that what happened was best accounted for if he saw a vision of his dead mother in the gallery watching him speak.
They did not dare to ask him.
Where was he to go next?
The young man was an obvious don.
Hoskyns wanted him in Cambridge as the chaplain of his college, Corpus Christi.
The rector of Liverpool, john How, knew Ramsey from Cambridge days.
He wanted a noisy, breezy curate to get at his rough teenagers.
He was aware that this description did not fit Ramsey.
‘I fear’, said How to Ramsey, ‘that you might be too retiring for the job.’
It looked as though the donnish youth would go straight back to donnery and be a don for the rest of his life; perhaps he was not suitable for other kinds of clergyman.
The vacancy at Corpus Christi vanished.
And on 23 September 1928 Ramsey was ordained deacon, to be the curate of St Nicholas, the parish church of Liverpool.
His stipend was £200 a year.
The Parish Minister
LIVERPOOL
St Nicholas is the old parish church near the quay-side and the docks.
The church where Ramsey ministered was bombed to bits in the Second World War.
It was mostly built early in the nineteenth century with a tall fair spire topped by a ship.
Near the docks the inhabitants were poor dock labourers.
Many were unemployed, many had only casual work.
Higher up the hill the streets were full of office buildings, so that the parishioners were caretakers.
To visit his people Ramsey had to go up in lifts.
The parish had about 7,000 people.
More than half the parishioners were Irish Roman Catholics, who went to two churches.
Both these churches were remote and estranged.
Their priests were intransigents.
Ramsey felt it odd that in two Christian churches, working side by side in a crowded port, the ministers could not pray together or work together and could hardly speak together.
He disliked this situation.
Moreover the diocese was not only divided between Anglicans and others.
The Anglicans were divided — the stoutest of Irish Protestants versus a few stiff Anglo-Catholic parishes; and in a fight the sympathies of Ramsey's parish lay with the second.
He disapproved of his bishop (A. A. David) for the tough way in which he handled three recalcitrant Anglo-Catholic priests who refused to conform to rules laid down by the bishop and yet did nothing about the radical dean of the cathedral who did things equally nonconforming in a Low Church direction.
Ramsey thought this an injustice; he decided that his bishop was vague and naïve in his theology, someone who took up new ideas with enthusiasm and with very little precision of thought; and yet he saw that the bishop disliked controversy and was hurt by it, and thought him to be a friend and a man of prayer.
It specially pleased him that the bishop encouraged him, in the midst of all the parish chores, to keep time for hard study.
The congregation of St Nicholas consisted of a few poor people from the neighbourhood and otherwise of less poor people from various parts  of the city or from Birkenhead across the Mersey.
Its congregation quite flourished.
John How was a solid good preacher but not a magnet to multitudes.
He was formidable, laconic, self-disciplined, earnest but not humourless, and it was said of him that he did everything with a kind of good-natured fury.
Most of the time he left his two curates to get on with their thing.
Ramsey could find nowhere to live within the parish.
Some distance away, only a few yards from the vast unfinished Anglican cathedral, he found lodgings (13 St James's Road) with a spinsterish landlady who by origin was a Northern Irish Protestant.
One of the other lodgers was a dwarf, with whom Ramsey made friends.
They called their censorious landlady IT.
The lodging was neither convenient nor happy.
To get to morning service in the church he had to catch a tram at 6.50 a.m.
If his work kept him late for a meal, he had satirical reproaches cast upon his head by the landlady.
At the general election of 1929 the landlady could be heard telling a Tory canvasser that everyone in the house would vote Conservative and Ramsey said forcibly that he was voting Labour (there was no Liberal candidate).
The air of the house turned sour.
For the last weeks of his curacy he left the lodgings and hired a room in a small hotel up Mount Pleasant.
The people liked him.
They are reported to have said ‘The new curate's not chatty’.
In later years he was once asked whether he, who was shy, was anguished when forced to go out visiting homes in Liverpool and to try to make the first touch with a strange family.
He said, ‘As a curate I was never frightened of visiting.
I never minded being shy.
I was content to be shy.
I perplexed other people.
I was content to be silent.’
He loved his confirmation class.
He visited the sick often, in homes and in hospital.
He disliked his Bible class of teenage boys because they misbehaved, but at times it was happy.
He disliked the work at the boys club because the teenagers misbehaved, and because he could see no use in the work.
He disliked teaching twice a week in the school because the children misbehaved.
He enjoyed and admired his rector.
He found his fellow-curate odious.
He loved the morning hours of hard study at the Bible.
He also read much else, for example a lot of Newman's sermons.
To his surprise, he discovered that what was needed to make a powerful political speech was not the same gift as that which was needed to make a powerful sermon.
The technique was different.
He discovered that various kinds of audience needed various kinds of utterance.
He thought that he learnt a lot about preaching from this experience.
Once at least he could feel that a sermon of his moved his  hearers.
But he told the bishop at a private interview that he was depressed about preaching, he felt the people to be so remote from the practice of religion.
An envelope of a few Liverpool sermons survived; including the first sermon which he ever delivered there (text I Peter 2: 9, ‘ye are an elect race’).
Like most first sermons it puts in too many ideas at once.
He calls St John's gospel ‘the most beautiful book in the world’.
The collection is very biblical.
It has no jokes, no digressions, nothing to lighten, except occasional quotations of poets like Tennyson.
It conveys the feeling of the grandeur of the sacrament.
The reader smiles when the preacher tells the people of dockland that they live ‘in a garden near the slopes of the heavenly mountain'.
Sometimes he wrote his sermon out in full.
Sometimes he prepared summary notes.
As he got on, and less nervous, the words came easily; and then he began to dislike being restricted by a written text and to prefer headings.
A little reputation outside the parish began to grow — that this was a curate who could talk.
William Temple ran a mission on the Blackpool sands, preaching from a tub to the buckets and spades.
He summoned a lot of helpers; among them Ramsey, who watched fat Temple on his fat tub talking profound truths in simple language.
That was a compliment to Ramsey.
No doubt Temple remembered that once they stood on the same platform at Cambridge.
It would be pleasant to have a film of curate Ramsey talking to the young architects of sand-castles.
The curate was troubled by the conflict between his love of biblical study and the chores of the parish.
He was saved from isolation of the mind by a lucky proximity.
He lived hard by the cathedral.
This cathedral had an exceptional canon.
Charles Raven was a fiery charismatic man with a large heart.
At Liverpool he turned himself into the most powerful preacher in all England.
In background he was nothing like Ramsey.
Low churchman versus high churchman; philosopher of religion and science versus close student of the Bible; radical divine versus enquiring conservative; suspecter of orthodoxy versus a young man who saw the stature of the Catholic tradition.
Nevertheless Raven cared passionately about things of the mind.
He was forward at seeking out young people of promise and giving them encouragement.
The coincidence was extraordinary.
An isolated curate who wanted knowledge found himself living a few yards from a man who at first sight was an explosive popular preacher, but who happened also to be one of the coming academic theologians of England, and an inciter of younger minds.
Raven ran a weekly class on the New Testament.
Ramsey joined it.
Raven's mode of running a class was provocative.
He drove Ramsey to contradict him.
Never before had Ramsey run up against so formidable a Christian opponent, and never before been so forced to defend his biblical ideas.
He found the experience good for his mind.
Raven also had him round several times to meals at his house.
After one of these lunches Ramsey recorded his affection for Raven.
This was not everyone's opinion of Raven.
Some good men feared his radicalism, and some good men disliked his passion, and some less good men thought him little but a rhetorician.
Ramsey penetrated to the essence of the man.
During the summer of 1929, nearly a year into his curacy, and aged 24, Ramsey was attracted to a Lancashire girl.
It was important to him, important enough to see that members of his family met her and that he found out what they thought of her as a possible wife for him.
They were unanimous that she would not be right for him.
And gradually he came to realize that there was a particular reason for the attraction which was not the empathy of the girl.
She had a physical resemblance to Ramsey's dead mother.
The friendship passed.
The priesthood 
It was then the custom of the Church of England that a curate should be ordained to be a deacon (the lowest order of the ministry) whose duty was to help the parish priest in all his pastoral duties but who could not perform the priestly acts of celebrating the sacrament or giving absolution or blessing.
After he served for a year as a deacon he was ordained as a priest.
To most people coming forward to be a Christian priest, the moment when they became deacons was a bigger turning-point in the life, and more emotional, than the moment when they became priests.
Truly to celebrate the sacrament for the first time, and to feel for the first time that the hands were the instruments through which God chose to nourish the souls of his people, could be overwhelming with gratitude or with penitence.
But to be made a deacon was for the first time to profess before a multitude that the soul undertook the cause of God in a special ministry, and for the first time to feel sent to an apostolic work.
Afterwards to wear clerical clothes for the first time, and instantly to be expected to be a confidant or soul's friend, was to many ordinands the more heartfelt turning-point.
Ramsey was unusual in that to him the priest's ordination meant much more than the deacon's ordination.
He used to say that his ordination to the priesthood, in Farnworth parish church on 22 September 1929, with Raven preaching, mattered to him much the more.
Why this was so we can only guess.
He was a high churchman for whom the sacrament of holy communion was the supreme moment of  worship.
His preparation to be a deacon was disturbed by a death and by mental illness.
Later in life he compared his own feelings at the two ordinations to be a deacon and a priest and his later consecration to be a bishop.
He said:
When you are ordained deacon you have arrived.
But being a priest — that meant far, far more.
That meant far more to me than being a bishop.
Becoming a bishop is an incident in the life of a priest.
I sometimes forget that it is the day of the year when I was made a bishop.
I never fail to remember on the day of the year when I was made a priest.
A little fold of the veil can be drawn aside to disclose his mood at that time.
In September 1929, before the ordination at Farnworth, he went into retreat at Bishop Tommy Strong's Cuddesdon Palace with its fifteen spare bedrooms.
During a time of meditation in that retreat, he wrote a note which survived.
It is in fading pencil.
Not quite all is legible:
‘My grace is sufficient for thee’.
How I do need to look away from self to God, I can only find satisfaction: in him.
My heart, to love him; my will, to do his will, my mind, to glorify him; my tongue, to speak to him and of him; my eyes to see him in all things; my hands to bring whatever they touch to him; my all only to be a real ‘all’: because it is joined to him.
And this will be utter joy: no man can take it away.
Self, self-consciousness, self-will, the self-centre cut away, so that the centre which holds all my parts is God.
Inquietum est cor nostrum.
Yes it is so because it is nostrum, cut out the nostrum, and let me give my heart to God — and all is...[rest of line illegible ]
Thanks be to God for being what He is, for showing Himself to me…
— and then comes a list of benefactors: Carter the Congregationalist minister, and Henry Balmforth the sixth form master at Repton, and Geoffrey Fisher the headmaster at Repton, mother, father,Frank his brother , Jimmie Seaton the head of Cuddesdon, Tommy Strong in whose chapel he then meditated, John How at Liverpool; the institutions, Cuddesdon and Magdalene, his home, and his Bible; his special teachers William Temple and Charles Raven (Hoskyns, note well, is not mentioned); and then gratitude for his crosses: the troubles of  school-days, the death, ‘the desolation’, the anxieties and wearinesses in Liverpool, ‘tiresome boys’.
And still my mind runs back to self.
Cut it out, God is in me; He is my centre — let me only believe it, and His energy will flood the whole of me, and self will be drowned…
Drive out, kill self, let God be then alone in me — then in God we will find (no, he-in-us will find) ourselves selfless free sons Come God — my God is and is in me, in you rather let God explode burst from within filling the whole of us away from self just He He He He Theos — no, the one — Heis.
Between November 1929 and February 1930 he kept a diary.
Unfortunately for the historian, it was the only time in his life when he kept a diary.
We find a man busy about his parish, up early, taking services, preaching, preparing to preach, visiting the sick, conducting funerals, running a club.
Some of it was happy, some less happy.
The rector was delightful, the people friendly, Raven's classes excellent.
He dreaded his own Bible class and found it hard to keep teenagers in order.
Two frustrations appear in the diary.
The contrast between the rural peace of Cuddesdon and the noise and dirt of Liverpool was hard to bear.
And an inner conflict lay between books and parish.
When he studied, he was happy.
When he could not study, he was miserable.
He asked himself whether he was someone like Arthur Benson, the Master of Magdalene, for whom books were a form of escapism from the real world.
He saw that the intellectual side of him could not be wrong, somehow he must baptize it.
But when he was in this mood, fear came.
During the time of desolation a year before, he suffered from fantasies.
When he got exhausted from parish work, and felt unwell, a fear would darken him, that the demon, seemingly exorcized, might return.
And already he knew in his heart that to be a vicar or a curate was not his vocation as a priest for the rest of his life.
While this internal argument reached its height, his superiors argued about him without his knowledge.
From opposite ends of England the academics said that this was a born teacher who ought to be in teaching as soon as possible.
Raven said it in Liverpool.
Hoskyns said it in Cambridge.
Bishop and rector expected him to serve his minimum engagement as a curate.
Raven pushed at the bishop that he ought to be in an academic post and soon.
Hoskyns found him the opening — sub-warden of Lincoln Theological College.
Lincoln brought in the big guns of William Temple to get bishop and rector to release the curate before the time.
Finally bishop and rector agreed, and Ramsey accepted the Lincoln work.
Later in life Ramsey believed that he learnt a lot from his short time at Liverpool.
It introduced him to the human race.
He met new-born babies, and said prayers in the rooms of the dying, and consoled families at the cemetery, and struggled to communicate with teenagers who did not know how to read.
It introduced him to the bizarre situation that Churches treated each other worse than they treated anyone else; and to the recognition that the reason for this was not religious but racial.
He met the descendants of Lascar seamen or other immigrants who settled into Liverpool and for the first time saw the need for justice to an immigrant community.
Later he knew that he learnt a lot.
But at the time he was glad to leave.
‘It's been a great school for the temper.’
He left Liverpool at Easter 1930.
Before he left, his brother Frank died very young, of a liver complaint after jaundice (19 January 1930).
It was important to Michael Ramsey, not only then but much later, that before Frank's death he felt him to be less far apart over religion.
In the last week of the previous October Michael stayed in Cambridge.
Michael saw that his brother's mind had moved — not far, hardly at ail, but still he had moved.
He no longer accepted determinism and was willing to see a meaning in the words ‘free will’.
Instead of rejecting religion out of hand as irrational, he enquired about it.
He wanted to know what are the experiences and emotions of religious people.
He said that as a boy at school he had such experiences and wondered whether they were like Michael's.
What struck Michael was, the enquiry was humble — as though religion might be something worth knowing about.
Michael told him about the evidence of religious experience in the Christian mystics; both of what some of the great masters had said about it and of the slighter experience of simple Christians.
All through this conversation he had the impression that Frank no longer sneered; and as he went back to Liverpool he was sure that he was more tolerant and sympathetic and ‘was willing to grant that there was some sense in some of the things which I longed for  him to share’.
In mid-January 1930 he stood by Frank's death-bed and imagined his heart going out to his brother.
It cannot have been easy for an ordinand or a curate to stand up to contemptuous persiflage about his religion from one of the ablest minds of the generation who happened to be his own brother.
In later years he thought that twice in his life, and twice only, he seriously wondered whether Frank was right, and he wrong, about religion.
The first time was when his mother died; the second time was when Frank died.
Maynard Keynes wrote an obituary of Frank in his Essays in Bio- graphy (1933), pp.
335 ff.
We see the younger brother's personality reflected in his friend's portrait of this atheist mathematical economist: the stony heights and rare atmosphere in which his mind moved; the easy efficiency of the intellectual machine which ground away beneath his broad smiling face, his bulky Johnsonian frame, and spontaneous gurgling laugh, and simplicity of feeling, and honesty of heart and mind and purpose; and with it a common sense and practicality.
Later in Michael Ramsey's life it disturbed his conventional critics when they found a guardian of Catholic orthodoxy saying that he hoped and expected to meet atheists in heaven.
LINCOLN
The Bishop's Hostel at Lincoln was one of those mid-Victorian foundations intended to train future clergymen.
Most of these foundations were sited in or hard by cathedral buildings because after the cathedral reforms old cathedrals had buildings or land available.
The window of Ramsey's study looked out to the west end of the cathedral.
The students were about forty in number, most of them not from universities.
The warden to whom he was sub-warden was Leslie Owen, a man of delicate health whom Ramsey liked.
His stipend was £220 a year but this was a big increase on his Liverpool pay because he had free rooms and free meals.
He gave a lot of lectures — four a week.
The worst of the teaching offered in theological colleges occurs because the staff are few and the ground to be covered enormous.
Therefore the few staff sit up late at night to prepare lectures on a few things they know about and a lot of things they know not much about, and spend their time keeping one page ahead of the class and depending on the textbook.
This was more  educative for the staff than the students.
Ramsey lectured on all the later part of the Bible and on the central Christian doctrines.
Every moment therefore of his time was dedicated either to preparing or to giving lectures.
Unlike some members of the staff who resented a forced superficiality, he liked the system.
He enjoyed educating himself in the things he wanted to know about.
For the first time he told himself that he was fully at home in his work.
He felt the teacher's rostrum to be his fit place; the place where he knew that what he had to offer was valued.
He worked hard.
He had to work hard.
And because no knowledge is fully clear in the mind until it is explained to someone else, the time at Lincoln was further formative for his mind.
‘Everything later’, he said, ‘was an extension.
At Lincoln I built a structure of thought.’
The story got about over the years that his lectures were very obscure.
That was probably the opinion of persons who found ail lectures obscure.
It was not the opinion of most students from those days.
They found him a teacher of clarity, whose lectures were the most enjoyable and most instructive which they heard during their training.
When he had leisure he went bicycling to Lincolnshire village churches.
He enjoyed the Cuddesdon-like monastic-like regularity of the daily worship.
Some of the students started to use him as their confessor.
He played tennis with them under the willow-trees by college, playing not well but with a brisk gusto.
He went round the golf-course in 95 strokes.
His shirt-tails flapping in the breeze, he faced the green at an angle of forty-five degrees and sliced every shot.
He helped to reorganize the local golf course so that students could play legally and cheaply.
He played the game of Murder in the dark through the vast rooms of the bishop's vast palace and told his nonconformist father that at last he found a reason why bishops should live in such large houses.
In vacations he consoled his father's loneliness by taking him on holiday — Cornwall, Criccieth, the Lakes, the Black Forest and Bavaria.
At other times in vacations he spent weeks doing hard reading in the library of Cambridge University and got good talks with Hoskyns.
He discovered the virtues of the Gladstone Library at Hawarden near Chester, a residentiary library founded on the basis of Mr Gladstone's own books.
In 1930 he went to Bavaria to see the passion play at the mountain village of Oberammergau.
The students from that time remembered a man with a sharp sense of the ridiculous; who ragged them but was too shy to be intimate with them though they liked him much for his friendliness and his humour; who was famous for long, sudden, and embarrassing silences; who was so eccentric that none of them believed that he could later be a man of  distinction in England or his Church; a man who loved theology — they never met anywhere else a man who so loved theology, and who regarded theology as the highest intellectual activity for humanity; a fierce defender of liberty of opinion, for Marxists as for anyone else; whose principal theme was the glory of God, and who was evidently touched by his ideas of Plato; who did not give the impression of a mind of exceptional ability — there was not enough knife in the mind — but who gave the impression of being an exceptional person; who disturbed other people's prayers in chapel with convulsive fidgets and sudden face-rubbings — they regarded him as tense in his devotions and were afraid of a nervous breakdown; who had a manifest and rare mystical sense of the immediate presence of God, a presence so brilliant that it could almost overpower.
Late at night one of the students passed Ramsey's room and heard strange sounds within, and it was Ramsey going round and round his table saying It is fire!
It is fire!
There was one occasion when he went into a café and asked for tea and then while he waited he suddenly saw a solution to a theological argument which he had with Leslie Owen the warden, and his waving of hands was so convulsive that the café refused to serve him with the tea.
Once the students, not without glee, watched him celebrating the sacrament with the ends of his back braces protruding out of the top of his vestment.
Sometimes he could be observed wearing some garment inside out.
Austin Farrer came on a visit to Lincoln and reported that Ramsey was a great man in the college and held his audiences spellbound and was less mad.
From Lincoln days descended a story which sounds like Ramsey-legend but the truth of which he confirmed.
An applicant for entry came to be interviewed.
For fifteen minutes interviewer and applicant sat opposite one another.
Neither said a word.
Then Ramsey said, ‘I think you will find Lincoln rather a quiet place.’
This was the end of the interview.
In vacations he still went for interviews with his psychiatrist, who did not feel that he had quite got ‘to the bottom of things’.
But this no longer disturbed the even tenor of life.
A little group of letters survived which affords insight into his attitude in this earlier time at Lincoln.
His Aunt Lucy came to live at Howfield in order to look after Ramsey's father and the family after Agnes Ramsey was killed.
She wanted help with being prepared for confirmation and turned to her nephew for guidance.
He wrote her letters.
From these letters to an aunt we can gather something of his  habits of devotion.
He taught her the words of the Angelus, the Hail Mary; though he said that he could not quite use all the words himself literally, but he respected those who could, and he did not think there was anything in it which made Mary take the place of her Son.
He taught her that the sacrament of the eucharist was so big that he did not feel that he had finished with it when he came home after the service at 8 a.m. on Sunday morning.
It was many-sided — worship, praise, offering, commemoration of our Lord's life and death, sacrifice, fellowship with the faithful in the unseen, all the many sides which centre in this one act.
He did not need words to join in this act, he could use the words of the prayer book or his own words, but he needed no words at all.
He liked incense, but he did not like an excess of ceremonial (’ scarlet, lace etc') which he condemned as vulgar and intrusive.
He could never be happy with morning prayer and not the sacrament as the chief morning service.
He thought a procession a bore.
He began to be known.
Invitations poured in.
He refused to preach in St Paul's Cathedral.
Offers of jobs started to come in.
He refused work in London.
Geoffrey Fisher went from Repton to be Bishop of Chester and invited him to be an examining chaplain; which he accepted — it would mean two or three visits a year — and was surprised to find how friendly Fisher was when they were not in the relation of boy and headmaster.
At this time of his life he always called Fisher behind his back Halieus, which is Greek for fisher.
Observers still thought them to be in the relation of boy and headmaster.
Here were two future leaders of the Church of England, the one a man of supreme common sense, the other a mystic; the one a conservative and establishment-man, the other a liberal and a reformer — they were fated never to understand each other.
After Fisher died Ramsey said that the time in their lives when they were closest in friendship was the time when he was examining chaplain to the Bishop of Chester.
As the first years passed, and the courses of lectures did not have to be prepared out of nothing, he sat at the bay window in the sub-warden's study, looking out towards the cathedral, and started to write his first book.
He did not start writing the book because he wanted to write a book.
He had something he wanted to say to the Christian world and the question was how best to say it.
Occasionally he would descend to the students' common room immediately beneath and beg them to make less noise so that he could write.
The students later believed a legend that part of this famous book was written ail over the walls of his room.
Longman's published the book in January 1936 at 7shilling; 6d: title,The Gospel and the Catholic Church .
For centuries men have fought for the Church, died for it, loved it, or  hated it.
Now no one seems to mind about its existence.
Its worship and its priests and its teaching are strange to the society in which it lives.
Society is not hostile, it passes by on the other side.
Can we make the Church real to society by turning it political; by making its essence not old creeds but moral judgements on bombs, or on socialist policy?
This is not the answer to which the study of the New Testament leads.
There the Church's work is to point to Jesus the Messiah and his death, and to sin, and to judgement.
‘In all this the Church was scandalous and unintelligible to men, but by all this and by nothing else it was relevant to their deepest needs.’
The Church cannot be any easier to understand than its Messiah.
And the society of his day doubted, questioned, despised.
The word scandalous is repeated four times in the first three pages.
So Ramsey cried to the Church not to dilute itself, or adjust itself to what contemporary Smith or Jones can swallow.
It cannot convert its gospel into social reform.
Ramsey cried to the Church to be itself; to know that its being rests upon a death and an empty tomb; and to be itself whether modern Britain will listen or close its ears.
The book had a second, equally important purpose.
The child of a nonconformist father learnt to drink deep of the Catholic tradition.
At the centre of his mind was a fusion between the evangelical Christian and the churchman; the first, biblical, a man of gospel and of conversion, of faith and the Word of God; the second, a man with a reverence for the Christian society through the centuries, its sacramental inheritance, its order, and ministry, and continuity.
And therefore this young evangelical churchman had something original to say, which was an effort to fuse the Protestant idea with the Catholic idea as they were fused within his personal history.
He would show the Catholic that the Church is nothing without the Word spoken in the crucifixion.
He would show the Protestant that the Church, with its order, and structure, and mission, is a necessary part of the Word spoken in the crucifixion.
The book is full of the Bible, and yet is an essay in Church order.
So, on one side, the book was a Catholic churchman proclaiming the cross of Christ in a way more common among Protestants.
On another side it was an assault upon the corruption of the highest truths; against turning love of the Bible into bibliolatry, or creeds into scholastic definitions, or the sacrament into magic, or Popes and priests and bishops into a bureaucracy or a rigidity where structure becomes the end instead of the means; or turning the Church into a social club.
Some people disliked this book very much.
The nonconformists noted that he did not unchurch them but were not happy with his plea  that they recognize bishops to be essential to the Church.
Bethune-Baker and his school at Cambridge disliked the anti-rational quality in the book — the ‘scandalousness’ of the Church and its gospel — and took several more marks off Hoskyns for begetting such a child.
When Ramsey came to read the book himself, later in life, he was astonished, and at one point burst out laughing, to discover what irrational expressions he could use.
Through Hoskyns he had come for the time under the influence of the leader of anti-rational European theology, Karl Barth, who at this moment was back in Basle after being expelled from Germany by the Nazis.
But the caustic critics were not the majority.
Whatever the book's faults might be, it was seen to be an original contribution of power, and that a new force in Christian thinking had appeared among the Churches in England.
Here was a young man learned in the New Testament and in the early Fathers; thinking hard for himself; manifestly a lover of God and of the gospel; an Anglo-Catholic but one who spoke in tones more persuasive to Protestants than was usual among Anglo-Catholics, with tolerance, and respect, and a gratitude for all that was best in the Protestant tradition.
The letter which he valued most came from the leader of English theology, who was now Archbishop of York, William Temple: ‘Men ought to acknowledge their major obligations, and so I write to thank you...’
He was also very pleased when he heard that George Bell, the famous Bishop of Chichester, took the book to read on his holiday in Switzerland.
Books of academic religion (or of any other academic subject) are not lasting because scholarship in all fields advances.
If they last twenty years before being replaced they have done a good service.
Yet fifty years after Ramsey's book a good judge of religious thought and literature during the twentieth century declared it to be an enduring masterpiece, which pointed forward to the road which Anglicans and not only Anglicans would follow.
That year, Cambridge University advertised a lectureship.
The lecturer would have to teach the history and the doctrine of the early Church.
This was what Michael Ramsey knew about.
Hoskyns badly wanted him for the post.
But this was impossible.
Before he wrote the book he could hardly get the job because he had not published a book.
After he wrote the book he could not get the job because it was a Hoskynsish sort of book.
Ten years later Professor Marsh was asked why the faculty refused to elect Ramsey to a lectureship.
He replied  laconically, as though it was a sufficient explanation, ‘He was influenced by Hoskyns.’
Moreover the book alienated the only one of Ramsey's backers who could stand up to the Cambridge establishment.
In a note Ramsey criticized Raven's view of a particular question.
Raven thought the criticism unfair.
He protested, coldly.
The note destroyed the intimacy between the two.
But even if the note was deleted (and Ramsey deleted it in a later edition), Raven could not have voted for Ramsey with enthusiasm.
Ramsey was now a channel for Barthian influence into England.
Raven regarded Karl Barth as the worst menace to sane rational thinking.
And Ramsey's book said that bishops were essential to the Church.
Raven thought this nonsense.
All his life Ramsey was sorry about the breach with Raven.
So Cambridge elected another person.
Hoskyns, who only had another year to live, was angry at his university.
If Cambridge did not want Ramsey, others did.
Suggestions of jobs kept flowing in.
One of them brings us evidence of how Ramsey appeared at this time to an austere critic.
St Chad's College in Durham, which was then a theological college, tried to get him as its Principal.
He went to see the Bishop of Durham, who gave him tea.
The bishop was Hensley Henson, who kept a frank diary: ‘26 November 1936.
Ramsey is a heavy fellow with a fat face, and a cumbrous manner, not prepossessing, but improving on acquaintance.’
After Hensley Henson's death this became one of Ramsey's favourite quotations.
There was a contrast.
Inside the college at Lincoln the students thought that this teacher was a fine teacher and fun but too odd to be offered responsibilities; and outside the college were a plethora of people who were not the university of Cambridge, anxious to offer every variety of job, pastoral, academic, or administrative.
Ramsey kept refusing.
This contrast was pointed by William Temple.
In July 1936 he gathered in his palace at Bishopthorpe a select team of ten for the purpose of preparing for the coming ecumenical conference.
There was Emil Brunner one of the two leading Christian thinkers on the Continent of Europe; there was Reinhold Niebuhr, one of the two leading Christian thinkers from the United States; there was Visser t'Hooft, the Dutchman who built up the World Council of Churches; there was J. H. Oldham, at that moment the leading thinker about Christian society in the British Isles; and there was Bernard Manning, the Congregationalist historian who was a friend of the Ramsey family in Cambridge.
And there too, in this galaxy, was the sub-warden of Lincoln Theological College.
He was not there only by courtesy.
Temple and Oldham pressed at him hard — he must write one of the essays, he was the only person who could do it, they told him.
He thought that they were wrong to press him.
He reluctantly agreed to write the essay and then did not.
It was the only time when he was intimate with his hero Temple.
He found him a charming host without any touch of stiffness or pomposity; ‘like a merry rollicking schoolboy’.
He enjoyed Temple's huge laugh.
With surprise he watched him consume a lot of macaroni.
They dressed for dinner every night.
The occasion hardly sounds important.
But to be a young unknown among the famous, and to hear them argue, he felt to be an education.
This meeting with Temple was so important to him that the photograph of the group hung on the wall of his room when he died.
The next move was strange.
That spring Ramsey gave a course of addresses during Holy Week in Lincoln Cathedral.
The Bishop of Lincoln, Nugent Hicks, in whose palace Ramsey played Murder, attended this course.
He could not understand what Ramsey was talking about.
He decided that this clergyman was in the clouds and out of the reach of the common man.
He told Ramsey that his language was paradoxical and difficult.
He said that what he needed was more contact with ordinary people.
Ramsey hoped now to be a teacher in a university.
He needed colleagues and a bigger library.
But he had a high doctrine of bishops.
He thought that a priest should if possible go where his bishop sent him.
The bishop gave him the extraordinary advice to go and be a curate again, at Boston in Lincolnshire.
Ramsey agreed.
It was the only strange decision of Ramsey's career.
For an unintelligible speaker to learn to speak intelligibly, it may not be the best training, and certainly it is not the only training, to send him to the pulpit of Boston parish church.
To cure woolly-headedness it is not indispensable to inflict the woolly-headedness on the denizens under Boston Stump.
And something is curious.
The evidence of the students at the college is that this was a clear teacher.
They told Austin Farrer that he was a spell-binder.
Ramsey was asked later, were you getting unintelligible, or was it only that the bishop was a bad listener to Holy Week addresses?
Ramsey replied, ‘I kept saying Yes is No and No is Yes.’
He was laughing when he said it.
Perhaps there was something more than coherence at stake.
A theological college is a narrow world, frequently compared to a greenhouse.
After only eighteen months breathing the dust of the docks, Ramsey taught for six years and a half in a greenhouse.
If he went to be the head gardener of another greenhouse and did another ten years  teaching among the geraniums, what species of hothouse plant might result?
Perhaps this is what Nugent Hicks saw, or feared.
But we know something else about the bishop's motive which he could not or would not say to Ramsey.
He told the rector at Boston that this was a person of unusual spiritual powers; that how to train him for the whole Church was a responsibility; that he was anxious that these abilities should not be confined to academic spheres.
Did the bishop see, what no one else could see, that this unusual teacher had the possibility of being a great bishop?
BOSTON
Boston Stump, a famous parish church and landmark, had a rector and four curates.
The senior curate, who was Michael Ramsey, was called lecturer but his duties were no different.
He lived in a little hired house five minutes from the church, on a stipend of £260 a year.
At first he was melancholy at leaving the friendships of Lincoln.
One of his fellow-curates was a champion cyclist, with incredible expeditions all over Europe and Asia.
His fellow-curates found him liable to vast silences, during which he twisted a bit of cotton with the fingers of both hands.
Ramsey had his district to visit.
He taught once a week in the primary school and felt a failure at it.
He had a weekly class for Sunday school teachers, which included a Methodist headmaster and several women who taught in the nonconformist Sunday schools.
This he enjoyed.
From autumn 1937 he had a large class of teachers to instruct on the gospels.
He was in demand as a confessor, from a few parishioners, a few neighbouring clergy, a few old students at Lincoln.
He found the parish set-up conventional and that was hard to be bear; ‘irksome’ he called it.
Told by high authority that no one could understand him in a pulpit, he worried about sermons more than anything.
He who had preached with power in Liverpool suddenly found preaching very difficult in Lincolnshire.
He was sure that the bishop was right and that he was hard to follow.
His struggles for clarity were painful.
But they made him realize that he was getting across what he wanted to get across, and not a holy-sounding fog of words.
If the people of Lincolnshire were thought by their bishop not to understand Ramsey in a pulpit, this was not the opinion outside the  diocese.
The invitations came thick and fast.
He was bad at saying no.
He could not lecture for the Archbishop of Canterbury because he was already committed to lecture for the Archbishop of York.
It was clear that he was no ordinary curate.
He was already a member of ecumenical committees.
A mind with original ideas, who wished to persuade the Protestants to be more Catholic and to persuade the Catholics to respect the truths of Protestantism, was instantly a must for those who thought about the reunion of the Churches.
He started to have to attend meetings in London.
William Temple got him an honouring invitation, as a delegate to the vast ecumenical conference at Edinburgh in 1937.
Ramsey refused this invitation because if he were away it would be awkward for the holiday plans of the staff of Boston parish church.
He afterwards thought this refusal very foolish and regretted that he did not go.
For his refreshment he played hockey vigorously in the local team or cycled in the fen country.
He would walk a long distance out to some pub, often the Malcolm Arms at Anton's Gowt, and have lunch in the bar on beer and bread and cheese.
On his walks he could sometimes be observed waving his hat about and talking to himself.
The oddity which the fellow-curates remarked was that as he walked in the procession from the vestry up the aisle he could be heard whistling.
No one minded.
They took it for granted that this was Ramsey.
The most famous story of Ramsey's absent-mindedness comes from Boston.
It sounds like legend but there is excellent evidence of its truth.
He went out without his front-door key.
When he came back he rang the bell.
His landlady was nervous of strangers and called through the door, ‘I'm sorry, Mr Ramsey is out.’
Ramsey: ‘I'll return later.’
About this time he started to wonder whether he ought to be a monk.
If he was not to be a lecturer at Cambridge because they did not think him academic enough, and if he was not to be a parish priest because he could not keep teenagers in order and because the adults were said not to understand him and because he felt a teaching vocation, where was his right place?
He had three functions in which he knew that he was at home.
The first was in prayer.
The second was in teaching the truths of Christianity, not in conventional ways.
And the third was as a confessor, because he knew that many souls valued him in this work.
A monastery was a place of prayer, and some monks had teaching duties, and most of them had to guide souls.
Was it possible that for the sake of prayer and guidance of souls he had a calling to the unmarried state?
The thought that it might be right to be a monk kept coming back.
His knowledge of the Anglican religious communities, such as it was, made him think that if he decided to try this out, Mirfield in Yorkshire  would be the right place; for at Mirfield many of the fathers had a vocation to teach, or to hear confessions.
Once he took this far enough to discuss the plan with one of the fathers from Mirfield.
In June 1937 Hoskyns died suddenly, at the age of only 52.
Ramsey felt the death to be a personal calamity.
The master and the pupil had moved apart intellectually — Hoskyns willing to be more and more obscure in his wrestlings with truth, Ramsey struggling for clarity of thinking.
Not till later was it diagnosed that the mental breakdown which destroyed Hoskyns crept upon him for a year or more before he died.
But the death was a ‘terrible blow’, as he said, in the affection and gratitude of a former disciple.
And it put still further off the remote vision of a lectureship at Cambridge.
The death had an unexpected consequence.
Corpus Christi College provided for Hoskyns's teaching in such a way that their parish of St Benet's, on the edge of the college precinct, was vacant.
They asked Ramsey to be the vicar.
The offer appealed.
The parish was tiny, hardly anyone lived in it, the church was small and easy to fill; congregations select; a little Sunday school but run by a lady; some undergraduates; hardly anyone to visit; the proximity of Edward Wynn and Milner-White and Wilfred Knox and his father.
If the students of Lincoln were right in thinking that he was not a good administrator, this church had less administration than any church in the land.
He would have access to the great library, and some touch with the academics, and yet his pastoral instinct, and his work as a confessor, would have outlet.
He then preferred the idea of such mixed work to a university lectureship.
The Bishop of Lincoln thought it ridiculous that this powerful engine which was Michael Ramsey should be used in a tiny little parish, and said so, but blessed him when he found he wanted to go.
He became the vicar of St Benet's Cambridge on 6 January 1939.
Corpus Christi College made the suggestion that he should sleep in Corpus but take his meals in his old college of Magdalene; a proposal so bizarre that it should be accounted for by a motive, not to have at dinner a famously silent person, imagined as a wet blanket.
In those days the Fellows of Corpus were rather proud of the briskness of their conversation.
Instead Ramsey moved into lodgings in Newnham (45 Owlstone Road).
ST BENET'S AT CAMBRIDGE
The number in the congregation did not rise.
A few dons came.
Ramsey's father frequently deserted his Congregational church and  came to hear his son.
Ramsey had a time announced for hearing confessions and some people came.
The service ground its way through, because the lady organist insisted on playing the hymns Lentissimo and this slow pace gave torments to the new vicar.
We have a memory of Ramsey from a girl whose family attended St Benet's.
She was sent to him to be prepared for confirmation.
He seemed to her to be extremely ancient (he was 35).
His hair was grey but with a trace of red hair remaining in his bushy eyebrows.
She noticed that he walked as though he had pebbles in his shoes.
‘He was very shy, and preparing teenagers for confirmation was not really his métier., Despite this verdict, she became a faithful member of the Church.
Usually a priest matters more by what he is than by what he says.
We have another memory from a girl who was then 16.
She agreed with the Bishop of Lincoln rather than with the students of Lincoln, for she thought him a disaster in the pulpit; blinking, and articulating his words with difficulty, and often using the peculiar phrase ‘paradoxic ally speaking’.
Then the children were evacuated from London in fear of air raids and that made life difficult for many Sunday schools, since the London children wanted to show the local children how tough they were.
But the girl remembered Ramsey taking the evacuees round him in the children's corner, and sitting on one of the low chairs meant for a child, and talking to them naturally and with an obvious pleasure.
The churchwarden Mrs Eagleston was to become a devoted friend of Ramsey.
It distressed her that her vicar should be seen charging through the town with his underpants showing through his trousers.
She thought that he needed a wife.
She was relieved, for the sake of the parish, when he rang her up in 1940 to say that he was leaving.
He saw little of Raven.
He had nothing whatever to do with the faculty of divinity.
He taught two pupils from Magdalene.
He studied hard at the Epistle to the Hebrews.
He meant to write a book about it.
The book never got written.
The world moved to war.
He must black out the house, and the vestry of the church.
He asked the bishop to put his name on the list for an army chaplaincy.
The worst of being in a job which the world regarded as not the right place for him was that the world would not leave him alone.
A month before the World War broke out, and only a few months after he became a parish priest, the Archbishop of Canterbury tried to make him head of St Augustine's College at Canterbury, which had the work of training men to be missionaries.
A month after the outbreak of war the Bishop of Durham, A. T. P. Williams, wrote in his lovely handwriting a letter sounding Ramsey whether he would become the professor of divinity at the university of Durham.
With the chair went a canonry at the  cathedral.
On 30 November 1939 the bishop converted this into a definite offer of the chair and the canonry.
Ramsey's college refused him a research fellowship.
His university refused him a not lofty post in the faculty of divinity.
And now he was offered a professorship at another university.
Most of the stipend at Durham came from the canonry.
Therefore the university was in the habit of leaving the choice of professor to the bishop.
The bishop was headmaster of Winchester College at the time that Ramsey's brilliant brother Frank was a scholar.
He asked the opinion of William Temple about filling the chair.
Ramsey asked himself whether if the electors had been the university officers without the bishop they would have regarded a man of one book as electable.
He decided that they would not.
His diffidence blinded him to the truth that the one book was already influential in modern thinking.
He was instituted to the canonry in Durham cathedral on 27 January 1940 and in mid-February settled into a gigantic house which went with the canonry.
The rooms were vast.
All the furniture which he possessed in Newnham furnished one half of one of the rooms.
He went to an auction of a big house in Cambridge and bought a lot of cheap carpets.
He seemed born to be a professor.
He arrived at this destination at the early age of 35.
He looked certain to remain a professor for the rest of his life.
Professor Ramsey
MARRIAGE
The house had historic escutcheons on the outer walls, and unhistoric battlements on the roof, and a glorious view from its cliff over the River Wear.
It poked its front door out into the green as though to challenge an equality with the deanery opposite.
It had no heating, its paint was peeling, and its wallpaper obeyed the rule of the new canon's parents that it does not show the dirt when it is dark.
The house was suitable for a prolific father who wore two pairs of combinations next the skin.
Ramsey lived in the rooms of the bishop's chaplain at the Castle while an architect put in central heating and clothed the walls in lighter paper.
Even with the new heating, warmth was hard to get: two years later the chapter struggled to find firewood for the canons since other fuel could not be got; and a defective boiler in the cathedral was made in Germany and could not be mended.
The first thing that struck the other dons who lived in the Castle was his oddness.
The Warden (Vice-Chancellor) Duff assured them that he was now not nearly so odd as he was when he had known him at the choir school of King's College.
The Principal of St John's declared roundly that he was a lunatic —‘I saw him yesterday afternoon walking down the Bailey with one foot on the pavement and one foot in the gutter all the way’.
Certainly he waved his arms about more than most men when in action.
And most of the seniors had not welcomed the appointment.
He was absurdly young.
Some of them disliked his book.
They thought that he looked antique, when at rest.
He was not yet quite bald, but nearly.
He had a grey fringe round back and sides, although a few wisps that had once been fair or ginger were combed over the top.
Occasionally he was referred to by those who saw him at services as ‘the old canon’ though he was much the youngest of the canons.
They were privately amused at his clumsiness.
In the college at Durham they saw him, as they thought, learning to ride a bicycle; but the truth was that whenever he rode a bicycle he looked as though he  was learning to ride.
They found that he was not good in processions, for the curious roll prevented him from keeping ranks like the others.
They attributed this not to anything physical but to meditation on higher things.
He had no curtains but shutters and makeshift scraps for the black-out.
That summer he enlisted as an air-raid warden and sat long hours of the night by a telephone doing nothing.
In October 1940 the army billeted an officer in one of the numerous spare rooms.
People who needed rooms came into his empty spaces.
A young Roman Catholic soldier from the Lancashire Fusiliers was billeted on him for two summer months of 1941 and never forgot the joyful singing which used to accompany Ramsey's washing and shaving before he went off to the cathedral each morning.
The Lucas boys kept their model railway in the house and their cries penetrated the professor's study disturbingly.
Sometimes he played soldiers with them and they thought little of his plans for defence in depth.
He ran races with their younger sister in the monks' dormitory.
John Lucas, the future philosopher, remembered being taught Greek grammar by Ramsey and sitting on his head while reciting Greek verbs.
As a canon of Durham Ramsey was one of the custodians of a great monument of the European inheritance in architecture, at a time when bombs dropped upon Britain.
The dean and canons organized their rota of fire-watching and felt helpless.
They took a vow like those of the Middle Ages where someone swore to go on crusade if his wife's life was saved.
They promised that if their cathedral came through unscathed, they would dedicate a window in gratitude to the Royal Air Force.
The window by Hugh Easton is at the north-west corner of the cathedral and was erected in 1950.
It has the text of Isaiah 31: 5, ‘As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem’; and above the city and cathedral of Durham an airman rides upon an eagle, protected from above by a winged seraph.
The Dean of Durham was Cyril Alington, a former headmaster of Eton.
An assistant master at Eton reported a message from the dean's wife, a delectable woman: ‘We have a new canon here at Durham.
His name is Michael Ramsey.
He is nice.
But he has no small talk.
He can talk about the Atonement.
But, whether unfortunately or not, that is not the subject which is usually uppermost in our minds.’
Alington allowed him and two other canons to introduce the daily sacrament on condition that they did not expect it to be part of the cathedral's official usage.
Ramsey preached in his canon's turn at the cathedral.
Some people found the sing-song voice a barrier, and found the beginning and the middle easier to listen to than the end.
It was soon  agreed, however, that he was worth hearing.
The music meant little to him, but the history, the architecture, the stones, the daily sacrament, and all the associations of the place remained with him permanently.
He was in demand for the hearing of confessions and made a little chapel for this purpose on the ground floor of his house.
He also took it in turns with other canons to act as verger and lock up the cathedral at night in the shortage of vergers caused by the war.
He once locked two visiting American soldiers inside the cathedral one evening and promised to come to let them out in half an hour but forgot to come.
Two doors away lived his former warden at Lincoln, Leslie Owen, now the Bishop of Jarrow.
Leslie Owen had a secretary who also was his chauffeur, Joan Hamilton.
She visited Durham to see a friend and fell in love with the city and began to help with girls' clubs in Durham and Sunderland.
Then she became Bishop Owen's secretary and driver and staff officer.
The idea of becoming a monk vanished from Ramsey's heart.
They announced the engagement in November 1941.
The morning it was announced a vast audience arrived for Ramsey's lecture and cheered him all the way up to the dais.
His eyebrows twitched and he said, ‘This week we are dealing with the sixth chapter of St Matthew…’ whereupon 90 per cent of the audience tumbled out of the room.
They were married on 8 April 1942 in the Galilee chapel of Durham cathedral.
It was the time of the Baedeker raids, when German bombers struck cathedral towns, and some of the guests who stayed in York the night before had sleepless hours.
Joan Ramsey, open-hearted, smiling, caring, changed his life.
The cold vast house became warm in atmosphere and hospitable.
Since she had been secretary to a bishop (she learnt to type by trial and error), and also chauffeur to a bishop (she learnt to drive by trial and error), she knew a lot of the clergy and their wives and had visited them all over the diocese, often in the black-out, and sat with the wives while the husbands talked to Bishop Owen, so she was good at remembering about them and their children and found the wives of the clergy to be fun.
She helped to create for him widening circles of friends, the cathedral community, the university, the clergy of the diocese, the students.
She could not provide him with small talk, or prod him to abandon his silences.
She did not cure absent-mindedness.
She would send him off to some lecturing engagement with butter and other  rations to give his hostess, and when he came back the rations would be found as a soggy mess in his pocket.
But she made him less formidable.
It was also noticed that he ceased to whistle unconsciously as he walked up the aisle from the vestry.
If he was in a procession the other members of the procession still worried about his inability to walk a straight line and feared that at some point he would peel off from the file.
Even five years later a clergyman who came to a retreat which he conducted thought him the oddest sight, sartorially, which he had seen among academics.
His high-pitched southern university voice caused amusement to North Country clergy who came.
But, said one of them, ‘when he began to talk about St John, all this was forgotten’.
The wit which once held the Cambridge Union in thrall was again in evidence.
Later in life he looked back upon the married time of his professorship at Durham as an idyll; the paradisal years of his life.
No children ever came.
Occasion ally they were vaguely sad about it but they never considered adopting.
They were happy together and both were fulfilled in their work.
And after a time they accepted it as their vocation to be childless.
But they were not deprived of children.
Various children, with whom both of them were very good, were about the house in profusion.
There were the Lucas boys with their model railway, there were a couple of evacuees with their mothers, there was a German Jewess refugee with her adopted child, there was a friend who lived with them and helped at a school and her children were in and out a lot.
Then the first ‘maid’ they ever had was a girl of 16 called Mollie and she had been deserted by her husband and came to live in the house with three tots.
Married life was a contrast with the experience of the bachelor living solitary amid echoing halls.
In the midst of all this young life it was fortunate that the house was roomy enough for the professor still to get enough quiet and space to write.
They started to run meetings in the house for the wives of the clergy, where Ramsey talked theology to them and mixed it with a lot of humour.
The professor was asked out to preach in mining parishes; and he discovered that, despite the views of the Bishop of Lincoln and the teenagers of St Benet's that he was unintelligible in a pulpit, he could feel them hanging on his words.
We have an eye-witness who heard him when he went to preach at Easington colliery to a large congregation of miners and their families, who felt that he himself and the other hearers were electrified.
Ramsey spoke of eternal life.
The witness judged part of the secret to lie in the way he seemed to think out what he wanted to say as he went along and made the audience share his struggle after truth.
THE DURHAM CHAIR
The faculty of divinity at Durham had as Ramsey's predecessor Oliver Quick, who with William Temple was a leading mind in the Church of England.
Michael Ramsey succeeded someone famous throughout the land.
The faculty could not think that a young man of 35 years, who had written one book which not everyone thought wonderful, could hold a candle to his predecessor.
They felt coolly towards the newcomer.
His first achievement as a professor was to overcome and then reverse the suspicion with which his appointment was received.
They found that he knew what he wanted; that he was persuasive in trying to get it; that what he wanted was good; and they suddenly realized that this new young professor dragged them into the twentieth century.
On the board of theology he was dominant, to reform the curriculum and the examinations.
This was the place where there were rows about his reformation.
The other members began to find that he gave the faculty coherence and a sense of purpose.
This was not by drama, but by being around, and by being himself, and by an infectious enthusiasm.
Whether or not he was a sound thinker, on which they could disagree, no one could doubt that they had a professor who loved his subject; he bubbled with it.
He was kept busy writing lectures for he found the faculty grossly understaffed.
He had a class of thirty young men.
He did not think many of them bright (but the record afterwards shows that several were very bright).
He got to know them well: years later when they appeared suddenly he could remember who they were.
At their request he umpired their boat-races on the River Wear.
As a lecturer he was concise and audible.
Though he did not dictate, he went at a pace slow enough for the listeners to take down a lot of what he said.
He would end his lecture with a summarizing epigram.
After a time it became known in other faculties that this was rather a special lecturer and people reading classics or history or the sciences took the trouble to go over to Ramsey's lectures and swell his class.
He managed to increase the staff in two ways; first by getting the endowment for the chair of Greek freed from the attachment to a canonry and then the endowment of the canonry used to give a second professorship of theology; secondly by persuading the vice-chancellor to find money for a lectureship in New Testament studies.
For this lectureship he chose (1945) Kingsley Barrett, who was a dedicated 
Methodist.
Since all the teachers in the faculty hitherto were Anglican, this choice of a Methodist for a key post did not go unobserved.
It was destined to influence Ramsey's later career.
He widened the faculty from being Anglican to being for all denominations.
He widened it from a training for future priests of the Church of England to a course which anyone might wish to read for their education.
Afterwards he felt that he had a hard struggle.
The teaching method which he found he regarded as spoon-feeding.
He thought the lectures far too many and that he gave too many lectures for his own good.
He reduced their number.
He wanted more seminars and more individual tuition.
He also wanted more theology.
Why should a faculty of theology teach only the history of Christianity or the study of language?
By the time he left it was the most respected faculty of divinity in English universities.
He hated the word student .
In his view it divided young from old by its suggestion that only young people study.
He hated the word department because it suggested bureaucracy.
But otherwise he preferred the system at Durham, where the teaching unit was powerful, to the system he knew at Cambridge, where the social unit was powerful yet excluded the spouses.
He also preferred the Durham system to the Cambridge system because it afforded the chance of more general courses of study.
He did not like an excess of specialization and thought that a university should do what it could to counteract the trend, and help arts undergraduates to learn a bit of science or vice versa.
With his experience of an old university and a less old university, with two different systems, he was able to frame for himself what he valued in the English university.
He thought that a lot of residence was of high importance; for he believed that the object of higher education was not just information, or preparation for a career, but a community of minds and personalities.
‘It is not difficult’, he would say later, ‘to produce sophisticated men and women by collecting them to learn certain subjects.
But it is not sophisticated men and women that a good university tries to produce.
It is men and women whose knowledge goes with character, and with reverence for persons and for the things of the mind.’
Young John Lucas, who lived hard by and sat on Professor Ramsey's head to recite Greek verbs, heard stories from his father of Ramsey taking on atheists in the university in public debate and wiping the floor with them.
Whether the boy understood what father said, or whether Ramsey did so, is more doubtful.
It was never his habit to try to wipe the  floor with anyone.
His experience of his brother Frank made him respectful of sincerity, and well able to hold his own against clever atheist onslaught.
The early years were war years — the horror of news, and fear of raids, and blackness at night, and poor food, and sitting up all night, and very earnest prayer.
Ramsey never failed to be grateful to the young pilots who won the Battle of Britain, and always afterwards remembered Battle of Britain Sunday.
In 1943 he suffered a disaster when the stock of his now famous book was all destroyed in the London blitz.
He continued to write.
The book which he spent most of the war writing was naturally about death:The Resurrection , published in 1945.
It had large sales for a time in England and America, but it had neither the originality nor the power of his first book.
The heirs of Bethune-Baker at Cambridge thought it lamentable.
The Modern Churchman produced what Ramsey called a ‘rather vehement and contemptuous’ review; slightly with an air of ‘we settled this question long ago, why must this young man interfere?’
Ramsey was not moved and printed a reply.
Then in 1949 he published a lovely book,The Transfiguration .
The thought of glory always rose quickly amid his devotions and the book was scholarly meditation on glory in the New Testament.
In far away Haiti a young black Methodist minister, Philip Potter, who would one day be Secretary of the World Council of Churches, mulled over the book as he struggled with villainy in a very poor and very sad land.
Near the end of his life Ramsey was asked which of his books he was most glad to have written.
He replied unhesitatingly,’The Transfiguration '.
One other book came out of the Durham days, though it was not published till later.
Frederick Denison Maurice, the Christian Socialist, was the most cloudy, some said most woolly, some said most profound, of the Victorian thinkers.
Because of the impact of Socialism in power in Britain and of the welfare state during Attlee's post-war government, Maurice attained a celebrity not known since his death eighty years before.
Lots of people wanted to know how Christians were Socialist and how Socialists were Christian.
Lots of people wanted to read Maurice.
They tried it and were baffled.
Michael Ramsey was the son of a mother who was a Socialist and who thought that her Socialism sprang out of her Christianity.
He decided to make Maurice understood by the undergraduates of Durham University.
That feat could not be achieved without making Maurice more down-to-earth than he was.
Ramsey grew famous in the Churches.
He got more and more entangled in committees of the ecumenical movement, which was on a rising tide of Christian hope, and which badly needed trained English  academics to help.
In 1947 he was well known as one of the authors — in fact he was the chairman of the group and the principal author and the person in charge of publication — of a report to the Archbishop of Canterbury, now Geoffrey Fisher, on the nature of Catholicity .
This report made such an impact that two other groups wrote answers to it.
At such meetings he was valued.
Here was an Anglo-Catholic who insisted on the apostolic succession of bishops, and thought intercommunion between the Churches, before a proper union, to be wrong, and yet refused to unchurch the Protestant Churches.
Rome refused to take any part in these proceedings, except by unofficial observers.
Therefore a man like Ramsey brought the argument about Christian unity up against the fundamental question of Catholicity versus Protestantism in a way which few others could.
The Protestant leaders found him far too rigid.
But he was curiously persuasive.
He was never tempted to see ‘bishops’ as a key for locking the door on dissenters.
He never separated ‘bishops’ from an agelong body of historic Catholic devotion and prayer.
He hated definitions of apostolic succession which made it sound as though a lot of laying on of hands from century to century was a bit of magic by which God preserves his Church.
He once defined the Anglican doctrine of apostolic succession to several Lutherans so that at the end they could be heard saying ‘Hear, Hear’.
And another reason why he grew more and more weighty was his refusal to accept Guff.
There was a mood, if we cloud all this up in realms of high theology then we shall all agree on what we cannot understand.
Ramsey was determined on clarity.
‘Seeing through a glass darkly’, he once told an ecumenical committee, ‘is not the same thing as an ecumenical fog., After the war he began to travel to meetings as a consultant.
The most important of these was at Amsterdam for the first meeting of the World Council of Churches 1948.
Here he argued with the European leaders of Protestantism, from Karl Barth downwards, over the difference between a Catholic and a Protestant idea of the Church.
At this point the old-looking young professor from Durham entered a European scene.
The Nazis created a wave of Christian feeling in Europe, almost a religious revival, in antipathy to their racialism and anti-Semitism and violence and injustice.
Before 1939 the ecumenical movement was always a clerical élite within the older Churches.
Its force among people  lay in the missionary areas and the young Churches where Indians or Africans could not see what European divisions had to do with them.
But Hitler made world Christianity something that for a moment even people in the pews could see as an expression of peace, and amity, and human rights, and the moral law in politics.
The old committees where clergymen of various denominations talked in polysyllables to each other 's waistcoats were given a sudden strength as they touched the aspirations of the peoples.
The meeting at Amsterdam was the focus of these hopes.
It could not fulfil them.
As a Cold War frustrated the yearnings which the people put upon the new organization of the United Nations, a cold war entered Christendom.
Was a meeting of world Christianity a propaganda design against an atheist Soviet union?
The American Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, practically said so at the Amsterdam meeting.
The Soviet government said so.
Therefore the Russian Churches, at a synod in Moscow that year, said so and refused to send a single representative.
The satellite states of Moscow followed this lead — no Bulgarians, nor Romanians, nor Yugoslavs.
How could Christendom be represented when the weightiest part of the most historic of Churches refused to have anything to do with the meeting?
Ever since the days when Ramsey was a boy at Repton, the Pope refused to have anything to do with the ecumenical movement.
The Churches said that they would try to unite — but this was nonsense, there was only one Church and he was it.
Rome suspected the ecumenicals of planning a Protestant federation across the world which would be designed as a force against Rome.
Some of the utterances of ecumenical s gave ground for this suspicion.
An American Congregationalist, for example, saw no possibility of uniting with Rome and every reason for not uniting with Rome — let us join the Churches which teach more or less the truth, not the Churches which do not.
Such speeches shocked Rome.
At some meetings during the twenties and thirties unofficial Roman Catholic observers were permitted.
But Rome did not merely refuse to send any representative to Amsterdam.
It banned unofficial observers from attending.
This rigidity shocked the ecumenicals.
How then could the meeting at Amsterdam pose as a meeting of Christendom when the largest Church in the world refused to have anything to do with it?
These strange circumstances pushed into prominence the only Catholics who were not banned from attending the meeting.
The Russian revolution of 1917 drove out many Russians.
At Paris Georges Florovsky taught theology and interpreted the Russian tradition to the  West.
At Amsterdam he talked out of a vast tradition which otherwise was not very articulate at the meeting.
His presence and influence there made him a figure in world Christendom.
And the Anglo-Catholic tradition would never swallow the idea that world Christianity was a federation of Protestant Churches.
Of the Anglo-Catholics the professional thinker in Amsterdam was Michael Ramsey.
The cold war condemnations of Moscow and the obsessive rigidity of Rome elevated Florovsky, on that stage, into a mouthpiece of the eastern Catholic tradition, and elevated Ramsey into a mouthpiece of the western Catholic tradition.
He described his own experiences in a public article (Ecumenical Review , I (1949), 388–92).
They met as a commission, under the chairmanship of the Swede Gustaf Aulén, to debate the first theme of the agenda, the Universal Church in God's Design.
The commission contained Karl Barth, and Florovsky, and the American Protestant Mackay who was a man of polysyllables, and the more profound American Protestant Richard Niebuhr, and Ernst Wolf to represent the German Lutheran tradition, and a few others.
Ramsey described the contrast as strange, between the hard hitting of the debate and the friendliness of the people.
They quickly discovered that they could not agree.
They made no attempt to cover up the disagreement with beautiful words.
Any member on a committee to which Karl Barth belonged had a rough ride.
Afterwards the general meeting was disappointed and some said that this commission was unrepresentative of the Churches and ought to be disregarded.
It was, they said, a set of academic hair-splitters.
But, said Ramsey, the idea that we can get Christian unity by going for a highest common factor and leaving everything else in the shadow will not work.
What is vigorous and worth while in the various traditions is precisely what is not in common.
The commission moved away from the idea that Christians agree on what is important and disagree only on what is trivial.
They were therefore accused of putting the clock back and bringing the best hope of Christendom to an impasse.
Still, despite the absence of Rome and Moscow, the antithesis between Catholic and Protestant was taken seriously by Amsterdam.
Ramsey had moved out of the Barthian influence which via Hoskyns attracted him during the earlier 1930s.
The continental commentators on Amsterdam were in the habit of minuting Ramsey's name as that of the chief opponent of Barth.
The recorded utterance of Barth to Ramsey at Amsterdam was, ‘I am sorry you do not hate the Pope’.
But Ramsey and Barth found that they shared a common sense of humour.
They had instant rapport.
Barth was amused and pleased when he heard  how someone said that if he and Ramsey could get on so well ‘the millennium must be round the corner’.
Barth had never met a real Anglo-Catholic before and was excited by what he found.
When he went home to Basle he showed the photographs to his family and pointed out to them ‘my very good neighbour Canon Ramsay [sic ]from Durham, an authentic Anglo-Catholic, with strange views concerning tradition, succession, ontology and so on, but also with a very convincing twinkle in his eye…a man with whom I more often agreed than disagreed…the outstanding figure in the picture of my first ecumenical experience!’
The Roman Catholics were interested that a combination between a Russian refugee, Georges Florovsky, an English high churchman, Michael Ramsey, and a dogmatic Swiss Protestant, Karl Barth, brought the ecumenical movement to an impasse because none of them was prepared to put up with a Protestant federation, and the union of these unlikely allies was too powerful to overcome.
The nature of the meeting left Ramsey with a doubt.
These meetings could not be said to be unimportant because world Christianity ought to be seen to meet.
But could the discussion do any good?
With such numbers, and so many set speeches, and with most of the participants having done no work beforehand, could you ever get clarity into a report produced by a mass debate?
This doubt about world synods was not lessened by later experience.
By the time of the World Council at Amsterdam the question began to come into Ramsey's head what he ought to do next.
He found that the canonry and the cathedral, and the administration in the university, took up a lot of time.
He seemed to himself to need more leisure to pursue his studies of the New Testament and of Christian thought more profoundly.
He wondered where he could find a chance of quieter work.
Some of the Scotsmen talked of getting Ramsey as Bishop of Edinburgh but not enough of the Scotsmen wanted an Englishman and no doubt there were those who wondered whether this professor who lived among clouds of glory would make a bishop who perforce lived in a too real world.
Then, by an extraordinary fortune, the three Cambridge chairs of divinity which were or could be in his field of study fell vacant within three years.
All of them had the attraction of fewer chores and a better library — as well as, for him, the genius loci of a childhood home.
They also had more of a challenge than Durham.
He would have to  move into a school where the powerful names were still Bethune-Baker (though he was retired) and Marsh and Raven and he would be, intellectually speaking, up against it in a way that he was not at Durham.
That was a challenge which he would like to undertake.
He thought the post ‘more exposed’, ‘less cosy’.
He applied for the first chair and then thought better of it and withdrew the application; refused to apply for the second despite the supplications of Cambridge friends; and finally applied for the third, the chair of primacy, the regius chair made vacant by the retirement of Charles Raven.
Raven did not want Ramsey to succeed him.
Although the chair was a regius chair, it was not like most regius chairs an appointment by the King.
Since the reign of Queen Elizabeth I the professor was elected.
In 1950 the electors consisted of a board of the vice-chancellor and eight persons of whom five were at Cambridge and three from outside Cambridge; but one of the five was away in America, and absent persons cannot vote.
Elections are confidential and no one knows what happened.
It is certain that the vice-chancellor in the chair gained the impression from what was said at the meeting that they were forced to elect from a weak field of candidates.
It is certain that the electors discussed the name of Stephen Neill, who had had a far more brilliant academic career as an undergraduate than Michael Ramsey and had lately dazzled the university by his lecturing and preaching power.
It is certain that they discussed the name of the neo-Thomist philosopher Eric Mascall, who succeeded Ramsey at Lincoln.
Professor Marsh, whose superb lectures the undergraduate Ramsey attended, refused to vote for Ramsey no doubt because he disapproved of Hoskyns.
The Cambridge philosopher of religion on the board refused to vote for Ramsey for he did not think his work up to standard — the Cambridge philosophers never forgave the ‘irrationality’ which was a streak in his first and most original book.
But in the eyes of other electors Ramsey had merits.
There was nothing arid about him.
He never lost sight of the religious nature of his subject, and never turned it into a boring desert.
Here was a person who took a faculty in another university and turned it into the most famous faculty in the land.
He was also an English thinker whose name was respected on the continent of Europe.
Whether his books were or were not weighty, he thought for himself, and was no man's copy.
Although a free and critical mind, he reached reasonably conservative conclusions about the New Testament — which pleased the nonconformists and the bishop on the board.
And those who worked with him on ecumenical committees knew that this was nothing like so rigid an Anglo-Catholic  as sometimes he was portrayed; and remembered what he did for the Methodists and other non-Anglicans in Durham.
Moreover we have the proverb that no one is elected to anything except to keep two other people out — and some of Cambridge doubted whether Stephen Neill for all his brilliance was reliable, and thought that neo-Thomism, despite the quality of Mascall's mind, was a retrograde movement in divinity.
The Methodist leader Newton Flew proposed Ramsey.
He worked with Ramsey on several ecumenical committees and respected his mind.
The Presbyterian T. W. Manson, a leading scholar in the New Testament and capable of judging whether or not Ramsey had academic weight, seconded the proposal.
And Ramsey was elected the Cambridge regius professor by the votes of five men out of seven.
None of the five was on the teaching strength of the faculty at Cambridge, and three of the five came from other universities.
It says something for Ramsey's person and mind and reputation that one of the two most Anglo-Catholic professors in England could be elected on the proposal of two nonconformists.
If two Cambridge electors voted against, that must mean that the faculty divided about Ramsey.
A lot of people in Cambridge were disappointed at the choice.
But some of the younger dons were ecstatic about the election.
So were Magdalene College, and Ramsey's father, and Archbishop Fisher, and Edward Wynn who was now the Bishop of Ely.
Eric Abbott prophesied falsely, ‘It is to be the great work of your life’.
And so it seemed.
‘The iniquity of the Amorite’, wrote Austin Farrer, ‘is at length full, and the progeny of Hoskyns is to return on the third decade to the Promised land.’
THE CAMBRIDGE CHAIR
Joan and Michael Ramsey moved to a house in Newnham, not far from where he lodged when he was vicar of St Benet's eleven years before: 3 Wordsworth Grove.
The house was large for their needs and soon they did not like it.
Ramsey became a Fellow of his old college Magdalene.
There he was a formidable force.
The Fellows were accustomed to do mostly what the Master, Sir Henry Willink, Bart., wanted.
Ramsey the Liberal politician had ideas of democracy which cut across this benevolent dictatorship.
He had the more force because it was, so to speak, hereditary in  the college.
But he liked the Master and admired the vigour of his leadership.
The faculty of divinity needed him.
Marsh, the professor of Old Testament, had been a superlative teacher but his health was gone and he was now a passenger.
No one except Ramsey could teach the New Testament.
No one except Ramsey could teach what Christian doctrine was about.
At his first lecture in the Cambridge divinity school the large room was packed.
The caretaker was heard saying to the professor of Hebrew, ‘It's only curiosity Sir’.
He found his work different from his work at Durham.
There were fewer lectures, many more private interviews with students, many more research students to see, a seminar for graduates and lecturers, far more leisure and therefore more time for study.
He gave two courses of lectures and the notes for both courses survived: one on the New Testament and one on the Christian idea of redemption.
‘To the preparation of both courses of lectures I gave far more attention than I had latterly been giving at Durham.’
He had a professor's room where he interviewed.
He was influential on the board of divinity.
It was a good time for building up the faculty.
The numbers of students grew, therefore the university could justify the money for new posts.
Within a very short time several of those who were disappointed at his election swung over to gratitude for his coming and enthusiasm for what he did to the faculty.
The swing from suspicion to welcome which he met at Durham he now met at Cambridge.
Ramsey missed his canonry; that is, he grieved that he no longer had a priestly connection with a church in the town.
He was in demand for preaching and conducting retreats.
He would appear at 6 a.m. in Addenbrooke's Hospital to celebrate the sacrament as its honorary assistant chaplain.
Bothered about Joan's health and the overspaciousness of the house, they searched and found a little terraced house almost opposite the Fitzwilliam Museum.
They sold the monumental furniture suitable for the acreage of Durham canonries and moved into Fitzwilliam Street.
They spent a whole day placing the furniture.
Then they sank back into armchairs, thanking the Lord that never again in their lives would they move house.
Never was gratitude more misplaced.
Ramsey bicycled over to Wordsworth Grove to see if there were any letters.
On the mat was a letter from Winston Churchill.
It offered him the see of Durham.
Ramsey had been a professor at Cambridge for exactly twenty months.
It is not usual for the advisers of the Crown to draw people out of important work when they have hardly had a chance to do what they have undertaken.
The offer had a history behind it.
Since the days of Queen Victoria the method of choosing bishops for the Church of England had changed, not wholly for the better.
Queen Victoria achieved a big improvement when she insisted that prime ministers should not choose whomsoever they liked without consulting the Archbishop of Canterbury; and in later stages she was able to insist that if the archbishop objected, the prime minister's nomination should not go forward.
Her son Edward VII, though he knew far less about clergymen than his mother, continued the same trenchancy.
If he found that the archbishop disliked a nomination, he coolly referred it back to Downing Street.
But with the coming of Lloyd George a Celtic nonconformist began to nominate.
King George V, who also knew not much about clergymen, had no desire to make trouble.
The system of consulting one or both archbishops continued.
But on occasion the prime minister disregarded what they said.
Lloyd George was not a person who knew little about clergymen.
He knew nothing.
Therefore he developed of necessity the system which Gladstone started under Queen Victoria, a little private team of secretaries or advisers.
This was desirable.
Prime ministers have various duties.
If they had to be responsible for choosing the leaders of the Church, they needed information and their secretaries should be able to talk to people who had the information.
Much depended upon the quality of the secretaries.
One of Lloyd George's advisers was a sensible and informed man.
The others were ignorant and prejudiced.
Lloyd George was driven from office.
The prime ministers between the World Wars, who were mostly Conservative, ran the system with sense and responsibility.
They consulted the archbishop or archbishops, took their advice, did not persist if the archbishop brought good reasons for a contrary opinion, and did not allow their ‘patronage secretary’ any ‘independent’authority.
The system ran well for the sake of the Church.
Successive kings had no reason to grumble, cathedral chapters were happy to elect, and the Church of England was given good leaders — William Temple of York and George Bell of Chichester among them.
With the Second World War the system started to creak.
Churchill was a sort of Anglican but was as ignorant about clergymen as Lloyd George.
He was supposed to take the advice of Archbishop Lang of Canterbury but he distrusted everything Lang said because he thought him an appeaser of Hitler.
The relation between archbishop and prime minister became at times very uneasy.
Lang thought Churchill (from this point of view only) the worst prime minister who ever worked the system.
Some of Churchill's nominations in fact were very good, that of Temple to Canterbury being the best.
But it made the situation no  easier because Churchill distrusted Temple as a sort of Socialist and as too outspoken a politician.
One of his secretaries Colville tells us that Churchill's attitudes to clergymen had a touch of King Henry II's attitude to Thomas Becket.
After the war Attlee went back to the more responsible system.
But in October 1951, when Ramsey had professed at Cambridge for exactly a year, Churchill came back to power.
This was a Churchill decaying physically, slower in the uptake, less able to work long hours, less interested in the peacetime problems of the country, but still well enough to make his own decisions.
He had an archbishop, Fisher, with a good judgement of men and with a lot of information about them.
So the discussion, and the argument, began to develop not so much between prime minister and archbishop, as between archbishop and Churchill's patronage secretary Anthony Bevir.
For the first time a civil servant, perforce, began to affect what happened.
The see of Durham was the fourth senior see in the Church.
Its occupant had an instant seat in the House of Lords.
When it fell vacant, one bit of history conditioned the argument.
For the last seventy-three years the Bishop of Durham was a scholar; five bishops in succession ranging from one who was among the leading minds of Europe to one who was more a publicist than a scholar but who still had academic interests.
During the recent years after the war the university rose in national importance and always had a close connection with the bishop.
Archbishop Fisher and Archbishop Garbett of York started to look around for scholarly clergymen and hovered over various names, ail of whom taught then or had taught in universities.
On 8 April 1952 the patronage secretary went to see the Archbishop of York.
Bevir's habit was to roam with a cloud of verbiage and then pop out of his hole with a startling suggestion, almost as quickly popping back.
He talked of the excellence of Mortimer at Exeter, formerly a professor at Oxford.
Then he started to talk about Ramsey and said ‘probably the best man for Durham’.
It did not seem to occur to him that Ramsey had been only eighteen months in an important job for which he was perfectly fitted.
Thus came a conflict of views.
The two archbishops thought that Ramsey would be an excellent bishop but it was not right, it was bad for the Church as well as for the study of divinity, to take him out of the Cambridge chair after so short a tenure.
(Notice the change which the Durham professorship, and Joan's coming, wrought — in 1940 no one could conceive of this absent-minded man as a bishop, and six or seven years later the electors to the see of Edinburgh mulled over his name and decided that it would not do, and five years after that both archbishops  and the prime minister's office were agreed that he would be a very good bishop.)
The prime minister hardly minded much, as yet, what was going on.
His civil servant thought that Ramsey should be invited.
And against the archbishops Bevir had this on his side.
He had talked to the Durham people.
He stayed at the deanery and talked far into the night about the needs of Durham and its diocese.
The outgoing Bishop Williams wanted Ramsey to succeed him.
Everyone in Durham to whom Bevir talked wanted Ramsey to come back.
The dean and chapter wanted him.
Behind the scenes they may have affected the prime minister directly.
For Canon Lucas, sub-dean and father of the boys with the model railway, decided while Ramsey was the professor at Durham that this was a possible Archbishop of Canterbury.
This was contrary to the opinion of the world and society which thought of him as a boffin.
Lucas knew Lord Halifax from his university days and now wrote to tell him that Ramsey was the man whom the diocese wanted as its bishop, and hoped that Halifax would do what he could with Winston Churchill.
Also, Bevir had another argument.
Possibly, he said, this was a future archbishop.
If so, it was good to give him experience as a bishop as soon as possible.
And Bevir was in the strong position, that neither archbishop wished to deny that Ramsey would make a good bishop.
If Churchill recommended Ramsey to the new young Queen who had never before been confronted with the situation, and the Queen asked the archbishops whether they objected, they could not say that they did.
This was a new development in the system of choosing bishops.
The prime minister's secretary went down to the diocese to consult the leading churchmen.
That meant, the secretary exposed his part in the proceedings.
Instead of a faceless figure behind the scenes, he was obviously a person who counted.
Yet he had no constitutional place in advising the Queen on the choice of bishops.
That made the system look more Erastian than it ever looked before.
Here was a civil servant exercising obvious power in the choice of a Church leader.
On the other hand it had a large compensation.
Always in English history bishops were chosen for national reasons and the diocese took second place.
But now for the first time the diocese was being consulted — informally, quietly, but systematically.
Under the old system, where bishops were chosen by archbishops and prime ministers who thought about the needs of the nation, Ramsey would not have been chosen.
He became a bishop because, and solely because, the diocese knew him well and wanted him back.
That was no small gain to set in the balance against the more obvious Erastianism of the new system.
There is a little evidence that the final choice lay between George  Chase, the Bishop of Ripon, mature in years and experience, a scholar, solid, stable, absolutely reliable, shy, and at times remote, and Michael Ramsey, without experience, untried, but one of the leaders of a party in the Church and someone who would do more to represent learning among the bench of bishops.
Churchill, confronted by a choice between a totally safe appointment and an exciting gamble, would have no doubts.
The new Queen approved inform ally.
On 30 May 1952 a letter went from Churchill to Ramsey offering him the see of Durham.
The house in Fitzwilliam Street at Cambridge was in a state of shock.
Someone who — has accepted a leading chair at one of the universities expects to do a job and does not lightly change after less than two years.
And this was more than just a professorship.
It was work towards which all Ramsey's training and expectations led as the right contribution which he could make to the life of his Church and to that of Christendom.
He knew that his gifts were those of a scholar rather than an administrator.
He knew that he was not going to be happy if he were deprived of the chance to study.
That the letter came from Winston Churchill was a point against it.
The Repton boy's horror at Churchill's anti-Bolshevist campaign had turned into a more adult and less ferocious criticism.
The Liberal Ramsey thought that Churchill was totally wrong to put Britain back on the gold standard; that he was illiberal over miners in the General Strike; that he was very mistaken in resisting the advance of India to independence.
He admitted the great debt which the country owed to Churchill for the Second World War.
But he would have preferred Lord Halifax to Churchill as prime minister in 1940 and even in retrospect believed that the country would have fought the war better under Halifax and that the admirals and the generals would have had a less neurotic time.
To receive the offer from Churchill did not raise it in Ramsey's estimation.
And something about the tone of Churchill's letter displeased Ramsey.
He thought it pompous.
But the actual letter survives and only a mind predisposed to suspect the sender could think it pompous: ‘After the most careful consideration I have decided, if you are willing that I should do so, to recommend your name for the succession to the see of Durham.’
Did Ramsey suspect that Churchill's ‘very careful’ consideration was more by proxy than in person?
Or dislike the ego of ‘I have decided’?
Anyway he did not like the tone.
That was an excess of suspicion, for the letter was drafted by David Hunt,vice Bevir who was ill, and Hunt made it conform to precedents.
And Churchill was not yet senile.
He cross-examined Hunt and knew perfectly well what he was doing.
Still, Michael Ramsey, being Ramsey, had to think that this might be the will of God for him.
Durham stood for an idyll of ten years.
He knew the people, and the work, and a lot of the clergy.
He also knew that his wife, after being secretary to a bishop and then secretary to the professor of divinity, and his hostess for eight years, was better equipped to be the wife of the new Bishop of Durham than any other woman in the country.
Durham was the place where he had found happiness.
But he had a fixed idea in his mind that to be a bishop was not his work.
Eric Abbott, his best man, had once begged him not to become a bishop in England.
He told him that a mitre could be a candle-snuffer.
Ramsey had read the life of Archbishop Randall Davidson by George Bell and found it very depressing — a noble and unspoilt man inside a sickening system —‘the wire-pulling, the hedging, and energy spent on things that don't matter, and all the sitting on the fence’.
But he had also read the life of Bishop Charles Gore and found it inspiring, so it was not always sickening to work as a bishop.
His first need was to find out whether Cambridge University would regard his leaving as betrayal.
He went first to the then elder statesman of the faculty of divinity, William Telfer the Master of Selwyn, whom Ramsey respected.
Then he went to the Master of Corpus Christi, Sir Will Spens, who was a lay Anglo-Catholic.
Then he went to the head of his own college, Sir Henry Willink.
To his surprise and discontent the first two thought that he ought to go.
Willink thought that perhaps he should not go; but he also discontented Ramsey by treating it as a problem in how Ramsey should get the best career in a worldly sense.
Nevertheless, it was clear that the wisest Cambridge leaders whom he could consult would not regard his going as betrayal if he felt it right.
On the eve of Whitsunday Joan drove him over to Ely to see the bishop, his first confessor Edward Wynn.
Wynn was not a man prepared to decide anyone else's future for them.
On the Tuesday Ramsey called on his former best man Eric Abbott in London, who had urged him never to be a bishop in England.
Abbott thought at first that Cambridge was bound to win.
But before the end of the conversation he realized how vocation pulled Ramsey towards Durham, and talked about ‘a theological bishop’ and did not discourage.
From Eric Abbott he went on to Canterbury to talk to the archbishop, Geoffrey Fisher.
The meeting with Fisher, in the Old Palace at Canterbury, was felt by Michael Ramsey to be odd.
Fisher, as was his way, was honest.
He did not pretend that he wanted Ramsey to go to Durham.
As clearly as anyone he saw what was  owing to the university of Cambridge.
He said that the diocese of Durham wanted him and that the Archbishop of York was now persuaded that they were right.
He said that he had an open mind.
He said no word to persuade Ramsey to accept the see.
And then he gave what Ramsey thought a startling answer to a question which to Ramsey was a crux.
Ramsey asked how valuable it was to have scholarly men as bishops.
Fisher replied that it did not matter much.
But, he added, sometimes commissions were needed and then it was valuable to have a scholar-bishop as the chairman.
Ramsey had formed the view that a bishop is an apostolic teacher.
His vocation is to guard the faith, to present it, expound it.
He did not think that the then bench in the Church were all well qualified to this end.
He had told a friend not long before, ‘If you walked from Humber to Severn and dodged Derby, you would not find a bishop who can read or write’.
That Archbishop Fisher treated all this as unimportant perturbed him.
If the official view in the Church cared nothing about the bishop in his function as apostolic teacher, anyone who was trained to teach had a duty to join the bishop's bench if he were asked.
The interview with Fisher strengthened Ramsey's feeling that he had a duty to go.
The settling blow was delivered by Archbishop Garbett, whom on the Friday Ramsey went to see at York.
Garbett had a retreat for ordinands and smuggled Ramsey into the house lest one of the young men guess that something was up.
He said that the Durham diocese wanted Ramsey.
He said that theology among bishops was important.
He said that it needed strengthening in the northern province.
He was sure that a bishop was not stopped by his bishoping from going on with some scholarly work.
Thus a Dean of Durham, and an ex-Bishop of Durham, and a complicated patronage secretary who popped out of holes like a rabbit, and a doctrine of apostolic authority, and an Archbishop of York, and a desire to follow the calling of God even if it looked unlikely, winkled a professor out of a career to which he seemed to have been born.
In old age Ramsey looked back and knew that this was the hardest decision of his life.
On 17 June 1952 a Fellow of Magdalene College walked down Trinity Street in Cambridge and was suddenly aware of the regius professor of divinity waddling ahead of him and throwing his arms about and muttering gloomily to himself, ‘Hell!
Hell!’
’ Why, what's the matter?’
’ The Lord works in mysterious ways!
I am to be Bishop of Durham.’
Despite the advice of William Telfer that he ought to go, Cambridge  was not pleased with Ramsey.
Some of the younger members of the faculty of divinity were angry.
The church historian Norman Sykes thought it a bad choice for the see, too party a man for a see which needed breadth of mind.
Cambridge, which always assumes that anyone who leaves it passes into outer darkness, found the decision incomprehensible.
They decided that it could only be because Joan's health was so poor in the fens that the professor was forced to move.
This story Ramsey had flatly to deny.
Durham was very pleased.
Kingsley Barrett, the Methodist, whom Ramsey had chosen for the faculty at Durham, wrote of his belief that a special providence must watch over the Church of England to give them at least some good bishops in spite of the deplorable method of their appointment.
On 8 August 1952 he and Joan gave a farewell party to Cambridge friends.
On the doorstep his final words to the last guest to leave were, ‘You must vote for me when next I apply for a Cambridge professorship’.
Occasionally, when he came back to Cambridge in later years, and especially when he came back to help the university elect another professor of divinity, he would be nostalgic, and say, ‘I should like to have another go at being regius professor,.
They went on holiday to a farmhouse at Ponsworthy in Devon and thither came a vast parcel, from the Clerical and General Tailors (Breeches Makers etc.), of Sackville Street, Piccadilly, bill £376; chimeres, wristbands, rochets, frills, breeches, gaiters, purple dress coat, black barathea breeches, patent court shoes, silver-plated shoe buckles, and other less rare articles of apparel.
In the farmhouse he practised putting on the gaiters and found it a struggle.
Much of the rest of the holiday he spent writing articles or reviews for publication.
He also read carefully the famous book of Pope Gregory the Great, from the sixth century, on the pastoral office in the Church.
He practised a new signature, Michael Dunelm.
On 24 September he went into retreat at Mirfield in Yorkshire, where once he thought of becoming a monk.
The retreat was a time for fear at first, and self-scrutiny.
It passed ‘into great peace with the help of Father Horner an old and saintly monk who gave me absolution and good counsel’.
He must do his homage to the Queen — her first bishop to do homage.
The civil servants in Downing Street played it humorously.
They warned the Queen's private secretary Sir Alan Lascelles that the Queen was about to meet an eccentric.
David Hunt from Downing Street told Lascelles that Ramsey had been known to stop in a procession, send for a pair of trousers to replace the wrong ones which he had put on by mistake, and change them in the middle of the aisle.
The Queen, he  said, should not be put off by any oddity of manner but could be assured that this was a man of great learning, deep human sympathy, and outstanding pastoral gifts.
(There was no truth in this legend but such legends gathered about the young Michael Ramsey and certainly he was odd in processions.)
Lascelles reported next day to David Hunt.
He said that the Queen eagerly waited for the bishop to show some of his eccentricities but, ‘fortunately or unfortunately’ he had acted with the utmost decorum.
On 29 September 1952 Ramsey was consecrated bishop by Archbishop Garbett in York minster and enthroned in Durham cathedral on St Luke's Day, 18 October.
The Marquess of Londonderry arrived with his traditional gift to a new bishop of two pheasants and a pound of butter.
The Master of Magdalene asked him whether he found it uncomfortable to wear the received garments of a bishop.
Ramsey replied, ‘They are like false teeth.
At first they irritate a bit but when you are used to them you find them serviceable.’
The Bishop
DUNELM:
Both the Ramseys loved living in Auckland Castle, a historic pile eminent in the history of England and of the Church, with magnificent memorials of celebrated prelates of past centuries.
‘I have never lived in a place where the past was so alive, and my great predecessors seemed like daily companions.’
At first they found it very cold, especially as they moved in just before Christmas.
To live in such a castle meant demands on the purse.
It was the time of their lives when they found it hardest to make ends meet.
It could not have happened unless the Church had helped to pay for the heating.
They inherited also a historic butler, of quaint majesty, Ernest Alexander, who governed the castle since near the beginning of the century.
When they arrived at Auckland Alexander asked them for the silver and his Presence was such that they did not dare to tell him that they had no silver, so Joan said that it was ‘in the bank’.
Ramsey loved the many-acred park with its structure to shelter deer, though there were no deer, and its grazing cattle and its river-banks.
Since the twelfth century the Bishop of Durham had a manor, and lived here except during the Commonwealth when bishops were in exile and this was the seat of the general who governed the North.
In spare half-hours he would wander in the market-place and streets and shops of Bishop Auckland and talk with the people.
He liked to sit on a bench in the square and talk with, or rather be talked to by, the old retired miners.
In 1954 he completed the restoration of the chapel, which was ravaged by death-watch beetle.
It had once been the great hall of the castle, and is among the fairest buildings of the twelfth century which Britain possesses.
Under King Charles II Bishop Cosin turned the hall into a chapel after the dilapidations of the Commonwealth general, and gave the medieval windows a clerestory.
Bishop Cosin's original colours of the roof, from the seventeenth century, were discovered during the  restoration and Ramsey had them brightly restored.
A panelled room, which was Bishop Cosin's study, Ramsey turned into a small oratory for weekday sacraments or prayers.
He liked to show parties of visitors round the house and to talk to them of Oswald, or Hild, or Cosin, or Lightfoot.
The finance for the restoration of the chapel was a gamble.
He asked the Church Commissioners to do it but would not wait to see whether they consented.
When the head of the Commissioners, Sir Malcolm Trustram Eve, who was no man to be trifled with, arrived a few days after the Commissioners approved the expenditure, the butler Alexander showed him the restoration already complete.
‘Never’, said Trustram Eve, ‘have I known craftsmen to be so expeditious.’
Ramsey felt the same ecstasy, of history speaking out of sanctified stones, in Durham itself.
He found that in such a place present was near to past and visible near to the invisible world.
He was often aware of the which defended the realm of England against the Scottish raiders and then back to the Celtic saints coming out of Scotland into Northumbria.
He found that he enjoyed going to a parish to confirm the children, or to institute a new incumbent, and stay afterwards for the sausage rolls or sandwiches at the bunfight and chat up the people with a mixture of silence and belly-bumping laughter and beams all round and leg-pulling but with care and affection.
Sometimes he felt desperately shy and this specially seemed to happen when titled laymen or captains of industry appeared.
But mostly he did not need to talk at a bunfight, people came up and talked to him, and he would nod his head and smile benevolently and say happily, Yes, Yes, Yes.
In February and March it was hard going out almost nightly but he liked it and Joan got to know the wives and children of the clergy.
One Sunday in four he refused to go out and stayed at home to read and write.
He was willing to go to confirm in an emergency at very short notice and this earned him some long-lasting gratitude.
On a parish visit the pastor would sometimes take him to the bedside of a dying man or woman and Ramsey would sit long by the bed, saying almost nothing, but holding hands and at the end giving a blessing.
At his first diocesan conference he told them his idea of a bishop's job.
He finds today unbelief, or apathy, and sometimes a collapse of the sense of right and wrong.
He needs to try to see the subtler reasons for this mood.
He needs not to forget that there are demonic forces in the universe whatever people say about the existence of the devil.
He needs to be aware of the social reasons pulling at ordinary people, the conditions of work in an industrial society, the nature of a people's amusements.
He needs continually to be at work dealing with the  shifting population of a modern age, so that people who move house to a new estate shall still find a priest and a sacrament for their souls.
He needs to think of how we are to find the right ministers, men and women — to let people know that there is a vocation called holy orders, of ‘unique difficulty and unique happiness’; the variety of ministers, deaconesses, teachers in schools, lay preachers, monks and nuns and friars who belong to ‘the praying heart of the Church’, without which its mission would not have the power of God within it.
He needs therefore to think about stipends and houses and church buildings.
He recognized that many of the weapons were not in the power of the parish system — broadcasting, or literature, or education, or public life.
But the parishes, and the parish missions, were central to the care of souls; and their ministers ought always to be refreshing themselves in the truths of the Christian faith, so that they do not slip ‘into versions of it which miss its height and depth and wonder’; and those ministers ought always to make room in their lives for silence and the chance of realizing their nearness to eternity.
A special happiness was the care of those who wished to be ordained.
He talked with them in his study or took them for walks in the park.
He would talk not only of their vocation to the ministry but of the books which they were reading and the circumstances of their family.
He usually knew their tutors and made jokes about them.
He found the ordinations, three times a year, to be his happiest moments.
With his lay people he had good fortune.
On 2 June 1953 the Queen was crowned in Westminster abbey.
By long history the Bishop of Durham had the privilege of standing at the right hand of the sovereign throughout the coronation as her chief supporter.
Since this was the first coronation to be televised to a nation, Ramsey was suddenly famous among the people of England; all the more so because the vast head, baldness girt by flowing white locks, mobile expressive eyebrows, and waddling gait drew the attention of millions of viewers.
Some people thought that with the mitre on his white hair he looked like one of the effigies on the tombs of the prelates which they met recumbent in cathedrals, and fancied that here was a bishop out of the Middle Ages.
The lay people of Durham were proud to have their bishop at the right hand of the Queen.
This cemented their acceptance of Ramsey.
He was a magnificent figure in ritual clothes.
On his massive head a mitre did not appear comic, and in gaiters and apron he looked every inch a bishop, with nothing fancy-dress about him.
As with William Temple, who looked equally natural in gaiters and apron, the bubbling humour and lack of pomposity heightened the effect of the personality.
Ramsey thought it a protection against wrongful ceremony to understand its  principles.
He said, ‘People who don't understand liturgical acts generally get pompous when they dress up.’
He worked mostly with secretary and chaplain.
He did not hold staff meetings, and hardly consulted those who expected to be consulted, like the suffragan bishop or the archdeacons.
He was reported to have said, ‘I did not really know what an archdeacon does.’
Afterwards he asked himself whether he did all that he should have done about the miners and the working men.
He diagnosed that his concentration on getting to know the clergy and the church people prevented him from moving among the wider community as he should.
He admired what the early Methodists did for the miners and how the earliest of the miners' unions was Methodist in its inspiration.
He knew what the Victorian churchmen of the north had done for the miners and how by the third quarter of the nineteenth century the Church was strong within the mining communities though it never took the place of the Methodists.
No Bishop of Durham could ever forget, or was ever allowed to forget, how one of his predecessors Westcott mediated in a bitter strike; how a vast crowd stood outside Auckland Castle, seeing the owners through the windows of one room and the miners through the windows of another, waiting for five hours as they watched the bishop go to and fro between the two rooms; until he brought the parties to a happy agreement, and when he came out among the crowd he received an ovation.
Ramsey knew of the bitterness engendered by the coal royalties paid to the Church, and how the miners once tried to throw a bishop into the River Wear.
He believed that the nationalization of coal was a blessing both for Durham and for the Church in Durham.
He became a friend of Jack Lawson (Lord Lawson) who was a faithful Methodist, and Sam Watson the Durham miners' leader, whom he came to know intimately.
He always attended the Durham miners, gala, which was the festivity and political demonstration of the mining community, and in 1955 preached them the gala sermon by invitation of the miners.
There they made him sing them a song and were enchanted by the noises which came out.
He thought that there was no barrier and that in time he could have done more for them.
Under the English system of parishes every diocese had variety; that is each parish had the Prayer Book but used it as it thought, with simple or elaborate ceremonial, and with variations of language sanctioned by the (illegal) Prayer Book of 1928 if it wished.
The person who decided this was almost always the vicar; though of recent years he could not make elaborate changes without the support of a majority in his church council.
Thus the possibility of a quarrel in the parish was still there.
A  parish used to simple ways of ceremony might be confronted with a new vicar who suddenly elaborated the ritual; or the opposite.
These quarrels were rare.
But when they came they were distressing and they particularly distressed the bishop responsible for healing; because Christians are not supposed to quarrel, and quarrelling about clothes or tinklings or perfume looked like fanaticism or obsession with triviality.
But it was more than these to those in the quarrel.
Were we making a Protestant Church to resemble the Church of Rome?
Or were we trying to make meagre the devotions of minds which were helped to pray by colour and symbol?
To mediate in such a dispute was the dreariest occupation of a bishop.
Ramsey inherited a battle like this from his predecessor.
The most Anglo-Catholic parish in the diocese was in South Shields, St Mary's Tyne Dock.
This had a record of superb parish priests and a full congregation.
While Ramsey was a canon the chapter appointed a new vicar; and while Ramsey's predecessor was bishop, a minority of the parishioners started to protest against the vicar's innovations and were in a strong position because the vicar introduced certain ornaments without the necessary faculty to do so.
When the vicar got a new bishop who was Anglo-Catholic he appealed to him for his sanction, in the hope that the bishop's approval would make up for the lack of faculty.
Ramsey's first holiday in Devonshire as a bishop was made unhappy by the news of the quarrel in the parish.
He thought little or nothing about law, or jurisdiction, or faculty.
What mattered were, first, to maintain the tradition of worship in the parish, and second, reconciliation.
He cheerfully gave his sanction to most of what the vicar did, the use of incense, the reservation of the sacrament, the wearing of vestments, the ringing of sanctuary bells, the veneration of the cross on Good Friday, the blessing of the palms on Palm Sunday, the blessing of a Paschal candle, and the pictures of the Stations of the Cross on the walls.
He only asked the vicar not to use Hail Marys with the Stations.
He went into the whole ritual and found nothing open to the charge that it encouraged superstition.
Meanwhile he separately interviewed the vicar, and churchwardens, and opposing groups of parishioners, and tried to get conciliation, and persuaded the lawyers to postpone the court while he tried conciliation; all to no purpose.
In the judgement (Jerusalem Chamber I February 1954) the Chancellor mostly backed bishop and vicar; but ordered out the statue and the sanctuary bells and the tabernacle on the altar, saying that what was illegal could not be made legal by the bishop's permission.
That did not settle the matter, which ran on for eight years more, long after Ramsey left the diocese of Durham.
The case brought the diocese, and  the parish, and its bishop, a little unwelcome publicity; but not much; for the world was tired of ritual quarrels, whereas sixty years before there would have come questions in Parliament.
On the whole Ramsey was no friend to dramatic public occasions.
But he revelled in the Northumbrian past, of Aidan and Cuthbert and the Venerable Bede.
On 19 July 1955 he walked barefoot across the sands of Northumbria to Holy Island, at the head of 3,000 people.
On the grass in the ruins of the historic priory, surrounded by parochial banners, Ramsey told the crowd that though they were outside the modern diocese of Durham, this was their true home.
He conjured before their minds a poetic word-picture of St Aidan coming from Iona in Scotland and settling there with his band of monks to pray and to spread Christianity among the heathen English; and spoke of St Cuthbert to whom on that spot the people went to seek help and comfort and guidance, until he fled across the sands and sea to be alone with God on his island — so carry the lesson back, to a county black with people and with coal, carry back the need for quiet, and separation from whirl, and silence; and so heaven will be nearer.
His predecessor but one, Hensley Henson, invented the magazine the Bishoprick and by the force of his writing made it a national and not only a diocesan journal.
Since the heady days of Henson it had become a duller and more local object.
Ramsey did not see why it should not have a wider interest as in Henson's day.
He started not only to print his addresses or charges but to review books of general interest; to consider a book on diplomacy and war, and not to lose a chance of holding up the character of Asquith to admiration, or to contrast the laziness and drift of Stanley Baldwin as prime minister with the crusading fervour of a Gladstone.
Some of the articles were hard for the layman to follow and quite hard for some clergymen to follow.
He tried to educate them about the nature of demythologizing , a word of which the press had got hold, and to guide them about the best modern writing on the New Testament.
He found that he could pay a compliment to Charles Raven, from whom he was so sadly sundered in spirit, for his book on Religion and Science.
The irksomeness lay in London.
He attended the House of Lords but did not speak.
He disliked the Church Assembly (which was the forerunner of the General Synod) and made only one speech there while he was Bishop of Durham, against the idea of recruiting people to come and be priests.
He enjoyed the friendly little Convocation at York.
But what irked him most were bishops' meetings.
Towards the ecumenical movement, as a system of vast Christian jamborees like the meeting at Amsterdam, his suspicions deepened.
He  attended a meeting at Lund in Sweden in 1952 and thought the atmosphere happy but the meeting useless and wondered whether the day of such occasions was not past.
But the assembly which shocked him was the next, at Evanston in the United States in 1954.
He hated what he saw at Evanston.
It was too large.
They sat in a place vast enough to ‘house a fleet of Zeppelins’.
‘I have rarely known such stultifying of the personal touch between speaker and audience.’
The American media moved in.
He hated the vulgarity of showing off the delegates as though they were exhibits, and the insincerity of pretending that platitudes were pronouncements of world-shaking import, and the feeling that he came a long way to greet fellow-Christians and found himself turned into a ham-actor on a second-rate stage.
A whirl of oratory for a fortnight.
He liked to take ideas gently, to get time to meditate on the best modes of expressing truth.
‘How futile to announce that some great lead to thought was going to emerge from the mountain of memoranda discussed at high pressure by exhausted delegates.’
And he was opposed to the idea of Christian unity which dominated most of the Protestant delegates from the United States — to create a world federation of different Protestant denominations.
His frustration and boredom were at their worst in the debates on the main theme of the Conference, Christian Hope.
A committee led by Karl Barth proposed a message for the Churches to adopt.
But the committee was hopelessly divided on what it meant by Christian hope — whether it was hope for peace and perfection in this world, or hope for a future life, or hope only of forgiveness at the last.
The document finally ‘agreed’ by the disagreed committee was stuffed with jargon and so incomprehensible that it was useless as an agenda for discussion; yet the meeting at Evanston had to discuss it; with results which may be imagined.
Ramsey made a speech which disconcerted the managers of the conference, who thought it a bad example of English insularity.
The speech led to a quarrel, soon patched up, with the general secretary Visser t'Hooft.
The meeting at Evanston clinched the sense of scepticism which Ramsey felt, not about the ecumenical movement, but about its inflated claims and its mode of organization.
That scepticism and memory were to be important when he became an archbishop and was expected to be a leader in the organization.
Still, at Evanston, he allowed the personal meeting to count — with Hungarian Christians oppressed in a satellite state, with a black South African who merely by being there seemed to make the Afrikaaner defence of apartheid incompatible with Christianity.
He realized, as he  never realized before, how Asian and African Christianity took the lead in the world-wide Church.
Always thereafter Ramsey's attitude was consistent.
He cared about Christian unity, no one more.
That unity must look towards Catholics as well as Protestants.
The way to find it was not by diplomacy and negotiation (though these had their part), still less by razzmatazz and public relations, but by trying to get nearer to God.
All meetings were boring to him unless the participants could talk in depth and unless the debate was by a small enough number of people for personal friendships to be fostered.
His principles were very strong, that the Church of England is a Catholic Church and must never compromise its Catholic principles.
In those days he contemplated the idea that if the Church abandoned that inheritance he would have to resign his see.
In his family he found an unlooked-for happiness.
During his twenties his father and he were sundered by religion.
His father did not mind his son becoming an Anglican priest but wished that he were not so Anglo-Catholic and not so high-principled about bishops.
Still, he was proud that his son should be a professor of divinity at two universities, and proud when his son became a bishop.
He did not wish to desert his Congregational cause or his Church.
But at the age of 86, immured by infirmity in his house, he wanted to receive the sacrament from his son.
With the consent of the Bishop of Ely, who was Edward Wynn, the Bishop of Durham came to Howfield and confirmed his father and ministered the sacrament to him.
The son said that this brought his father deep happiness.
‘It is unusual’, he wrote, ‘for a bishop to confirm his own father — but it is as a great Nonconformist that I revere him.’
Ramsey was already a leader, not just in the diocese of Durham, but in the Church.
He had a big personality.
What he said counted.
Archbishop Fisher went so far as to tell him that he was a possible future Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Catholic minds in the Church rejoiced to have one of such influence, and such prayerfulness, high in the counsels of their Church.
During the autumn of 1955 Bishop Wand of London retired and the health of Archbishop Garbett of York failed.
The two leading sees after Canterbury needed new occupants simultaneously.
Anyone who looked round the Church of England saw Ramsey as possible for one of them.
But he had been Bishop of Durham for less than three years, and was in a see which fitted his gifts perfectly.
It was a long and anxious debate about Ramsey without him knowing; between the Archbishop of Canterbury, the prime minister Eden, the prime minister's patronage secretary Bevir, Garbett the outgoing Archbishop of York, and Wand the outgoing Bishop of London.
Who was the biggest person in sight?
Without question — George Bell, the Bishop of Chichester.
Lover of Christian unity, friend of the European leaders, ally of the Germans who stood against Hitler, courageous critic of area bombing, patron of art and theatre, compassionate over refugees, he was the only bishop in England that the world had known about since William Temple died.
But he was 72 and would be 73 by the time he had to move if he moved.
Is it sensible to move a man to new work at the age of 73?
What is the point of moving a person who is famous through the world as Chichester to the anonymity of being Archbishop of York?
There is a point in moving him to London because that is near the Houses of Parliament where he has weight.
But the see of London is work for the physically strong, not for declining energy.
Who else has stature?
Ramsey of Durham.
He is much younger.
He could manage the see of London.
But he is a new bishop.
And he values scholarship.
Are we to kill his scholarship and make him unhappy?
His wife has uncertain health, could she manage life in London?
Two sees, York and London — Bell or Ramsey?
If Bell is ruled out as too old and Ramsey as too new, who else has stature?
George Chase of Ripon, good as gold and wise as Solomon, but even shyer than Ramsey and without his intellectual bite?
Two other circumstances entered this prolonged argument.
These were hardly mentioned but underneath were not trivial.
First, the York diocese had no desire for George Bell and every desire for Ramsey.
Its dean was his former teacher and friend, Eric Milner-White.
Dean and chapter did everything in their power to get Ramsey.
And in this new structure, where the prime minister's secretary popped out of holes and asked them what they thought, they had a better chance than any previous dean and chapter.
The leading layman of the York diocese was the politician whose judgement was likely to weigh with the Crown: Lord Halifax, the former Foreign Secretary, and a devout Anglo-Catholic.
Halifax helped over prising Ramsey out of Cambridge.
He was now likely to want the prominent Anglo-Catholic bishop.
And Garbett wanted Ramsey to succeed him at York.
The authorities of the York archdiocese were unanimous.
The second almost silent circumstance was Bell's reputation.
He was revered in the Church of England.
In Germany he was a hero.
But he was resented by long memories in those who had fought a war; by Churchill's men for weakening the morale of the Air Force through his attacks on area bombing; by the school of Lord Vansittart which  loathed Germans and said that Nazis were typical of that race, and hated a bishop who told them never to identify the true Germany with Hitler.
The prime minister Eden was Churchill's man; a fight-to-the-limit man; an unconditional-surrender man.
Suppose that Archbishop Fisher thought Bell the best person despite his age for one of these sees, could he get Bell's name past the prime minister?
Or would Eden think of the air marshals, and the children who had lost their parents in a blitz, and former warriors who had seen too much blood on a battlefield, and exercise a silent veto, by going for the second preference?
Archbishop Fisher was aware of these circumstances.
He had the merit of going always straight to the point — what is best for Christianity in England? and besides that the scruples of air marshals, or the wishes of the Dean of York, or the comfort of Bell, or the scholarship of Ramsey, are nothing.
If York or London needed Bell or Ramsey they had a moral duty to move whether or not they wanted it.
He did not think Ramsey's scholarship a weighty part of his quality as a bishop; occasionally he hinted that he thought the books were a distraction from pastoral care.
And he had another point for moving Ramsey.
He saw him now as a possible Archbishop of Canterbury.
If we ask, how do we best train the next Archbishop of Canterbury, which see is better?
Obviously (in Fisher's eyes), London.
So on 29 October 1955 Fisher recommended to the prime minister that Bell be asked to move to York because he was the biggest person in sight and — despite his age —‘he might tide over for five or six years’; and that Ramsey be invited to go to London, because that huge see would ‘respond to his commanding ability’.
But he made the recommendation with a proviso.
He, Fisher, should be allowed to ask Ramsey privately whether his wife's health would stand up to life in London.
The first Ramsey knew about these discussions between Fisher and the prime minister was when a letter arrived in Durham on 8 December 1955.
The letter asked whether Joan's health would prevent Ramsey accepting the see of London if it were offered to him.
This letter horrified both the Ramseys.
The aim of his life was to remain a scholar and a teacher while he was a bishop.
This was of the first importance to him.
He felt it a necessary part of his vocation.
The London diocese was vast, difficult, rent with controversy, dotted with rebel or eccentric clergymen comic and uncomic, and needing a dedicated administrator whose time would be loaded.
It would be a candle-snuffer.
He did not want the job at all.
He decided only to answer the question which he was asked.
He talked to Joan.
He consulted Joan's doctor.
He wrote to Fisher that while she might never be strong, her health did not depend upon  locality.
Therefore ‘no personal circumstances would preclude my giving thought to coming to London’.
He signed himself, not without a touch of misery perhaps, ‘ever sincerely and dutifully’.
Fisher now pressed him.
You are the best appointment to York.
You are the best and most convincing appointment for London.
I think it would be best for you also.
No other bishop can meet the demands of the see of London, in statesmanship, scholarship, spiritual force, ‘and the rest’.
If this is right, who should go to York?
And meanwhile Garbett was still spreading doubt on whether to send him to the see of London was the best way for the Church to use the best scholar on its bench of bishops.
Fisher's next move was to consult Ramsey about the entire problem of the two simultaneous sees.
On 12 December 1955 Ramsey went to Lambeth Palace.
He determined beforehand that he would not mention to Fisher his longing for time to read books.
But Fisher raised the question of time for study and writing.
Ramsey asked the pointed question whether William Temple would have been able to write if he had been Bishop of London and not Archbishop of York.
Finally Ramsey said that he would respond to any invitation provided that it had a consensus of advice behind it, and provided he was sure that the need for strength in the North was considered.
Fisher thought that Ramsey at this interview was ‘gloriously analytical and dispassionate’ and that his point about weight in the North had force.
Ramsey's long memory always regarded the decision to leave academic life as the hardest of his life.
To the observer this decision of 1955 looks as hard or harder; to agree to accept a post which he expected to hate, and for which he regarded himself as unsuitable, and in which he would have to neglect that scholarship which was essential to his happiness and to his sense of vocation and to the reason why he ever became a bishop at all, if the leaders of the Church declared that this was where he was needed.
His long memory also told him that this was a moment of his life when he felt a total rapport with Fisher.
On 14 December 1955 Fisher repeated his recommendation to Anthony Eden that Ramsey should become the Bishop of London.
On the same day, knowing nothing of what Fisher was doing, Ramsey drove to Bishopthorpe outside York to see his frail and dying archbishop.
Garbett said that he thought it would be right to go to London, for the sake of the Church; that he longed for him to come to York, for the sake of himself, he wanted Ramsey as his successor.
‘If you go to London I shall feel it right.
If you come to York, I shall be happy.’
Ramsey knelt by his bedside and Garbett blessed him.
Ramsey never saw him again.
For the twelve days before Christmas a black cloud hung over the Ramseys.
He had no desire to move anywhere.
This was not just a bishop married to the see and people of Durham, it was a love-marriage.
Those years were not long enough to do what he had hoped to do for Durham, but long enough to know what needed to be done.
Joan was at home both in Durham and in Auckland Castle.
But from 12 December he knew that he had to move somewhere, under orders.
And the fear was a burden, that he might need to move to a place which would kill his intellectual life.
On Christmas Eve among the Christmas cards he found a letter from Anthony Eden offering to recommend him to the Queen for the see of York.
Whether it was the wishes of the archdiocese; or whether it was the inarticulate growls of air-marshals; or whether it was the judgement that someone of 73 carries too many years to move to big new work; or whether someone among Eden's advisers thought scholarship important for some bishops — Eden rejected Fisher's preference that Ramsey should go to London.
The relief to the Ramseys was overwhelming.
Michael Ramsey took Eden's letter into the chapel but knew what his answer would be even before he put it on the altar.
In view of what was to happen, it is important to notice the situation.
In 1952 Archbishop Fisher had not wanted Ramsey for the see of Durham.
He thought it wrong to take him out of Cambridge so quickly.
Now he preferred him at London, for Bishops of London are by geography close colleagues of archbishops at Lambeth.
But Fisher was happy in accepting what happened, and glad to have Ramsey moving to York.
He openly talked of him as the probable successor to the see of Canterbury.
He looked forward to working with him.
The historian has a doubt.
If Ramsey was to be Archbishop of Canterbury, what was wrong with leaving him in the weighty see of Durham until the day came?
What higher interest of Church or nation was served by driving him to move too quickly?
Did the Church of England have so obsessed an idea of hierarchy that it liked promoting people up a ladder without any snakes?
Was it a mania for translating bishops — represented at its oddest in the idea that it was sensible at the age of 73 to move the revered George Bell to one of these sees?
Or was it true that the Church was so short of people of stature (under the age of 73) that only one man among them had enough stature for the see of London and for that reason his scholarship must be sacrificed on the altar of a higher good?
This last motive was present in Fisher's mind.
It is hard to believe that it was a right judgement about all the other people possible.
Ramsey's last act for the Durham diocese was to publish a collection of his Durham Essays and Addresses .
It is one of his best and most readable books.
In it the mutual affections of bishop and diocese cannot be missed.
Ramsey felt no sense of gratitude to anyone who moved him out of Durham.
He was seen weeping in the waiting-room at Durham station, and the misery was the giving up of Durham with its epic history, its Bede and Cuthbert, its beauty and its strength, his new friends and his old, the university and the mining communities.
He felt it as a bereavement.
The prime minister Anthony Eden was a Durham man.
Ramsey felt remote from him.
Soon after all this was agreed, he went to see Eden to have a talk with him about new appointments, and because Eden wanted to know him better.
This meeting was a failure.
Ramsey was abnormally shy about meeting the upper class and Eden's voice was the caricature of an upper class voice.
But worse than this pardonable affliction was Ramsey's discovery that when they talked about his beloved Durham this Durham man showed no interest.
Later he made to himself excuses for Eden; that he left Durham young and that his childhood was unhappy.
Still —‘I did not see him again and I did not want to’.
EBOR:
Ramsey's confirmation as the new Archbishop of York was held at Lambeth on 13 March 1956 and was marked by one of those protests which to the outsider are amusing and which to the subject of the  protest are vexatious.
Mr Kensit, a name long famous in the history of Protestant expostulations against Anglo-Catholicism, the secretary of the Protestant Truth Society, appeared at the ceremony and presented a document.
He lodged what he took to be a legal objection against Ramsey being admitted to be Archbishop of York.
The grounds were two.
First, he had failed to do what he ought to have done when Bishop of Durham to discipline the ritualists in the parish of St Mary's Tyne Dock, although some of the parishioners appealed to him for protection against illegal practices and ornaments of a Romish character.
Secondly, he had published doctrine at variance with the Athanasian Creed and the Homilies of the Church of England and his teaching was at variance with that of the Archbishop of Canterbury and other bishops.
This second charge came because Ramsey had written an article in the Bishoprick which criticized the evangelistic work of Billy Graham, who led a mission in England a few months before.
Ramsey said that the name of Billy Graham was linked with fundamentalism; and that fundamentalism was the error of regarding the Bible as so divine that the human element disappeared.
Billy Graham like all such evangelists called for people from the congregation to make an immediate decision and to come out from the crowd; and Ramsey wrote that the call for an immediate decision had danger because the mind could be stifled in the process and this could bring a later revenge in scepticism and indifference.
He said that at the recent mission in Cambridge Billy Graham had taught the grossest doctrines.
The reader of the article remembers Michael Ramsey's experience of the missioner William Nicholson in his undergraduate years.
Since many of the evangelicals shared Billy Graham's opinions and valued his methods and saw the good which he did, his article stirred wrath among them and fear about the Bishop of Durham becoming the Archbishop of York.
For this purpose Archbishop Fisher acted in his capacity as the Queen, s commissioner.
He ruled the objection out of order.
He said that the only questions under discussion were whether Ramsey was Ramsey and whether he had been legally elected.
Since no one could imagine that in these circumstances or in any other circumstances anyone could successfully impersonate Ramsey, the ritual was a piece of legal nothing which allowed a Protestant agitator the chance of publicity which might help his own cause but must also help Ramsey.
If a man is worth protesting against he must be somebody.
Nevertheless, Ramsey found the experience of Kensit's protest a little frightening.
For the first time he met, peeping above the surface, the force of a prejudice which had unrelenting ferocity.
He would meet it, not peeping, later in his career.
Less fanatical minds of the Protestant school were not pleased with the choice for York.
The editor of the Church of England Newspaper remarked that the overzealousness of Ramsey's friends did him a disservice by making him the representative of an intolerant school of thought and by inflating his reputation beyond what his record would endorse.
Archbishop Fisher went so far as to write a very tough letter to the editor in defence of Ramsey.
The new archbishop was enthroned in York Minster on St Mark's Day, 25 April 1956.
That the Dean of York was Eric Milner-White, his former teacher, gave pleasure to both parties.
The dean said, ‘My child in the Spirit has become my Father in God.’
It was the first enthronement of an archbishop since television became a national service; and Ramsey agreed to broadcast on television on the night before his enthronement.
The diocese was larger than the diocese of Durham and more varied; industry on Teesside, moors of the North Riding, wolds of the East Riding, the plain of York, cities like York and Hull.
But although it was larger his life was easier.
He had three suffragan bishops and three archdeacons.
By now he had discovered what archdeacons do, and did not have to do everything himself.
He inherited a regular staff meeting and was penitent that he had never invented such a meeting in Durham.
He now had a whole-time chaplain.
Martin Kaye, whom he put in charge of the ordinands.
One of them, Peter Cornwell, later published a sunlit retrospect of what it was like to be one of Ebor's ordinands, and how he valued the privilege that the bishop who ordained him was a thinker, as he put it, so profound.
Martin Kaye also helped Joan to make sure that the conversation was not too oppressively silent when ordinands or clergymen came to meals.
Thus Ramsey found leisure to read, and write, and make friends in the diocese.
Afterwards he wondered whether he visited parishes less often than his predecessor and took the trouble to work it out.
He found that he did just better than his predecessor and was pleased.
Despite this diligence in the diocese he had more leisure than at Durham and much more leisure than later.
At York he was able to write a weighty book,From Gore to Temple , which traced changes in Christian thought in England during the last eighty years.
His first problem was where to live.
He had insisted on living in Auckland Castle though some people said that it was absurd for the Bishop of Durham to be saddled with such a pile.
Garbett decided that no one after himself ought to be made to live in a château like  Bishopthorpe.
He planned to turn Bishopthorpe into a retreat house and to put the archbishop into a small house nearby called the Chantry.
Ramsey instantly scrapped this plan.
The Ramseys wanted a house big enough to be able to entertain the clergy and their wives in their own home.
He needed room for a lot of books and wanted his chaplain and secretary to be able to live in the house.
He was determined to be under the same roof as his chapel.
His sense of history and of genius loci was potent.
And the memory that William Temple used to meditate in the garden was not trivial to him.
The chapel went back to the thirteenth century; in the Restoration of Charles II Archbishop Frewen gave the house a façade to the river and built a magnificent dining room; and during the eighteenth century Archbishop Drummond added a Gothic gatehouse and made the surround a charming bit of eighteenth-century Gothic.
Joan had an eye which knew what to do with apparently unpromising houses.
Their bachelor predecessor had no such eye and did not try to change it.
Joan saw that it needed cheering up.
She put coral paint in the panels of the Strawberry Hill Gothic hall.
She picked out the arches in ivory white.
She transformed the entrance so that it sang a welcome to the visitor.
In summer she filled the great blue and white Chinese vases with the deep blue delphiniums grown from buds which Cosmo Gordon Lang originally planted.
Visitors found it a lovely house, full of air and hospitality.
Joan was discovered to have a genius for turning an ancient block of stone into a home.
The house had not the vistas or the parkland of Auckland Castle, and its chapel could hardly compete with the chapel at Auckland, but it had good walks along the Ouse.
The diocese was pleased that he lived there.
Robert Reid from the BBC interviewed Ramsey in the garden at Bishopthorpe in April 1956, with daffodils spattering the lawn.
‘He's a most engaging fellow — essentially human’, Reid reported as though there was something odd about an archbishop being human.
‘He's a huge fellow.
He looks as though he's been a footballer in his time.
He's got a keen sense of humour and there's a perpetual twinkle in his eye…
This is not a scholar emerging into the world.
He's already in it...
He will not be a rubber stamp.
He already has the shape of a great leader.’
In the following year a BBC man who came to Bishopthorpe to have a brains trust in the house was shocked to discover that there was no television set in the house and told him that he was cut off from the experience of millions of his countrymen.
He presided three times a year at the Convocation of York, which he  found a happy body.
This last statement should be noticed — he disliked assemblies and places where speeches were made at length and he did not enjoy being a chairman — but he made this single exception, the Convocation of York; he always gave a presidential address, about which he took much trouble.
He visited the other dioceses of his province, including a tour of several days to the Isle of Man.
He preached to the World Scout Jamboree and was blamed by the Daily Telegraph for reading his sermon to a multitude of boys and that the notes were too visible when they were blown about by the wind.
He went with the Dean of York and the Lord Mayor of York to interview the chairman of the University Grants Committee about setting one of the new universities in York and was glad, before he left York, to see the plea accepted.
He continued to conduct retreats: the old students at Cuddesdon, clergy at Pleshey in Essex, the Franciscans at Cerne Abbas in Dorset, the nuns at Whitby; probably he was the first archbishop in the history of the see to make so much time for such days of peace, even though, for the conductor, they were days of intellectual and emotional effort.
The work dearest to his heart was the development of the Retreat House at Wydale Hall near Scarborough, for which he made money available, encouraged the nuns, Sisters of the Holy Paraclete, who ran it, and was grateful when he saw more and more people go there to say their prayers.
For one who was nervous with aristocrats, it was unusual that he made a special friend in the diocese of the hereditary lay leader of the Anglo-Catholics in England: the Earl of Halifax at Garrowby, whom he would have preferred to Churchill as a war leader.
They found plenty of common Church interests and then friendship; they had conversations, which Ramsey enjoyed enormously, about matters political as well as religious; Ramsey went over to Garrowby several times for meals or to stay the night and celebrate the sacrament in the morning; and he conducted Halifax's funeral at Kirby Underdale in 1959.
He afterwards regarded making friends with Lord Halifax as one of the happinesses of the York years.
During his time at York he was invited to be the visitor of the House of the Resurrection at Mirfield in Yorkshire, the community of priests founded at the end of the last century by Charles Gore.
He liked his association with the monastic life in this form.
He conducted a visitation every five years, when he went there and interviewed each individual member of the community and finally gave them all a charge.
Their work was mainly that of missions and teaching ordinands and conducting retreats, though their work in Africa was both tense and world-famous.
He respected the community, valued its work, and was grateful  for the friendship of its members.
He shared enough of the monk's ideal to be able to help.
It was in part because of this love of the specially religious life, and in part because of the affection for the long history of the Church, that he led another pilgrimage (1959) of several thousand people to Holy Island on the coast of Northumberland and even The Times had a piece about the archbishop walking barefoot.
William Temple, while Archbishop of York, wrote in the York Quarterly , a journal which expired in the first year of the Second World War.
Ramsey knew that as a bishop he had a teaching ministry, and that this needed a journal which was more than diocesan news.
No sooner did he reach York than he resurrected the York Quarterly and kept it going for five years and nineteen numbers, with the arms of the see on the outer cover, and underneath, ‘Editor: the Archbishop of York’.
In some numbers he wrote half the contents; in others, especially at the time of an operation on his eyes for glaucoma, little.
This operation (1960) seriously delayed him, for it left one eye permanently damaged, and he was in the Purey-Cust nursing home by the minster in York and then had a convalescence of several weeks.
In the York Quarterly he used the services as writers or reviewers of good men about him.
Here he weighed nuclear disarmament or the latest ways in the study of the New Testament or the nature of the establishment in Church and State or the Church in industrial society.
He expounded to his clergy advanced books of original thinking which most of them were never likely to see or read.
Two or three of his articles were hardly intelligible to some of the subscribers.
It was no wonder that the journal had no easy task making ends meet.
It is a well-written journal of value to the contemporary interpretation of Christian thought and life.
In the York Diocesan Leaflet he wrote a more popular message to his diocese.
He quoted Newman's sermons, which he loved for their awareness of the closeness of the divine behind the veil of matter.
He mentioned the possibility of sacramental confession at the time of Lent.
He pleaded for a regular reading of the Bible, and for sermons which expounded biblical passages, and for the use of the Bible in connection with prayer.
He recommended retreats in a noisy world, and gave a beautiful description of their purpose.
He begged for more laymen and more laywomen to teach in Sunday Schools.
He wanted to keep the church schools and the church colleges for the training of teachers despite the large sums of money which this needed.
He brought before their minds disarmament, or the plight of refugees, or the plight of countries in poverty, or the work of the Church in other lands, or murder in the Congo.
He told them how  morally indefensible was the policy of apartheid, and asked for prayer for Africa.
He recommended to them lists of books for the better understanding of their religion, and the advice was excellent.
He liked them to try one or two of the classics of Christian writing.
While he was Archbishop of York both the ancient universities made him an honorary doctor.
Their different ethos was illustrated by the difference in the virtues which they celebrated.
The Cambridge deputy orator of 1957 commended him for his ecumenical work, and as the tireless pastor of the northern province, and made no mention of his academic originality — perhaps the ghost of Bethune-Baker still peeped through a window of the Senate House.
The orator mentioned his debt to William Temple and to Edward Wynn, and his wit, and gargantuan laugh.
The Oxford public orator of 1960 commended him for all he had done in persuading Oxford undergraduates to a reasonable faith and called him a most penetrating interpreter of the New Testament and a very powerful bulwark of Mother Church.
Perhaps the Oxford public orator consulted Austin Farrer.
In 1958 Archbishop Fisher assembled the Lambeth Conference of bishops.
Ramsey entered this conference with a reputation outside England as well as inside it; and the proceedings of the conference confirmed the opinion of a lot of bishops that he ought to be their next leader.
George Bell, retired, fatigued, soon to die, attended the conference against the advice of his doctor.
He thought the agenda too large and the business too hurried.
He recorded in his notes that there were not many weighty bishops at the conference but of those who were weighty Ramsey was outstanding.
At the opening service in Canterbury cathedral (3 July 1958) Ramsey muddled his instructions and wandered all round the cathedral looking for where he was supposed to sit and stand.
This conference was not without hiccoughs.
First, Fisher invited Archbishop Makarios of Cyprus whom some held responsible for the murder of British soldiers in the quasi-civil war in Cyprus.
Makarios accepted but did not come.
When the conference opened, a couple of members of the League of Empire Loyalists, one a journalist and the other a chiropodist, hired eastern bishops' flowing robes from a theatrical costumier, walked in unchallenged, and got up to make a speech against the ‘archterrorist’ Makarios.
They left quietly when asked but their pictures gave fun to the newspapers.
The second hiccough concerned Ramsey directly.
The Church  Union, organ of Anglo-Catholics, decided to hold a eucharistic congress at the Albert Hall just before the Lambeth Conference opened; a demonstration of Anglo-Catholicism at a key point of Anglican history.
They invited Ramsey to give the inaugural address.
He gave an address which the hearers thought masterly and was the more needed in that the succeeding speeches bumbled.
The Observer commented that Ramsey destroyed his chances of succeeding Fisher as archbishop by so openly identifying himself with the extreme high church party.
The Sunday Express speculated about the next primate and thought that Ramsey probably ruled himself out by his partisan behaviour in attending the eucharistic congress.
Archbishop Fisher did not approve of his fellow-archbishop being prominent in such company at such a moment of history.
At breakfast together Fisher exploded and attacked the Church Union and all that it stood for and said that they had done great harm and ought to apologize.
Ramsey confessed that they had done a lot of harm and ought to apologize but said that the best of them were trying to, and that the Church of England ought to apologize to the high churchmen for the way in which it sometimes treated them.
The main theme of the Lambeth Conference 1958 was the Bible.
Ramsey was made the chairman of the commission on this theme.
He drafted the report.
The Bible and the modern world: the problem with which he had wrestled since he was an undergraduate; a Bible world-picture and a modern scientific world-picture, each hardly able to understand the other.
If we take a knife to the Bible and cut out the bits which the modern world cannot understand we compromise the message which Christianity has to give to society.
If we baldly declare the Bible world-picture and do not interpret it to the modern world in such a way as to make it intelligible, we are useless.
Therefore on one side we must assert the authority of the Bible over man and the Church, and not the authority of man and the Church over the Bible.
It probes to the roots of moral distress and brings the remedy.
While we do this we must beware of those who are so hungry for authority in our societies that they want to press the authority of the Bible over men and the Church in such a way as to lead to extravagance or to sectarianism.
On the other side we must assert freedom of enquiry.
We must accept that study has proved that the Bible is not historically true in all its parts; we must declare that no Christian need suppose the book of Genesis to be an accurate physical account of the making of the world, nor mind if study proves contradictions in the different accounts in the gospels.
The divine spirit is at work not only in the consciences but also in the minds of humanity, and the careful study of the texts is a  part of that.
And we have to remember that God always remains above the possibility of human words, even when those words are the words of inspired men or women.
Treated so, the authority of the Bible is not diminished but enhanced.
Thus we commend the Bible to be read by the Churches and by Christian families in their homes, as nourishment for their souls, and not to be separated from the sacrament in the liturgy; we commend modern translations, into the various languages, as a help to understanding; we commend the people who have the duty of seeking to interpret the Bible in terms of the modern scientific view of the world; and remind the Churches that all knowledge is of God and therefore that scientific discovery is also part of His work; and so the world will be brought to know God as its Maker, and the Cross as timeless.
The critics fastened upon two sections of this report.
A long paragraph presented the acts of God in the Bible as like a mighty drama.
This was the single part not drafted by Ramsey.
The word drama, with its suggestion of a stage-play, did not please everyone.
The idea of a day of creation being ‘flashed upon the screen’ by Genesis, as the report said, was incongruous.
And at one point, showing how the books were formed into the New Testament by the early Church, the report expressed the belief that God gave the early Church its three gifts of ordering of the New Testament, creeds like the apostles' creed, and the ministry of bishops in their succession from the apostles.
This did not please everyone.
The Church of England Newspaper said, unkindly, that the weakest part of the Lambeth Conference of 1958 was its report on the Bible; and that this would have been an excellent report for a Lambeth Conference of 1858 not 1958.
But this was not a common opinion.
Most bishops thought that the handling by Ramsey of this difficult theme was masterly.
No Church before committed itself so decisively to the rightness of modern biblical criticism and the freedom of biblical scholarship, while it continued to maintain the Bible and the faith of Easter as indispensable to the moral predicament of humanity and of its societies.
One can picture Hoskyns looking down from the skies and being grateful for his pupil; and Bethune-Baker looking down and thinking that he always knew where Hoskyns might lead the Churches.
Those who encouraged new translations did not yet imagine what would happen.
The bishops expected the hallowed Authorized Version to maintain its mastery because it was sanctified in everyone's affections and moral sentiments.
They had no idea, as yet, that the coming of modern translations, and the making of English into an international  language, would destroy the commonness of a single text of the Bible which was the property of the simple as of the sophisticated.
The Lambeth Conference of 1958 took other resolutions.
It called for a revision of the Prayer Book — and the bishops of that day had no idea how far this call would lead the Churches.
It surveyed the reunion schemes across the world.
It sanctioned the ordination of men while they continued in their lay occupations.
It urged the full use of trained and qualified women — and the bishops had no idea as yet how far this resolution would lead some of the Churches.
It blessed the religious communities and thereby committed the Anglican Communion to an official acceptance of monks and nuns in a way which was so far unique to the Churches which came out of the Reformation.
It asked governments to abolish nuclear bombs, and wished for the strengthening of the United Nations.
It condemned racialism in the strongest language.
It warned against the abuse of drugs and alcohol.
It demanded the concern of government for the plight of refugees.
It accepted that monogamy was inherent in Christianity and yet that there were polygamous societies where even the Church could not enforce the rule at once, and that the chief way forward lay in a progressive emancipation of women in those societies, especially in the sphere of education.
Those who afterwards blamed Lambeth 1958 for platitudes did not know what they were talking about.
The resolution which hit the headlines was that which approved the rightness of contraception.
It denounced the idea that gratification is the end of sex, but said that parents have the duty of choosing how many children they have.
They partly justified this by an eye upon the too rapid growth of population in some countries.
A Jesuit instantly declared that the Anglican Communion was pandering to paganism.
Archbishop Fisher was very pleased at what Ramsey did for the conference.
In particular Ramsey helped the Anglo-Catholic members of the Conference to take a more friendly attitude to the South India Church, which united a Church with bishops to Churches without bishops in a unified structure over a period of years.
If the conference began with a breakfast explosion between the two archbishops, it ended with mutual gratitude for what was achieved.
Yet nothing could alter the double personal difficulty — a difference of principles between a low churchman and a high churchman, and an indefinable difference of temperament.
The first problem was order in the Church of England.
The legal Prayer Book was still that of 1662.
Since the noises in the House of Commons in 1927 and 1928, the bishops sanctioned or winked their eyes at various modifications which were sensible and did not mind that  they were illegal.
For centuries the Church of England was liberal in its spirit and never pressed its clergy to conform to every rubric.
But there was a difference between liberal freedom and anarchy.
State law could not provide discipline because it met resistance from consciences.
Therefore church law must do it — that is, canon law.
The last code of canon law, still nominally in force, was made just after the death of Queen Elizabeth I Tudor.
Some of these canons were still observed (what to wear when conducting morning prayer) and some were long obsolete (rules about clergy nightcaps or yellow stockings on their legs).
It therefore occurred to the canon lawyers — a rarefied group of experts — that Church law, framed by the Church organs and then approved by the sovereign, could achieve the canons which would bind consciences.
Archbishop Fisher accepted the argument and became the enthusiastic leader of the new movement.
The work was hard; hard to frame, hard to get through committees, hard to get accepted.
No archbishop but Fisher would have had the administrative ability or the tenacity to achieve the end.
During the discussions Ramsey grew uneasy.
He had in his background two things which were missing from Fisher's background.
He was a Free Churchman by origin, likely to suspect religion by law.
And during his dark night of the soul while he was at Cuddesdon, part of the darkness was the behaviour of the House of Commons.
Thus he had an inherent antipathy to the idea that law, even Church law, canon law, could achieve anything that was good for the Church.
It should be an axiom, he thought, that the fewer the rules the better.
He may have remembered St Mary's Tyne Dock, where he freely sanctioned certain things that were illegal because the parish church council wanted them for purposes of devotion.
He disliked the whole idea of tidying up worship.
Not that he liked anarchy.
But he saw the prayers of the Church as a living and fruitful tradition which threw up new ideas, some on reflection wrong or offending and to be rejected, others the seeds of devotion.
He had an inner contradiction which rose out of his background.
He wanted order in the Church.
But he could hardly bear the idea of law as an instrument for telling people how to pray.
This difference between the two archbishops was illustrated over the memorial requiem in York minster for Lord Halifax.
As the son of a stalwart Anglo-Catholic Halifax loved the form of the first English Prayer Book, that of 1549 under King Edward VI.
Naturally this order, which Halifax had in his little church, was appropriate for his requiem.
But it was illegal.
An order which was quietly used in some parish churches round the country without offence looked different when used  on what was a national occasion with a national congregation.
So Fisher knew.
But Ramsey, who had come to love Halifax, wanted what Halifax wanted; in such a case, in his view, the law does not care about trivialities.
Fisher objected that an Archbishop of York ought not to encourage illegality by being present at the requiem; and, painfully for himself, felt under a duty of conscience not to attend the memorial service.
Nothing was going to stop Ramsey attending the memorial service for a close friend, whether it was legal or illegal.
He had a feeling that the Archbishop of Canterbury was now too powerful in the Church; that he and the other bishops were more like sheep as they sat saying yes to what Canterbury suggested.
Ramsey afterwards felt that he was partly to blame that he and Fisher were not closer together.
He never lost the early sense of a gulf in age, and experience, and speed of mind.
He never quite got over the sense of being a boy in the presence of an adult.
Fisher called him Michael, Ramsey did not yet dare to call Fisher Geoffrey.
Some things he longed to talk about — he agonized over the Christians' attitude to nuclear bombs and it grieved him that Fisher did not agonize.
He admired so many qualities in Fisher: the shrewdness about people, the grasp of practical problems, the ability to work very long hours, the patience under abuse from the press, the humility which went with a cocksureness that was not arrogance.
And yet, despite all this, the Archbishop of York was not comfortable with the Archbishop of Canterbury except in the moments when the two powerful senses of humour coincided in laughter.
In these differences there was nothing unusual.
It is orthodox doctrine that the Archbishop of York ought not to hold exactly the same opinions as the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Queen obeyed this doctrine in the choice of Ramsey for the see of York.
But now, for the first time in English history, a set of circumstances existed which tested, whether this doctrine is always workable.
The test came over the choice of a new Archbishop of Canterbury.
In former days this emotional moment could not arise because archbishops had little say in the choice of bishops and no say at all in the choice of their successor.
But the sovereigns from Queen Victoria onwards turned consultations with the archbishop into a constitutional convention; so that now the Archbishop of Canterbury had the principal say in the choice of bishops and had a right to be consulted on the choice of his own successor; or, if he had not a constitutional right, at least he had every right to proffer advice to the prime minister whether  the prime minister asked for it or not.
Harold Macmillan, prime minister since 1957 and an Anglican wanting to do the best for the Church, was sure to ask Fisher for his advice and would have felt scandalous if he had not.
Fisher determined to resign from early in 1961.
He was 74 that coming April and felt that he was tired mentally.
And he was tired mentally, for once he addressed a bishops' meeting for a whole hour without stopping.
By the convention in force he had the duty of suggesting the name of a successor.
The biggest man in sight was the Archbishop of York.
Yet the last three years made Fisher doubt whether Ramsey was possible — because of his Catholic restraint on reunion schemes and his suspicion of the ecumenical movement, because of his willingness for wide Catholic liberties in the way of worship, and because of his attitude to law.
A glory of the Church of England was its comprehensiveness.
It had never yet had as its leader someone who represented one of the more extreme parties in the Church — never at least since the days of Archbishop Laud which ended in the archbishop's head being cut off.
Was it conscientiously possible, in such circumstances, for the Archbishop of Canterbury to recommend to the prime minister that the Archbishop of York should succeed him?
ELECTION TO CANTERBURY
Ramsey was told by Fisher that he intended to resign.
He asked himself whether Fisher would recommend him to the Crown as his successor.
He thought it possible that he would and probable that he would not.
He asked himself, who else?
The Bishop of Peterborough, Stopford, was an excellent administrator.
The Bishop of Bradford, Coggan, was an evangelical with a quality then rare among evangelical leaders, namely learning, and was a likeable person who made himself respected by good sense at bishops' meetings.
Ramsey narrowed his private short-list to three: Stopford, Coggan, Ramsey.
For the first time since he was a professor at Cambridge, he began to hope, though with modesty, that he might be chosen for the work.
If one is partly responsible already for the general policy of a Church or for anything else, it is better to be more responsible.
It puzzled him into the New Year of 1961 that no one asked his opinion.
Five years before, Fisher drew him into the argument.
This silence was marked.
He assumed that this could only be because he was one of the possibles.
Without Ramsey's knowledge, Fisher came to the decision that he could not want Ramsey to succeed him, for reasons given above.
He pressed Harold Macmillan not to recommend to the Queen that the choice should fall upon Ramsey.
He did not think that Ramsey would be interested in the load of administration which he would have to carry.
He said to one of his chaplains that Ramsey spent too much time theologizing up in York instead of tackling problems practically.
He thought aspects of the Anglo-Catholic movement had danger; and that though Ramsey was not a danger, he would have such sympathy with them as not to be vigilant.
He threw before the prime minister other names — Coggan, Stopford, and some more.
Harold Macmillan was perturbed.
No prime minister before him had faced this exact situation.
He found himself with the duty of helping to make a vital decision for the Church of England at a moment in its destiny.
Like the rest of the world he could see that one possible successor was larger in stature than the others.
His personal religious feelings would not make him doubt Ramsey, for he owed something in his private religion to that tradition of the Oxford Movement which Ramsey represented.
Early in his time as prime minister he asked Ramsey to come down from York so that they could meet.
They talked in the Cabinet Room at No.
10 Downing Street.
Ramsey, formerly put off by Eden's drawl, was at first put off by Macmillan's blear-eyed appearance and puffy eyes.
‘To start with I really thought that he was asleep.’
But then they talked about the North, of Stockton and Teesside, and Macmillan enquired with a warmth of feeling which Ramsey found impressive.
And at one point in the conversation they touched on the kind of people who ought to become bishops.
Macmillan was very frank about his personal preference.
‘He discoursed about his understanding of the Church and he said that we had to hold the high and the low together but for his part his sympathies were with the high.
He added that while the evangelicals had their part in the Church he did not think that on the whole they had the qualities suitable for being bishops.’
History knows a cynical law: that in all lands politicians dislike ecclesiastics who interfere and therefore, when influencing who is to be a new bishop, prefer not to have bishops too practical and too effective; and a respectable way of having ineffective bishops, the only respectable way, is to have otherworldly bishops, who live to God and spend much time in prayer and are not well informed on matters of this world.
Those who talked to Harold Macmillan at this time were sure that this cold politicking did not enter his head; that he was sincere and only wanted to do the best that he could for the Church.
The kind of  clergyman with whom Macmillan felt kinship was a person of spirituality and otherworldliness, not the person who was a born administrator or Church politician.
Therefore he felt a rapport with Ramsey.
That Fisher said that Ramsey was too Catholic would not disturb Macmillan; and that Fisher said Ramsey was not an administrator would leave Macmillan unmoved.
Yet a lay statesman ought not in such a matter to trample upon the opinions of his Church advisers.
England was no longer in the days of Lloyd George or Palmerston.
And the only Church adviser with a constitutional right to speak thought that he would be wrong to tell the Queen the name of the person whom his instincts told him to be the right person.
There is evidence of Macmillan's perturbation of mind at this predicament.
He started by going to unofficial advisers and seeing whether they agreed with his official adviser.
He interviewed, one by one, some of the other names put forward by Fisher, to see what they were like in comparison with Ramsey whom he knew already.
He summoned the Dean of Westminster, Eric Abbott, to Downing Street.
We do not know what Eric Abbott said but he was Ramsey's second superior at Lincoln Theological College and then his best man at the wedding.
Macmillan talked to Sir Henry Willink, the Master of Magdalene.
Perhaps the prime minister expected that Willink would push for a Magdalene man but he did not get a firm line out of him.
Willink as a lawyer had a lot to do with the administration of the Church and saw the argument that an archbishop must be able to bear a load of administration.
Macmillan consulted the Queen, who knew and liked both Ramsey and Coggan.
He also took the trouble to buy and read a new book of theology which Ramsey at that moment published; an account of the development of English religious thought from the late Victorian age to the age of William Temple —From Gore to Temple .
It is hard to imagine Lloyd George or Churchill, Disraeli or Palmerston, reading the rather obscure books which some prelate wrote about religion.
From Gore to Temple is not an easy read for the layman.
It is a study of Liberal Catholic thought in English religion.
It has good things about Gore, about Hoskyns, about Temple.
It mentions Bethune-Baker six times in each case with the object of dissent and in one case to imply that his opinions were obsolete.
We are not aware that Macmillan had ever heard of Bethune-Baker.
We do not expect that he perused every word of the book.
Nevertheless we know that he liked it.
From what he was told by the Queen, by his unofficial advisers like the Dean of Westminster, and from his own conviction, Macmillan was sure that he must recommend Ramsey to the Queen.
He knew that this  would disturb Archbishop Fisher, which he did not wish to do.
He hoped to show his respect for Fisher's advice by simultaneously recommending Donald Coggan for the see of York.
He knew that he could be accused of acting like some less satisfactory prime ministers in this constitutional field, that is, choosing an archbishop of his own lay power without the approval of the Church; and he disliked that situation.
But he felt that he could do no other.
Fisher announced his retirement to the Convocation of Canterbury on 17 January 1961.
Ramsey, who knew the announcement was coming, delivered a public tribute to Fisher in the York Convocation.
On the evening of 17 January Harold Macmillan telephoned his offer to recommend Ramsey to the Queen for Canterbury.
He apologized for this method of enquiry.
He asked Ramsey to telephone an answer, next morning.
He said that if Ramsey accepted he had it in mind to recommend Donald Coggan for the see of York.
‘How should I shirk?’
Ramsey asked himself.
He telephoned next morning and said Yes.
Macmillan asked if he were willing for Coggan at York and he said Yes.
Ramsey was sure that this was a first in history; the settlement of the choice of an Archbishop of Canterbury by telephone.
All the courtesies were then observed by letter.
Macmillan made two mistakes of protocol.
The Queen was about to go abroad for several weeks.
Therefore this all had to be settled before Friday.
This made the country talk of breathless haste.
The Church likes time to say its prayers.
It preferred to be allowed to say some prayers for the Queen, the prime minister, and everyone else concerned with the choice, before they reached their conclusion.
Ramsey pointed this out to Macmillan in the famous telephone conversation and was overruled because of the Queen's movements.
Not all the members of the Church welcomed the instantaneousness of resignation and appointment.
There were protests.
Some of the protests came from people who were afraid of Ramsey at Canterbury.
Some came from people who longed to have Ramsey at Canterbury.
The second mistake was more technical and more secret.
Without realizing it Macmillan trespassed on the modern constitutional convention.
He asked the Queen to appoint an Archbishop of York without first asking the Archbishop of Canterbury.
He got the sanction of Ramsey, which was important because Ramsey and Coggan would have to work together.
The doctrine of dissimilarity was being observed.
As Fisher pressed Coggan for Canterbury he could not object to Coggan going to the see of York.
But technically, it was a breach of convention.
Fisher was disturbed by it.
He thought it retrograde constitutionally.
He made his displeasure plain to the prime minister.
London was  coming vacant and London was a more important see than York and Coggan ought to go there.
Thus Archbishop Fisher had two reasons for not being pleased with the prime minister.
But this question was quickly resolved when it was discovered that Coggan much preferred moving to York and not London.
Macmillan said to Ramsey, ‘Fisher doesn't seem to approve of you.’
Ramsey defended him.
‘Fisher’, he said, ‘was my headmaster and he has known ail my deficiencies for a long time.’
’ Well', said Macmillan, ‘he is not going to be my headmaster.’
Later Macmillan was reputed to have defended his decision in a sentence which is likely to be authentic because it has the Macmillan ring: ‘I thought we had had enough of Martha and it was time for some Mary.,
Fisher wrote a kind letter to Ramsey, who found that in the circumstances it showed a generous spirit.
‘You will add great distinction to the office in ways to which I could not aspire; but I fear you will find a great deal of the work here work which does not really interest you.’
He warned Ramsey of the burden of administration and how he would need advisers.
Those who are interested in the affairs of Church and State will observe that, at two of the three crossroads of Ramsey's life, it was the State authority which secured the result.
The State winched him out of the professorial chair when the ecclesiastical authority was lukewarm.
The State made him the ecclesiastical head of the Church of England by trampling on the opinions of the relevant ecclesiastical authority.
Thus was made an archbishop who did more than any Archbishop of Canterbury since Stephen Langton of Magna Carta to make the Church more free in its relation to the State.
In May 1961 a girl to whom Archbishop Fisher allowed a flat in Lambeth Tower when she and a husband were desperate for a place to live walked her pram round the courtyard, and observed the two archbishops also circling the courtyard and deep in conversation.
She took it for granted that they talked about ‘the handover’.
She recorded her description.
‘It was like a cock-sparrow hopping about by the side of a dinosaur.
The new and younger archbishop looked twenty years older than the older archbishop.’
In June 1961 Michael Ramsey was enthroned Archbishop in Canterbury Cathedral.
‘It is a macabre thought’, wrote Monica Furlong in the Spectator (30 June), ‘that if the Canterbury Special had crashed last Tuesday morning it would have wiped out at one go practically the whole of the English episcopate together with numerous foreign archbishops and bishops, most of the Orthodox patriarchs, the leaders of the Lutheran Churches in half a dozen countries of Europe and the  heads of our own Free Churches.’
In the cathedral she observed the new archbishop moving among the strange costumes, the rosary with purple tassles and red beads the size of pigeons' eggs, and the purple velvet fez.
She expected him to keep looking over his shoulder to make sure that all the fuss was not intended for the man behind.
She was moved by his address: not so much by the declaration of the reformed and Catholic nature of the Church of England, nor by his condemnation of racialism, nor by his challenge to the State to give the Church more liberty to follow its vocation in worship; but by his gratitude at the growing longing within the Church for a deeper life of prayer.