

TRAILER
Going to the pictures, the movies, the flicks:Seeing in the Dark is about poetic licence in a public place under cover of darkness.
This is where chance comes in.
You're in a dreary barn of a place, its halcyon days long gone.
You're surrounded by strangers, your dozy curiosity in their sayings and doings dimming as the house lights go down.
Then a rectangle of brighter light illuminates the dusty ruched curtains as they glide towards the ceiling.
Your neck muscles lock, your body dematerialises.
Later, for a whole scene in Fritz Lang's film You Only Live Once you find your eyes flitting from a closeup of jailbird Henry Fonda to a dancing hank of fluff stuck in the projector gate.
Fonda studiously ignores the hairs as he drawls to an off-screen interrogator.
The silhouetted fibres crave his attention.
Tension mounts.
Finally, the actor's gaze shifts across screen to fix imperiously on the audacious fluff.
At that very instant the fluff throws in the towel and sashays from view.
The audience stamps and cheers.
It's at moments like this that something magical happens.
However engaging the film sequence is in its own right it remains Henry Fonda in a 1930s thriller, a captivating spectre, but a spectre nevertheless.
Yet, take an accident like that hair in the gate, put it together with the coincidental gaze of a ghost, and it's as if Fonda really has come back to life.
It seems there can never be an absolute spectacle overpowering cowed spectators: some hair will always get in the gate.
We looked almost in vain at one hundred years of literature on cinema for evidence of how going to the pictures is experienced by audiences as a collective rite rich in surreal experience.
Film critics and reviewers are obliged to describe films seen either alone, or in the company of fellow professionals, in preview theatres, on video or in archives.
Academics study and analyse films in  lecture rooms.
Yet in public cinemas we, the customers, watch film in the shadowy company of an anonymous crowd, each one of whom, like us, lives a life of which cinemagoing is but a part.
Those few studies of cinema audiences that do exist have employed the methods of mass sociology and market research, which cannot fully capture the individual, subjective experience of filmgoing, since they miss out idiosyncratic detail and the personal dreamworld.
Measuring applause does not reveal that the movie was memorable for the woman in the third row because the building on screen reminded her of where she went to school and all those childhood memories came flooding back intercut with the film while the auditorium gently shook as an underground train passed beneath and cigarette ash fluttered down from the balcony in the projector beam.
And who, sitting in the stalls next to John Hinckley at a matinee of Taxi Driver, would have guessed that their neighbour's conclusion from watching the film was that, in order to prove his love for Jodie Foster, he must go out and shoot Ronald Reagan?
So we started by asking our friends, who in turn asked others, until we were eventually inundated with testimonies from witnesses around the world who provided popular proof that there is something about the cinema that encourages, right there in the picture house, thoughts, feelings and behaviour in its patrons by turns enigmatic, terrifying, erotic, sad, hilarious and poetic, often triggered by uncanny interplay between screen image and real-time events in the auditorium and in the world beyond the muffled doors.
‘Alone in a crowd’ is never so intense as at the movies, and never so open to sudden dislocation.
It is the complex play between me, you, them, the film, the cinema building and the world outside that enables us, on occasion, to experience reality more completely, and as in dreams to see in the dark.
IAN BREAKWELL & PAUL HAMMOND 
SNOWWHITE
I was three years old.
Nobody had told me what a cinema or a film was, and certainly nothing about the concept of an animated cartoon; and I was taken into the largest enclosed space I'd ever seen, into a crowd of strangers, put on a seat, and the lights went out.
Figures fifteen feet high loomed over me.
The film was Snow White ; and I felt my sanity slipping until the moment when the queen metamorphosed into the witch.
Then I screamed and screamed, and could not stop.
My mother called an usherette to have me removed, and I was handed into strange-smelling arms behind a bright beam that dazzled me.
The arms hugged my squirming form and carried me out, while my mother stayed to watch the rest of the film.
But the exit was at the foot of the screen, and I was being borne up towards that great and drooling hag, away from safety, pinioned by someone I couldn't see, and the witch was laughing.
When we got home I was thrashed for making my mother ‘look a fool’.
The nightmares began and have haunted me ever since.
The witch has my mother's face.
[Alan Garner]
SHADOW CAPTURE
There were a few dark places my parents liked to go into besides under their covers in bed.
You have to be amazed how young and silly they could be or how solemn with foreboding.
In the midst of summer when you came out, your eyes burned with sunlight and your small meaty smooth arms and legs were stung by the pavement's heat.
Or leaving the dark glimmering interior in winter when the ice wind bit through your leggings, mittens and embroidered button holes.
Darkness mysteriously filled with people.
Where had they come from?
Why had they gathered in the shadowed space?
They did not even all know each other, unlike a herd  of cows, a coop of chickens, or a pen of pigs in communal mud.
My mother pinpoints the downfall of western civilisation as the moment when a teenager turned on a transistor radio during a screening of The Robe .
[GLEN BAXTER]
Two ritual spaces forever commingle.
The castle-like stretch to interior sky twinkling with crystal lights.
Aroma of incense and in the distance a terrifying version of Santa Claus, haloed in light and shadow as he swung a lamp and chanted hunting sounds.
We were immobile on the velvet cushions, my legs sticking out, jacket and skirt velvet enveloped by soft fabric.
Nevertheless terror was the measure.
That night I began to stutter.
My parents often mentioned their remorse, I was speaking so well before we went to the Russian Orthodox Easter Service.
But Dumbo was different.
We carried sticky ice cream cones into the large dark room.
We each had to sit in our own chair.
I had crawled into mine and was turning round peering into the dark where many people sat eating popcorn and candy.
My parents were pointing up to a beam of light and saying ‘Dumbo’.
I stared at a huge rectangle of light, it was pinkish floating flickering and suddenly I saw…a pig!
‘Piglet!’
I yelled.
‘Piglet!’
Piglet was up there!
From the book I held on my lap!
Piglet who I improved with blue and green crayons was here, huge powerful incandescent unreachable and in motion!
I sank into an exquisite passivity staring ahead as dazzling colours flushed and flew, metamorphosing into duck elephant cat dog house.
My parents were happy and proud that I was finally seeing what they saw.
[CAROLEE SCHNEEMAN]
TIME FLIES
We were watching Feuillade's Judex .
Insulated both against the cold and the ordinary activities of the town we abandoned ourselves delightedly, there amidst countless panelled enclosures in this little cinema in the sticks, to the all-consuming comfort of another era.
Suddenly on the screen there appears a clock set in the centre of the kind of sumptuous salon that epoch, and Feuillade, alone had a  taste for; it shows 4.40 p.m.
One of us automatically consults his watch: 4.40 to the second.
For an instant our present, across the ruins of several decades, has rejoined that of an afternoon in the 1910s.
[PETR KRAL]
We were watching a documentary about Canadian sports.
A commentator came on and my mother froze in her seat.
‘What's up mum?’
I asked.
‘That's your father up there on the screen,’ she said.
It's the only time I ever saw him.
[Murray Martin]
TRAIL
A lone horseman appeared in a vast landscape, a shot rang out in the badlands, dust rose from a wagon train.
We crossed the park to get home.
My brother walked.
I was carried at a smooth lope by Trigger, or sometimes Silver.
I sat snug in the tooled leather saddle, the reins lying easily in one hand.
Trigger, the palomino, was obedient to the slightest pressure.
Thus the magic lasted, and always lasts if the images on the screen take possession.
[JENNI CALDER]
DONKEYS
We drew out of the gravel drive in a perfect crocodile.
I was Elizabeth's partner.
She wore white ankle socks; my mother preferred me to wear fawn knee-length ones, but our skirts and berets were the same except mine had a leather band inside you couldn't see.
Before leaving school we had knelt on the floor in a row to make sure our hem lines touched the ground, just grazed it, and then we had stood up and had our knickers checked.
Now we were on the move.
Elizabeth was German and her mother was a clockmaster.
I wasn't afraid of Elizabeth but I was frightened of her mother and I was glad the nuns were leading us away from the road where she lived.
I didn't like her clockwork elephants.
It was strange seeing nuns outside.
I felt ashamed for them.
We were going all the way along Pond Street.
We were going to see a film and I hadn't seen a film before.
Stage presentation preceding Men of Two Worlds.
London, 1945
We followed the nuns to the steps of a tall, gloomy building.
We gathered in a long, low room surrounded by pictures of donkeys and men in long striped skirts like shepherds.
I was afraid that I was doing something wrong.
Being with the nuns only made it feel worse.
After being counted one more time, still holding Elizabeth's hand I followed the crocodile miserably through darkened rooms.
I wanted to go home.
I was told to sit down and not move.
The air was smelly and dim.
Elizabeth helped me with the flapping chair.
I flattened my thin skirt between my bottom and the furry seat.
A silver dish like a holy water font was fastened to the seat in front of me.
The bowl was covered in pimples.
In the distance a square of light flickered and I heard music swelling.
I wrinkled my socks down so they didn't feel so tight, and closed my eyes.
When I woke up Elizabeth was crying, a huge pale donkey was breathing down my neck, and Mother Ignatius was smiling.
Her beautiful brown eyes looked at my face.
perhaps she was a donkey too.
Everybody sitting around me in the dark knew something that I didn't know, because they were real Catholics and I was only pretending.
The film was called Never Take No for An Answer , but in my ignorance I didn't even know what the question was.
All my friends had been transformed, their faces shone, they couldn't move, while I just rolled my tie up and down and counted the bars on the radiator.
[SELIMA HILL]
WORD IS OUT
My mother is holding my hand to stop me getting away across the foyer.
I'm looking at the framed portraits of the stars: Anna Neagle, Liz Taylor, Dirk Bogarde, hand coloured like the photographs that Mr Fuller tints, an elderly artist who lives across the road from my grandparents.
This is my  first visit to the pictures, a treat to take my mind off starting school the following Monday.
When Cinemascope arrived many cinemas ‘widened’ screens by cropping the picture, thus giving the desired impression.
So when old films were shown with projectors masked for ‘scope the top of the image, where the most expressive part, the human face, tends to be, was lost.
Halfway through Wuthering Heights I bitterly complained.
Came the reply, ‘You're not supposed to see the faces, it's a dark film.’
[Raymond Durgnat]
‘It's the pictures,’ I say, pointing.
‘Yes.
We'll see some big pictures in a minute though.’
‘Oh’.
I know at once that I've made a fool of myself.
I remember my father saying earlier that we're going to see a big television.
I look around at the milling people, imagining we'll be split up into smaller groups and led through the blank doors to sit in armchairs and watch a TV set on some kind of plinth.
I decide to keep my mouth shut about this.
We take our seats in the front of the circle and the cinema gradually fills.
A series of ornate gilt mouldings on the walls funnels down towards the brocaded red curtain, arranged into rectangles like the huge old picture frames in Mr Fuller's house, surrounding the dark oil paintings he did as a student and smuggled out of Belgium when he settled here after the Great War.
Nowadays he copies postcards, cropping them to improve the composition.
Years later he will show me the sketches he made with mud and chalk in the trenches, of fragile running men and tangled machines, lit up by exploding shells like arrested frames of film.
But for now there are only the empty frames on the walls of the cinema and the rich maroon emulsion they are set against.
I wonder if it is here that the pictures are to appear, worrying that the seats are badly arranged, pointing the wrong way, that we won't be able to see them properly.
And then the lights go down.
The film is One Hundred and One Dalmations .
Its images unfold in my mind as effortlessly as a story riding on the voice of a parent, a voice so familiar it disappears, entering in the half-dark, soluble in dreams.
My father carries me from the car and I glide up two flights of concrete steps, suspended in midair by anti-gravity.
I already know that school is bad news, but behind my lids Miss Fisher and her sidekick, Lavatory-legs Spencer, are receiving diabolical tuition from Cruella De Ville.
The school is a locked mansion of empty, high-ceilinged rooms, of dangerous clearings and winding stairs, a country through which children travel in huddled groups of five, flattening themselves against walls while brave scouts check the route ahead and guard the rear.
Word is out.
Miss Fisher and her cackling lieutenant are hungry again.
I'm new in this place but you've got to learn fast or go under.
A girl who's managed to stay alive for a whole year takes me aside and passes on the two basic rules of survival: 1) Never get separated from the others.
2) Always carry a dustpan and brush.
The only sure method of avoiding capture, she tells me, is to walk backwards at all times, flicking every particle of dust from every footprint into the dustpan as you go.
That way they can't pick up your trail.
[JOHN MUCKLE]
Papillon has just been recaptured for the fourth time.
An exasperated Scouser, anxious no doubt to reach The Grapes before half ten, explodes.
‘For fuck's sake!
Give up, will yer?’
[Chris Proctor]
THE BIRD
By the 1960s the Regal had long since had its day.
It never drew large crowds and The Birds was no exception.
During one of the indiscriminate assaults by the murderous flocks of birds the screaming inhabitants of the town ran to and fro in a vain attempt to ward off their attackers.
From the cinema itself there also came a piercing cry.
The lights were on in a second and the usherette was at the screamer's side.
The woman concerned was in a state of shock.
A bird had gained entry through one of the broken windows and flown helplessly around until it collided with her.
The woman had lashed out in fear and given the bird a fatal blow, feathers everywhere.
She was helped from her seat and taken to the rear of the cinema.
The remains of the bird were gathered up and removed.
[JOHN WEGON]
THE CHILD'S BRAIN
King Kong plunging to his death from a great height and the real death of a bird in the sky, events dramatic enough for the whirring imagination of a seven year old to cope with.
ln the early 1930s part of my childhood was spent at Redcar on Teesside, then as now a down at heel seaside resort surrounded by steel works and wind swept dunes.
Yet I hold the town close to my heart, for it is the birthplace of many a dream and memory: it is winter, it was always winter and cold, I am alone on the beach building a secret world, a sand landscape of hills, mountains, ravines with bridges, towns and harbours.
Of a sudden a gull which has died on the wing crashes to the sand at my feet, its feathers brushing my forehead as it falls.
There it lies, twitching, huge as gulls are huge, and dead, a weird visitor to my private world.
Of the three flea-pits the town boasted my favourite was the pavilion, at the Coatham end of the prom.
It was, in  truth, all that remained of what had been the North Pier, blown away by a great storm in the 1920s.
Films like dreams come and go and are soon forgotten, yet King Kong, which I must have seen in 1933, or early 1934, with its scenes of adventure in a fabled land, was the one to overwhelm my mind and stay with me to the present day.
And of those scenes my hero, for that is what Kong had quickly become, tumbling head-over-heels from the roof of the skyscraper to his death on the street was the one to dominate my mind.
Death from the sky, again.
In my child's brain he crashed at my feet as I walked through a strange city.
[ANTHONY EARNSHAW]
ALFRED: A TRINIDADIAN TALE
The last time I saw Alfred was the day the police shoot them three fellas, remember?
We had just come out of a 12.30 matinee and the street was burning in the sun and those who had come out of the theatre was cool and real but the others in the street were moving in a white light that had them like shadows.
Alfred was like us, cool and real, but as the police moved in on him things became a bit confused.
The film had been two of those Kung Fu films.
By the time I had gone through the narrow tunnel to pit the first film had already started and I had to use the reflection of the action on the faces of the audience to find a seat without too much of ‘Here, Here’ and ‘Sit down nuh!’.
Then the whole 12.30 thing began like it always had since I was small.
The whole audience became like one and anything somebody say is like you say it.
That afternoon there was a voice among us that seemed to be leading the whole thing — anything he say is what we thinking, but before.
As I saw the circle moving in on Alfred, I realised that that voice had been his.
The films were real ‘bad’— plenty action and thing — and with Alfred there, our thoughts would gather together and sweep across the screen creating  Trinidad out of China.
At first I thought that was why the police wanted him, because the sort of way we were thinking in there had been definitely subversive, I mean they don't teach you that in school eh!
But no.
It wasn't that ner.
Really, I had heard something about him being involved in some ‘group’.
After he leave school he had set up some sort of agricultural commune thing, he was always a man like that, saying we were people must make the most of we community skills and thing, but he get squeeze in that farming business and last I hear of him he had gone in the hills and become a guerrilla.
Many films of my youth were viewed on either side of bouffant and beehive hairdos which filled the centre of the screen.
In the hippy era images filtered weakly through a hairy sea of tangled tresses.
When afros came in I gave up.
[George Littleblack]
So there he was, all frozen in the hot sun, I began to realise things were really serious when I see them machine guns itching to smoke in the fuzz hand.
All of us stand up watching as we come out of the theatre and Alfred glance up at we.
Me ain't know what was in that glance, but we moved in behind the police.
They shouted for us to stop, but we ain't take that on any more than if they were Chinese in the film, we were recreating our life like how we recreate the film.
We were waiting for Alfred to drop he gun, I don't know how we knew he had one but we knew, and slowly he took it out of his waist and dropped it.
The police relaxed and move in.
All of a sudden, Alfred strike one karate pose there and leap one leap on the front man, knocking him down, grabbed his machine gun and with two more leaps he was past them and through us as we open up like a black red sea and close again.
The police catch theyselves and rush us shouting and some start to shoot, straight into we.
That was when they shoot them three fellas, remember, but they ain't get Alfred.
He was gone.
[CHRISTOPHER LAIRD]
SHORT-SIGHTED DISCIPLE
In Iraq we have ‘summer cinema’, usually a building next to the real cinema.
Because of the heat this second cinema has no roof.
The flat roof of our own house was high enough for  me to see two summer screens for free.
The trouble was they were just too far away to see things clearly, and also I couldn't hear the sound.
One day I suggested to my father that he buy me a pair of binoculars.
Thus equipped I could watch the films in comfort, switching from one screen to the other.
I'd go up there every night and see the same films over and again.
One night I saw a film about Jesus Christ.
There was a scene in which Christ staggers away from the camera with his cross on his back.
I couldn't make out what was going on so I began walking towards the image, binoculars pressed to my eyes.
My mother grabbed me at the very edge of the roof, just before I toppled the two storeys to the street.
[SALAH FAIQ]
Written in biro on a scrap of paper stuck on the kiosk window of a cinema in Bangor, Co.
Down: ‘Closed Due to Lack of People.’
[Noel Spence]
MISSIONARY
Mosspark Picture House.
1927.
Saturday matinee.
Age four.
A gothic thriller.
The tall lantern jawed villain in top hat and tails plays an organ.
I am terrified and run home as fast as I can.
Years of nightmare.
Age thirty-four.
I buy a harmonium — nearly an organ — and spend the rest of my life playing it, thickened with doleful dirges, vainly trying to lay the trauma, my only satisfaction the ashen faced, staring eyed audiences staggering out at the end of performances, primed, and ready to carry on the good work.
[IVOR CUTLER]
MR POWER
There were four of us, and our father, who was the Wesleyan Chapel steward, knew that cinema films would overstimulate our brains, give us over to vain imaginings and, worse, tempt us to worship false gods.
Our mother was an East Riding woman and her regime  was enlightened and less oppressive.
Now and then, on Saturday afternoons, she financed a mile and a half walk to Thirsk to visit Power's Picture House.
But first we called at Mr Macauley's sweet shop to stock up for the frequent film changes.
One of the never mentioned delights of the silent cinema was that you crunched and sucked to your heart's content, annoying nobody but the piano player.
Now the Bijou, the Globe, the Luxor, the Roxy and the Star are bingo palaces.
Old ladies with thick stockings holding veins like knots of worms, and men whose eyes are duller than clay alleys dream other dreams and watched the numbered screen, killing time, hoping for a win.
The Empire is a supermarket now, a freezer full of TV dinners where the Gents once stood.
[Mike Harding]
We liked to visit Mr Macauley's shop because his furious brother George played cricket for Yorkshire.
You will recall that in 1926, when A W Carr disastrously won the toss and put the Australians in, it was George who bailed us out with an unbeaten 76.
You may not recall that, when Edgar Oldroyd asked him how he was enjoying a long spell bowling into the wind, he answered, ‘It's like bowling up t'bloody cellar steps.’
Although it was a family business I don't think Mr Power worked the projector.
Perhaps Mrs Power did.
Mr Power can't have done because now and then when rebellion stirred during overlong film repairs he rushed down the aisle cracking a whip.
The North Riding is a long way from London.
As God is my witness,he cracked a whip .
[J L CARR]
GENDER
In 1954 I was eight and every Saturday morning I would set off to the movies with my first boyfriend, ten year old Skippy.
For several hours we would be transported via the newsreel to the exotic East, where American soldiers were valiantly fighting the red, or was it yellow peril, and then to the Wild West, where Hoot Gibson or Eddy Dean would be showing cattle rustlers or unfriendly Indians ‘what America stood for’.
We would spend the afternoon re-enacting in the parking lot behind the apartment what we had seen in the morning on the screen.
It was then that I began to discover the fate that awaited me as a female.
Whilst I saw myself as the hero's faithful sidekick got up as I was in cowboy gloves with real leather fringes, two guns in holsters buckled on  and tied around the leg for fast draws, ten gallon hat and waistcoat, Skippy insisted that I be the daughter of the murdered rancher whose cattle were being rustled.
Gradually it began to dawn on me that while in the celluloid world all things were possible, in the other world it was quite a different story.
[Had I been more perceptive I might have noticed that even in the movies women were always the rancher's daughter.]
Years later, on the day our first child was due to be born, when it became obvious that the birth was not imminent, my husband Roger suggested that we go to a film to take our minds off the event.
The nearest film was a Canadian thriller called Shivers .
It turned out to be a story about the residents of a block of flats being used as breeders by aliens, who implant their offspring into the unsuspecting humans.
On reaching maturity they begin to wriggle furiously, eventually emerging via the startled human's mouth amid much blood and wailing.
Just as the film was reaching its climax my firstborn began one of his frequent exercise periods.
So lost was I in the film that for an awful moment I too was about to spawn one of the dreadful aliens.
[MARLENE WINFIELD]
A WOMAN'S PREROGATIVE
Something is troubling the curly-haired boy I'm playing with in the backyard of my grandparents' house.
His name is Christopher.
We've been prowling around all day on a level with earthworms and rusty, broken down appliances, pressing our ears against the hot wooden trapdoor to the cellar and hearing the silence of ghosts.
‘Do you know what The Beatles are?’ he asks, letting me climb into his baby pedal car.
‘Yes.’
‘The Beatles aren't boys, like us.
They're men.’
‘I know.’
I'm eight and a half years old and disgusted that my mother has to come with me to see A Hard Day's Night when usually she just sees me to the edge of the estate and across the main road.
I introduced Alice Guy's 1913 silent film A House Divided .
Halfway through the film broke, the houselights came up, and I was accosted by a wino.
He insisted that the female lead had worked in Woolworths in Plymouth and he retained an unrequired passion for her.
He grabbed me by the throat and began throttling me, all the while demanding her address.
[Judith Higginbottom]
‘It's for the kids,’ she says to Freda Leader, our next door neighbour.
‘Why do they want to go putting an ‘A’ on with it?’
But when she sees the Teds and greasers and hard-faced girls who make up the matinee audience, she thinks it's just as well.
We take our seats half way up the stalls.
Below us rows of lads have put their winklepickers up on the backs of the seats, their feet crossed at the ankles, perching like a flock of shiny blackbirds with pointed wings.
‘All right, missus?’ says a boy with a floppy quiff, turning round.
My mother's ears are burning and she squirms in her seat.
I begin to pronounce the sequence of words and numbers that will prevent her from giving him a piece of her mind.
Then the first film starts.
It's called A Woman's Prerogative .
‘Of course, he didn't understand any of it, so that was all right ,’ she says later to Freda Leader, in a whisper that echoes around the landing.
‘1 mean, how could he know what a woman's prerogative is?’
She laughs uncertainly.
‘I wasn't sure I knew myself.’
That night I lie awake in bed for hours, thinking about this.
I remember nothing from the film except a lot of droning talk and a fully clothed woman with dark lashes lying down.
What exactly is a woman's prerogative?
I go through every part of the female body in turn.
Bosoms, bottoms, the lot.
Suddenly I realise that there must be another part, something like a gap, a hole left by the word I don't understand.
[JOHN MUCKLE]
NATURALISTS
Nineteen fifty two and mother and I were in Bordeaux.
My father had excused himself.
He had to look after his dahlias.
My mother, an innocent at home, aghast when told that ‘sod’ might mean other than‘earth’, was abroad easily  befriended by complete strangers.
This time they were naturalists.
In stature Don Quixote and Sancho Panza.
We drank evening coffee with them.
They corrected our accents.
The larger one claimed to be minor aristocracy.
For the weekend they suggested their camp.
‘So much to see, so much to learn’.
We caught a late bus out of Bordeaux and arrived in darkness.
We were shown our chalet, and then hurried along to the cinema to join the other camp residents.
Being shortsighted I moved to the front while my mother stayed at the back.
The film was of large happy female peasants dancing, with garlands held aloft.
I became aware that my mother was pushing her way towards me.
Her face was flushed with excitement.
‘The men aren't wearing trousers,’ she stage whispered.
I looked at her, then behind me.
They all had jumpers on but she was right, definitely no trousers.
It is part of the tradition of naturism: no matter how cold you are, off come the pants.
[HILARY PHILLIPS]
CUT FOR CUT
Zaragoza is a windy town.
I think that is why it has so many cinema fans and why the best cinema creators in Spain come from there.
When I was ten the civil war started.
Films were not imported in the fascist zone.
Distributors showed repeatedly the old films from their stocks.
I must have seen De Mille's Cleopatra a dozen times.
I used to stay until Claudette Colbert was unrolled from the Persian carpet, then I left.
Cinema was not just an entertainment for our generation.
It was a medicine, an antidote to the monstrous reality outdoors.
Films reflected another world, where comfort, joy and love were possible.
Movies were life and reality, and what happened in the murderous streets an absurd nightmare.
Censorship, dictated by the military and Catholic priests, cut a lot.
Dubbing films became obligatory by law, and they  took advantage of it to change the dialogue.
In their anxiety to eliminate sinful love they presented lovers as relatives, thus transforming the boring Hollywood sex code into a frolic of perversions.
We could see Garbo kissing her father in a most peculiar way, and Ava Gardner seducing her brother, Clark Gable, in Mogambo .
At sixteen I discovered an old man who exhibited silent films in villages.
He rented me a projector, and because he wanted to retire sold his movies to me for a few pesetas a twelve-reeler.
Some of the classics were in excellent condition, as he had seldom showed them.
They later became part of the collection of the National Film Library.
But most of the material was falling to pieces.
I had to learn to cut off the rotten celluloid and splice together the usable bits.
When projecting the resulting film the jump cuts of the narrative could produce interesting surprises.
Soon I mixed in bits of different movies: Lady Windermere looking down from her balcony and seeing…whatever!
Most of my splicing I did at random, automatically.
When I had completed a two hour programme my friends came to my home and we saw it together.
The Bunuel family was particularly fond of these programmes.
And that was the start of the first film society in Spain during the Franco dictatorship.
[J F ARANDA]
Doomed cinema, Madrid (photo: Andrew Greaves, 1985)
GOLD RUSH RUE EVERLOR
The war was over.
The family were staying with a friend of my grandmother's in La Ciotat, a small harbour town near Marseille, our normal home.
I remember a dark apartment, ships' masts, a smell of tar, iron and iodine, grownups.
My father said, ‘je vais t'emmener au cinema ce soir voir La Ruée vers l'or .’
’ I am going to take you to the pictures tonight to see The Gold Rush .’
I did not know what ‘cinema’ was, it was one of those wonderful and unimaginable pleasures like La Semaine de Suzette and its doll Bleuette, which the war had taken away.
Grown-ups would evoke them discreetly, so as not to make you envious, not to corrupt you with impossible desires.
They would say, ‘Avant guerre, tu vois, il y avait …’
’ Before the war, there was…’
My grandmother had a beautiful satin box with flowers painted on the cover.
She hoarded ribbons in it.
She said, ‘You see, before the war, this was given to me as a present, and it was full of chocolates.’
I could not imagine what they were, apart from an unattainable marvel, part of a world gone for ever.
I thought that the ribbons were beautiful, all the colours of the bunch of flowers painted on the cover.
Now all these things were returning, one by one.
Cinema was one of them.
We went late one evening.
I remember dark streets, and walking hand in hand with my father.
I had misunderstood the name of the film, and not dared ask too many questions.
You were supposed to be bright if you took things in quickly.
I liked to play at being bright.
I had vaguely understood something about a press of people, and was surprised to see the streets so empty.
I had heard, not La Ruée vers l'or, ‘ruée' being quite outside the bounds of my vocabulary, but ‘La rue Everlor’.
Everlord, Everlaure, Héverlore, Aiverlaur?
It would be foreign, magical.
Each of the streets through which we went might have led to it.
I remember I kept saying, ‘Is this it?’ and my father said, ‘No, a bit further.’
I loved my father, and he loved me.
It was so intense and we were both so strung up, uneasy about it.
But exalted.
All this spare passion between us, which we did not know how to show.
So we were exceedingly well-behaved towards each other.
I was promising myself to be  very quiet, whatever it would be.
He was coaxing me to walk a bit further without having to carry me, by promising that it was just a bit further.
It was all part of the Rue Everlor.
When he did say ‘nous voilà !’
I just didn't get it.
It was a house, a kind of shop with a rather dingy entrance.
People were queueing to get in, but without ration stamps.
I never twigged what the gold rush was.
It took me years to finally comprehend.
But the house hanging over the cliff got me into agonies of suspense, and I was amazed, when the dark came without bombs, by how the black on the screen, especially the black of Charlie Chaplin's suit, his moustache, hat and rolling intense eyes, fitted the darkness of the little cinema.
And how the white, the snow, the sheet that was the screen, was the light, and you forgot yourself when you were watching.
The hunger that made Charlie, Charlot, chew the boiled slices of boot, moustache toing and froing under his nose, I understood as well or as little as the hunger of the grown-ups around me, my mother eating the woodworms along with the oats and the silence as everybody stopped to watch her.
I was lucky, thin as a rail and never hungry.
I remember the terror though: when the bear comes out of the wood and stalks after unsuspecting Charlot on the steep, cliff-edged mountain path.
I remember screaming and my scream breaking into ecstatic laughter and relief as the bear, instead of eating Charlot, started walking splay-footed in imitation of him, then went back into the wood.
Yes, the war was over.
And Charlot never even noticed.
[NICOLE WARD JOUVE]
WAR GAMES
Now aged seventy-four I have lived the past fifty years within hailing distance of Earl Grey's monument: he of the 1832 Reform Act.
Towering over the modern centre of Newcastle, the provincial capital of the north east, and facing Tyne-wards, he surveys the ancient city.
I was born  into the war torn world of May 1915 in a mile long street of two storey houses strategically located between Wallsend railway station and Wallsend drill hall.
It was the kind of street that money-grabbing, rather than socially inspired, landlords provided, and thus created their lasting and unenviable reputation.
No bathroom, no indoor water and an outside ash closet.
The back lane could have provided the set for Chaplin's The Kid .
The wartime government had promised the troops they would return to ‘homes fit for heroes to live in’, but the sick joke was that you had to be a hero to survive in them.
I remember black faced miners and not so black faced shipyard workers passing to and fro to the nearby yards or the ‘G’ pit at the end of the street.
Much more inspiring and less frequent were the sight and sounds of soldiers marching to war from drill hall to station.
Less inspiring was the sight of those returning.
By 1919 the number of soldiers began to decrease and the numbers of unemployed to increase.
My father was one of them, and when ‘Buddy Can You Spare a Dime?’ topped what was then the hit parade, its lyrics summed up the poverty, dependence and despair of the millions of poor throughout the world.
We all knew how little and how vital a dime was.
A few ex-soldiers volunteered for the White Army, an unsuccessful venture designed to strangle the Russian Revolution at birth.
But most of them stood on street corners.
Nothing will ever feel as real as those times.
No other world will take me so fully into its secret ways.
No oranges will taste the same as those we ate on t hose Saturday mornings, saving the peel to throw at the screen when Roy Rogers brought out his guitar to serenade Dale Evans across a Texas campfire that was flickering in an enchanted cave in a Manchester street.
[Mike Harding]
On first seeing All Quiet on the Western Front it was as if the whole cast had marched through my life on their way to Wallsend station and the battlefields of Europe.
With a little imagination I envisaged the hopes and fears, and the overwhelming horrors these young men had to face.
When Lew Ayres reached out to that ephemeral alighted butterfly his expression revealed the most delicately sensitive emotion I had experienced until then.
In a flash a sniper, who could have been any gun happy soul anywhere, had killed.
That contrast of tender sensibility and senseless brutality was etched into my mind, exposing the utter meaninglessness of violence and war.
By the time I was ten it seemed I had lived backstage to so many of those early film sets.
It was the revolutionaries who were the villains, the Royals and their supporters the  good and kind and handsome heroes.
Their enemies were villains with downturned mouth and black moustache, not then Russian, always French.
The crowds that lined the roads on the way to the guillotine looked much like most of the people in Wallsend.
And the women seemed to knit the same kind of loops my mother did.
The next street towards the River Tyne was under the railway arch.
Hadrian Road was named after the Roman emperor who, we agreed, must have genetically bequeathed to us some superlative qualities.
What more natural then that we could hang up our football boots, change into our French cavaliers' outfits or as quickly become Roman gladiators?
Ben Hur's chariot race was re-enacted around the Roman Wall, too neatly preserved in Wallsend Park.
With iron gords, or hoops as the rich people called them, and with clashes and tensions no less thrilling and dangerous than the real thing, we competitively raced until we dropped.
Then our ash closets were exchanged for flush toilets.
The new metal dustbins were quickly lidless.
Armed with wooden swords, cardboard breast plates, and now shields, we set off with renewed enthusiasm.
Hand to hand fighting dominated our imagination as if right and wrong, good and bad, had to be decided in violent confrontation on the spot or at some predetermined location.
And the reward, as our film heroes had it, was the beautiful lady.
Alas, we always had to return to our cobbled back lanes.
If, as frequently happened, two of us would fall out and come to blows, then passers-by would stop, form a circle and watch without intervening, confirming their view that justice would be achieved this way.
The short is a film about sailing.
It turns its attention to the Isle of Wight Regatta.
‘Ever since the days of Queen Victoria,’ runs the commentary, ‘the Royal Family has been associated with Cowes’.
Round of applause at the Chelsea Odeon.
[Chris Proctor]
As I took my place with two jamjars in my first Saturday morning kids matinee queue, apprehensive lest the currency had been devalued or even replaced with money, I observed that not only were Royals the heroes in the films but that my choice of cinema was between the Queens and the Royal, and I was warned that before the performance you were supposed to stand for the pianist's rendition of ‘God Save the King’.
I took against this practice and reflected later that ‘God Save the people of Wallsend’ would have been more appropriate, for few in authority cared much, let alone had the power to assuage the people's  meagre needs.
Foyer display with live bat, London, 1960
Then we moved into a street called Portugal Place.
Not even the most persuasive estate agent could have produced one environmental reason for moving there; but it was a miner's house and rent free.
Certainly my mother's successful campaign to have the nearby men's urinal closed was vigorous and rewarding.
The town's mortuary adjoined the urinal.
At that time it would provide a resting place for six to ten clients a week, and the arrival of each one had the macabre side of me guessing what kind of corpse it was.
On odd nights that would worry me but in time I realised they were the kind of neighbours who never caused a disturbance.
But there was a third amenity, and vitally essential it was: the corporation depot, with its stables and Clydesdale horses and endless line of carts.
Horse manure, horse muck or just plain horse shit, depending on your susceptibilities, was a much needed and highly effective fertiliser for the allotments, and so from an early age a daily chore was to keep an eye open for droppings, grab your shovel and bucket and run out to scoop it up.
Portugal Place was to the supply of horse shit what Wimbledon ‘insiders’ are to Centre Court tickets on final days.
You could almost stand and wait for a horse to deliver.
I want you to recall with me Chaplin in City Lights .
Charlie has taken a street sweeper's job to earn the money to pay off the cruel landlord who would otherwise put a blind girl and her mother out onto the streets.
It was like that in Wallsend in those days.
In addition Charlie needs to raise enough money to finance an operation to restore the girl's sight.
No money, no sight: the way it was before the National Health Service came to Wallsend.
Imagine Charlie with his sweeping brush and shovel neatly disposing of a pile of horse droppings and then, looking into the camera, observing a passing elephant.
A twitch of his moustache, a movement of the eyebrow, and what else did he need to do?
When the new sighted flower girl sees not a handsome, well groomed, six foot Adonis her eyes reveal something different.
You see he was a hero , a social hero, a small guy, a fall guy, not necessarily a brave or courageous guy, usually the opposite.
Chaplin was telling me that such  people don’ t qualify for medals or monuments, unlike those who fight and kill or wound, or are killed or wounded.
I was and remain a supporter of Chaplin's view.
[T DAN SMITH]
SEARCH LIGHT FOR QUALITY
‘Rotting Hill!
Shocking Hill!’ was the 52 bus conductor's cabaret turn on his every approach to Notting Hill.
And so it was with the Notting Hill Gate Classic cinema around 1969.
At one late-night show the main picture was projected in the reel order 1, 2, 5, 4, 6, 3, 7.
The line I took with the manager was that, as a composer of music for films, I really needed to see equal commitment all along the picture beam to the public.
‘I don't see any other dissatisfied customers’ was his reply.
This cinema had also capitalised on the psycho-acoustic phenomenon prevalent in rock music of suggesting heightened intensity with ‘fuzz’: the speaker cone had plainly blown, rendering all dialogue and music as if through comb and paper.
And the projector's arc lamps were not so much set as sunset, through a fog.
How poignantly vignetted was the ice in Alexander Nevsky , but Eisenstein would have stabbed the projectionist with icicles.
[RON GEESIN]
ANTHEM
When we attended film shows in the RAF the National Anthem was played before the picture, accompanied by film footage of the Queen riding side saddle down Horse Guards Parade.
We had wagers on how many times the horse's prick bounced back and forth in the time it took to cross the Parade.
Arguments were fierce: some said six, some six and a half, some seven.
As we all stood to  attention in the darkened cinema, singing the anthem, we Would count them off: ‘God save our — one — gracious Queen — two — Long live our — three — noble Queen — four.’
[ALF MACGABHAN]
I saw tombs open and the terrifying silhouettes of walking corpses set out on the road.
That night I couldn't close my eyes, the slightest creaking of the furniture announcing the imminent arrival of the undead.
My screams of terror awoke my parents and brought them rushing in panic to my room.
[Nelly Kaplan]
WITNESSES
Try watching Witness in Dublin, where the inhabitants use films as an aid to conversation.
Every appearance of the boy Samuel is greeted with, ‘Ah, doesn't he just remind you of Kevin/Michael/little Christy?
Sure, they're all coming up on the bus from Mullingar/Limerick/Cork on Friday for the whole weekend.’
Even when Samuel is facing death by having his throat cut in the Gents the exchange goes like this, ‘Mother of Mary, that reminds me of my poor Joseph going.
Didn't he have the anaemia, and the Hodgkiss, and a touch of leukaemia too.
How's your own then?’
[ROGER WAKELING]
BEST OF BRITISH
The Odd Hour Cinema, Nottingham, the 1950s.
You went in, you came out; whenever you felt like it.
Through a tiny door off the dry page of the street, from the cold light of day to sitting in womb-like blackness.
Where did the giant images come from?
I didn't know.
I knew only that they happened there in the darkness and only a few feet from the pavements.
The blackness enveloped so warm and close and, I believed, extended infinitely away from the street on all sides, something that made any street plan impossible.
And I believed that this world of darkness and changing images went on without a break, as unceasingly as the other less real one outside, wherever outside was, and by some unlikely philanthropic gesture of the city corporation was allowed to co-exist and be connected by the little dark doors with dark portholes.
In the darkness I felt in the hands of God, someone who could do anything He liked with me, even though that someone was more likely to be Mr Slieman, the manager, who with his pencil moustache looked more like a used car salesman and was constantly trying to show Louise, the cashier and kiosk girl, his collection of prophylactics.
You left the cinema your hand in your pocket clutching a non-existent ‘rod’, you went rat a tat tat Chicago piano machine gun style and did a James Cagney hoodlum staggering along the pavement with your hands to your chest until you collapsed into a doorway mown down by gangsters' bullets crying for Pat O'Brien or Joan Blondell to take the message to ma.
It was a great way to die.
[Arthur Moyse]
The Dale cinema.
Early 1960s.
A time of endless summer evenings, Bobby Rydell and Bobby Vee.
The last drainpiped leg of the Teddy boy era.
And the last show at this austere palace in the area of Nottingham full of smoke and even less substantial youthful dreams.
The one would be abolished by the Clean Air Act and the others would die and disappear one by one, passing through the gates of the fatal factories close by.
The final curtain as it was for so many cinemas at this time, before they became cash and carry warehouses for bowls and colanders, brushes, clothes pegs, cloths and uncountable tons of things being produced in orange plastic.
After that they slipped into anonymity, disappearing altogether into the buildings surrounding them, turning into workshops for alloy welding and serious industrial accidents.
The Dale, perhaps for the only time in its short life, was full.
The word ‘anticipatory’ falls limply from its first syllable in its attempt to describe the atmosphere, recharged from row to row.
Young next to old, doing-well next to down-and-out: a heterogeneous mass present for its own mutually exclusive reasons.
The buzz, the uninhibited, excited talking, yes, uninhibited talking, in a district where you were made to feel peculiar if you allowed any expression to cross your face in the street, died as the lights slowly faded.
Complete darkness.
Then, in that second of hushed silence before the screen and fanfare blaze out, there came from the middle of the auditorium a huge and shocked voice ‘What the fookin''ell are yo’ doin'? ', followed almost at once by two mighty smacks that could only have been someone being hit.
The fanfare seized up on its first chord and then seemed to fall over itself, collapsing in a welter of notes.
The first frame of the programme appeared for a moment, juddered, then disappeared.
The  lights came up and we were not in that magic world beyond the screen but back in the familiar tawdry surroundings of Sneinton, Notts.
A gargantuan Teddy boy was standing in the stalls, looking down at his feet.
The seat next to him was now empty.
The torches, that had from the back played on and around him like searchlights finding the enemy, were switched off.
Disbelief vied with sideboards as extensive and useless as Chesil Bank for domination of his face.
He looked up and all the way round; all eyes were on him.
He pointed down under the seats: the edge of a shabby raincoat could just be seen.
In a voice full of virginal astonishment he said, ‘'E were touchin' me fookin' cock.’
A B western hero hiding up a gully while the posse rush blindly past was believable.
This was not.
The police arrived, three stripes followed by a constable.
There was some cheering.
It was a great performance by the sergeant as he strolled up to The Mighty Tharg.
The PC seemed a trifle unnerved playing to a full house.
The sergeant spoke inaudibly to the Ted and they began to escort him out, one on each side.
Halfway up the aisle the Ted turned his head again to the packed house and in the same pained voice of injured innocence repeated, ‘'E were touchin' me fookin' cock.’
It was a low-down dirty day.
I was leading the life of a bat in a dark hole, eating candy and gobbling images.
I plugged my naked feet in between the empty seats as tears rolled down my cheeks.
I've learned to cry silently during movies.
[Lynne Tillman]
The Scala in the 1960s showed all-night horror films.
There were as usual only a few lone silent figures, sitting in isolation.
One, after watching the first two films, was hunched at the end of a row, asleep and snoring.
Except this time there was another, a thin, raincoated, restless figure.
I watched his silhouette moving from seat to seat, watching the others, shuffling and sidling closer, sometimes stopping as if uncertain, but then moving again until he was next to someone.
Then he'd sit for a while, occasionally glancing at the figure next to him, until at last he'd lean towards the other's ear.
The response was to push him off or to move away or no response at all.
Then the silhouette looked round again and began to move towards someone else.
An all-nighter was a triumph of will and my eyelids were already dropping, but I kept my eyes on the thin figure.
He would get to me soon.
Though the film was running I had seen no staff in the cinema for hours.
The film,Mr Sardonicus , was about a man whose face has frozen into a  wide and terrible corpse-like grin.
The silhouette sat down next to the snoring man, and looked hard at him.
I felt uneasy.
The thin figure leaned over and whispered in the sleeper's ear.
The man screamed, fell off his seat, and rolled down the aisle to the front.
He was awake by then, as was everyone else.
The thin figure had slipped through the velvet curtains and was away.
Halfway through Hush, Hush, Sweet Charlotte big white subtitles came up saying YOUR MOTHER IS GOING TO DIE.
For weeks afterwards I prayed for her, though I'm not religious and she seemed as fit as ever.
Then one day my father sat me down and said, ‘Lisa, I have some bad news I'm afraid.’
I interrupted him and said, ‘It's about mother isn't it?
I know already.
I went to see a film last month and the film told me.’
[Lisa Montague]
The Odeon, St Albans, the 1970s.
The film Shivers , a real horror of bloody worm-like parasites the size of Errol Flynn's penis.
In front of me five youths, age seventeen, leaning back, arms spread, cool, sniggering and making jokes, pretending not to be frightened.
Next to me a girl eating a box of liquorice torpedoes.
On the screen a woman nonchalantly opens the lid of a washing machine and out leaps one of the Things.
Everyone in the cinema, everyone except the five youths, jumps and screams.
The box of liquorice torpedoes leaves the hand of the girl next to me.
as if in a slow motion sequence from a Peckinpah film I see the torpedoes escape from the box, turn head over tail as they rise, reach their zenith, and begin falling again, towards the heads and shoulders of the youths in front.
The sweets land.
The youths jump up, shouting with terror and disgust and begin waving their arms about, flapping at the air, furiously brushing their hair and shirts.
Jumping up they have made everyone else jump again.
Then they see the torpedoes.
They laugh now, but are shaking with the release of tension.
Everyone laughs, not at them but with them.
The youths are still standing, trembling laughing.
They meet the eyes of others.
They admit their fear.
Everyone is shivering together.
It is a lovely moment.
A little place on the Tottenham Court Road.
The 1980s.
The sort of place that still does double features, which it was doing that bright sunny afternoon.
My wife and I went up to the pay booth.
A friendly Asian face looked through at us, gave us our tickets, and pointed to the black double doors further in.
We paused at the kiosk.
The face disappeared from the pay booth and appeared again in front of us and sold us a packet of sweets.
We went on towards the double doors.
The friendly little Asian appeared from another door and held his hands out for our tickets.
He tore them, passed half back to us, pointed to the doors again and  said, ‘Anywhere you like.’
I opened the black doors and we entered.
From behind the screen curtains an organ played a jolly tune.
There was no one else in the cinema.
It seemed so sad I could have cried.
We sat down.
After a minute or two the Asian suddenly slid out from the side of the big curtains and then stopped, a tray of drinks and ice creams round his neck.
He just stood there, right at the front with the curtains at his back, staring into the auditorium.
We stared back; there was nowhere else to look.
I had to walk down and buy something, lots of things.
He smiled and said ‘Thank you’ as if he'd never seen me before, as did I. I went back to my seat and faced the front again.
He stayed there a little longer, then disappeared back into the curtains.
The organ went on playing.
I wondered if it was him, playing on a pre-recorded tape; or his brother.
Whose face would it be, looking through the small square window behind us?
The films started and finished on time.
He was there at the end, opening the double doors for us.
We went out into the bright sunny street.
The traffic and the crowds were passing interminably in each direction, as they had been all the time.
If the cinema is right the film need hardly matter.
Mr Slieman may still be spending most of his working day shuffling ever closer to Louise, unaware or uninterested in the magic he and his house create.
But it is still there: the soaring vague walls and giant secretive curtain washed with colours you've only dreamt about, the colour of all the things you were never allowed to have as a child, suddenly real and there before you.
[ROGER WAKELING]
THE PERSIAN PANTHEON
Siah Armanjani once told me how he used to see the movies in his native Persia in the 1950s.
He said there was a person, famous throughout the land, whose job it was to visit the halls where films were being shown and to describe the films to the local people.
This man provided a  running commentary on the events on the screen, which were otherwise a fabulous mystery.
His non-stop verbal explications, declaimed as he strode up and down the crowded aisles, described the gods and mythology and history of the people of Persia; and his improvisation fitted what was happening in the film as the hair fits the head.
In this way were seen Gone With the Wind and All Quiet on the Western Front : as events in the nation's history, peopled by characters from the Persian pantheon.
At the same time, our poet's impromptu verses — often he hadn't seen the film before — were in the complex scheme of Persian poetry, rhyming, scanning, and so on.
Armanjani reported to me that at the height of his powers our man sometimes accompanied a two hour programme of film trailers spliced together.
The popular poet's imagination, skill and learning could concoct, at that instant, a sustained story with a cast of hundreds that linked all those wars, love affairs, catastrophes, comedies and come-what-may into a coherent whole.
During a scene in W C Fields' The Bank Dick in which men were digging a trench in the road I became aware that my feet felt cold and wet.
Looking down I saw they were in a puddle of water that hadn't been there at the start and seemed to be oozing out of the ground.
[Ian Breakwell]
Since Siah told me this story about a supreme storyteller, 1 have told the story myself many times.
I think it has grown in the telling.
[PATRICK HUGHES]
GUN LORE
As a child I was given a grey plastic gun as a birthday present.
Working on the torch principle the gun became a simple projector.
Hinged along its top edge, it was possible to open the gun so that a film loop could be inserted round its profile.
Two small batteries fitted the butt while the beam escaped at the muzzle.
One of my greatest pleasures was to load my gun, draw the curtains in my bedroom and then crawl under the bed.
I was now completely in the dark and it was here that I would shoot whatever film I had onto the skirting board of my makeshift cinema.
[LES COLEMAN]
BEING
I was the bad gunslinger who was new in town, and the snot-faced boy who wore army boots but no socks was the good cowboy.
As agreed, he swung a punch to my chin so that I should rise in an elegant arc of slow motion to fall sprawled in a dramatic contortion on the bar room floor.
I fell hard against the asphalt playground and I felt the pain that had not been visible on film.
When my brother looked through his new spectacles into the Cinemascope format of the wide mirror I saw that he gently let his lower jaw fall a little so as to give himself more of the thin-faced appearance of Hank R Marvin in Summer Holiday .
Once, when he was the centre of attention at the youth club I saw him do it again.
The other people seemed not to notice.
They were all being in other films.
[TIMOTHY EMLYN JONES]
ESSOLDO AND ENVIRONS
For me, movies and play were enmeshed during childhood, a certain cinema and its environs being both stimulus and setting for my juvenile adventures to the extent that, thirty years later, its contours and hidey holes still haunt my dreams.
When not submitting to its weekly invasion by hordes of kids, the back and sides of the Deco-fronted Essoldo in Chaddesden bore silent witness to our after-school games.
This monolith sat atop an escarpment which accommodated the raking of the auditorium and the levelled hardcore of a car park, and cast its long shadow over an adjacent bit of parkland, a cosy corner of scrub, stream and wood that drew me and my friends to it like a magnet.
We rarely played close to the building which, when not lit up, had something of the baleful haunted house about it.
And the car park was too rutted and stony to permit ball games, far too exposed to sustain our hiding and seeking, tick and  nicking.
This car park was not without charm, however.
In wet weather it was a site for spectacular puddles, a mucky moat from which the picture house rose like a medieval castle.
In one corner of the lot was a sad, wet-rotten arch which bore the legend ‘For Patrons Only’.
just what was a ‘patron’ I wondered?
In another corner was an equally decrepit cabinet which displayed a handful of publicity stills that were changed twice weekly, along with the dayglo signwriting on the marquee, as if by legerdemain.
One day we were poking around in some sodden ashes by the rear exit and found a few slivers of celluloid with images on them.
In trying to conceal his negligence the projectionist had provided me with tangible evidence of the grand illusion.
I couldn't be sure how, but felt that a truth had been revealed.
At the height of the Teddy boy era the local cinema foolishly premiered Rock Around the Clock on bonfire Night.
Bangers punctuated the soundtrack, snow fountains cascaded in the aisles, and the film ended abruptly when a five-bob rocket went straight through Bill Haley's open mouth.
[George Littleblack]
Come five o’ clock on a Saturday afternoon you'd bundle your way out of the pictures, delirious with image overload, to be hit between the eyes by the blinding light of day and a balmy blanket of heat.
You'd hesitate to drink in the hallucinatory detail of the visual field, to assimilate the odd distancing of natural sound, before joyously plunging with your cronies into your outdoor make-believe.
The park was reached via a slippery slope.
As we slid at speed down the escarpment we took care to avoid nettles and barbed wire, then we'd squeeze between the splintery struts of the Essoldo's picket fence.
Once through, we really cut loose.
This bit of park had just enough hint of wilderness to be readily transformed in imagination into prairie, canyon, rain forest, river delta, open sea.
Our hinterland of the imaginary actually consisted of grass tussocks, brambles, a grove of willows, some hawthorns, a beech tree or two, drainage ditches, a slow and deep brook with steep banks, a weir, twin tunnels which took the stream beneath the main Derby to Nottingham road and, upstream, a wooden footbridge and wobbly stepping stones.
All in all, the perfect showcase for a new identity as hero.
I recall imitating a stunt performed by the obscure Buffalo Bill Jnr in a Poverty Kow serial, when he outwitted his pursuers by swinging at speed from saddle into tree.
On dry summer days the dust raised by galloping posses could be evoked by a vigorous soft shoe shuffle in the red Derbyshire clay, your  sandals given spurs by a twig slid in by the outer ankle.
Any film appearance by Robin Hood reinforced a belief that this wooded playground was surely once part of a Sherwood Forest.
Our village had been written into the Domesday Book.
The park itself, only an arrow's flight from the movie theatre, still had the undulations of a feudal field system.
And the ecclesiastical yew wood slightly further afield would, we convinced ourselves, have been a perfect provider of the English yeoman's longbow.
The muscular derring-do of our film heroes inspired us to imitative feats of climbing, usually trees; and their prowess in stalking and sniffing out was echoed in our exploration of sombre, dingy and often damp places.
Up into the light, down into the dark.
The willows between Essoldo and stream were old, stunted and easy to climb.
Some were split and bent almost double by their own mass, which meant you could charge straight up them into the lower branches six feet above ground.
All were hollow, and with care, for there were protruding knots to buffet and bruise you, you could lower yourself into their embrace and experience the exquisite anxiety of claustrophobia and entrapment.
Looking up you would see an alluring smidgen of sky through the spiky branches.
The stream, tumbling over the weir, spread itself and then disappeared into two tunnels.
[The ‘For Patrons Only’ sign loomed over this pool.]
One of these tunnels, which seemed awesomely long, black and terrifying, was, with gumption and at such times as the brook was not in full spate, explorable.
When at last your gum boots got you, bent double, to the other end you could straighten up to see, again framed in foliage, the mature dream gardens of well-off homeowners, their sumptuous spreads a far cry from the fresh plots of intractable clay that fronted our council houses.
Somewhere a big old penny dropped.
Why of course: the Essoldo had been built for these middle class folk in the 1930s —they were Patrons!
[PAUL HAMMOND]
Dear Son, There is a shilling on the mantelpiece.
Do not see any X films.
Get yourself a bag of chips on the way home.
[Mrs Finch]
A HOLE IN THE SCREEN
In the 1940s we lived alongside a cinema, in a small town lost in the southern pampas of Argentina.
The cinema was immediately adjacent to our house, so that every night we could hear the film and imagine what was on the screen.
All of us that is except uncle Eugenio, who had never been to see a film, saying that it was a fraud, all illusion, and that when the lights went up and all the characters disappeared the screen was no more than a rag.
When he saw us coming back from the movies every Sunday, discussing the film, he would say, ‘I don't believe it.
I never would have credited that people would talk about these illusions as if they'd really taken place.’
He regarded us as stupid and ignorant.
If the film had a sad ending aunt Delicia, who always took anybody's love affair for her own, would return home crying.
‘Poor thing,’ she'd sob, thinking about the heroine, and she'd get undressed so that she could carry on crying in bed.
Uncle Eugenio would get mad with frustration, utterly unable to find the words to refute the fact that illusions might provoke real tears.
We convinced him in Holy Week.
They were showing a film,The Life of Christ , and though this was clearly an illusion as well it had taken place in real life, and uncle was very much a believer.
He went in acting very worried, looking at people as though ashamed that they were seeing him in a cinema.
But five minutes into the film he was as possessed as when he was down at the football stadium watching a match.
When uncle Eugenio saw Judas striking a bargain with the Romans he cried out ‘I can't stand this!’ and ran out of the movie theatre.
He reappeared with his shotgun just at the moment Judas was handing over his master.
And so as not to hurt anyone inadvertently uncle Eugenio waited until the apostle was some way from the rest of the crowd.
The hole in the screen coincided with screams and the lights going up and the immediate disappearance of the images.
In the midst of the smell and dust of his incredible deed, and the smoke from the gunshot, it was uncle Eugenio who seemed like an illusion.
[DANIEL MOYANO]
To humour me my patient father agrees yet again to my choice of film.
He has endured most of the French New Wave, and anyway is content if the seats are comfortable and conducive to naps.
This evening my choice is Last Year at Marienbad .
During one of the long corridor scenes dad falls asleep.
He wakes up much later during another corridor scene.
‘Mmm,’ he remarks, ‘that was a long corridor.’
[Pete Ayrton]
HOLY SMOKE
Twice I was at the cinema when it burned down.
The first to go was the Alamein.
Panic ensued.
Fathers deserted their children.
The cowboy film carried on playing.
When we got out there were hundreds watching the blaze.
This was Allah's revenge, they said.
The second was the Gazi.
The fire started in the projection box.
From inside we could hear screams of ‘please, open the door!’
Then the exits burst open and we swarmed out.
Again there was an assembled audience for the conflagration.
Because a mosque stood next door it was said that the cinema had been rejected by Allah as an unworthy neighbour.
Rumour had it the owner of the Gazi burned it down for the insurance money.
A bank was built on the site, a much better class of neighbour for the place of prayer.
[SALAH FAIQ]
PROTESTORS FAIL AS FILM IS SHOWN
Strident protests and strict security checks on everyone entering the Cork Opera House seriously delayed the screening of The Last Temptation of Christ as part of Cork Film Festival last night.
The first public showing of what many Catholics view as Martin Scorsese's outrageous interpretation of the biblical epic drew both predictable and highly unpredictable howls.
The advice of Bishop Michael Murphy to his flock to stay away was heeded.
The great bulk of those who thronged Emmett place last night wanted to see the film, and they outnumbered protestors by a minimum of ten to one.
Extra security was designed to prevent trouble inside the Opera House.
One man was evicted when he was discovered to be carrying two small cans of paint.
What was unpredictable about the protest was a devastatingly subversive counter protest by a small group who said they were present ‘on behalf of the acolytes of Our  Lady of Ballinspittle’ and who said they wanted to ‘protect the rights of blasphemers and heretics and Nobel prize-winning great novelists’.
As the small group of less than one hundred people genuinely opposed to the showing of the film sang hymns and said the rosary, the group of luridly dressed and made up ‘acolytes’ loudly parodied their prayers with phrases like ‘General Franco pray for us’and ‘General Pinochet stand by us.’
Those anti the showing declined to give their names and said they had come as individuals.
Those anti the protestors declined to give their names and said they were there as individuals.
The protestors carried placards saying things like: ‘Jesus, in Him there is no sin’, ‘It's a sin to go in’ and ‘It is the work of the devil’.
Those protesting against the protestors had placards stating ‘Mary Mag was a Hag’ and ‘Jesus was nailed not screwed.’
When the lone girl ‘acolyte’ had the word ‘screwed, torn off her placard by an exasperated protestor she said.
‘My fellow Christians are welcome to my placard, all they have to do is ask.’
A protestor against the showing of The Last Temptation of Christ tears a placard carried by an acolyte of Our Lady of Ballinspittle outside Cork Opera House (photo: Des Barry, 1988)
The genuine protestors were mostly middle aged and assembled outside the Opera House from 7 p.m.
One group of sixteen came from Ballyvourney by bus, another smaller group came from Ballinspittle and there were more from the city.
There were no clerics nor foreigners amongst them and it was obvious that many of those going in to view the film viewed them as a sad little group.
One man said it was significant that this was the 33rd Cork Film Festival and Christ died when he was thirty-three.
‘Maybe the Film Festival will die at thirty-three as well.
I hope it does,’ he said.
Opponents of the film carried pamphlets which they distributed.
These stated: ‘Everybody who calls himself or herself a Christian must now rally to the side of Christ and defend Him, not only with their rosaries and prayers but by protesting in a public and persistent manner against this film.’
This stern injunction was widely ignored in Cork last night.
[DES O'SULLIVAN,The Cork Examiner , 4.10.88]
DARBY O'GILL AND THE LITTLE PEOPLE
I saw heretics beheaded, martyrs burned at the stake, Mexicans massacred, gooks machine gunned, Indians annihilated; and strolled home happy.
But when the death coach came galloping out of the wild black sky to take Darby O'Gill to hell, it fairly put the fear of God in me; more so than any clergyman before or since, however vivid their threats of eternal damnation.
The Sunday sermon was so predictable, as were the plots and stock characters in every cowboy, pirate or war film.
In those early pre-TV Saturday afternoon matinee days at the Ideal cinema in Carrickfergus, only two movies broke the mould for me and lodged themselves forever in the imagination:The Wizard of Oz and Darby O'Gill and the Little People .
Kansas and the land of Oz were sufficiently far away not to keep me awake at night, but Darby O'Gill  lived just down the road, somewhere in Ireland; and his world of leprechauns and banshees was outside my window at night.
The illuminated Moorish fountain in the cinema foyer contained goldfish.
One day a cable shorted and they were electrocuted.
But not killed: instead it put a uniform kink in their spins.
Afterwards the fish swam in jerky circles.
[Paul Hammond]
No matter how corny the characters in the picture postcard parish of Rathcullen, I recognised the fields, I knew the smell of Guinness from drunk men's breath, and my father wore a cap just like Darby O'Gill's.
I do not recall much of the plot but all through childhood and beyond I have remained haunted by vivid remembered images: little leprechauns in mad underground celebration dancing round pots of gold, leaping over plundered treasures; Michael and Katy skipping hand in hand through the fields; the jaunty, laughing, Guinness swilling, devil may care Darby with his pub stories, his sideways philosophy and his battles of wit with the wily King Brian of the leprechauns; but mainly, and most frighteningly, the dreaded death coach with its headless coachman come to call Darby's soul on the one way trip to hell.
The thought of it still sends shivers throughout me.
Therein is part of the magic of cinema: to implant a visual image so strong that somewhere in the psyche the cinematic illusion becomes as real or as powerful as any actual experience.
Hollywood sends back its version of Irish folklore and legend and we buy it with added Technicolor and schmaltz.
put it in the shop window in New York on St Patrick's Day along with forty shades of green paperweights, the lacquered shillelaghs, and the wonderful world of deedeelee eedeelee eedeelee Irishness; skipping dancing jolly little leprechauns in bright buckled shoes and battered hatted bow legged bright red drunken faced gombeen men with little devils in their laughing Irish eyes, mischievous gossipy white haired old women with shawls, pure white skinned colleens skipping carefree through green fields dutifully ready to return in an instant to domestic chores, strapping athletic lads with fine belts and sturdy boots ever willing to put in a fair day's work or hit each other a clout.
I suppose when they string together every possible Celtic cliché, you can only sit back and submit knowing that the stereotype is so overplayed as to be utterly ridiculous, yet at the same time resenting the perpetration of it.
While wanting to dismiss the stereotyping and silly superstition, the snag remains that within all the ballyhoo there are elements of truth.
So instead of being outraged, one is left with a resigned smirk.
How can Darby O'Gill be dismissed as superstitious nonsense when it is part descriptive of a society where even now devotional queues are forming to watch supposedly moving statues.
If there is a bit of a want about such people then the good Catholic church surely provides for it.
Miracles and dramatic visions, wonderful and fearful, are the stuff on which the faith has survived.
The interweave of religion, superstition and legend within Irish history and culture is a living interrelationship which has not died with the coming of any modern age.
Exaggeration is an integral part of the Irish storytelling and myth making tradition and any tale will be followed by the remark ‘sure that's nothin'’ from an unimpressed listener who will then proceed to recall or invent an even more amazing yarn.
The whiskey glass from which King Brian drank is given pride of place as a hallowed relic on the top shelf of The Rathcullen Arms, destined to be the basis of many a tall tale.
It is no coincidence that we move from this shot to a view of the holy pictures and medals surrounding Katy's mirror.
Darby O'Gill serenades King Brian Walt Disney Productions
And then there was the review.
If it was like seeing a long lost friend again after twenty-seven years,Darby O'Gill was comfortingly predictable with touches of the old sparkle but we had lost a lot of common ground as I had moved from a place of romance and innocence through a world of cynicism and calculated sophistication.
Every technical device and dramatic trick was blatantly obvious this time through, and yet there was still a lot of delight, not from smug recognition of prize kitsch, but for a good yarn well told with the perfect characterisation of Albert Sharpe in the title role.
If you are talking of definitives you are talking of Olivier as Richard III, Charles Laughton as the Hunchback of Notre Dame, W C Fields as Mr Micawber, Phil Silvers as Ernie Bilko, and Albert Sharpe as Darby O'Gill.
His bright eyed, dishevelled, toothless, likeable, harmless old rogue is a cinematic gem, crucial to the enjoyment of the whole film by providing an almost believable character focus in the midst of crudely painted cardboard mountains, fake Irish accents, and stick on red sideburns.
What was once awesome fantasy all seems rather tame now.
The magical world of Darby O'Gill was shattered long ago when television came into the houses of Carrickfergus.
The Ideal had to close down, and a vandal's brick made it the Id al, which spelled the end of an era.
[JOHN CARSON]
CLIPPED DIALOGUE
Approaching the 60 watt twilight, rocking on your heels at the leaden doors, your reason already gone into reverse as you pad across the spongey carpet.
Then the skinny fey usher in white gloves neatly snips your proffered ticket in two: with a pair of nail scissors.
Midway through the film the houselights come up, the screen goes dark.
Three men have forced their way in.
They make their way to the front and start peering, aggressively, into the faces of row upon row of startled punters.
In the  paranoid, anguished silence you surmise, or maybe you were told later, that these heavies have been swindled in some drug deal in the scuzzy wine lodge next door, and that they are out to commit violence against the perpetrator.
For a long moment you, and each and every one of your neighbours, pray that you are not this man's doppelgänger.
More or less satisfied we're not, the howling lowlife departs.
But we can't settle.
[PAUL HAMMOND]
I remember a cinema full of screaming kids giving the ‘fuck off’ V sign to a newsreel of Winston Churchill giving his ‘victory’V sign.
Later I understood why our national hero was so unpopular: he was the Tory minister who had called out the troops against the miners in the 1920s, an action much more pertinent in our mining town than the defeat of Hitler.
[Michael O'Pray]
DAD
Some of the front seats on the other side of the aisle were occupied by a gang of Teds.
They took little interest in the film and just larked about.
Next to us sat a man and his two children.
I have this image of them being very poor.
He wore a cap and a longish mac done up at the neck.
The man asked the Teddy boys to be quiet.
He asked them a few times.
They stood up, laughed and fooled around.
The man finally stood up and went over to them imploring them to be quiet.
I remember his children becoming very agitated.
It was then he was stabbed.
He stood there slightly bent for a few seconds holding his stomach and then he staggered and slowly fell to the floor.
[RALPH HAWKINS]
DOUBLE DEATH
Custer of the West climaxes with a reconstruction of the celebrated Battle of Little Big Horn.
Kirk Douglas in the title role finally stands alone on the battlefield in the midst of his dead troops, and exposed to the arrows of the Indians who circle round him.
Yet he is not to die: at the very last moment the image jumps slightly and then we note Custer's singular absence at the centre of the famous circle, which at that moment begins to break up.
Disappeared, literally, without a trace.
Obviously caused by a simple technical fault, this spiriting away of his death gave him a singular nobility totally lacking from the rest of the film.
[PETR KRAL]
PUTTING BACK THE RITZ
Between about 1947 and 1951, when the Ritz in Sheffield, Alabama was still open, my main encounters with the place — between the ages of four and eight — were on trips with my father across the river to pick up the final reports on the daily receipts on all four of the Rosenbaum theatres our family owned in Sheffield and Tuscumbia.
[There were three more in Florence at the end of his route, and two more in Athens, where he drove once a month.]
As soon as we left Florence and crossed the Tennessee River we passed from Lauderdale, a dry county, to Colbert, a wet one, and the difference was plainly visible: a sudden array of beerstands and gaudy neon nightclubs flickering past made Sheffield a sort of Baghdad next to the more prim outposts in Florence, the birthplace of W C Handy, and a bastion of respectability.
Sheffield was the smaller town, but it had a bigger train station, more industrial soot, more prostitutes, and an all black movie house, the Carver, all in close proximity to one another.
Across the tracks was ‘Jack's Chicken Shack’, a Negro hangout that sold bootleg liquor after the county went dry around 1952, and Sheffield began to grow more ashen and dusty, shrivelling into a near semblance of a ghost town.
Today the town shows some signs of coming back to life.
Colbert went wet again in 1982, there's an active local theatre group, and some people in the area are in the process of restoring and reopening the Ritz — which had survived mainly as a warehouse, and briefly as a recording studio in 1957 — putting on plays, and possibly a film series too.
It hasn't shown a movie for over thirty years, but  the pink seashell murals, the stage, and the ‘white’ and ‘coloured’balconies are still intact: fossils of another culture.
When I read Milton's description in Paradise Lost of Satan, fallen to lie in Hell, a monstrous unimaginable bulk, I was reminded of that Odeon.
[Roland Miller]
My father's nightly trips across the river were usually to the Colbert in Sheffield [built around the time of Pearl Harbour, half a block from the Ritz, today a parking lot]and the Tuscumbian [built in 1950, a block from the Strand, today part of a bank].
But if the daily figures hadn't yet been brought over from the Ritz and Strand, he would stop off there too.
Sometimes my brothers and I were allowed to get out of the car with him and peek at the movie in progress while he spoke to the manager or cashier.
In a way it functioned for us like window shopping: a random five minute slice of a feature would enable us to decide whether to see the whole thing at the Shoals, Princess or Majestic in Florence, when it resurfaced there.
But sometimes a double bill would show at the Ritz and nowhere else.
One such occasion was Labor Day 1949, when my parents went off on a holiday barbecue or picnic and deposited the three oldest toys — David [eight], Johnny [six]and Alvin [four]— with a teenage black babysitter named Earl at the Ritz to see Li'l Abner [the early black and white version, with Buster Keaton in a small part]and I Married a Witch .
It was Alvin's first time at the movies, but the other three of us were seasoned veterans by this time.
Jim Crow laws dictated that we all sit up in the coloured balcony, so we followed Earl up the stairs of the separate entrance, located to the right of the box office, and found ourselves in the highest tier of the auditorium.
Down below were the pink seashell murals lit by fluorescent lights, and distant black and white movies on the screen.
Li'l Abner — without the colour of the comic strip in the Sunday paper — seemed bogus, and bogus hillbilly at that; but David and Earl, both schooled in the macho preference for raucous art, liked nothing better than a bogus barnyard.
For Alvin and me, bogus mansions and graveyards were the thing, and I Married a Witch a sweeter brew.
The principal moment I'm left with is a shot of two smoky essences in bottles, the sound of dry autumn leaves rustling through a chill night wind, and the voices of Cecil Kellaway and Veronica Lake, father and daughter, conversing from their adjacent bottles.
Most of this has to do with Veronica Lake's deep, husky voice: a smoky spirit whose name and form collectively conjured up a feminine aura of water, vapour, air, smoke and flesh at the same time; a floating dreamboat that any boy of six would be proud to be married to.
Having just seen Topper at the Princess the week before, I had all I needed to complete my erotic evaporation fantasies.
Indeed, by the time that the credits of René Clair's supernatural comedy came on, the ads had already done their work, and I was already invisibly inside that bottle too, ready to share in Veronica's throaty vibrato.
[JONATHAN NOSENRAUM]
If you live in the Aussie outback you need all the friends you can get.
When I saw my friend Bob Hope in some comedy or other at the age of six I provided him with an imaginary wife, who was called ‘Nothing’.
I don't mean she didn't have a name; that was her name: ‘Nothing’.
You can see I had no great hopes for my future as a woman.
[Deirdre Clark]
SIX PENN'ORTH OF DARK
In the 1930s you learnt how to behave as a human being from movies.
You learnt how to smoke, how to hold a cigarette.
I wanted to become a reporter because I lusted after a belted trenchcoat like the one Joel McCrea wore in Hitchcock's Foreign Correspondent .
Girls kissed with their eyes closed and raising themselves up on tiptoe, because that was the cute shot in American movies.
We believed in Hollywood.
Cinemas themselves were special.
Nobody had central heating, so it was warm.
It was dark: ‘six penn'nrth of dark’ was what people were after.
The cinema was our motel.
And it was opulent in the way nothing else in your life was.
They were called ‘picture palaces’ for a very good reason.
At the Empire, Leicester Square, the toilets were truly lavish: ‘I dreamt I dwelt in marble halls’ had red meaning.
Before the cinema opened the men on the staff were given cigars to puff, so that when you came into the foyer it had that smell of luxury.
There were staff rackets.
Teas were served in cinemas then.
When you wanted tea you could either have a pot of tea, or a ‘cinema tea’, which was a pot of tea and a plate on which was a sandwich with the crusts cut off, which also represented something, and a cake.
It's very difficult to eat in the dark.
We noticed that quite often if people ate the  sandwich they left the cake, or vice versa, so when we used to collect the trays from them we would take whatever was left.
At the back of the stalls there were radiators which had plush curtains and we would shove these cakes and sandwiches under the radiators, and the next time somebody ordered a ‘cinema tea’ we would go to the kitchen and order a pot.
Maybe the ‘cinema tea’ was 9d and the pot of tea was 6d.
We'd then pull out a sandwich and a cake, put it on the tray: nobody could see what they were eating, and we'd pocket the difference.
The stuff could have been under there for days, if not weeks.
I remember in the RAF at Blackpool going to the pictures, and they didn't bother with an intermission.
Tea was served at 4.30 no matter what was happening.
Suddenly the film would stop.
The lights would go up and they would serve tea.
What you quickly learned was not to sit on the end of the row, because the usherettes would pass the trays down the row and as soon as everybody was served they'd give the nod to the projectionist, the lights would go down again, and on the film would go.
When people had drunk their tea they would pass the trays to the end of the row.
If you were sitting there you would have to peer over the pile of cups on your lap.
Originally a concert hall in which Liszt played and Dickens read, Cork's Assembly Rooms then became a cinema.
The usher's name was George, and during the westerns whenever a redskin bit the dust the audience called out, ‘Georgie, take out the body!’
When the Assembly closed the story goes that they found hundreds of dead Indians behind the screen.
[Mick Hannigan]
There were other tricks you could pull.
You regularly turned the heating up before the intermission, when the icecream girl appeared.
If there was anything like a Foreign Legion story, or something like Hitchcock's Lifeboat , when the characters had to ration out the water, you'd slowly turn up the heat.
There were girls who couldn't walk backwards.
Some usherettes couldn't carry the icecream trays: ‘I can't do it, Mr Norden, I come over funny if I walk backwards.’
You wondered what genetic quirk there was.
I was only seventeen and the girl would say, ‘I can't do the ice creams today, it's my time of month.’
Ten days later she'd say, ‘I can't do it, it's my time of month.’
I didn't know enough about the subject to be able to query it.
I was at the Trocadero, Elephant and Castle, as an assistant manager, and there were a hundred and twenty-two on the staff.
It was military, everyone in uniform, and there was a staff parade.
The manager would inspect the ranks.
You had to stand with your hands held out, and he'd  look at your nails.
The public paid to see gleaming buttons, luxury.
Everything had to preserve the illusion.
For example, we were not allowed to show ‘white screen’.
When the curtains part and you see a white screen you know you're watching a screen and it isn't real.
So projectionists had to put a colour tint onto the screen before the first frame hit.
It was showmanship so that the illusion might have force, impact.
The Honorary consult : a slow, moody, almost mute film.
At one point our hero, drunk, mindless, ruined in body and spirit, crashes to the muddy ground, a monument to excess.
From the other side of the wafer-thin wall between Odeon One and Two comes the voice of The Jungle Book's Baloo: ‘I want to talk like you,walk like you, I want to be like you.’
[Chris Proctor]
The Saturday morning club for kids was murder.
I had to announce a big disaster during the war, the fall of France or something, and it was during a children's matinee.
We had to tell them because they might have wanted to go home.
It was Christmas time, and we used to give them oranges and sweets.
This bad news had come through, and of course nobody had television then; not everybody had a radio.
Maybe it was Narvik, although now I can't even remember what Narvik was.
The place was full: twelve hundred kids.
So I said to the organist, whose name was Bobby Page, ‘I'll come up on the organ.’
I announced: ‘We've had this bad news’.
And the kids all shouted, ‘Where's the fucking oranges!
Where's the fucking oranges!’
Unshelled peanuts: after the second house the floor was audible.
You walked audibly.
It was like the whole audience was eating celery.
I had a mate who could crack peanuts between his knees, which was an enormous asset if you had a girl with you.
At the Watford Gaumont, which I managed, people would come in dinner dress and they would have the same seat every week.
[A]you had to remember their name, and greet them by name; and [B]you had to remember their seat.
As a cinema manager you thought up your own publicity stunts.
If the film was, say,Old Mother Riley Goes to Paris , you'd have three of your doormen dressed up as Old Mother Riley, which was a very cheap costume to hire, and you'd build an Eiffel Tower, put it on a barrow and go round the town during the busy shopping time.
You'd give prizes of tickets.
You'd run competitions.
You'd do ‘tie-ins’ with the local shops: you'd sell the Paris idea to them for instance.
There was a magazine called Kine Weekly , which would give a showman's award for the best stunt.
Cinema manager grooms himself before the main feature
At the Trocadero there were gangs.
The tenement slums at Elephant and Castle have since disappeared.
The gangs were called up during the war.
But before that they used to raid.
They'd try and ‘bump in’.
One of them bought a ticket and he'd go to an exit, open the door and his mates would flood in.
These gangs were thirty- and forty-strong, youths in long black overcoats and white knotted scarves, like Sid Field.
It was your job to chuck'em out.
There were pitched battles, so they lay in wait for you.
I took over from a guy who went out the stage door and somebody said to him, ‘Have you got a light?’
As he put his hand in his pocket he was grabbed from behind and they razored his face.
I used to go back home via the local Underground and I'd take six of our Irish doormen with me, all of them six foot three, and they'd take the rollers from the roller towels in the Gents and they'd stand around me, and we would go out in a ‘flying wedge’.
These were tough people.
The gangs would want to watch the film, but occasionally also drag an usherette into the exit.
They'd barricade themselves in.
We had a couple of usherettes raped.
We'd ring up the police, who would take a bunch of these youths into the same exit and do'em over.
At the Troc we had a list of troublemakers, plus police photographs, nicknames and descriptions, above the cashier's grille.
There was one lady called ‘Toss-Off Kate’ who used to go round the audience and sit beside various isolated gentlemen and ask them if they wanted to be serviced.
What I liked about her was that she charged less in the 6ds than she did in the 1/3s: she had a sliding scale.
At the Trocadero there were always six hundred people waiting in the 6d queue.
We did four shows a day.
As we took one house in the queue would form again.
An enormous bomb fell on a place nearby called Spurgeon's Tabernacle, so close that it blew in all the windows and knocked the marquee for six.
Nobody left the queue: they weren't going to lose their place, they'd been queueing for an hour.
People came anticipating a double feature.
They'd ring me up and say, ‘What's the also?’
You had two films, the first feature and then the ‘also’.
We got top West End variety acts.
We had an orchestra, an organ, two major feature films, all for 6d.
We did opera.
We played circuses  there.
The stage was wide but it had no depth.
When we had the circus the lions were put behind the screen, but we were showing an MGM picture and every time the lion at the beginning roared the lions at the back would answer him.
The auditorium of the Holloway Odeon hit by a V2 rocket, August 1944
I was a relief manager, sent around the Gaumont circuit.
At the Troxy, in Commercial Road, Stepney, they'd have American stars coming over.
One big American came out to do his act and I saw him blanch, and then visibly pull himself together before proceeding.
I went round afterwards and asked him what was the problem.
He said, ‘I've never seen anything like this.’
It was an early show.
He had to come on and be funny at 1.30 in the afternoon.
And the whole front row was full of women who were breastfeeding their babies.
Cinemas had their own magazines: the Gaumont, Watford, had its own magazine; the State, Kilburn, had its own magazine, and I used to write for them and did verses.
It was a community.
People would ring up and say, ‘Can you get Mrs So-and-So, her baby's crying and I can't stop her.
‘So you'd write a carbon-backed slide with this message and project it over the film.
And then you'd hear scurrying feet in the cinema.
I started writing organ solos.
A cinema organ is like a big jelly mould, illuminated from within, a most spectacular thing that changed colour according to whether a major key or a minor key was being played.
I would write parodies of popular songs and my selection would go all around the circuit.
I thought I was Terence Rattigan.
On a Sunday night you used to show different films from the rest of the week.
You'd show films that were old, even in those days.
One Sunday at the Trocadero the chief circle usher said to me, ‘I think you'd better come up to the back circle, Gents, we've got a bloke behaving obscenely.’
So I went up and there was a bloke standing in the middle of the toilets, by the basin, tossing himself off, and I said, ‘What do you think you're doing?’
He said, ‘I can't help it.’
We were showing a Jessie Matthews film called Evergreen , one of her first films, in which she wore long silk stockings.
He said, ‘When I was a kid I saw that film, and I wanked for days on end.
And I've come back years later and it's had the same effect on me.’
The habit of going to see the movie — that sophisticated notion — no, people went to ‘the pictures’, they didn't go to see such-and-such a film.
‘What are you doing Tuesday night?’
’ Going to the pictures.’
[DENIS NORDEN]
While the trailers trailed Anne visited the Ladies, then returned groaning and limping.
She's misjudged the weight of the chromium door and crushed her big toe.
Mary visited the Gents and returned, groaning and holding his head.
He's misjudged the size of the chromium door and knocked himself flat.
Nursing our wounds, clutching foot and forehead, the film began.
Aliens : ‘This Time It's War.’
[Marty St James & Anne Wilson]
WITH A FIGURE LIKE YOURS
I cannot recall the number of occasions I shuffled back in regulation sex cinema garb to see Daughters of Darkness , the lesbian vampire movie that starred Delphine Seyrig as Countess Erzsébet Bàthory and Andrea Rau as her lover Ilona.
In those days I lived with my parents and when the film resurfaced at a local cinema I convinced them to spend an evening feasting their eyes on those sanguinary sapphics.
My father had purchased a box of Maltesers, the chocolates with the less fattening centre, to sustain him through this no holds barred erotic horror film.
With my mother we settled down in the back row.
My father quickly  fell asleep.
He chanced to resurface at a moment in the film when the divine Ms Rau is indulging in carnal acrobatics with the leading male actor.
As she pouted and sighed, locked in an impossible sexual position, my father's leg jerked involuntarily, catapulting the Maltesers onto the floor.
The legs of Jessie matthews in Evergreen
The cinema was bereft of carpets and we all could hear, for what seemed an eternity, was the doleful roll of each Malteser down the incline to its nemesis beneath the feet of the people in the front row.
Not only was the rumble of the sweeties heard by the audience.
On the screen the actor had reached orgasm.
Then he turned his head to one side as if he, too, was listening to the Maltesers rolling past the front row, under the bed on which he and Andrea had cavorted, towards the French windows on the far side of his bedroom, and out into the garden.
[CHARLES PELTZ]
NOT IN YOUR HAND
For Simon and me, short light coloured macs, mohair sweaters, slim Jim ties, tight trousers and chisel toed shoes were obligatory for our adolescent cultural trips to the cinema.
The films were inevitably foreign and subtitled, and even if we didn't understand them it was as though through exposure to some cinematic photosynthesis we would absorb the esoteric and become all the better intellectually for it.
On one occasion, to kill time before a suitably uplifting film, we met at Waterloo station and decided to go to the cinema within the station precinct which showed a continuous programme of cartoons for the convenience of passengers with time on their hands.
This was not entirely true of the matronly middle aged woman and her elderly male companion sitting three seats away from me, as she applied herself methodically to his penis.
What intrigued me was their mutual indifference to an activity I'd always imagined to be both intimate and passionate.
As she ate  Maltesers from the box on her knee, apparently engrossed in the antics of Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck or pluto her left hand seemed not to know what her right was doing.
It felt inappropriate that my introduction to live sex was wholly voyeuristic and accompanied by images from Looney Tunes .
[CHARLIE HOLMES]
Have you ever been the only punter in a big cinema?
The film has been showing to an empty room.
Now there is you.
eventually, guilty about being there, you leave.
Does the film continue to the end?
[Ian Walker]
FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT
Carol, who went to see Jungle Book , has a daughter, so her child is not David, who ate the popcorn.
Snow White was the main feature at the cinema where the choc ice was eaten.
Ann bought the hot dog, so Carol, who did not buy the ice lolly, must have bought the orangeade.
So Tom and Jerry must have been the support film for Jungle Book .
Therefore Carol's daughter is not Julie, whilst Donna was taken to see Mary Poppins , so it must have been Linda who went with Carol to see Jungle Book .
We know that David's mother is neither Carol nor Ann, who bought the popcorn, nor is she Jean, whilst Meg is Simon's mother, so David's mother must be Helen, and they therefore saw Mickey Mouse .
We know that they did not see Jungle Book and Popeye was the supporting item for Peter Pan .
As David ate popcorn, he did not see Snow White , and we know that Donna watched Mary Poppins , so Helen and David must have seen Fantasia .
Mary Poppins was not supported by Bugs Bunny , so Donna must have seen Donald Duck leaving Bugs Bunny as the cartoon screened with Snow White .
Therefore Ann's child, who did not see Donald Duck, cannot be Donna, and must be Julie, who therefore ate the hot dog.
The film combination rules out Donna as the child who ate the choc ice, so Meg and Simon must have watched Snow White and Bugs Bunny , leaving Donna as the eater of the ice lolly.
By elimination, Donna's mother must be Jean, and the programme seen by Ann and Julie must have been Peter Pan and Popeye .
[CHARLIE HOLMES]
In Diner Mickey Rourke bets his buddies that the sophisticated lady will hold his penis on their first date.
He pokes it through the bottom of the popcorn box they share.
She has a healthy appetite.
He wins the bet 
UNCLE SAM
Until I was eight I lived in the village of Feltwell in Norfolk where there was a joint RAF and USAF base.
Although the RAF children came to the local primary school there was little contact between us locals and the American children.
However on Saturday mornings there was a film show, run by the Americans for their children, which the local children could also attend.
I went once, when I was five.
I remember nothing about who I was with or what the films were, I remember only the interval.
Members of the audience were invited to participate in some games.
I volunteered along with four or five others.
An American soldier gave us each a balloon and told us that the winner would be the one who could soonest burst the balloon by blowing it up beyond its stretching point.
We all started to inflate our balloons and eventually one burst.
It was not over then however, as the soldier said that the rest of us should continue until we had also burst our balloons.
One  by one everyone else's balloon burst but I lacked the courage to blow too hard.
The soldier, becoming bored with the game, laconically reached out his cigarette end and burst the balloon in my face.
Thirty years later my volunteering instinct has come through intact but I still mistrust the American Air Force.
[VIEANNE LYLE]
FIRST WESTERN IN THE EAST
A small cinema on a Royal Air Force camp near the Egyptian town of Suez in 1951.
A crowd of people filled the darkened space with noise and smoke.
Other noisy people who were very grey moved rapidly backwards and forwards on the end wall.
These people, one of whom was a whiskered old man, carried guns which they let off frequently, rode horses at terrifying speeds across an arid landscape similar to the one I played in each day, while breathless crashing music and a small dog pursued everyone everywhere they went.
Suddenly all this stopped and blinding bright lights came on.
As I was swept along by the noisy laughing crowd out into the tropical evening I persistently wanted to know what had happened to the dog.
For several nights afterwards nightmares of violence and death disturbed normally peaceful sleep.
A few days later the emergency evacuation of civilians from Suez to within the camp's barbed wire perimeter fence began.
Hand guns were issued to all personnel guarding the convoys of lorries.
At the end of each day my father would return, a holster on his hip.
The pistol would be discreetly locked away in a cupboard.
Soon afterwards we were all evacuated by air, back to England.
Later I learned the old man was Gabby Hayes and the film starred Roy Rogers.
[MIKE LEGGETT]
My friend was followed from seat to seat by a dirty old man during He-Man and the Masters of the Universe .
She'd soon had enough of this and yelled out, ‘I am She-Ra and I will break your balls!’
That did the trick.
[Gerry McCarthy]
GATEWAY TO THE STARS
It was a life-size cutout of Roy Rogers on Trigger that held me.
It stood in the entrance to the cinema: the stetson, white suit, palomino horse, silver spurs.
I kept wondering what it had to do with the cowboy we were going to see on the screen.
Similarly, I remember peering through the expanded grille they drew across the cinema entrance when it was closed.
Although the movie had ended they, the stars, were still visible in the publicity stills behind glass just inside the entrance.
I was fascinated by these glossy black and white photographs.
I couldn't understand how these moments had become frozen in time like that.
Had they literally cut them out of the film?
Once, a still photograph had slipped from its frame, and lay enticingly just inside the gate.
I reached through one of the diamond shaped gaps between the bars and pulled the curling portrait out.
It felt illicit.
I was stealing something out of the film: I had captured the stars in the act, and they couldn't slip away, off the edge of the screen.
From the age of eight I attended the Odeon in Exeter.
It was the second largest building in the city, next to the cathedral, which was much less prominent.
The Odeon dominated from the highest point in Exeter, surrounded by terraced houses like regular furrows in a ploughed field.
There it crouched, hump backed on the hill, overshadowing everything round about, a Behemoth.
I suppose I had been given a sense of the evil of cinema by my strict Methodist grandparents, who were visibly shocked when once I confessed that I had been to see a film on Sunday.
Inside the Odeon, on both sides of the screen, up the soaring walls, ran a frieze of cartoon characters.
They seemed to ascend two giant rainbows: Snow White and her Dwarfs, Mickey and Minnie, Pluto, Donald and his nephews, Popeye and Olive.
I remember these figures illuminated from behind, like giant shadows.
It was as though they were marching up great soaring bridges to get on to the screen, where they would enter into the films we had come to see.
Then there were the sweeping layers of thin gauzy curtains that swished elegantly back to reveal the screen.
Sometimes this happened after the film had  begun, when the curtains rippled the frame round the black and white British film censor's certificate, like a giant bank note.
In a dream I went to the pictures, in Germany I think.
I paid in gold coins and got change in jewels, amethysts in gold mounts.
The audience sat in a warm honey glow, drinking tea and eating richly iced cake.
You appeared on screen, pretending to be a bush, a bush with round purplish leaves and pale green shoots.
[P P O'Leary]
I could never get over the transformation of the vast auditorium by the dimming of the lights, the beautiful changes of colour on the curtains, and the anticipation brought on by the roaring lion, the muscle man with his gong the snow capped mountain, the searchlights probing the 20th Century.
That moment seems in retrospect to have been more exciting than any of the films that followed.
The 20th Century Fox logo always made me think we were about to see a war film, as the searchlights that had woken us in London in the blitz always preceded an air-raid.
Even in peace time Exeter, bombed London, in reality and on the newsreels, was hard to dislodge from my mind.
[ROLAND MILLER]
THE FACTS OF LIFE
The three major cinematic events in my life have functioned as harbingers to major changes in my own life, after which things were never quite the same.
The first one, the first time in fact that I can remember going to the pictures, was being taken to the cinema in Lewisham by my mother to see Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs just before the outbreak of the Second World War.
For a child of five this was a terrifying experience, although it was meant to be a birthday treat.
The fact that it had a happy ending was immaterial to me.
As far as I was concerned it was a nightmare, and merged in my memory with actually being evacuated; the kids going down to Ladywell station in a crocodile on one side of the road, clutching oranges and bars of chocolate, and the mothers on the other, weeping and wailing and shouting to us across the street, lots of dwarfs and lots of Snow Whites.
The second one: having got over the actual evacuation and the idea that I probably wouldn't ever see my mother  again, being evacuated in itself was great.
Our school was evacuated to Hadlow Down in Sussex, just about where the German bombers used to off-load their bombs to save themselves the trouble of having to go all the way to London.
There were a lot of French-Canadian soldiers stationed in the area, together with British and Americans, and a weekly film show was put on for all-comers in the Methodist chapel on Saturday nights.
The first, and only, film that I can remember seeing there was Sergeant York , the dialogue of which was very loudly interpreted by the more bilingual of the French-Canadians for their monoglot mates, much to the annoyance of the anglophones.
I think also that aspersions were cast, as asides, on the true soldierly qualities of Sgt York, and hence on all American soldiers, and a three-way fight broke out among the French-Canadian, American and British, to a background drone of German bombers wending their weary way to or from London, or circling in a desultory fashion prior to dumping their bombs with a dull thud on the surrounding countryside.
The very next day, Sunday, I would have to attend the same chapel in its religious function, and the fact that the previous evening it had been a battleground for people who were supposed to be friends and allies, while the ‘enemy’ got on with his job uninterrupted outside, led to a more or less permanent confusion in my mind, which I now believe to be totally justified, between violence and religion, and between fact and fancy [or film].
On screen Peeping Tom .
Possessed by the movie camera with which his sadistic father tortured him in childhood ‘Tome’ skewers his girlfriend with a stiletto tripod leg while he films the grim business.
My companion leaps from his seat and himself shoots the scene with his Bolex.
An umbilicus is being tugged.
[David Curtis]
The third one: once the buzz bombs started to come over it was at last realised that it wasn't a very good idea to have children evacuated directly on the flight path between Germany and London, and we were all shipped off to other locations, myself to Teignmouth in Devon.
There, in the only cinema, we had a sadistic manager who delighted in not letting the kids into ‘A’ films unless we could con a grown-up into buying the tickets and going in with us, after which we would split up and go our separate ways, ourselves to the front row if possible, otherwise as near to the screen as we could get.
But on one mysterious occasion the sado-manager waived the rules and waved us in: we couldn't understand this behaviour at all, but took up the offer nevertheless, putting it down to grown-up inconsistency.
The programme took its usual course, until it came to news time.
The wartime commentator's jingoistic jangle was this time replaced by a solemn voice, and we were confronted with pictures of moving skeletons, some of them smiling weakly and making slow gestures.
This was the newsreel of the liberation of Belsen, and I think that I have thought about those images every day since.
Before that I had never known that human beings could do such things to others, but after that I knew.
[JOHN FURNIVAL]
A grim, angst-filled film by Ingmar Bergman became ludicrously enjoyable through the persistent hiccups of the person sitting in front of me, which provided a perfect counterpoint to the strangulated Swedish voices onscreen.
[George Littleblack]
WEEPING
As in a waiting room I sit.
Surrounded by breathing, close enough to neighbours to touch knees.
The seats are cushioned, and in the dark I am waiting for more than entertainment.
I am waiting to be bathed in film.
It is a matinee performance of ET The Extra-Terrestrial .
I am not lost in the story, it is like reading a comic on the bus.
Children chatter loudly.
What are they talking about?
Anything and everything.
A conference hall for the under elevens.
Towards the end of the film attention is gradually transferred to the screen.
Sadder things are happening.
ET is homesick.
He might die.
I am jarred by the sound of these children weeping.
[FRANKIE EARNSHAW]
THE PASSENGER
That shadowy world of small rooms visited by regret, of dim streets crossed by half familiar figures, of meadows steeped in yearning, beckoned to me.
There must have been a draught because I wrapped my coat around my knees.
As I left the cinema I was seized in an irresistible spasm of shivering.
My jaw hurt, my teeth were locked in  an instinctive bite, and when released they chattered as if propelled by clockwork.
It took ten minutes of brisk walking to get my blood flowing again, my consciousness slowly returning from a journey beyond my body.
I boarded a train.
The suburban setting of my destination was unexceptional, simply a footbridge over tracks, a few solemn railway buildings, a row of villas, a couple of trees.
And yet, alighting in the sunshine from the trembling train I found myself in a space transfigured by the three stages of the passage through the underworld that is matinee cinema: the transition from day to night; the day for night of the viewing; the transition back to daylight.
[ROGER CARDINAL]
Cinema in Buchenwald
UM AL-MARHOOM'S SHADOW
I was six years old and had to be accompanied to the cinema by my two brothers [five and seven].
They had refused to go with me, claiming they wouldn't be able to face their friends after that.
My father threatened to punish them, so they were forced to accept my company.
The cinema we went to was the Al Washash summer cinema, situated in Baghdad City.
We had to be there one hour before the beginning of the film in order to get seats in the front row.
Following our father's advice both brothers made sure I was seated between them, at the same time refusing to exchange a word with me.
It was inevitable that I was fully occupied by my fear rather than watching an Egyptian film,Abla and Anter , a classic Bedouin love story.
Half an hour later an ambiguous shadow covered the screen, then manifested a distinct movement.
At once I turned my head to the source of the light.
My eldest brother told me to keep still.
The same shadow kept covering the screen at regular intervals.
Shrinking into my seat I murmured, ‘It has to be God.’
Or was it part of the film?
Ten years later I discovered while watching the same film on TV that the shadow wasn't part of the film after all: it was Um Al-Marhoom's shadow [Um Al-Marhoom is what we in the Middle East call the woman who is left without children after the death of her only son], trying to sell some boiled chickpeas to us children.
[HAIFA ZANGANA]
Photomontage by Ian Breakwell, 1980
WHITE SQUARE
I remember watching flecks in the concrete passing under the tips of my black button shoes and the flaked brown paint of the step of my pushchair.
Then some grass, and a dark green van, and doors opening at the back of it, and grey flat people moving in a white square.
Must have been the early 1940s, my mother taking me for a walk near Bostall Woods during a gap in the bombing.
Some Ministry of Something travelling information film.
Towards the end of the war another memory.
A trip to London to visit my ‘Aunt’ Josie.
A bigger white square.
A man playing a ukulele and riding a bicycle across the sky.
Then a live magician on the stage; some singing; the flat white again and men firing rifles across dead buffalo at the rest of the herd.
Afterwards I sat on the mat that smelled of dog while my mother and Josie talked.
About Josie's son drowned at sea and her daughter Irma's fiancé ‘missing’.
He was in the Fleet Air Arm.
I liked those words and repeated them often to myself.
[TOM RAWORTH]
SNAKE SCALE
As a kid the scale of the film images was frightening, and then there were the myriads of dots, scratches and lines, accompanied by clicks and plops on the soundtrack.
I remember trying to make sense out of these ghostly darting signs that overlaid the story of the film, which most  of the time I couldn't follow.
When I was older, eight or nine, I used to take a large piece of plasticine to the pictures and make what was appropriate.
Once, during a jungle film 1 made a snake by rolling out the plasticine on the back of the seats.
At a particularly exciting point I dropped it between the seats in front, and insisted that my parents ask the people to look for it.
After some time, and the lighting of matches, I got the snake back covered in fragments of crisps, popcorn and cigarette ash.
[MAX EASTLEY]
A MOTHER TO ME
My first visit alone to a Saturday matinee at the Queens, just off the docks in Whitehaven, next to the Quay Street Roman Catholic chapel and infant school I attended.
In the serial Superman was left in the final frames pushing desperately with his outstretched arms at the sides of a tunnel melting into a hot, dangerous, black treacle-like substance which threatened to engulf him.
The image was awesome and utterly seductive.
My second memory is of another matinee film, but not a children's one.
In its final moments a sophisticated urbane man in a nightclub is led discreetly through a back door into a room which is a mortuary run by nuns, one of whom shows him a dead body drawn out of a wall on a slab.
The scene has never left me.
I was seven years old or less.
In my third memory my mother takes me to see Chaplin's Limelight .
I know she liked the theme music.
I also knew then that seeing the film at a matinee on a weekday was an illicit pleasure for her.
My father would not have approved.
I had to be told which character was Chaplin; he was so old and looked nothing like the silent comic I knew so well.
All these memories are connected incoherently to my mother: the oozing uterine passage closing in on Superman; the dead man disclosed by nuns [so pretty and so erotically close to the nightclub]; and the sadness of Limelight where, sitting in the dark with her I knew her pleasure at the tale was different to mine, an adult one, beyond me.
So much that is inexpressible in our relationship survives in memories of late afternoon empty cinemas in a small northern town in the 1950s.
[MICHAEL O'PRAY]
Two locals were scrutinising the forthcoming attractions outside the tiny cinema in Glenarm, Co.
Antrim.
‘Singapore .
Do you suppose it's a western?
[Noel Spence]
REVENGE OF THE ‘D’ STREAM
Sunday nights have always been a problem for the serious cinemagoer, since this is the night that brings out the lads whose parents don't make them go to bed early before a fresh week at school begins.
One Sunday night at the Wood Green Odeon a group of youths and girls were making so much more than a tolerable racket that I eventually asked them to quieten down.
Some hope.
Humiliated, I decided to fetch the manager.
The usherette assured me that the manager would do something about it but he was busy just then with the projectionist, so she would pass on my complaint when he came down.
After suffering another half hour of mouth farts and high-pitched giggles I was stiff with indignation: at the rabble, at the management, at my ‘don't make a fuss’ partner.
Why does nobody else seem to care?
I care.
Gary Cooper cares.
Marlon Brando cares.
This was an occasion that required character.
I'd go it alone and rid this cinema of the bums who terrorise it every Sunday night.
Striding boldly over I fired a sharp round of insults.
Wounded, the punks were stunned into silence as my vitriolic invective ricocheted around the stalls.
I was stopped short by torchlight in my face.
At last here's justice, I thought.
A black suit was stepping in to take the bodies away.
‘All right you,’ he said, shaking the beam in my eyes, ‘out!
I've had complaints about you.’
The wild bunch were giggling helplessly as I was escorted, proud and unprotesting, to the exit.
Tonto followed with the coats.
[CHRISTINE HAMMOND]In 1958 there was only one television in our street, and when the Lone Ranger made his weekly appearance it was like a mini-cinema in John Logue's front parlour with about twenty of us clustered round the little walnut cabinet.
Our only hope for a TV of our own was our uncle John Hep who did the bins and could always be relied on for an old radio or a gramophone.
One day he excelled himself, turning up with a piece of furniture the size of a large sideboard which housed the coveted television set along with a radiogram and a place to keep your records.
It was corporation booty however, and it was only reasonable to expect that this early entertainment centre might not be firing on all cylinders.
In fact the only parts that worked were the radio and the sound on the television.
It was ours though, and Mrs Logue's parlour had been getting a bit rough lately.
So we used to sit and listen and try to work out what was going on, which gave the Lone Ranger even more mystery.
Then came a very special occasion.
Not only was the Ritz showing The Lone Ranger and the Lost City of Gold on the screen, but the Lone Ranger himself was going to make an appearance ‘In Person’.
My older brother and I immediately laid siege to our mother to let us go.
The first main feature we had ever seen.
Fantastic!
Like visiting the Sistine Chapel after having only read the Thames & Hudson Michelangelo in braille.
Then the actual Lone Ranger appeared.
He strode out onto the stage in his pale blue suit amid shouts of ‘Where's Tonto?’ and ‘Take off your mask!’
My brother and I had already discussed the possibility of this not being the real Lone Ranger but an impersonator dressed up, and when our man appeared we knew.
His trousers were too baggy.
[JOHN KINDNESS]
KEYNAS AND CHIV IN RATBY
The sign over the box office of the Majestic cinema, Ratby, Leicestershire in the mid 1950s read: ‘It's warmer inside’.
In summer the word ‘warmer’ was covered by a wooden panel, hung on nails, which read ‘cooler’.
Beneath this, another sign reassured us that ‘This cinema is treated with DDT’.
The cinema was built on a hill, giving a natural rake to the auditorium seating.
The back two rows of seats, from which every alternate arm rest had been removed, were for ‘Couples Only’.
At the age of nine I wondered how I would handle my eventual initiation to the back row seating.
The occasion arrived in June 1960, for a screening of Samson and Delilah , with Victor Mature and Hedy Lamarr.
The front rows were a different world.
These seats were the province of yelling, farting, belching gangs of adolescent males, the bane of the long-suffering manager, Len.
It was a toss up whether to try for acceptance in the front row ranks, or work towards qualifying for the back row.
One night Len's wife, a small woman, had repeatedly asked a trio of Teds from the next village to cut down their noise and stop carving the backs of the seats.
On her ice cream round she lost her temper, bringing down on the head of the ringleader the entire tray of ice cream.
Tubs, wooden spoons, choc ices everywhere.
And silence.
In the centre of the screen was a dark, dribbled patch, a constant feature of every close up kiss, jungle scene and war torn sky.
In the late 1960s I went regularly to the plaza cinema in the Isles of Scilly.
In the middle of the screen was the same dark patch.
The two most notorious characters of the Majestic front row gangs were Keynas and Chiv.
Keynas was short, round, swarthy, with matt black hair and an oily burgundy Ted suit.
Chiv was tall, broad, fair and clean cut, ruddy faced, shirt collar open even in the depths of winter.
Keynas and Chiv were inseparable.
Always in the cinema, always wisecracking, often thrown out before the end of the film, but always back next time.
Sometimes they would sit on opposite sides of the aisle so that they could turn their banter into a public performance.
‘Eyup Chiv, a yo farted?’
‘Wornt mey Keynas.
Musta bin the bugger beyind me.’
My mother told me once that on November the fifth someone in the audience had thrown a firework at the screen and the people in the film jumped.
[Max Eastley]
Another night, during a close up shot of Yvonne De Carlo, Keynas called across the cinema: ‘Eyup Chiv, shey's got the kinda gob tuh smoke a prick!’
And when, as often happened, the screen began to yellow and darken, the cry would go up from the front rows: ‘Purra nother bob in Len!’
Then Len, who was also the projectionist, would adjust the carbon rods and brightness would be restored.
But if Len had nipped out the back for a smoke, the cry would go unheeded, the screen flickered and faded into blackness, then all hell would break loose.
Whistling, rapid stamping, cheering, hurling of wrappers, cartons and ice creams [which would explain how the screen got stained].
Towards the end of the final reel came the scrape and swish of the velvet curtains being swept across on their metal rods followed by the clank of the push bars and the sudden rush of cold night air down the back of the neck.
A sure signal for those in the ‘Couples Only’ seats to adjust their dress, and the rest of us to prepare for the pre national anthem stampede.
With the crescendo of the closing music the audience scrambled for the exits, leaving national servicemen and isolated royalists standing to attention.
It was half a mile to the chip shop, so you had to get a head start.
I left the village in 1963.
By that time the cinema had closed down, sold to a firm making fibreglass covers for pneumatic drills.
From time to time I have had vivid dreams in which the Majestic has again been open for business, the glass cases full of photographs, lit up, with posters advertising wonderful movies covering the outside walls.
In 1986 the plastics factory caught fire and the building was razed to the ground and the dreams have not recurred.
[CHRIS GARRATT]
TE HOKINGA MAI KI WHANGANUI
The Maori name for the New Zealand Film Archive is Nga Kaitiaki o nga Taonga Whitiahua [The guardians of treasured images of light].
The most significant of the Maori films in its care are those made by James McDonald during expeditions to various parts of the country in the 1920s.
The lengthy restoration process has included, besides the usual preservation and repair work, the translation of all intertitles into Maori by tribal experts, and the return of the films for screenings amongst local people.
So now after all these years we are taking He Pito Whakaatu i Te Noho a Te Maori i Te Awa o Whanganui (Scenes of Maori Life on The Whanganui River), made in 1921, back to Koroniti.
It is dusk when we arrive.
We are cold and cramped, and apprehensive about our reception, the adequacy of our response to the speeches of welcome, and our awful singing.
But because the two meeting houses are enveloped in giant tarpaulins ready for overnight fumigation there will be no official welcome.
We meet our local hosts, and in the dining room tea and lamingtons are waiting.
While the equipment is being set up people come in from their work outside and visitors start arriving from up and down the Whanganui river.
By the time dinner has been eaten and evening prayers conducted it is eight o'clock and about a hundred people have gathered.
There is a vocal, direct reaction to all the films on the  programme.
Great interest is shown in the activities and scenes depicted: the skill and panache with which cat's cradle is demonstrated is commented on, the speed and technique of the weavers astounds, the making of crayfish pots and operation of eel weirs is studied intently.
The whole hall is convulsed to see children elbowed out of the way while the adults take over skipping ropes and doubledutch, 1920s style, fills the screen.
There is a contemplative silence when divinatory sticks move seemingly of their own accord.
In the Wimpy after 2001 we imitated the apes banging their bones on the ground with our knives and forks on the formica table.
‘Daaah Daaah Daaah Da!
Da!’ me and my brothers sang in chorus.
[Melissa Benn]
More profound and moving is the direct communication which the film opens up between the living and the dead.
The children in the film are identified as the brothers and sisters of the elders among us.
The adults are their parents, grandparents, aunts and uncles.
Most are known by name and some are greeted as if they stood before us.
The effect, though tears do flow, is not maudlin.
personal characteristics are laughed at, family likenesses in the present generations are pointed out, even among the pigs and dogs which still wander around the village.
After the film some of the elders talk to the group about the effect the films have on them, of seeing people they still feel spiritually close to on the screen, of the inheritance they have received, and the traditions they want to pass on.
For some, the step back in time brings only sadness, for others what they have seen will provide an impetus for the future.
We all feel touched by the greatest gift our ancestors have handed down to us.
For a while there are speeches, then half the hall is up, performing song after song for us, the visitors, and for themselves as their pride in being Ngati Pamoana manifests itself.
At last the mattresses are brought out.
It has been both exhilarating and draining and we have to work tomorrow, so we put in our earplugs and pull our sleeping bags over our heads while all around us the talk goes on and on.
[SHARON DELL]
Ko étehi whanganga a te Máori/Aperahama demonstrating method of measuring, Loriniti 1921.
Photograph by James McDonald, courtesy National Museum of New Zealand
MIVVIS AT HIGH NOON
A day of B westerns brought in fans by the droves.
Members of western clubs from all over the country converged on a private cinema in Kings Cross.
Each group was dedicated to a particular cowboy, be it Red Rider, Tom Mix or Randolph Scott.
Their attire was that of their hero, complete with guns and leathers.
Hundreds of them assembled outside the cinema, and a group of Asian cowboys from Handsworth staged a shoot out in Grays Inn Road.
Self conscious in my normal clothes I seated myself at the rear of the upper stalls.
After the first two films there was an intermission.
Ice creams and soft drinks were to be served.
The ice cream girl must have had a lie in this Sunday morning, and she arrived towards the end of the film showing prior to the interval.
As the film ended she faced the darkened cinema.
When the lights came up the girl looked at the audience, her mouth slowly opened and on her face was an expression of incredulity.
The armed and thirsty outlaws were rising from their seats and moving towards her with jangling spurs and cap guns.
They had one thing on their minds and she was it.
The punk ice cream girl with the Mohican hair cut fled stage left.
[JOHN WELSON]
MAORI COWBOYS
In New Zealand's’ King Country' — so called because of the Maori kings who fought a guerrilla war against the settling English — Maori lads fresh from rounding up the droves of merino sheep from the bush clad hills would have a night out in the one horse town and go to the fleapit.
They'd cart a case of beer and their heavy saddles into the cinema under the cloak of darkness and, sitting astride their saddles in the front row, would cheer on the cowboys and ride rough with them, Waikato 4X in one hand and their stetsons in the other.
They hooped and hollered with john  Wayne, Sitting Bull, Doris Day and Jack Palance, thirsty for the shooting and the scalping, riding hell for leather through gorges and down hillsides.
Their hats sailed up, whirling black against the screen, as the dust rose from the red plush seating, while in the back rows the disapproving dentist's wife, would shake their heads and tut tut at the rowdies down front.
[ALYSON STONEMAN HUNTER]
MEN ON HORSEBACK
Because I found historical films about men on horseback so moving I was pleased when my then wife, Jenni, set to writing a book about the wild west.
She wrote it in Nairobi, where I had a university job from 1968 to 1971.
It was an exciting time, in retrospect a brief golden age between the end of colonial rule and the point when the repressiveness of the Kanu regime grew so blatant that disillusion, new East African writer would emerge, following in the  footsteps of my already famous colleague, who then called himself James Ngugi.
The first Kenyan African novelist was a man of anger, developing the marxist position that would eventually bring him detention without trial for a year, followed by exile.
After an argument about politics and poetics on the verandah of the Norfolk Hotel, I would often go with Jenni to the movies.
Nairobi commonly saw Hollywood films before they reached Britain.
We were not starved of new westerns in that era when great old stars were playing aged gunfighters and movie squabbled with movie on the ideological terrain laid out by the war in Vietnam.
I was captivated by Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid .
Newman and Redford seemed to express the youthful, anarchical values of 1968-and-all-that.
Then came a conference of the English departments of the East African universities at Moshi, in Tanzania, a wonderfully beautiful place near Mount Kilimanjaro.
As wagtails flittered over the swimming pool, Jack Mitchell heard me admire Butch and lectured me sternly.
Jack was a gingery Scottish communist normally domiciled in East Berlin but then teaching in Dar es Salaam.
He had not been one of the late Stalin's critics, but I liked the way he sang his large repertoire of Scottish folksongs and I heeded him when he denounced Butch and Sundance.
‘Arrogant American imperialism.
Look, laddie, it takes the entire Bolivian Army to wipe out two gringos.
The Wild Bunch did not seduce me.
We went to see it with Ngugi and his wife Nyambura.
I found the film's final frenzied violence detestable.
At the end, I turned half in shame towards Ngugi, who merely grunted.
I fancied that I knew what he was thinking; much like what Jack would have thought.
Back in Britain a year or two later, I was one of a panel collected to perform before a group of young Americans who were paying Richard Demarco, Edinburgh's most flamboyant cultural entrepreneur, for the privilege of drinking the wisdom of the New Scottish Enlightenment at source.
The issue of violence in the arts came up.
Another participant was an elderly Orcadian poetess prone to say very, very softly things such as‘life is like a glass of pure water’.
When I suggested that The Wild Bunch was a prime example of nasty, unartistic violence, she reproved me.
‘That,’ she said, her voice echoing with the cries of oystercatchers and lapwings over remote beaches where seals rolled and basked inshore, ‘That is one of the most beautiful films ever made.’
[ANGUS CALDER]
TICH'S NIGHT OUT
The Wheel Tapper pub behind the railway station in Taunton was my haven when I worked at the art college there in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Straight off the London train and in the front door.
It was the one pub where students could be guaranteed not to gather in jabbering crowds: the reason was the clientele.
The Wheel Tapper was a cider pub, and the only one in town that tolerated the hard core of tomato-faced cider drinkers who, outside licensing hours, sat talking garrulously on public benches or passed out surrounded by flagons on the lawns of the Floral Gardens.
When the sun went down and the evening turned chill the cider-heads made for the warmth of  the Wheel Tapper bar.
At 9 o'clock I joined them.
The draught cider, poured from wooden barrels, was of two kinds: sweet, which no one drank, and rough.
The latter was aptly named, so tart that the first gulp curled your lips back.
No one called it scrumpy, just as no one in Ireland ever says, ‘Top o'the morning’.
It was rough cider, known wryly as ‘cripplecock’ to those whose lifeblood it was.
Every barrel a different strength, no quality control in those days.
But never less than dangerous and unpredictable, as were its effects.
A domino game was cut short when one of the players clawed his jacket to shreds trying to ward off the spiders.
Another night a man rushed out of the bar and head-butted a double-decker bus.
The next day a father broke his son's arm.
A man playing cards had an open wound in his forehead, blood dripping onto the crib board.
An old woman telling me the story of her life shat herself halfway through the Second World War.
A regular in wellington boots plastered with cow dung ordered a pint, took off his overcoat and hung it up, unaware that he'd lost his trousers somewhere en route.
But most nights it was quiet and uneventful.
One Monday I was the only person out of four in the bar who was not unconscious.
by no means the perfect pub, but as good a place as any to spend an evening in a town which I always thought would make an ideal site for a nuclear test.
As the credits rolled my mother and father, like most filmgoers of that generation, stood for the National Anthem.
But my mother's leg had gone to sleep.
It gave way beneath her, she fell and then rolled helplessly down the aisle.
My father, torn between allegiance to The Wife or the Monarch, remained standing to attention, biting his stiff upper lip.
[Jo Finn]
Tich, my darts partner, was a loner.
When the rest of the crowd turned out at closing time and headed for the Floral Gardens with their carry-outs, Tich bedded down for the night in the public lavatory on the other side of the railway bridge.
On Christmas Day he was moved out by a policeman, and that, he said, was when he lost his faith.
A gentle, amiable alcoholic, Tich supplemented his dole money in the pea picking season, but the soil got into the cuts on his hands and poisoned his blood.
Rough cider destroys one of the healing vitamins in the body if drunk to excess, and Tich was pickled in it.
His face grew puffy, his arms and legs swelled up, and his fingers turned into purple sausages so that he kept dropping his darts.
They took him to the cider ward of the local hospital and a week later he was dead.
But Tich was always happy in his way, and curiously one of his merriest nights was when he and the  The Shepton Mallet pop festival was one of the first and biggest outdoor pop concerts, a drug-raddled campsite without tents, populated by beaded flower children in kaftans and body paint who had hitch-hiked west in their tens of thousands.
Some of them straggled back through Taunton, and being in no hurry to get home settled down in the Floral Gardens, playing guitars and tambourines, smoking joints, dropping acid and chanting mantras.
The ciderheads took an instant liking to these fellow dropouts who also slept rough and were equally unsteady on their feet.
But the old 'uns were scathing about the hippies' chemicals.
‘You don't want to bother with none of that there marry jewarna m'dear, that's a king's ransom you'm paying.
Here, have a swig of this m'old beauty, and it only be a shilling a pint.’
Glug, glug, glug.
‘Wow, far out, and it's organic man.’
‘Oh aah, it be that all right m'dear, you'm grow leaves if you drink enough of it.’
One day we sat there enthralled by Hiroshima Mon Amour .
During the final minutes the woman in front of us exploded.
She's been wearing an inflatable plastic suit that slimmed your body and she'd ignited it with her cigarette.
[Tom Wakefield]
A bond of kinship spanned the generation gap.
The bar of The Wheel Tapper filled up and then one night emptied completely: Woodstock had eventually found its way to the local cinema.
The festival film to end them all, nonstop music and a million people stoned out of their skulls.
Nirvana.
The hippies and the ciderheads alike were keen to see it.
They formed a queue outside the cinema, pockets of greasy overcoats and grubby kaftans bulging with flagons.
Those few citizens of Taunton who walked the streets after dark tut-tutted and averted their gaze as the motley queue filed inside and settled down.
The film was everything they had hoped for and they loved every minute of it.
The miasma of cider, dope, urine and unwashed flesh filled the auditorium, while on screen their American friends wallowed in the mud with glazed eyes.
And when the little bouncing balls came up onscreen, pointing out the subtitled lyrics for ‘Fixin' To Die Rag’, the ciderheads were in seventh heaven.
What was a night out without a sing-song? ln broad Somerset accents they bellowed out the words, waving their flagons in unison.
‘And it's one, two, three, what are we fighting for?
Don't ask me I don't give a damn, next stop is Vietnam.
And it's five, six, seven, open up the pearly gates.
Ain't no time to wonder why, whoopee we're  all going to die!’
Those who couldn't read the words made them up, and Tich, who'd lost his glasses, settled for singing ‘Widecombe Fair’ instead, coughing, spluttering and relishing his last night out.
[IAN BREAKWELL]
AN AFTERNOON AT THE OPERA
When I lived in Dublin at the end of the Second World War, one of my friends was an obsessive film buff whose dramatic recall, frame by frame, of scenes such as the Odessa Steps sequence from Battleship Potemkin or the final chase in Fritz Lang's M often hypnotized even the drunks in the bars we frequented.
One afternoon we went together to see an Italian filmed opera in a small cinema off Grafton Street which specialised in foreign films.
In his usual way, as soon as the film started, George begin to give me a run down on the technical assets I might otherwise be missing.
‘Observe, dear Lionel, the remarkable framing of the leg and its juxtaposition with the Corinthian column.’
And so on.
When, at the high point of the opera,Norma , the stir began to get into her stride with ‘Casta Diva ’, and George into his stride with gratuitous evaluations of the lighting and editing, a woman behind us brought a large bag of herrings smartly down on George's bald head, with the words: ‘Will yer for Jesus's sake hold yer gob while I listen to that poor woman there!’
[LIONEL MISKIN]
SECOND EDIT
On an aeroplane you're helpless.
The film you see is somebody else's choice, and it usually has George Segal in it.
Once I watched a whole movie with the wrong soundtrack.
It was Fletch , and when Chevy Chase spoke it was  Julie Andrews who came out of his mouth.
On Saturdays in those Isle of Arran summers the picture palace became the dance hall.
The splintery stage was then commanded by a gramophone roaring out 78 rpm hits of the period.
Fronting it was a thin moustachioed man confined in a tight suit.
With nothing but a pole up his back and a drum wedged between his legs he bashed away with panache, as if frantically sewing up a leaking willie with giant needle and thread.
[Ron Geesin]
You're trapped in your headphones and trapped in your seat.
You feel helpless, too, because you're watching it in danger.
Cinemas are safe, that is one of their charms.
They're dark and upholstered and warm as the womb.
There's staff with uniforms to look after you.
A plane cabin tries to fool you with the same set-up, but suddenly it meets turbulence, bumps and jolts, and three hundred of you sit there thinking of the drop beneath.
In the middle of A Man for All Seasons there's a ping, and on come the little red signs: FASTEN YOUR SEATBELT.
In front of the celluloid swordfight three hundred souls fear for their lives.
Once, coming back from New York, we were all watching a romantic comedy.
It was interrupted by the captain's voice telling us that thanks to the strong following winds we would be arriving in London three quarters of an hour before schedule.
Trouble was, the film wasn't nearly finished.
So a stewardess fast forwarded it.
We sat, rigid in our seats, as chunks of gabbling plot sped by.
Our suave heroes were transformed into Laurel and Hardy: suburban life speeded up into some manic, coronary inducing rush hour.
How time flies!
We were at our stewardess's mercy.
She had promoted herself into the film's second editor, and slowed it down to normal at the bits she liked, and thought we would appreciate.
These bits were the love scenes.
Suddenly, once they were in each other 's arms, our hero and heroine acted like normal human beings.
According to our blonde stewardess, herself an object of fantasy, all life was a mindless rush, gabbled nonsense, sweaty commuting between the only moments that made sense, the embrace of a man and a woman.
And how beautifully she stage managed it: as we touched down at Heathrow, the final credits were rolling.
[DEBORAH MOGGACH]
BLIND MAN'S MOVIE BUFF
The screen — the sail of the new voyages of discovery
Movies in flight —
the jet held on its course by the steady pressure of an image
Listen — the seeing eye dog
whines in the darkroom
Celluloid begins to yawn and flower
As the atomic submarine approaches the pole
the sailor beginning to crack leaps up in front of the
projector
Across an outdoor cinema screen flaps a heavy
unidentified bird
A berserk laundromatte — the last switches are being
pulled in the control rooms of Atlantis T.V.
The montage gets too complex here — the film splits open
with screams of laughter
The mad dentist is projecting
grand canyons into cavities
baby movies onto atom-clouds
The hands in the laps growing still
as the lava pours over Herculaneum
The hell within the negative —
throats nostrils and all orifices
glow with an unearthly inward burning
X-ray plates clenched between the teeth of skulls grinning
on candid camera
snap into two —
And at last the darkroom door swings open


The seeing eye dog
is tracking the smell of burning
back to a cigarette on a luxury movie-house carpet
— Odour potent as the first
land-breeze
A field of crickets is heard distantly through the sound of
the projector
We are drifting towards a mysterious landfall
The faint ground-flicker of interior universes
within the darkening screen.
[HARRY FAINLIGHT]
KETCHUP ARTISTES
A wet afternoon in Pwllheli.
Lawrence of Arabia squinted across the dunes.
He was wearing a tea towel all right, but Lawrence was a funny name for an Arab and he seemed confused about caravans.
I suspected a con, especially when the shot horses didn't bleed.
The beach had been promised the night before, but rain had obliged an alternative treat.
Going to the pictures fitted the bill: somewhere to go, something to do, a rarity shared by crowds of strangers.
That week it was Lawrence of Arabia .
Next week it was probably The Sound of Music .
It usually was in Pwllheli, until the bingo.
I left the cinema with a rush of questions, mainly about blood, and a wise response answered them all: ‘It's only a film.’
The realisation dawned from that moment.
Films were made up.
They were trying to put one over on us and would no longer get away with it.
Puzzlement gave way to bravado and a new found delight in catching the ketchup artistes at it.
Back home, matinees provided the chance to practise and shine.
For a while it was enough to heckle the love scenes and cackle at disasters.
When the novelty of criticism began to wear off  we set up rival fringe performances.
A bag of popcorn and a seat at the edge of the circle could attract more attention down below than Flash Gordon .
A marble and a stalls back seat could be worth several minutes of noisy bagatelle.
All this was kids' stuff though compared to the break into directing.
We were about ten when nuisance escalated into serious engagement.
Someone pretty old told us moths flew to light.
We already knew films were just projected light, as a spin-off discovery from experimentation with Park Drives.
Luckily, railway stations around Manchester kept their gas lamps well into the age of juvenile delinquency.
The prospect of the moth scam was so exciting we even bought platform tickets so as not to blow it at the development stage.
Captured moths were consigned to jamjars overnight to await the matinee.
The usherette was untrained in spotting sweaty palms.
The film was unmemorable Elvis.
Small guerrilla hands hovered ready to unscrew jamjar lids.
The moths suffered a rousing shaking as the right moment was watched for.
Framed by a swimming pool and women with pointed breasts, Elvis sneered lustily and was clearly about to burst into song.
Off with the lids.
The exquisite timing would have been a credit to the deftest of film editors, but was wasted.
The moths stayed  put.
Rattling the jars dislodged them.
Three or four dropped into the darkness and choc ice wrappers, dead; a few fluttered aimlessly to rest around us; some took off into the vast space above.
Half the faces in the stalls were turned the wrong way, trying to see what the fuss was about in the back row.
Anticipation turned to frustration.
Recriminations flew.
Too many privet leaves had made them dozy.
Not enough holes in the lids had made them breathless.
Suddenly, they'd made it: huge black fluttering blots on the smooth features of a full frame Elvis.
The cavalry had arrived, the dambusters had done it.
Yells of triumph and foot stomping attracted the attention of the manager, who attracted ours with a long cane.
Thrown out, blinking, into the daylight, we wondered if they'd find the jars.
If they did, would the silvery dust mean anything to them?
Some of us wondered about the moths.
We decided they'd be all right eating the bile yellow satin curtains.
And we were famous anyway.
The rest of the week was passed scrawling graffiti in splendid public places.
Next Saturday we were frisked, just like in the films.
The following week we took the Ritzy.
Like actors remembered as great for just turning up, the moths are recalled as gigantic, vivid images when they were probably just spectral smudges.
They made a mark though.
[STEVE BUCKLEY]
NILE ON FIRE
As we enter the darkened cinema it is around 11.30 p.m. and the seats are quickly filling with various rowdies, late-night drinkers and revellers to whom we eagerly add ourselves.
In the cinema foyer the two old ladies who run the cinema are both dispensing and receiving abuse from all sides as to the quality of the night's offerings,Storm Over the Nile and Voodoo Woman .
They are dressed in blue nylon housecoats over knee length silver boots.
inevitable Pearl & Dean advertising slot comes hurtling out of the screen.
Immediately we realise that something is very wrong.
The sound has been increased to such a volume that, as I turn my head as if from a physical blow, I notice rows of heads with their eyes staring wildly and hair blown back as in a fierce gale.
I stumble up the aisle to the immense ponderous tones of a god extolling the virtues of a restaurant in Moscow Road, Bayswater, and pass through some dingy curtains into the foyer.
I try to explain to the two silver boots [now accompanied by the projectionist, drinking tea]what is wrong but I cannot make myself heard even out here.
By pointing to my ears and making signs I eventually elicit the response from the projectionist, ‘I'll turn it down when I've had my tea.’
The first night a girl put her hand inside my trousers was during a Kenneth More film about the sinking of the Titanic .
It was called A Night to Remember .
[Mike Evans]
During the first film,Storm Over the Nile , there is such a storm of noise in the cinema from the drunken audience that it proves impossible to follow the plot at all.
After about an hour when the pies and chips have stopped flying across the screen I notice a strange purple growth, like a cancer cell under a microscope, at the bottom left hand corner of the screen.
Growing in the most sinister manner, it is embedded in a battle scene taking place across the River Nile.
Suddenly at the height of the battle this purple and now orange mushroom bursts across the entire screen, devouring both armies in its path.
Immediately and without any explanation the screen darkens and the deafening strains of ‘Bye Bye Blackbird’ burst from the speakers.
[NICK CUDWORTH]
LE CINEMA AU PEUPLE!
A film festival in one of the poorest countries in the world, Burkina Faso, celebrating the development of authentic, indigenous African cinema.
Last night a group of small children sang ‘L'Internationale ’, uncertain about the words, out of tune, but with an authenticity and optimism that is  no longer possible in Europe.
A double bill in the afternoon.
I sit next to a down and out who has salvaged h is lunch from the bins.
He reaches into his bag, brings out a sandwich, then stands up and inspects it is the projector beam to see what it contains.
He has a classic sense of gastronomic order.
Meat and cheese must come after fish; there is fruit for dessert.
The whole meal takes almost an hour and makes me ravenous.
[Pete Ayrton]
La Patrie ou mort nous vaincrons !
Here, this evening, in a local open air cinema on the sprawling outskirts of a one storey town (Secteur 14), the screening of a political documentary from Ghana with a Radio Moscow soundtrack.
The commentary is largely ignored by an animated audience that talks while watching and participates by applauding the rich images of trays of ripe fruit and tomatoes in the marketplace in Managua, Nicaragua.
Then Comrade President Thomas Sankara stepping off a plane, during a state visit, inspects a row of soldiers and salutes a flag.
L'Ecran africain aux films africains !
The noises of scuttling and rustling on the concrete floor.
Glancing down to see brown rats moving confidently amongst the metal chairlegs, sniffling at the discarded sweet papers and orange peel.
The audience is blithely unconcerned as the rats' rancid pink tongues stretch out to lick gently at pink heels.
[ROD STONEMAN]
MOMA
The film shows at the Museum of Modern Art attract a strange audience.
Very old people who come to all the shows tend to talk throughout the experimental work or leave.
People drift in and out.
The serious remain.
Very big audiences become small ones.
It's a hard crowd to figure.
One night I was there, before the start of the film, a young man leaped onto the stage and announced that he was an unemployed actor looking for a role in a movie.
He pointed to his seat and urged anyone interested to contact him then and there.
Smiling he leaped from the stage and the audience applauded.
We became a more relaxed crowd and 1 remarked casually to the elderly woman beside me, ‘New York's such a crazy place.’
Her answer was less casual.
She replied: ‘Yes, that's because of the Galiciani.
The Litvaks are not funny.’
She paused and continued: ‘the English are Jews.
Gaelic is Hebrew but no one knew this until Pitman invented shorthand and then without the vowels it was clear that Gaelic and Hebrew were the same.
The English are Jews.’
Her hand waved in front of her and she said: ‘My daughter wrote the best art book ever written.
It's across the street in the Donnell Library.
My husband invented radar.
All the books are across the street.’
I consider this as the lights dim.
[LYNNE TILLMAN]
Street scene, Burkina Faso (photo: Rod Stoneman)
STRANGLING IN THE STALLS
Festival crowds here in Montreal are a committed lot.
By the time the two week World Film Festival winds down at the beginning of September most of the cinephiles standing in the long queues at the box office have no idea what they're waiting for; they'll watch anything that moves.
Once in the cinema, openness of mind and concentration tend to be their trademarks.
So it was with some surprise a few years ago that our attention was drawn from the dull French film noir onscreen to the back of the cinema, where a couple were resolving a lovers' squabble.
The man had his fingers around the woman's throat and was banging her head against the back of the seat.
When another patron tried to step in, the enraged lover flew at him.
An usher made an unsuccessful attempt to separate the two men, but it took the intervention of the woman to calm things down.
She guided her emotional mate back to his seat and sat with her arms around him until he tried to kill her again.
This scene was repeated at five minute intervals until the police arrived.
[BARBARA SAMUELS]
CINEPHILES
The National Film Theatre in London shows a wonderful variety of films but obviously has little of the atmosphere of the high street picture palace.
Even the bars and foyers are reminiscent of nothing so much as an airport lounge, an impression reinforced by the tannoy announcements of five, three and one minute calls for Casablanca .
Paris Texas and Roma .
But strange people, outcasts from public cinemas, can become members of the National Film Theatre by anonymous postal application.
So the stodgy respectability of the official state cinema becomes leavened with curious characters.
The tweedy lady, very county, who suffered from some extreme fungoid disease of her feet, which were wrapped in many layers of polythene and which in a public cinema would have guaranteed her a whole row to herself, but at the NFT caused whoever was unfortunate to have the adjoining numbered seat to retain vivid Aromavision memories of particular films.
Colonel Flasher, very military bearing, exposed himself with parade ground precision.
Napoleon's Number One Fan, who during Abel Gance's film was accused by the man in the next seat of masturbating underneath his hat and splashing his wife, but who stoutly defended himself by saying that the unfortunate staining would never have happened if she hadn't nudged him and thus dislodged the titfer from his lap.
And then there was Our Lady of the Leftovers who entered the NFT bar wearing a fur stole and carrying a sequinned evening bag.
Her face lit up with a delighted smile as she gazed at an abandoned plate of half-eaten sandwiches on a nearby table.
She stuffed the sandwiches into her evening bag and continued on her way, her eyes sparkling.
With special affection I remember the metro railway enthusiasts who, confronted by rigorous structuralist films or scenes of sexual and scatalogical excess, walked out of the cinema in baffled confusion during the first NFT International Underground Film Festival and indignantly demanded their money back after having booked for a whole season of what seemed like fascinating specialist  delights: German Underground, American Underground, Italian Underground.
In the first scene of Annie Hall Woody Allen was talking directly at the audience.
The man behind me leant forward and whispered in my ear, ‘Tell that guy to quit yapping will you?
Tell him I wanna watch this film.’
[Timothy Emlyn Jones]
Meanwhile, back in the ‘bar area’ the deadly serious cinephiles for whom going to the cinema had as much magic as attending evening class droned endlessly on.
An elegantly dressed man and an elegantly dressed woman were sitting opposite each other.
She was dressed in a two-piece suit, the skirt just above her knees, and black calf-length boots.
He was dressed in casual wear: grey sweater and slacks with knife edge creases.
He was telling her who, in his opinion, are the most important French film directors, pausing only to adjust the creases in his trousers.
She listened, her little finger cocked as she held her coffee cup poised above its saucer.
As he spoke he broke the seal on the carton of cream for his coffee, inadvertently squeezed the carton, and squirted a little jet of cream up her skirt between her thighs.
[IAN BREAKWELL]
BROBDINGNAG
I don't know how it came to be shown at the Carlton, East Ham, but one Sunday my parents took me to see The Sheep Has Five Legs starring the French comedian Fernandel.
I was nine years old and this was the first foreign film I'd seen (probably the first most people had seen in East London).
As far as I recall Fernandel played all five brothers in five linked episodes.
The part I vividly remember was about a South Seas tramp steamer captain.
The scene was set in a cabin on the boat with two men lone Fernandell and a beautiful Tahitian girl wearing only a grass skirt.
In front of each man on the table was a lump of sugar and sealed in the cabin with them was a fly.
If the fly landed on your sugar lump you got the girl.
The tension mounted as the fly buzzed around the room giving the audience, every now and again, a fleeting glimpse of the girl.
I was already sliding down in my seat trying to indicate to my parents without actually looking away from the screen that I wasn't at all interested, when suddenly there was a close shot of the fly as it settled on her shoulder.
The camera followed it down as it walked across her breast (thirty foot wide) and past her nipple (five foot high).
What a sight!
I sank down further until I could just see over the seat in front.
What a Sunday afternoon!
[JOHN CHRISTIE]
The manager was patrolling the aisles and found a pair of lady's panties on the floor by the back stalls.
He picked them up and courteously enquired of the young woman sitting closest with her boyfriend if they were hers.
With equal decorum she replied, ‘Oh no, mine are in my handbag.’
[Noel Spence]
THE OPAQUE SCREEN
When I was six my grandparents took me to see a film which I was told to observe closely because I would learn lessons about good behaviour and deportment from one of the juvenile characters.
All I remember is that at one point he walked along with one foot on the kerb and the other in the gutter and was told off for limping.
After the film I tried it myself, with similar results.
Since then I have always had trouble with films that were supposed to teach me something, or from which I hoped to learn.
Film shows at school on the manufacture of coal gas intercut interesting views of hot coke being extruded from retorts with dull shots of gas scrubbers removing sulphur compounds from the hot gas.
But neither at school nor at home was there a gas supply.
I knew that occasionally people put their heads in gas ovens, but there was no mention of that.
When I looked to films for information on sexual and romantic matters they were not much help either.
It seemed that in emotional encounters men and women stood face to face, talking excited nonsense while each looked with agitation into their partner's eyes.
Then, unless gangsters broke in and disturbed them, they lay down and the screen went hazy, then the lights went out.
Slide shows were just as bad.
I went to a lecture on hermaphroditism.
The introduction was all about X and Y chromosomes in embryology, and I fell asleep.
I woke to see through half open eyes enormous Technicolour images of baffling genitalia filling the wall.
To this day just to see or  hear the word ‘hermaphrodite’ is sufficient to make those luminous pictures shimmer before my eyes.
I was watching Stalag 17 with my grandmother and being felt up by a dirty old man.
I was disconcerted but the fascination with the film went on.
I was seven years old.
It was an almost empty theatre in Long Beach, Long Island, a tourist spot with a boardwalk and beautiful beaches.
I came out and told granny, she was ashamed of me.
We never went there again.
[Suzannah Hall]
The seeds of further sexual confusion were sown by the custom, in the cinemas of Wellington, Shropshire, where I lived, of spraying the audience with perfumed deodorant during the intervals.
Sometimes I smell that odour as a perfume on women, like sweet Harpic.
Then came military service and a training film on snipers.
Two men with muddied faces and bracken on their helmets are in a ruined building, trying to spot an enemy rifleman.
At an upstairs window they present a life size dummy head: firm jaw, aquiline nose, shining complexion.
Crack!
The head disappears backwards.
Aha, just as they thought, and they have kept a lookout for movement, a flash that reveals the enemy position.
But questions remain as the film continues.
Do soldiers really carry around realistic papier-mâché heads just in case?
If, having signed for one of these heads, they return it with the nose shot off, what then?
Did some firm have a contract to produce these heads, and in what quantities: a hundred, a gross, a thousand?
Is there somewhere an MOD store, perhaps underground at Box Hill, a long wooden building smelling of oil and blankets, with row upon row of heads, snipers for the use of, gathering dust while the rosy, hand tinted complexions fade to chalk and grey plaster?
Code name ‘Warhead’?.
[P P O'LEARY]
THE HEN THAT LAID THE SILVER EGG
At the end of the war my neighbour Mrs Cooper was young Giovanna Boccalon, growing up in Pasiano, an Italian village not far from Treviso.
Those were lean years, without money for trips to the cinema.
But the Boccalons kept chickens.
Giovanna and her friend Ninetta were willing to help with the hens, in fact to provide physical assistance in the premature delivery of eggs.
While Giovanna sang encouragingly, stroked and patted the chicken's back, Ninetta watched underneath for any result.
Patience was essential.
‘With one bound he was free’.
And we were too.
[John Conquest]
On a good day, eggs in their pockets, they would set off knowing the silver screen was theirs.
The cinema was tiny, run single-handed by Neno Rossi, who would store the entrance eggs in straw and then run the projector.
By the time films reached Pasiano they were far from pristine: they might be unintentionally silent and sometimes stopped altogether.
Giovanna would return home, ravished but resentful.
To her criticisms her mother would say: ‘Well, what do you expect for an egg?’
[MAGGI HAMBLING]
FADING EDDIE
Each year, shortly before graduation, the sixth grade class of my elementary school was treated to a day of sun, roller skating, hot-dog gorging and swimming pool frolics at Tones Beach, Long Island.
The day came, and with it a forty days, forty nights style rainstorm.
We felt damned.
I'm sure none of us noticed what must have been expressions of pure panic on the faces of our two teachers and the several parents who had volunteered to keep their own children and their classmates from certain death by drowning in the pool.
Rut some desperate quick thinker had phoned Radio City Music Hall, that palace of film, live shows and the mighty Wurlitzer.
This was long before ‘X’ or any other ratings except those of the Catholic Church, and no one thought or cared to ask what was playing.
We arrived, toting our towels, watched the Radio City Music Hall Rockettes do their synchronised high kicks (a great bunch those Rockettes), the curtains parted in front of the screen, the symbol of the film studio appeared (I've always loved this part, but was it a lady or a lion?), and the title of the film zoomed forward:The Eddie Duchin Story , starring Tyrone Tower, my mother's favourite.
The film ended as poor Eddie met his Maker in a way unmemorable except in visual  terms: he sat at his piano becoming lighter and lighter in tone.
I found myself thinking, ‘old piano players never die, they just fade away.’
I think this was my first conscious experience of cynicism in response to sentimentality.
[ELENA ALEXANDER]
Kids and chicks, Easter matinee at the Stepney Troxy, 1950s
TRICK
There are a couple of sequences in The Gaucho that stay etched in the memory.
In one Douglas Fairbanks tells a woman to follow him and when faced with her persistent refusal, arguing as she does that she cannot abandon her home, he tethers his horses to the latter and carts the whole house off in a burst of white-toothed laughter.
At another moment in the film a door is closed and we see a key in the lock.
The gaucho slips a rug under the door, ejects the key and then recovers it by hauling the rug towards him.
As simple as can be, except that nowhere in the world have I encountered a door with such a gap between it and the floor.
Thirty-five years later I saw the film again in New York.
But the time to ‘recognise’ it image by image had gone; just as the moments of each day fade away, so I'd forgotten it.
A more precise impression remains of Shoulder Arms , seen around the same time.
It concerns the famous sequence in the flooded trench when the soldiers are getting ready to spend the night.
Charlie Chaplin lies down, his body disappears from view, then his head.
Even today I remember my stupefaction close to terror.
Because I couldn't countenance how you could stay under water without being asphyxiated, and yet at the same time I was incapable of comprehending the trick.
Faced with a fact that was visually undeniable I was snared in the total impossibility of ‘understanding’ it.
In short, here was an extremely succinct initiation into the notion of the ‘existence’ of the world, once religious fakery had been eliminated.
[MARCEL MARIEN]
In the sleeper compartment of a train speeding through the night a youth crouches over a naked woman he has drugged with a hypodermic syringe.
The youth unwraps a razor blade and slices through the veins of her wrist, fastening his lips to the wound as he hungrily drinks the spurting blood.
The man in the row in front arches backwards over his seat, his breath sucked in through clenched teeth.
[Ian Breakwell]
WATER AND DREAMS
I fell into a swimming pool.
My mother found me floating face downwards and I was saved by artificial respiration.
After that I had a fear of water, especially the sea, but I learned to live with it and even became a good swimmer.
Then, when I was grown up I saw the film The Sinking of the Titanic and it brought back the terror.
people were floundering in the water.
My nightmares returned at a time when everything was crowding in on me and I couldn't cope.
I decided to commit suicide, by drowning.
I made two attempts but they both failed, each time my fear of water proved too much.
The first time I went back to a lake where I used to go as a child.
I tried to knock myself out with some cider I'd bought, then I swallowed a bottle of weedkiller and started to walk towards the lake.
But I'd bought the wrong weedkiller, it was Tumbleweed and I found out later it's only lethal to tropical fish, apparently I should have bought pathklear which is much stronger.
I was suddenly violently sick and fell into a ditch.
When I came round I felt much better and I turned my back on the lake and went home.
The second time I caught a bus to the coast.
The brambles were head high, my face got all scratched.
Eventually I reached the cliff top.
Down below were lots of fishing boats  and I decided to wait until they returned to the harbour.
I lay down across the path.
Some time later a man came along the path and stopped to ask me if I was all right, I told him yes and to please go away, which he did but I thought he'll go to fetch help so I'd better do it now.
I took off my rings and jewellery and put them in my handbag then lowered myself over the cliff edge.
I slid down until I became entangled in some bracken.
I looked down at the sea breaking on the rocks.
I became paralysed, unable to go down or up.
Then I heard voices saying, ‘Is this where she was?
Here's her bag.
She's down the cliff.’
They must have rescued me, I can't remember anything except my terror of the dark sea.
I don't think I would ever do such a thing again, but when the depression settles on me I'm very vulnerable, and if I went to see a film and it had a drowning sequence in it, or swirling water, then you just can't tell.
people say it's only a film but they don't know.
[LISA MONTAGUE]
BLUE WATER
A John Wayne film.
A fight spills out of a saloon.
A cowboy falls into the horse trough, which is full of bright blue water.
Then he is repeatedly dunked in it.
What I remember is the unrealistic blueness of the water.
I had never seen water that was that blue.
Thirty years on I saw it again, when I started going to the Aegean.
Most days there was that colour spread from the shore to the sky, bigger than a horse trough.
One summer I stayed in Molyvos on Lésvos.
They have an open-air cinema there.
A toilet with a hose to wash it down, a kiosk from which to sell tickets and Pepsi-Cola, and a rude shelter for a projector they never secure.
And a wall.
You sit on rows of stacking chairs.
Intermittently a film is projected at the wall.
All kinds of films.
Films with women with big breasts and cars and fighting.
Cars got the biggest response.
The most forceful shout was for a Toyota  truck on a stand in a showroom.
It was big and it gleamed.
It was in the film to be blown apart.
And there was a man handcuffed to his chair.
In his other hand a grenade with the pin removed so he couldn't put it down to free himself from the handcuffs, and so from the chair, and so from the room.
Lots of explosions in that film.
Lots of advice from the audience: gasps, sighs of sympathy, roars of contempt, screams.
I walked into the college cinema to find the tutor watching the film on his own.
‘This fucking audience is getting me down,’ he said.
‘It hasn't turned up again!'
Coke cans, once emptied, would aec over the heads of the audience.
Good throwers could hit Lee Marvin or Clint Eastwood full in the face.
And always the unawareness of the actors that anything had touched them: not a flinch.
The cans banged and rattled over a fuzzy soundtrack already overlaid with calls to Vassilis to move his head or Kostas to provide a cigarette.
Out of the darkness beyond the white wall, streaks of fireflies: sudden lines of light matching the projected gashes on the film, which would suddenly stop and the lights come up to make an interval.
Often elements of the story would be edited out by the interval.
If the projectionist didn't like the film it didn't get shown, or only part of it.
Sometimes events were shown reordered or shown twice.
Sometimes no picture for a while.
Sometimes no sound.
They sold many Pepsi-Colas.
One night along came Doctor Strangelove , so we went out early to eat before the film started, in a taverna near the cinema.
We chose something quick to prepare.
And they took a long time making it.
And they took a long time serving it.
And while they were taking their time we argued about something else.
Some small argument, but it was immobilising.
As we sat there Doctor Strangelove began.
We listened to the soundtrack through the back wall of the cinema, separated from each other by plates filmed in olive oil with pools of tomato juice, and half finished wine.
Alcohol and heat, unreason against unreason.
And the aural projection of a film mocking unreason, mocking stupidity.
Two years later: Batsi, on the island of Andros.
Another open-air cinema.
The same communality, the same responses.
We were watching a film with many trees in it.
It began to rain.
In the film.
It began to rain.
In Greece.
In the  world outside of the film.
In our world.
We sat in the rain, looking at filmed rain.
Some of the audience calmly fetched additional chairs from a store and we each sat holding our stacking chair over our heads until the shower subsided, in about the same time it took the film rain to subside.
When we were twelve our aspiring sex lives were chronicled by seat location in the cinema.
If you sat with a girl in rows A to F, you'd just met.
F to M you were undoubtedly snogging (mouths closed).
M to P was snogging (mouths open).
While P to V meant access to the inside of a liberty bodice.
I never could believe what they said happened in rows behind V. [Chris Proctor]
We walked home in the dark along the wet road around the bay.
Car headlights made it difficult to see, in the way that an usherette's torch can temporarily blind.
On our right the dark sea which, if the sun were back on, would have been an impossible blue.
[LAWRENCE UPTON]
DRIVE-IN
The perfect evening would be sometime in August when the heat of the summer is distilled and concentrated and the ground in the pine forests has become brown and crackly, the tarmac on the roads quite soft.
At eight o'clock I get into my car, a Chevy with bench seats in the front and the back, no bucket seats.
I drive down the strip past the car dealerships and the drive-in motels with their dusty swimming pools out front.
I stop at the drive-in bank then I drive out the highway to the lake to pick up my date.
We  have a quick swim in the dark, cold water, touching the sandy bottom with our toes as we dive off the raft, the evening still bright, still hot.
Then we drive down to the drive-in restaurant where we eat lots of crap including a double order of onion rings.
One night in 1962 Kurdish rebels entered a Kirkuk cinema disguised as policemen and silently surrounded an officer known to be torturing opponents of the government.
They took him outside and up into the mountains.
Then they threw him over a precipice.
[Salah Faiq]
About 10.00, dusk, we motor over to the drive-in which is showing a triple bill of horror movies.
We park near the back of the lot.
My date gets out of the car to go buy popcorn while I fix up the speaker.
When my date comes back the credits are rolling on the first film.
We settle in to watch.
All of the films are about teenagers getting massacred by monsters.
The first to die are always the ones who have had sex with each other.
The heroes and heroines are nearly always virgins.
This makes my date and me laugh.
There is a lot to do in a dark car late at night besides staring across the roofs of other parked cars at flickering images on a screen.
We turn off the speaker.
[KATE PULLINGER]
IN THE FLESH
In 1970 I was a member of an Anglo-American theatre troupe, the Wherehouse La Mama Company.
One afternoon Beth Porter, an American founder member of the company, invited the rest of us to a double bill of soft core porno movies in Piccadilly.
Eight of us took our places in the small but crowded cinema.
Some of us, including Beth, sat in the front row.
Our four female members were the only women in the audience.
The reason for our excursion was that, back in the USA, Beth had taken a leading role in one of the films now showing.
Being a radical experimental company of the time, given to onstage nudity, we were no strangers to Beth's voluptuous physique and it was hard to suppress our giggles at the absurd movie, in which a deformed, slobbering handyman ogles and gropes our heroine before coming to a violent end.
But our real kick came at the end of the film when the lights went up.
Beth  rose from her front row seat, turned, and allowed the audience to get a good look at her before making her way out.
A frisson of disbelief and unease passed though the male patrons as the woman they had been watching in simulated copulation on the screen materialised in the flesh before their very eyes.
[NEIL HORNICK]
Surrounded by local hardknocks, Bob Golden was the only gringo in a Taos, New Mexico, fleapit.
The film was a western, and the moment John Wayne walked onscreen a rain of knives traversed the auditorium and killed his image.
[Paul Hammond]
YMIR AT THE COLISEUM
The Coliseum in Green Lanes, North London, was originally a Victorian music hall.
Refitted as a cinema in the early years of this century it subsequently became a bingo hall and finally a flood-damaged carpet warehouse.
In the early 1960s one result of shrinking cinema audiences was the Sunday double bill of low budget horror movies.
One of these was a 1957 black and white feature called 20,000,000 Miles to Earth , in which a spaceship, returning from Venus, crashes into the sea.
A canister is recovered from the craft, the contents of which solidify into an at first small creature called an Ymir.
The creature grows at an alarming rate, then escapes and cuts a swathe of destruction as it moves through the southern Italian countryside.
It approaches Rome, lumbering up the Appian Way, doubling its size every few minutes.
The pursuing army patrol the streets in jeeps with mounted machine guns, until one soldier flings his arm into the air, pointing: ‘Look,’ he shouts ‘there it is on top of the Colosseum!’
At this, a girl in the audience with a beehive hair-do leaps to her feet screaming, ‘Where?
Where?’
Others in the auditorium begin whistling and stamping their feet.
There is a rush for the door, the audience spill out into the road, stopping the traffic and gesturing wildly at the roof of the cinema.
[TERRY GENIN]
When the shapeless Blob cornered the heroine Tina, a voice came from the back of the stalls, ‘You're all right Tina, he's got no thingy.’
[Mike Evans]