

Vernon Bogdanor Brasenose College, Oxford 
1931 Revisited: The Constitutional Aspects
Reginald Bassett's 1931:Political Crisis , published in 1958, was the first attempt to look at the events of 1931 free from contemporary preconceptions.
An anonymous reviewer of the book in the Times Literary Supplement declared: ‘If a student of British politics were to demand some precepts to guide his researches, the compiler would have little difficulty about the first and most significant maxim in the creed.
For surely it is true that whosoever will understand British politics before all things it is necessary that he comprehend the events of 1931.'
But today, over thirty years after Bassett's book appeared, is there anything new to say about 1931?
At that time there were hardly any scholarly accounts of the period in question.
The only really important biography was that of George V by Harold Nicolson, which had been published in 1952; the more recent biography by Kenneth Rose adds hardly anything to it.
Yet, as I shall try to show, Nicolson's account is far too discreet, and obscures some of the most important features of the crisis.
Since Bassett's book was published, biographies of most of the main protagonists have appeared: but, with one exception, they shed much less light on the crisis than might have been imagined.
The exception is David Marquand's splendid biography of Ramsay MacDonald, which is at its best when dealing with 1931.
Indeed, Marquand gives us perhaps as much detail about the events of August-October 1931 as we are ever likely to need.
There are a number of biographies of Stanley Baldwin, the Conservative leader; but none of them really casts much light on his attitude to the crisis.
The same is true of the various biographies of Lloyd George — although, no doubt, when John Grigg's multi-volume Life reaches 1931 it will illuminate much that has hitherto remained obscure; likewise, in the case of Lloyd George's great enemy, Neville Chamberlain, we have to await the completion of David Dilks's biography.
Professor Bernard Wasserstein of Brandeis University is shortly to publish a new biography of Herbert Samuel, who was, in effect, leader of the Liberal party for the crucial months of 1931, during Lloyd George's illness, and a central figure in the crisis.
A more detailed life of Lord Reading, Liberal leader in the House of Lords and an important actor in the events of 1931, would be of great value.
A thorough and detailed biography of Arthur Henderson is also badly needed; the recent short studies by F. M. Leventhal and Chris Wrigley add little, at least in so far as the events of 1931 are concerned.
There is, however, a valuable article by Andrew Thorpe on Henderson's attitude to the crisis.
More has been written on the party history of the period.
There is Robert Skidelsky's history of the second Labour government and Stuart Ball's excellent account of the Conservative party in opposition, a book which casts an enormous amount of light on the inner life of the party.
There is no equivalent history of the Liberal party during this period.
The three main works — by Trevor Wilson, Roy Douglas, and Chris Cook — are all rather slight when they come to tackle the complexities of the Liberal attitude during the crisis.
There is however, an excellent Cambridge Ph.D.
thesis by Philip Williamson.
But even these valuable works share one major deficiency.
They tend to conclude their account with the formation of the National Government, giving ensuing events — in particular, the decision of the National Government to go to the country as a National Government — fairly perfunctory treatment; and this despite the fact that, as Ball rightly claims, ‘The radical restructuring of British politics after 1931 lies not in the events of 13–28 August, but in the changing attitudes within the National Government   during September and October 1931.'
D. J. Wrench is one of the few to have considered in any detail what happened after the National Government was formed.
Yet the really important decisions, affecting the whole shape of politics in the 1930s, were those made in September and October 1931; it was these decisions, and not the formation of the National Government itself, which were to determine the configuration of party politics for the rest of the decade.
Even beyond these deficiencies in the existing literature, there remain two large gaps to be filled.
The first calls for psephological analysis, using modern statistical techniques, of the 1931 general election.
In 1958, Reginald Bassett lamented the fact ‘that no study of the General Election of 1931 was made at the time on the lines of the extremely useful studies of the 1945 and subsequent General Elections sponsored by Nuffield College’.
There is at present only one study, and that unpublished.
The second and more important lack is that of any real constitutional analysis of the crisis.
The virtual demise of modern constitutional history as a subject of study has meant that there has been hardly any analysis of the major constitutional questions which arise out of the crisis — what role did the king play, what are the relative rights of the Prime Minister vis-à-vis his Cabinet, what is the relative importance of party and of the ‘national interest’, and what justification can there be for a peacetime coalition government?
The first step towards understanding the crisis of 1931 is to distinguish between different types of coalition government.
This is not easy to do since most historians persist in speaking of ‘The National Government’ as if the same sort of government ruled from 1931 to 1940.
Yet this is quite erroneous.
The historian should distinguish between three different types of coalition government, or three National Governments.
The first National Government, the government which forms the focal point of most historical writing on the crisis, followed the collapse of the Labour government in August 1931.
It was conceived of by all those who participated in it not as a coalition government as generally understood, but as a temporary, emergency government, formed for a single limited  purpose: to balance the budget through drastic economies and increases in taxation.
In October, however, the National Government decided to appeal to the country as a National Government, and the second National Government which followed the election was a very different animal.
It was a genuine, albeit unbalanced, coalition between separate political elements, in particular between the Conservatives and their allies, the National Labour party and the Simonite Liberal Nationals, and the Liberal party, led by Sir Herbert Samuel.
The third National Government followed upon the resignation of the Liberal ministers and of the free trader, Snowden, in September 1932, after which it became little more than a Conservative government, with the adhesion of a few ex-Labour and Liberal politicians, all owing their seats to an electoral pact with the Conservatives.
It was this government which ruled Britain until May 1940, when yet another coalition, led by Churchill — a genuine all-party coalition — governed Britain until 1945, when there was a return to party politics and alternating governments.
The first National Government was not intended to be a coalition government in the normal sense of the term.
It was something very rarely seen in Britain, or in other democracies: an emergency government — or, in Hoare's words, ‘an emergency Committee of public Safety’, formed for a specific purpose, and intended to last for a specific period of time.
It was clearly proposed not as a permanent arrangement, but as a temporary measure of co-operation between different individuals, who, it was hoped, would be supported by their parties.
The second National Government, by contrast, resulted from a general election in which it had inflicted a massive defeat on the Labour party.
It was clearly not an all-party government, yet, until September 1932 at least, it was something more than a mere Conservative front.
True, the Liberal Nationals were becoming indistinguishable from the Conservatives, while National Labour was too small to be able to exert very much influence upon the massed ranks of Conservatives, although the prestige of the Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, gave it — as Marquand shows — an influence far greater than its mere numbers would have warranted.
The sole genuinely non-Conservative and independent element in the government was the Liberals, led by Sir Herbert Samuel.
A party supporting the government, yet differing from most of the other members of it in one specific particular: its opposition to the tariff.
This conflict between tariff reformers and free traders was to lead to the ‘agreement to differ’ convention in January 1932, and the resignation of the Liberals from the government in September 1932; but, until they resigned, the National Government was a  genuine coalition in the sense in which that term is used on the continent: a government comprising independent yet conflicting elements allied together, a government within which party conflict was not superseded but rather contained — in short, a power-sharing government, albeit a seriously unbalanced one.
The third National Government, after the resignation of the Liberal ministers, was hardly a coalition — although again Marquand shows that the non-Conservatives retained more influence upon it than their numbers alone would suggest.
Yet these non-Conservative elements — the Liberal Nationals and National Labour — were becoming more and more adjuncts to the Conservative party, and they owed their seats entirely to the willingness of the Conservatives not to oppose them in the constituencies.
The attempt to build up a separate National Labour Party proved a dismal failure, while the Liberal Nationals continued as pensioners of the Conservative party until finally merging with them — as the Liberal Unionists had done previously — in 1966.
This third National Government, like the Conservative-Liberal Unionist coalition of 1895–1905, was the type of coalition government with which British history is much more familiar: a coalition between one major party and a fragment from another which has broken off because it disagrees with one of its parent party's central tenets — in 1886 Home Rule, in 1931 unwillingness to reduce unemployment benefit on the part of Labour and unwillingness to tamper with free trade in the case of the Liberals.
The third National Government was not a power-sharing coalition, but a coalition which led to party fusion.
The reason why so many books and articles on the 1931 crisis end with the formation of the first National Government is that their authors are still obsessed by the time-worn and stale debates about Ramsay MacDonald's supposed ‘betrayal’ of Labour, about a hypothetical ‘plot’, and about the ‘bankers’ramp'.
Hardly any of the studies of the crisis go on to consider why the National Government broke the specific pledges upon which it had been formed and went to the country as a government in an election which bore some considerable resemblance to the ‘coupon election’ of 1918.
And yet it was the second National Government, not the first, which really determined the politics of the 1930s.
Had the National Government stuck to its professed intentions and dissolved, after about six weeks, into its component parts, with the ensuing general election bring fought by the parties, the political landscape might not have been changed as much as in fact it was.
It seems important, therefore, to try to establish how the decision to fight the election came about.
For it was the general election of 1931 which so drastically altered the balance of parties in the House of Commons as to give the politics of the 1930s its special character.
This article analyses the constitutional aspects behind the formation of the first and second National Governments, examining in particular the role  of the king in the formation of the two governments — a role which, as will be seen, was rather more important than is usually thought.
The key to the formation of the first National Government lies in the parliamentary arithmetic facing the second Labour government as it sought to implement its programme of economies in August 1931.
Labour was the largest party with 288 MPs; the Conservatives, who had gained more votes than Labour in the 1929 general election, were, nevertheless, only the second largest party with, by 1931, 262 MPs; and the Liberals had fifty-nine MPs.
There were a further ten independents and five MPs who owed allegiance to Sir Oswald Mosley's short-lived New party, formed after Mosley's defection from Labour in February 1931.
It followed, therefore, that if the Labour Government was to secure acceptance of its economic package, it had to secure the support of MPs from either the Liberal or the Conservative party.
This obvious feature of the parliamentary arithmetic is ignored by many writers on the 1931 crisis.
They consider, sometimes in fairly abstract terms, the kinds of policies which Labour might have adopted, without asking whether such policies had any chance of securing parliamentary support.
A policy of Keynesian expansion, for example, whatever its merits, had no chance whatever of gaining majority support in the conditions of August 1931.
Nor would adoption of a tariff obviate the need for economies, given that the Conservatives insisted upon severe retrenchment, whether combined with a tariff or not.
The Labour Cabinet was, it is clear, united in its view that the budget had to be balanced.
What it could not agree on was how the budget was to be balanced; and it was this disagreement that led to the break-up of the government.
It is sometimes said that the dissident minority in the Cabinet, led by Henderson, were not willing to accept cuts in unemployment benefit.
That is not strictly true.
They were willing to accept a cut in transitional benefit which would have had the effect of ‘throwing at least some of those receiving transitional benefit upon public assistance’, while Henderson pressed hard for a ‘premium’, a flat deduction of 1s. a week from all unemployment benefits.
What the dissidents objected to was a cut in the standard rate of benefit.
The whole Cabinet agreed that there should be a cut in the amount that the unemployed were receiving; where they disagreed was in whether this should include a cut in the standard rate of benefit.
The opposition parties, however, were unwilling to accept any programme of economies which did not involve a cut in the standard rate of  benefit.
As the Labour dissidents in the Cabinet recognized, they did not have the power — they were a minority in the Cabinet as well as in the Commons — to avoid such a cut; all that they could do was to ensure that it was not a Labour government which imposed it.
Those commentators who blame Labour for not pursuing an alternative set of more socially just proposals in the conditions of August 1931 ought rather to blame the electorate for not giving Labour sufficient support to form a majority government in 1929.
In a minority situation, some form of power-sharing — even if it did not necessarily involve coalition — was inevitable.
Parliamentary arithmetic dictated, therefore, that Labour would have to produce a package which was acceptable to at least one of the opposition parties.
This the Cabinet was unable to achieve.
The question then arose of what alternative government was available.
Such a government had to be able to carry a programme of economies through the House of Commons: this immediately ruled out the possibility of a Labour minority government led by Henderson, as suggested by Moodie in an otherwise illuminating article.
It was quite clear that Henderson, the leader of the dissident minority in the Cabinet, had no chance whatever of producing a programme which could secure the support of a Commons majority.
If, therefore, the King had turned to Henderson after MacDonald had proffered his resignation, or had sought the views of Labour Privy Counsellors as suggested by Herbert Morrison, he could have been accused of wasting valuable time.
In the existing conditions of financial crisis, it was essential for a government to be formed which could ensure a parliamentary majority in support of the economy measures so that they could pass the Commons.
Without some grasp of this basic requirement it is impossible to understand what followed.
How, then, did the first National Government come about?
No serious historian today accepts the theory that it was the result of a plot or conspiracy; almost all agree that it followed, almost by accident rather than design, from the confused events of 19–24 August.
Nevertheless, the idea of a National Government had been in the air for some time before its actual formation.
There were, broadly, two interrelated reasons for this, the first relating to Britain's economic and Imperial difficulties, the second to the internal dissension in all three parties, a symptom perhaps of the need for a realignment of political parties.
The serious economic problems facing Britain following the slump of 1929, and the seeming inability of any one  party to offer a way out, together with the parliamentary deadlock, led many to ask whether a combination of like-minded politicians from different parties might not prove better suited to resolving Britain's problems than any single-party government.
The idea of a National Government, as Philip Williamson shows in his thesis, was common currency among businessmen and opinion-formers well before the financial crisis of August 1931; furthermore, one of those most sympathetic to the call for a National Government was the King.
In October 1930, ten months before the first National Government was formed, Sir Arthur Balfour, an industrialist and a member of the Economic Advisory Council, wrote to Ramsay MacDonald, saying that he had been forced to the conclusion: That our industrial and commercial economic situation is steadily deteriorating and if this continues, in a few months time, we shall be on the verge of a debacle.
The steps which will have to be taken are, in my view, so grave, that it becomes a question whether any one party can carry them through, and whether some form of Coalition Government is not imperative to meet the crisis which is rapidly developing.
Balfour called for drastic economies, to include a reduction in unemployment benefit and the imposition of a revenue tariff on manufactured goods.
He concluded by stating that he had been ‘compelled to trench on political questions as well as economic — because I feel we are approaching a situation that is so grave that it compares with the War, when we were compelled to act together in self-defence’.
The King's Private Secretary, Lord Stamfordham, wrote to MacDonald to say that the King was ‘profoundly impressed with Sir Arthur Balfour's letter to you — his review of the critical condition of affairs will, in His Majesty's opinion, bring home to his Ministers that the time has come when even emergency measures may be necessary in order to avert a calamity which, as Sir Arthur Balfour states, is not altogether incompatible with that of the Great War.
It was on the King's suggestion to MacDonald that the Cabinet considered including in the Speech from the Throne in October 1930 a plea to ‘all sections of parliament’ to ‘unite’in treating unemployment ‘on national as distinct from party lines’.
Another proponent of a National Government was Major-General Jack Seely, a former Liberal minister.
In October and December 1930 he held two  dinners to promote the idea, the guests including Ramsay MacDonald, Lloyd George, Lord Reading, Winston Churchill, and Sir Robert Horne.
At the first dinner, on 29 October, a letter, prepared by Seely, was read out.
It began: ‘I can imagine a wise and well-informed man, quite aloof from any political party, saying to our little gathering: ‘The Country and the Empire are in three tangles, which the ordinary process of disputation followed by a General Election in this country cannot unravel.’
The first tangle was the economy.
To cut the dole was, in Seely's view, essential, but ‘this tangle cannot be unravelled by any one party, or even any two, because if opposed by the third they would lose the Election and the evil would continue.’
The second tangle lay in Imperial economics.
A majority for Imperial preference in a general election would be of little use from the Dominion point of view, since it was ‘obvious that the whole system might be capsized in a year or two.
As a consequence, whatever the result the Dominions would be disappointed and disgruntled.
They would say, not without truth, ‘Britain claims to be head of the Empire, but cannot make up her own mind.’
The third and final tangle was India.
‘Here again a General Election in this Country, with the solution of the Indian problem as an issue, would settle nothing.
A small majority either way would encourage the discontented elements to further disorder.’
’ Be it observed, therefore,’Seely concluded his diagnosis, ‘that in these three vital matters, which taken together create an emergency greater than any through which this country has passed for centuries, no solution can be found unless all three parties combine to solve them.’
Seely's solutions were, in fact, not too dissimilar from those eventually adopted by the National Government — a cut in the dole with acceptance of the principle of work or maintenance, a 10 per cent revenue tariff, and settlement of the Indian question on the lines of the Simon Commission.
Before this dinner took place, Seely sent a copy of his letter to the King.
The reply, from Stamfordham, said that the letter had been forwarded to the Sovereign, ‘but added on his own account ‘I wish you every success in your efforts.'
Shortly afterwards, in March 1931, Stamfordham died.
His successor was Sir Clive Wigram, who in June 1931 attended another dinner, this time given by a South African millionaire, Sir Abe Bailey, to promote the National Government conception.
Among the other guests were again MacDonald and Churchill, now joined by Leo Amery and Herbert Samuel.
In August 1931, Wigram wrote to Sir Horace Rumbold, the British Ambassador to Germany, regretting that  no single Party is going to face the music of reducing wages and cutting down the dole.
What we require is a National Emergency Government, but no two men I meet can agree how this can be formed.
Neither Ramsay MacDonald nor Baldwin will agree to serve under the other.
Lloyd George is out of the running for some time and I suppose Herbert Samuel will act as leader in the House of Commons.
A neutral head of proved ability who would command the confidence of the Nation is hard to find.
On 11 July 1931, with financial crisis looming as the value of the German mark threatened to collapse, Wigram wrote to the King:
If a crash comes in Germany we shall have a financial situation something like that at the outbreak of war, and there will be a demand for a moratorium all round.
A Minority Government will hardly be able to deal with the situation, and it is quite possible that Your Majesty might be asked to approve of a National Government.
The idea of a National Government, then, had implanted itself in the mind of the King, and in that of his closest adviser, as a possible solution to the economic crisis which many felt to be imminent.
But it was in the air for a second reason also: for one striking feature of the years 1929–31 was that all three parties were deeply divided.
Indeed, the divisions within the parties were arguably more fundamental than those between them.
‘The internal dissension in the three parties,’ wrote Beatrice Webb in her diary, ‘each party finding its bitterest enemies among its own members or ci-devant members, would be ludicrous if it were not a sinister symptom of the decadent disrupture of British public opinion, owing to lack of faith either in the present order or in any consistent and comprehensive principles of reconstruction.'
The Labour government found itself under pressure from three directions: from the left wing, largely concentrated in the ILP; from the TUC, which, under the leadership of Citrine and Bevin, was coming to a new view of the causes of unemployment, one based upon the writings of John Maynard Keynes; and from Sir Oswald Mosley and his supporters.
Of the three, the TUC was to prove the most serious challenge to the government's chances of survival.
The Conservatives.
too, found themselves split after their unexpected defeat in 1929, and Baldwin's leadership came under severe  attack from no fewer than four different directions.
first, there were the press lords, Beaverbrook and Rothermere.
To call them swine, Baldwin told Sir Cuthbert Headlam in February 1930, ‘was to libel a very decent, clean animal’.
Second, and more threatening, there was grass-roots discontent at Baldwin's indolent approach to the tasks of opposition.
These two forms of dissent coalesced in the demand for a stronger approach to the Tory nostrum of tariff reform.
In addition, trouble threatened from the mercurial figure of Winston Churchill, who had resigned from the Shadow Cabinet in January 1931 in protest at Baldwin's acceptance of eventual self-government for India, an issue which threatened to be an explosive one for the Conservative party, since it allied Churchill to the fourth source of discontent: the Diehard element, also strongly represented amongst the grass roots of the party.
The Liberals, also, by August 1931 were beginning to crumble.
Lloyd George's attempt to wrest the initiative for his party by a bold espousal of Keynesian economics had failed in the 1929 general election.
His strategy of seeking an accommodation with Labour was bitterly opposed by many Liberals.
In March 1931, Sir john Simon spoke of socialism as ‘a poisonous doctrine’ and declared that he would not close his mind to tariffs as a method of dealing with the economic crisis.
In June 1931, Simon and two other prominent Liberals resigned the parliamentary whip.
It was generally believed that they were proposing to seek an electoral pact with the Conservatives, so as to ensure that they would hold their seats against what was expected to be a Conservative landslide at the next general election.
The uncertain nature of political alignments in these years made it inevitable, then, that a National Government would come under serious consideration as a remedy for Britain's ills.
Yet, unless a real emergency should occur, it was difficult to see how such a government might be brought about.
The idea of a National Government was primarily an idea of the political centre and right: there was hardly any support for it in the Labour party — except from Mosley, and he was moving rapidly to the right.
Nor could leaders of the Conservative party offer active support for the idea, for it implied lack of confidence in the leadership of Baldwin no less than in that of MacDonald.
The Conservatives, Baldwin declared in a speech in December 1930, were the true National party, and so those who sought a National Government should support the Conservatives.
Besides, a National Government might well involve abandoning the Tory principle of protection, and Baldwin, under pressure from the protectionists, was unwilling to form a government with free traders.
In July 1931 he declared that he could not ‘work with anyone except on the ground that he believes in the guarding of our home market and the development of our Imperial market  as absolute essentials’.
‘I could not help recalling,’ Sir Maurice Hankey, the Cabinet Secretary, wrote in his diary in September, ‘that on the last day of Parliament Mr. Baldwin had walked across the yard outside [the House of Commons]and had said ‘I will do everything I can to help the Government in making economies, but I will not enter a Coalition Government.'
Neville Chamberlain, often regarded as the architect of the National Government, confessed, in July 1931, ‘I myself hate the idea and hope it won't come to pass’; nevertheless, he admitted that a National Government might come about as a result of the financial crisis.
When the crisis did occur, however, the first reaction of the Conservative leadership was to ensure that Labour took full responsibility.
Coalition, Baldwin told Chamberlain, ‘must of course be stamped on’; he went on to say ‘that if R.M. did approach him he would reply that there was no occasion for a Coalition.
Let R.M. consult him if there was any difficulty and he would support him in any steps necessary for the national interest.'
When the crisis broke, Baldwin showed annoyance at having his holiday in France interrupted, and deputed Chamberlain to act for him, giving him full powers but no instructions.
From France, Baldwin wrote to Chamberlain:
I think in the long view it is all to the good that the government have to look after their own chickens as they come home to roost, and get a lot of the dirt cleared before we come in.
To have the consequences of their finance exposed — and acknowledged before the world — within four months of their budget will be a wonderful lesson.
P.S. We must not forget on the platform that the Liberals are just as responsible as the government for this crisis: indeed more so, for their assistance was voluntary.
They have deliberately supported the government (which they were not obliged to do) as being the less of two evils.
Thus, despite widespread support for a National Government, there was little idea of how such a government might be brought about; and little support for it among those who really mattered.
the party leaders.
The idea, indeed, was supported more by those on the fringes of political life than by those at the centre.
When the Labour Cabinet, in August 1931, failed to agree on an economy programme, Ramsay MacDonald, in his own words, ‘strove hard and took great risks in being responsible for the delay, to keep the Government in, because no National Government of any kind is the sort of thing that I should support of my own free choice.'
By Sunday 23 August, however, it was clear that agreement might well not be possible.
MacDonald saw the King at 10.30 a.m. and told him, as he recorded in his diary,
that after to-night I might be of no further use, & should resign with the whole Cabinet.
He asked if I would advise him to send for Henderson, I said ‘No’, which he said relieved him.
I advised him in the meantime to send for the leaders of the other two parties & have them report position from their points of view.
He said he would & would advise them strongly to support me.
I explained my hopeless Parlty. position if there were any resignations.
He said that he believed I was the only person who could carry the country through.
I said that did I share his belief I should not contemplate what I do, but that I did not share it.
A number of comments must be made upon this remarkable passage.
The first is that, contrary to what is implied in Harold Nicolson's biography, Sir Herbert Samuel, who saw the King shortly after noon, was not the first to make the suggestion that there should be a National Government: the first suggestion came from the King himself.
For the King not only told MacDonald that he would see the other party leaders, but said that he ‘would advise them strongly to support’ him.
MacDonald's reply —‘I explained my hopeless parlty. position if there were any resignations’— is a clear indication that he found the idea of a National Government distasteful; indeed, that his position was likely to be ‘hopeless’.
The King, however, undeterred by this, told the Prime Minister that he believed that he was the only person who could carry the country through'.
MacDonald's reply, that he did not share that belief, is, again, an indication that he did not wish to remain as Prime Minister if his government collapsed.
The King hoped next to see Baldwin, but the Conservative leader could not be found: he was, ironically, lunching with Geoffrey Dawson, the editor of The Times, and discussing Cabinet appointments — something he found easier to do with Dawson than with his party colleagues.
The King therefore saw Samuel before Baldwin; and Samuel gave the advice which the Sovereign wanted to hear, namely that if MacDonald proved unable to carry his Cabinet, the best solution to the crisis would be a National Government, led by MacDonald, ‘unless he found that he could not carry  with him a sufficient number of his colleagues’.
This significant qualification is omitted by Nicolson.
Baldwin finally arrived at the Palace at 3.00 p.m.
Instead of being asked, as he must have hoped, whether he would be willing to form a government, he was instead asked whether he would be prepared to serve in a National Government under MacDonald.
This was a question to which, for a patriotic Conservative leader, there could be only one answer.
The King's actions in August 1931 are sometimes defended with the argument that he was merely acting on the advice of the party leaders.
But the course of these interviews shows that no party leader was unequivocally in favour of a National Government led by MacDonald, in the event of the Labour government collapsing.
MacDonald said that he ‘might be of no further use, & should resign with the whole Cabinet’; the night before his interview with the King, Baldwin had gone to Neville Chamberlain's house in Eaton Square, and ‘hoped and prayed that he might not have to join a National Government’; even after his interview with the King.
Baldwin reported to his colleagues that MacDonald was likely to resign and that ‘H.M.
sends for S.B. tomorrow’.
Of the three who offered advice to the King, Samuel was the only one who favoured a National Government (and then only with qualifications) were the Labour government to collapse.
Samuel was not, of course, a party leader, and there is no way of knowing what advice Lloyd George would have given had he been fit.
What we do know is that Lloyd George, despite his public stance of support for the National Government, thought, in private, that it had been a mistake for the Liberals to join it.
On the day the National Government was formed, Sylvester, Lloyd George's secretary, asked him: ‘Are you in or out of this?’
He replied: ‘I am keeping outside.
I would not take office under MacDonald, and yet it would have been impossible to have refused.
I am glad, therefore, that it has happened thus.'
Tweed, the Liberal election agent, ‘knew…that it was not illness or the tedium of a long convalescence which kept him out, but that his heart was not in it and that confronted with the serried ranks of vested interests which compose this new Government, his sympathies were as always with the bottom dogs…'
Nevertheless, despite the fact that a National Government led by MacDonald was the preferred choice of at most one of the three party leaders, the King now knew that both Baldwin and Samuel would be prepared to  serve under MacDonald, were the latter willing to continue as Prime Minister.
MacDonald himself, however, appeared determined to resign.
After the meeting of the Cabinet held that same Sunday evening, when it became apparent that agreement could not be reached on the economy package, MacDonald, on his way to the palace, told Sir Ernest Harvey, the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England: ‘I am off to the Palace to throw in my hand.'
But when MacDonald saw the King again at 10.20 p.m., to report that he ‘had no alternative than to tender the resignation of the Cabinet’, the King ‘impressed on the Prime Minister that he was the only man to lead the country through this crisis and hoped he would reconsider the situation.
His Majesty told him that the Conservatives and Liberals would support him in restoring the confidence of foreigners in the financial stability of the country’.
MacDonald was not convinced.
At a meeting with Opposition leaders in 10 Downing Street later that night, he appeared resistant to Chamberlain's pleas that he remain.
Baldwin, significantly, remained silent.
The next morning, Monday 24 August, the King held, at MacDonald's request, a conference at Buckingham Palace between the Prime Minister.
Baldwin and Samuel.
At this conference, the King gave the three party leaders a virtual instruction that they should form a National Government under MacDonald's leadership.
The memorandum of the King's Private Secretary, Wigram, is explicit on this point.
At 10 AM the King held a Conference at Buckingham Palace at which the Prime Minister, Baldwin and Samuel were present.
At the beginning, His Majesty impressed upon them that before they left the Palace some communiqué must be issued, which would no longer keep the country and the world in suspense.
The Prime Minister said that he had the resignation of his Cabinet in his pocket, but the King replied that he trusted there was no question of the Prime Minister's resignation: the leaders of the three Parties must get together and come to some arrangement.
His Majesty hoped that the Prime Minister, with the colleagues who remained faithful to him, would help in the formation of a National Government, which the King was sure would be supported by the Conservatives and the Liberals.
The King assured the Prime Minister that, remaining at his post, his position and reputation would be much more enhanced than if he surrendered the government of the country at such a crisis.
The King, then, was not merely the facilitator of the National Government, but the instigator of it.
Three times he had made it clear to MacDonald that he did not wish to accept his resignation — on the morning of Sunday 23 August, when he told MacDonald that he would ‘advise them  (the other two party leaders) strongly to support (him)’; at 10.20 p.m. on the evening of the same day, after the Cabinet meeting, when the King ‘impressed upon the Prime Minister that he was the only man to lead the country through this crisis and hoped that he would reconsider the situation’; and at the Buckingham Palace conference itself.
Had the King simply accepted MacDonald's resignation, either there would have been no National Government, or, if there had been, it would not have been led by MacDonald.
Sir Clive Wigram's memorandum of the Buckingham Palace Conference makes it clear that the National Government was formed on quite specific conditions.
Baldwin and Samuel said that they were willing to serve under the Prime Minister and render all help possible to carry on the Government as a National Emergency Government until an emergency bill or bills had been passed by Parliament, which would restore once more British credit and the confidence of foreigners.
After that they would expect His Majesty to grant a dissolution.
To this course the King agreed.
During the Election the National Government would remain in being, though of course each Party would fight the Election on its own lines.
These conditions are rendered more precise in a memorandum written by Sir Herbert Samuel at the Conference, after George V had withdrawn.
1.
National Government to be formed to deal with the present financial emergency.
2.
It will not be a Coalition in the ordinary sense of the term but a co-operation of individuals.
3.
When the emergency is dealt with the Government's work will have finished and parties will return to their ordinary positions.
4.
The economies and imposts shall be equitable and shall generally follow the lines of the suggestions attached, designed to enable a loan to be raised in New York and Paris.
5.
The election which may follow the end of the Government will not be fought by the Government but by the parties.
6.
If there is any legislation which it is necessary to pass for special departmental or other reasons, and is generally accepted by the different parties, it may be undertaken.
7.
The Cabinet shall be reduced to a minimum.
At the final Cabinet meeting of the Labour government, held at 12 noon on 24 August, shortly after MacDonald had agreed to lead a National Government, he said:
The proposal was that His Majesty would invite certain individuals as individuals to take upon their shoulders the burden of carrying on the Government and Mr. Baldwin and Mr. Samuel (sic ) had stated that they were prepared to act accordingly…the Administration would not exist for a period longer than was necessary to dispose of the emergency, and when that purpose was achieved the political parties would resume their respective positions.
The Administration would not be a Coalition Government in the usual sense of the term, but a Government of co-operation for this one purpose.
It had been agreed that at the General Election which would follow the end of the emergency period, there would no ‘coupons’, pacts or other Party arrangements.
In a letter written to the junior ministers the same day he reiterated this theme:
The Government that has been formed is not a Coalition but a co-operation between individuals who are banded together to avoid the disaster.
No parties are involved in it, and as soon as the country gets on an even keel again, the Government will cease to exist.
And Baldwin, in a press statement issued on the same day, stated that
The National Government had been allotted a definite task, and on its completion it is understood that Parliament should be dissolved as soon as circumstances permit, and that each of the parties should be left free to place its policy before the electors for their approval.
By this means no party will be called upon to sacrifice any of the principles in which it believes.
The conditions set out by Samuel were intended to distance the National Government from the Lloyd George coalition which had cast its shadow across the politics of the 1920s.
Most of those involved in the formation of the National Government had in fact been prominent opponents of Lloyd George in the past.
Samuel and Maclean had been prominent in the Asquithian wing of the Liberal Party while Baldwin, Hoare, and Neville Chamberlain had been the leaders of the Conservative anti-coalitionists in 1922.
‘As we have said several times in the last few days,’ Hoare wrote to Neville Chamberlain on 31 August, ‘we had some great good luck in the absence of Winston and L.G.' Having destroyed one coalition, Baldwin had no intention of entering another.
MacDonald also had condemned the Lloyd George coalition as corrupt and unprincipled and had been a major beneficiary of its fall.
The conditions laid down were therefore designed to differentiate the National Government from the Lloyd George coalition, and to make it clear that the National Government was not intended, as the  Lloyd George coalition had been, to lead to a permanent realignment of the party system.
Rather, the analogy was perhaps with the 1915 coalition, a government supported by the Liberal, Conservative, and Labour parties with definite but limited wartime objectives.
Similarly, those who formed the National Government believed that it was National in the sense that its objective — balancing the budget — was shared by all parties.
For the minority in the Labour Cabinet who opposed the cut in the standard rate of benefit had divided the Labour government, not on the question of whether the budget should be balanced, but, so they claimed, on the subordinate question of how the budget should be balanced.
It was not long before the dynamics of politics made such niceties quite irrelevant, The bulk of the Labour party came out in opposition, not only to the National Government, but to any economies, even those which the Labour Cabinet had agreed.
On the Conservative side, calls for an election were soon heard.
The first Conservative to utter this call was not, as A. J. P. Taylor has said, Churchill, but Lord Hailsham; Attorney-General and Lord Chancellor in Baldwin's 1924–9 Conservative government, Hailsham was excluded from the National Government as unacceptable to National Labour, on account of his role in piloting the 1927 Trades Disputes Act through Parliament, and (along with Leo Amery) to the Samuelite Liberals, on account of his support for tariffs.
Hailsham, in an article in the Daily Express , of 3 September, called for an election, to be fought on party lines, with the aim of securing a Conservative majority for protection, The government, Hailsham said, should hurry up to complete the purpose for which it was formed, namely the balancing of the budget, and then go to the country on party lines.
The unanimity of the Conservative party in supporting Baldwin's decision to join the National Government has masked the existence of growing backbench resentment on the part of protectionists.
Enjoying widespread support in the constituencies, the supporters of the tariff threatened to become a danger to Baldwin's leadership — as they had been during the 1929–31 period.
On the day the National Government was formed, William Ormsby-Gore, the new postmaster General, wrote to Baldwin;
I am a little alarmed over the prospects of another Coalition…
Even if it is absolutely essential to have one to prune expenditure I hope you will get a free hand to have a dissolution in the autumn as we cannot recover any revenue or any industry now without a tariff…
We can carry protection in the country at an early general election if the position is not seriously compromised by coalition with 
Liberal Free Traders.
And we want nothing which will tend to rehabilitate the fallen fortunes of the Liberal Party in the country.
I mistrust a twister like Herbert Samuel.
Amery wrote in his diary on 25 August: ‘Milner once remarked to me in South Africa about the Cabinet of his day, how difficult it was to keep a lot of empty sacks standing up straight….
After two years of bingeing up Baldwin and bringing Neville along to find that even Neville loses his head, and sells the pass in the first fortnight of serious crisis.’
At a Conservative party meeting on 28 August, Amery noted that Horne ‘on the whole agrees with me that we have got into a considerable mess and that the great thing is to extricate our people as soon as possible,’ while Hailsham in his speech ‘supported entirely what had been done but trusted that it would not last longer than two months — whereat loud cheers’.
On 30 August, Amery was saying how glad he was that Hailsham was outside the government; ‘I can look to him as an ally in helping to bring the thing to a conclusion reasonably soon.’
The next day, Beaverbrook (who, with Amery, had been among those who had helped bring down the Lloyd George coalition in 1922)‘strongly urged’ Amery ‘to work closely with Hailsham both to keep the positive campaign going and decide when the critical moment should come for putting an end to the Coalition’.
On 8 September, Churchill, hitherto a free trader, spoke in the Commons, expressing doubts about the wisdom of joining the National Government, and urging an early election fought on tariffs; ‘An audacious rollicking speech,’ commented Amery, ‘by no means pleasing to the Front Bench.'
These were considerations that could not be ignored by a Conservative leader, Austen Chamberlain had been toppled in 1922 because he had not withdrawn from an unpopular coalition in time; and one of the motives for the destruction of the Lloyd George coalition was a desire to replace it by a protectionist government.
Over fifty years later in 1975, another Conservative leader, Edward Heath, was to be overthrown, in part because, in March 1974, he had proposed a coalition with the Liberals and, in October 1974, he had proposed a government of national unity, Thus, among Conservatives, the motives for an election were clear: for those left out of the government, the desire to secure a Conservative majority for protection; for the leadership, a desire to reunite the party, and simple self-preservation.
It was, however, Geoffrey Dawson, editor of The Times, who, in an editorial on 16 September, was the first to suggest that the National Government itself, and not the parties separately, should make an appeal to the country ‘on a broad programme of reconstruction which will include a tariff’.
Dawson wrote this editorial after discussing the idea with Baldwin  and MacDonald, both of whom he had found to be ‘receptive’.
Within the Cabinet, it was, paradoxically, Snowden — usually regarded as a sea-green incorruptible on the issue of free trade — who, overcome by hatred of Labour and a desire to smash his old party, appeared to relish the idea of an early election in which Labour would go down to defeat.
In the budget debate on 15 September, he addressed Dalton:
The Honourable member concluded his speech with a challenge.
He wants a general election.
He dues not want it more earnestly than I do.
I have noticed this during the last two or three days that I have been sitting here, being able for the first time in this House, to see the faces of my old associates, I have admired the way in which they have cheered to keep their spirits up, and I have admired those who have done that knowing — knowing — that only a few weeks, possibly, remain, before the place that knows them now will know them no more.
Snowden, unlike Samuel, was willing to agree in late September to a prohibitive tariff on luxury goods.
On 26 September, before the Cabinet had seriously begun to consider whether an election should be called, Snowden declared that an early election could not be avoided; and on 2 October, Neville Chamberlain noted in his diary, ‘Snowden expressed strongly the view that imports must be controlled’.
There is some evidence that it was Snowden who suggested the formula of the ‘doctor's mandate’, at a Cabinet meeting on 5 October, under which the component parts of the National Government were each to issue their own manifestos, with a separate personal appeal from the Prime Minister, According to Neville Chamberlain, ‘Snowden…produced the suggestion that the Prime Minister should issue his own manifesto asking for a free hand [i.e. on tariffs]and the two Party leaders should each issue their own programmes and to our astonishment this was at once accepted by the Liberals, ' Amery, who perhaps got the information from Chamberlain, wrote in his diary on 6 October, ‘Apparently when the deadlock seemed most complete Snowden suggested that the PM should issue his own manifesto, each of the other party leaders issuing theirs.'
Tom Jones, whose source was Lothian, also said that the formula was Snowden's.
It is ironic that, after the National majority had been safely won, and shown itself, as might have been predicted, protectionist, Snowden reverted to the role of stubborn free trader, and gave currency to  the view of MacDonald as a feeble halfwit, without principles or dignity, Yet MacDonald, although no doctrinaire free trader, had fought harder to reach a formula that the Liberals, Snowden's free trade allies, could accept than Snowden himself had done.
Yet for the National Government to fight the election as a government, rather than on party lines, was a clear breach of the undertakings which had been made at the time of its formation.
The King was, in a sense, the guardian of this agreement, and it might have been expected that he would remind the party leaders of it.
On the contrary; he took the view that a continuation of the National Government was in the best interests of the country.
When MacDonald told him on 29 September that he was having difficulty finding a formula which could unite his colleagues, George V
impressed upon the Prime Minister that the country had to be saved and that there should be a combination of all decent minded politicians towards this end.
Party differences should be sunk.
If a Socialist Government came into power and carried out their extravagant promises to the electorate, this country would be finished.
The King was sure that the present Prime Minister was the only man who could save the country and His Majesty himself was prepared to support him…
The King throughout was in favour of an Election and the Prime Minister when he left certainly seemed more courageous and more firm in his conviction that a General Election was necessary.
On 2 October the King saw Samuel, the leading recalcitrant in the Cabinet,
and found that he had hardened his views and was most obstructive and unhelpful.
His Majesty appealed to him as a Statesman and as one who had been a Minister of the Crown to place before everything the present dangerous situation of the country, Sir Herbert replied that he and his party were just as patriotic as the Conservatives: the country would be in far greater danger from Tariffs — price of food stuffs would rise, there would be strikes and outbreaks all over the country.
He would be a traitor to his cause if he sold the pass now.
Sir Herbert suggested that Henderson, the leader of the Opposition, should be approached to join the National Party, which was not a National one at present: In short his attitude was to oppose any National Appeal and to be mischievous.
On 3 October ‘the King told the Prime Minister that he must at all costs find the solution himself, and His Majesty would refuse to accept his resignation.
He must be more patient and brace himself up to realise that he was the only person who could tackle the present chaotic state of affairs,'This was the fourth time the King had told MacDonald that he would not accept his resignation.
There were certainly strong arguments in favour of the course which the King adopted.
It was clear that the dominant element in his government, that is, the Conservatives, were determined upon an election.
Moreover, MacDonald was in principle in favour of an election, but unable to secure agreement upon a formula which could reconcile protectionists and free traders up to the very last moment.
The King could reasonably take the view that he was doing no more than exercising the right to encourage, one of Bagehot's famous trinity of rights, and that he was encouraging his Prime Minister in achieving his aims, rather than pressing MacDonald to adopt a course which was unwelcome to him.
Moreover, there was a case for suggesting that the change of ministry in August required the endorsement of the electorate.
This was the argument voiced by The Times on 8 October: ‘The working of parliamentary institutions, of democratic responsibility, and of constitutional practice, demands it.’
And, since the King had played some part in securing the formation of the National Government in August, the election would, in a sense, validate the King's action as well, ‘Of course you are going to vote,’ the King said to Sir Maurice Hankey, the Cabinet Secretary, on 2 October, before the Cabinet had alighted upon the doctor's mandate formula which made the election possible.
When Hankey explained that, since the war, he had ‘rather made a point of not voting’, to emphasize his detachment from Party politics, the King replied, ‘But this time it is different.
I want the National Government to get every vote possible.’
When he confirmed to Hankey that this was a ‘command’, the latter replied; ‘Very well, Sire.
Your Majesty can claim to have canvassed one vote for the National Government.'
Behind this exchange — which perhaps need not be taken too seriously — there lies the fear that a victory for the Labour party in a general election would constitute a repudiation of the King's actions in August, To the extent that the National Government was formed through the agency of the King, a repudiation of the National Government could be conceived of as a repudiation of the King.
So it was that the agreement on which the first National Government was formed was ignored by the King, who granted a dissolution under conditions which broke both the letter and the spirit of the agreement.
It may be argued that the King had a special responsibility to preserve the agreement, in that, in a country such as Britain without a codified constitution, there is no reference point, no pouvoir neutre , over and above the exigencies of party politics.
Only the King, therefore, could defend the agreement.
He did not do so.
Indeed, he put pressure on Sir Herbert Samuel to abandon its terms.
Despite the arguments in favour of the course which the King adopted, his encouragement to MacDonald to hold the government  together and to fight the election as a government had quite momentous consequences for the politics of the 1930s.
Although the King's intentions were not partisan, the consequences were such as to offer very considerable benefit to the Conservative party.
The 1931 general election gave the Conservatives a huge overall majority in the House of Commons, enabling them to pursue their tariff policy with little hindrance.
The announcement of the election itself drew together the various elements in the Conservative party, and validated Baldwin's decision to enter the National Government.
From 1931, threats to his leadership disappeared, Moreover, because the Conservatives took with them into the National coalition elements of the Liberal and Labour parties, the party competition of the 1930s became seriously unbalanced, the left being too shattered and divided to offer effective opposition.
The effect of this election on the other parties was disastrous.
While it served to reconcile warring elements in the Conservative party, in the other parties it prevented any such reconciliation.
In particular it widened the gap between Labour and National Labour, and made it quite impossible for any reunion to take place.
For the Liberals, the election meant a breach between the party and its leader, Lloyd George, Indeed, it meant the end of Lloyd George's connection with the Liberal party.
He refused to allow the party access to his fund, and partly for this reason the Liberals were forced to accept a drastic reduction in the number of candidatures, from 513 in 1929 to 112 in 1931, The condition of the Liberals was far more serious than that of Labour, for the Liberal party was beginning to lose its sense of identity and purpose (and has still not fully recovered it).
Once the party had shown itself, in the 1929–31 Parliament, unwilling to support Lloyd George's programme of national reconciliation, it had no answer to the question: What did the Liberal party stand for?
Its only rallying cry remained free trade; and yet it was clear that the 1931 election would result in a protectionist majority.
The seeming gains made by the Liberals in the negotiations before the Cabinet agreed to an election — that there should be no joint manifesto, and no pledge to introduce tariffs, merely an impartial inquiry — turned out (as might have been expected) to be worthless.
The squabbling in Cabinet over the formula on which the National Government was to fight the election was, in reality, a form of shadow-boxing: for, whatever the formula, it would be interpreted by those who had the power to interpret it, that is, the Conservative and protectionist majority.
Lloyd George, himself perfectly willing to countenance departures from free trade in his 1918–22 Coalition, now argued that free trade was best defended through a vote for the Labour  Party.
The 1931 general election was the last election until that of February 1974 at which the electoral performance of the Liberals was of significance to the two major parties.
In agreeing to fight the election as part of the National Government, the Liberal party abdicated from its role as a major participant in the political system.
Because they were losing their sense of identity, the Liberals were split three ways by the 1931 election — into Simonites, Samuelites, and the Lloyd George family group, The first group advocated co-operation, culminating in a merger, with the Conservatives; the second sought to preserve an independent Liberal party; the third sought co-operation with Labour.
So also the french Radicals in the Fourth Republic were to splinter in all directions, participating in governments of both left and right.
The Liberal party could no more than the Radicals answer the fundamental question of whether, with political liberalism and universal suffrage achieved, there remained a distinctive philosophy of liberalism which could differentiate the Liberals from other political parties.
Between 1929 and the formation of the second National Government after the general election, the Liberal party had been a genuine participant in the political system and the other parties had to consider carefully what its reactions might be.
During the course of the 1929–31 government, MacDonald gradually appreciated that the hopes which he had entertained during the 1920s of eliminating the Liberals and winning over the whole of the progressive vote for the Labour party could not be achieved.
It was for this reason that he felt compelled to offer the Liberals the alternative vote, an electoral system which would have the effect of entrenching the third party as part of the political system.
The events between the formation of the first National Government and the general election, however, turned what had been an incipient three-party system into an unbalanced two-party system in which the Conservatives, reinforced by defectors from the Liberal and Labour parties, the Liberal Nationals, and National Labour party, were the obvious beneficiaries.
It was the general election, then, and not the formation of the first National Government, that was the crucial event in the politics of the 1930s.
The King was involved in the decisions precipitating both events.
In recent years there has been considerable discussion of the role of the Sovereign in the eventuality of a hung Parliament, such as that of 1929–31, and the general conclusion has been that her role is essentially a passive one.
Yet  both in the formation of the National Government and in the decision that it would fight the election as a government the King played an important, perhaps a crucial role.
That was in fact the private view of Harold Nicolson, although he did not allow it to be expressed in his official biography of George V. In an unpublished section of his diaries, he writes of his interview with Queen Mary on 21 March 1949, ‘I talked to her about the 1931 crisis and said that I was convinced the King had been a determinant influence on that occasion, ‘Yes certainly; he certainly was,'
It is perhaps futile to ask the question, were the King's actions constitutional?
In a country without a codified constitution, it is hardly possible to give a definitive answer.
If one asks the further question, were the King's actions wise?, one's answer is likely to be all too heavily conditioned by hindsight, by the views one takes of the later politics of the 1930s, of the restoration of a two-party system, and of the decline of the Liberal Party.
The historian, perhaps, can do little more than echo Disraeli's pregnant remark in Sybil , Book IV, Chapter I: ‘when parties are in the present state of equality, the Sovereign is no longer a mere pageant.’
DAVID R. DEVEREUX Kings College London and Canisius College 
British Planning for Postwar Civil Aviation 1942–1945
A Study in Anglo-American Rivalry
One of the least-known aspects of British planning for the postwar world relates to the field of civil aviation.
The British realized during the war years that they could never reap the benefits of the expected postwar boom in international civil aviation without a coherent national programme that would enable Britain to compete on equal terms with the United States.
This issue was first raised as early as 1941, and by 1943–4 had become a subject of major concern for the British government, aware that unless rules were laid down in advance, the United States would use its enormous wealth, undamaged industrial capability, and the advantages obtained during the war years to drive Britain and other countries off the international air routes.
As one authority has put it, ‘competition for air routes, services and traffic was not unlike the ‘scramble’ for Africa in the late 19th century'.
In 1943–4, the British attempted to devise a Commonwealth approach to civil aviation policy as a way of countering US influence.
Civil aviation, along with monetary and tariff policies, control over Middle East oil, and the continuation of Britain's rubber trade, was a subject of considerable Anglo-American rivalry in terms of protectionism versus competition that was not resolved until the postwar period.
This conflict was a symptom of Britain's relative decline as a world power, and was characterized by its attempts to retain something of its former position through the Commonwealth and Empire.
This article suggests that the  British hoped to create an international civil aviation environment favourable to their interests, but were unable to do so because of American opposition.
They also embarked on an ambitious national scheme that was designed to place Britain at the forefront of the postwar civil aviation market.
British air travel before the war had largely been in the hands of two companies, British Airways for European services and Imperial Airways for services further afield.
Both functioned with a degree of official support, especially in the form of mail contracts, but proved themselves to be unprofitable in the face of subsidized foreign competition.
In 1939, after several years of study, the Conservative government attempted to reorganize the rather inefficient operation of the two airlines and to encourage more competition.
The result was a single national airline that was to be the so-called ‘chosen instrument’ for British air services: British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC).
However, with the immediate advent of the war, BOAC never had a chance to establish commercial operations on any scale, and quickly found itself used by the Air Ministry (its overseeing body, also in control of the Royal Air Force) for military transport duties and ferry and communication services.
Its role was downgraded even further when the Royal Air force's Transport Command was formed in 1943, using largely American-built transport aircraft.
This latter point was perhaps the greatest concern for Britain's aviation planners as the war went on.
One stipulation of Lend-Lease agreements signed in 1941–2 was that Britain should concentrate on the production of fighter and bomber aircraft for the war effort; its transport needs would be met by American aircraft.
While this made eminent sense for production efficiency in wartime, it was very much apparent to the British that this would give the United States a natural advantage when the war ended.
The Americans would have thousands of surplus transport aircraft that could be turned to civil use, and a well-developed transport aircraft industry; the British, on the other hand, would have virtually none.
This fear of American inroads into areas that Britain used to control effortlessly was not confined to civil aviation; the British also resented the activity of US oil companies in the Middle East, and US attempts to break into the British-dominated international rubber market and the sterling bloc.
With Britain's security in its greatest peril, American support was bought at the price of much of Britain's long-developed overseas economic power.
The British were especially angered by the rapidly enhanced role of the premier American overseas air carrier, Pan American Airways (PAA) as a  result of the war.
Under the chairmanship of Juan Trippe PAA had rapidly increased its position in the 1930s, enjoying a monopoly on US flights across the Pacific to Japan and China, into Latin America, and over to Britain.
Under a 1937 agreement, PAA was allowed to operate two flights a week to the UK: it continued to do this during the war years, unmatched by BOAC.
Pan American, like its counterpart Imperial Airways, enjoyed government backing through mail contracts and its powerful political influence in the capital.
Unlike Imperial Airways' successor, BOAC, which was a nationalized company and used by the British government during the war, Pan American was able to use its private enterprise and political influence to expand its services dramatically.
In 1941, Pan American began a Brazil-West Africa-Cairo service with British permission, intended mainly as a supply route for Allied forces, and necessitating the construction by Pan American of appropriate airports in British and French colonial territory, A new company, Pan American Air Ferries, was created to operate the service, which connected with Pan American's existing network in Latin America.
Although the British needed this route to support Egypt, many of them saw Pan American as opportunistic and poised to exploit its advantage in the postwar years.
Air Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder, RAF commander in Egypt, wrote that ‘the cloven hoof of Pan American [is]now well to the fore’, and called BOAC's attitude ‘hopelessly defeatist’, Pan American was making inroads in Africa and the Middle East that BOAC might never be able to match.
To the British, the US company embodied ‘the idea and methods of the East India Company and the chartered corporations of Africa.
Their aims will be economic, their ambitions to enjoy commercial power without responsibility.'
Pan American's privileged position, and the British government's perceived failure to assist BOAC's own position, were so strongly resented by the British company that all but one of its directors resigned in protest in March 1943.
With the conduct of hostilities the paramount concern for both the USA and Britain, civil aviation remained a minor issue in the early years of the war.
Nevertheless, the British were looking towards the war's end and the possible shape of civil aviation even before the United States entered the conflict.
In August 1941, an interdepartmental committee was formed under the chairmanship of Sir Francis Shelmerdine of the Air Ministry to survey the whole field of aviation and to make recommendations for peacetime.
Although an interim report was submitted in May 1942, after  which Shelmerdine was replaced as chairman by Lord Finlay, the committee's main recommendations became the plank of British civil aviation policy for the next three years.
The Shelmerdine Committee concluded that international civil aviation should be internationalized and placed under an international authority.
This conclusion was based upon the general perception that pre-1939 aviation was overly competitive and unregulated, and subject to vicious throat-cutting in the national interest.
Countries had used subsidies to further the interests of their national companies, and Britain had found it difficult to compete in this arena.
Internationalization, it was believed, would alleviate the problem.
The Finlay Committee which followed up the Shelmerdine report was charged with looking at ways of bringing about internationalization, and how the issue should be raised with the Dominions, the USA, and the USSR.
The Committee reported in December 1942, by which time it had become a part of the larger Cabinet Committee on Reconstruction problems.
The Finlay Report discussed Pan American's route structure and rapid wartime expansion under the guise of military service.
It was acknowledged that Pan American would lobby strenuously in Washington to avoid inter-nationalization, which would be a threat to its dominant position.
The Finlay Committee urged the full internationalization of civil aviation at war's end, and failing that, internationalization among European countries and their dependencies.
Operations should be run by a highly centralized unitary body which would provide services on the trunk routes of the world.
The timing of such an arrangement would be crucial if adverse American reaction was to be avoided; it was believed that the first approaches should be to the Dominions, followed by the USA, USSR, and China, culminating in a full international conference.
The British government adopted the report as official policy, and pursued a diplomatic approach to the problem over the next two years.
Meanwhile, in 1942 another committee was at work on Britain's postwar civil aviation policy, but with a different focus: the aircraft themselves.
This side of the issue was entrusted to Lord Brabazon of Tara, whose committee was invited to make recommendations on the types of aircraft that Britain should produce for the postwar period.
The committee reported in February 1943 in very alarming language that there would be nothing left for the British postwar aircraft industry unless something were done at once.
The British aircraft industry was expected to shrink to only a fifth of its existing size, giving the USA an enormous head start.
Work on civil versions of the Halifax bomber, York military transport (itself a derivative of the Lancaster  bomber), and Shetland flying boat was needed to stave off the decline.
More importantly, however, the Brabazon Committee listed five main categories of aircraft for which brand new types were needed if Britain was to compete effectively with the United States.
Of these, the first, Type 1, was the most important; it was to be a large multi-engine landplane capable of flying from London to New York non-stop.
This was the aircraft intended to meet American competition head-on.
Type 2 was a two-engine landplane for European services, and Type 3 a four-engine aircraft for the Empire trunk routes.
Type 4 was the most innovative and intriguing: a pure jet transport aircraft for the North Atlantic service.
Finally, Type 5 was a small aircraft for local services in the UK and the colonies.
This radical and sweeping blueprint for Britain's peacetime civil aviation industry was considered by the War Cabinet on 25 February 1943.
The Cabinet accepted the recommendation that a substantial British aircraft industry was required to hold off competition, and should be developed with more than just the Empire in mind; also the premise that work on new aircraft should proceed under government direction, with the Treasury accepting responsibility for new types.
This was the first sign of the real importance Britain was to accord civil aviation, viewing it as an essential component of the country's postwar recovery.
Although Britain was forced by circumstances to continue devoting the bulk of its resources to military aircraft production, work did begin on the specifications and design for the postwar civil transports.
It was recognized by all concerned that it would take at least three and more likely five years for any of the Brabazon types to come into production, so work also proceeded on interim types that could hold the gap until the newer types were in service.
Britain had virtually no civil aircraft otherwise, and various designs were evolved by A. V. Roe and Handley Page based on their Lancaster and Halifax bombers.
The Brabazon Committee, working with the Air Ministry and the Ministry of Aircraft Production, also began to oversee the design of the new types that it had recommended.
Work, however, proceeded slowly because of the demands of war.
The most spectacular of the new aircraft was the Type 1.
Under the Brabazon recommendations, the aircraft would have six to eight piston or reciprocating engines, possibly replaced by gas turbine engines if available, and a pressurized cabin, and be capable of flying 5,000 miles non-stop at 275 miles per hour.
Its design and construction were handed to the Bristol Aircraft Company, which designated it model 167.
Bristol proceeded with  the aircraft's design, and had a mock-up prototype completed by the end of the war.
However, some of the problems that were to haunt the postwar aviation industry had already begun to appear.
By November 1944, only the Bristol 167 and the Type 2 aircraft, the twin-engine Airspeed 67, had gone much past the preliminary design stage, and the Brabazon Committee warned that the five new types would face obsolescence if their development were not speeded up.
Part of the problem was the less than perfect relationship between the Air Ministry and BOAC, which would have to operate the new aircraft.
BOAC clearly had profit on its mind, and wanted its requirements incorporated into the new designs, but these were only partially met.
In October 1944, Lord Knollys, the BOAC chairman, told a meeting held in the Ministry of Aircraft production that the Brabazon Type 3 would be the airline's ‘bread and butter’ aircraft for Empire routes, carrying twenty-five sleepers or forty to forty-five day passengers.
It was to be a four-engine aircraft, possibly with gas turbines, with a range of 2,750 miles.
This aircraft subsequently underwent numerous design changes before it was incorporated into the Type 4 jet aircraft, which enjoyed later fame as the DeHavilland Comet.
The Bristol 167 was to be Britain's great new advance on American types such as the Lockheed Constellation and Douglas DC-6, which did not have the range to fly the Atlantic non-stop.
It was also to be the largest aircraft ever built in Britain.
However, even by the end of the war, the design had run into serious difficulties.
Sir William Hildred, who as Director-General at the new Ministry of Civil Aviation was Britain's senior civil servant in charge of aviation, told a meeting in September 1945 that he had lost interest in the Bristol 167 because its undercarriage width of 93 feet was wider than any runway then in existence, and two prototypes were estimated to cost £7 million.
Worst of all, BOAC, the type's only possible operator, had also lost interest in it.
The Bristol aircraft was eventually completed as an experimental airplane under the name Bristol Brabazon.
Despite its immense size, it was severely underpowered: by the late 1940s, with BOAC refusing to use it and with no other customer, the project became an expensive white elephant and was ultimately scrapped by the succeeding Conservative government.
The issue of internationalization remained the government's first priority in aviation policy, because only this would allow Britain to compete on equal terms with the USA.
Following the report of the Finlay Committee, a sub-committee of the Cabinet Committee on Reconstruction Problems was  appointed, consisting of Lord Jowitt (Minister without Portfolio and Chairman), Sir Kingsley Wood (Chancellor of the Exchequer), Sir Stafford Cripps (Minister of Aircraft production), and Sir Archibald Sinclair (Secretary of State for Air).
The sub-committee agreed on the need for an effective UK civil aviation programme, and that the USA should be approached on the issue of internationalization.
As US agreement on inter-nationalization was considered unlikely, Britain would also prepare to operate in a Europe- or Commonwealth-centred system.
To study the recommendations of the Finlay Committee on how to bring about internationalization, another official committee was created under the chairmanship of Sir Alan Barlow of the Air Ministry.
Finlay had recommended four alternatives: full internationalization, a European plus dependencies system, an Empire only system, or international regulation.
The Barlow Committee recommended full internationalization without the reservation of internal services (i.e. even domestic flights would fall under international authority).
As this was considered unlikely to succeed because, of US opposition, a European and dependencies system was considered second best.
Commonwealth representatives were first told of British thinking on the subject of civil aviation at a meeting chaired by Deputy Prime Minister Clement Attlee in February 1943.
Anthony Eden, the Foreign Secretary, asked them to what extent the full internationalization of civil aviation was possible.
Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa supported inter-nationalization with US involvement, but if this were not possible, they preferred a Commonwealth or European arrangement.
This was substantially in line with British thinking.
Canada, influenced by the importance of air links with the USA, favoured full consultation with the Americans before any arrangement was finalized.
The meeting agreed only that no decisions would be taken until Dominion government opinion had been consulted.
The representatives met again on 29 March to consider the Finlay and Shelmerdine reports, and Stanley Bruce, the Australian High Commissioner, stated that the USA and USSR should be approached immediately on the subject of civil aviation.
The reports were then sent to the Dominion and Indian governments.
It was finally decided on 15 June that there should be a Commonwealth statement on civil aviation, and although Australia and South Africa favoured Commonwealth consultation ahead of time, Canada was wary of offending the USA.
For this reason, when asked to host a Commonwealth conference in Ottawa, the Canadian government  agreed only on the condition that the USA was also invited, to avoid charges of ‘ganging up’.
Nevertheless, the British were intent on obtaining Commonwealth agreement before approaching the USA.
Lord Cranborne, the Lord Privy Seal, was given authority to plan for civil aviation discussions.
British and Canadian representatives held talks in Quebec in August 1943, and the British believed the Canadians were afraid of powerful US influence on any meeting of Commonwealth representatives before an international conference.
Finally, Britain proposed a meeting of Commonwealth representatives in London, which Canada agreed to attend, in October 1943.
A strong force in the discussions was the Canadian-born Lord Beaverbrook, who had now replaced Cranborne as Lord Privy Seal.
The Canadian representative at the talks was the equally formidable C. D. Howe, the Minister of Munitions.
The meetings produced wide-ranging agreement on the need for full co-operation on operation of the Empire air routes.
There was also general agreement that there should be an international authority operating on the lines of a domestic regulatory board, with the power to regulate routes, arbitrate in disputes, and set technical standards.
perhaps even more importantly, the Commonwealth representatives agreed on four ‘freedoms’ of the air that would form the basis of an international settlement: the right of innocent passage over sovereign territory; the right to land for non-traffic purposes (i.e. refuelling, repairs, and emergencies); the right to land passengers, mail, and freight from the airline's country of origin; and the right to pick up passengers, mail, and freight for passage to the airline's country of origin.
The conference's report was approved by the War Cabinet on 27 October 1943, and Beaverbrook was given leave to proceed to Washington when the timing for such a meeting seemed propitious.
Beaverbrook noted in November that no conference with the USA would be possible until after the presidential election one year later.
He was acutely aware of the power of the airlines, especially Pan American, in Congress and in the administration, and he wanted to choose his ground carefully.
In that same month, the British embassy in Washington sent an assessment of US attitudes.
It believed that the USA wanted a round-the-world air route with access to all countries including the Soviet Union, China, the Middle East, and Africa, as well as the British Commonwealth and Empire.
The USA would dislike any bilateral agreements that discriminated against a third country, the embassy believed, and was suspicious of  ‘all-red’ routes.
They would likely want to retain the use of airfields built during the war in the Caribbean, South America, Africa, the Middle and far East, and the Pacific, but would also likely agree to the four freedoms enunciated at the October 1943 Commonwealth conference.
Canada had already told the US embassy in Ottawa about the results of the London talks, and in February 1944 sent the State Department a draft 23-page convention for use in the proposed international conference.
It summarized the Commonwealth conclusions on an international authority with the ability to divide routes and services fairly.
At the same time Beaverbrook told the House of Lords of Britain's willingness to attend an international conference on civil aviation.
Aware of American dislike of centralized control, he confined his remarks to generalities about open trade welding nations together for mutual benefit.
As noted above, Pan American Airways and its chairman, Juan Trippe, had the ear of Congress and president Roosevelt, and fed fears of British dominance in the air.
It is quite true that the Americans were at least as worried about the British as the British were about them, but for very different reasons.
The Americans were intimidated by the possible British routes allowed by Commonwealth and Empire airfields the world over.
They therefore had no wish to be restricted by British manoeuvring for postwar influence, and were unsympathetic to British demands for international control.
Roosevelt, like Churchill, saw the significance of postwar civil aviation, and believed in free and open competition.
However, he was suspicious of Juan Trippe's attempts to keep a monopoly on US overseas air services.
At a meeting at the White House in November 1943, he told Assistant Secretary of State Adolf Berle, Under Secretary of State Edward Stettinius, and others that no single airline should dominate American airline services, and favoured a sectoral distribution of routes, of which Pan American would have some of the best.
This led to a decision by the Civil Aeronautics Board in 1945 to distribute routes in the Pacific, Latin America, and Europe to various other American airlines, some of which continue today.
Active planning and discussion of an international conference occupied the early months of 1944.
Britain wanted to hold a preliminary meeting of the Dominions along with the USA, and the Americans wanted to invite the  Soviets.
Finally, it became clear that no preliminary conference would be possible without widening the discussions unduly, and it seemed best to hold bilateral discussions first.
On 21 February 1944, the British sent a draft agenda of their thinking on civil aviation to the State Department.
They wanted to discuss an international authority at the preliminary meetings, and detailed twelve possible roles for it.
John Winant, the US ambassador in Britain, wrote on 28 February that this reflected Britain's concern with security rather than with ‘commercial enterprise’; ‘It also reflects the British apprehension that they may be swamped competitively by US aviation and their consequent desire to guarantee themselves a percentage, even though small, of the available business.’
They might even try to consider intra-Empire trade as internal routes, or cabotage, Winant wrote.
With the decision to scrap multilateral preliminary talks, the USA decided to send Assistant Secretary of State Adolf Berle, who was in charge of civil aviation matters, to Canada and Britain for bilateral talks.
It was clear that the USA wanted no international control of commercial operations and would accept it only in the realm of technical standards.
Berle met with Canadian officials at the end of March 1944, and told them that he liked their draft convention, but considered it a long-term rather than an immediate possibility.
He then went on to London, to hold talks with Beaverbrook and other Air Ministry officials.
Berle and Beaverbrook came to quick agreement on the need for the USA and UK to standardize technical aspects of aviation, and on a definition of ‘cabotage’ as traffic between the metropolitan power and its possessions, for example, the USA and Hawaii, or Britain and its colonies (but not the Dominions or India).
The main areas of disagreement were over the economic control of aviation on the North Atlantic.
Beaverbrook insisted that the volume of traffic must also be under international control; this Berle vigorously opposed.
Beaverbrook then presented the final draft of the October 1943 Commonwealth conference on civil aviation, with its four ‘freedoms’ of the air, Berle accepted this as a reasonable basis for negotiation.
Beaverbrook considered it an achievement that the USA and UK had settled on the 1943 draft as a formula for future negotiations, but US ambassador John Winant, at lunch with Churchill, Berle, and Beaverbrook, thought the Prime Minister wanted the Lord Privy Seal to ‘soft-pedal’ the internationalization aspect so as not to offend the USA.
In any case, the British hoped for an American-British-Dominions agreement that could be used as a basis on which to invite other countries to a conference.
In order to prepare further for the forthcoming conference, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers were told of the US-UK discussions at their meeting in May 1944.
Britain still hoped that a Commonwealth front could be achieved, with considerable internal control of Empire air routes.
The Air Ministry proposed a single corporation as a holding company for services between the UK and India, Australia, and New Zealand.
It would be controlled by the four countries on the lines of BOAC, and would be overseen by an Empire council.
Beaverbrook told a meeting of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers on 10 May about his discussions with Berle the previous month, and that he hoped for Commonwealth agreement before an international conference.
Canada's Mackenzie King, always the most suspicious of British motives, said that each country should develop the routes important to it, and there should not be a single Commonwealth body to control aviation.
However, he did agree that there should be an international authority, as long as it included the USA.
All the Commonwealth Prime Ministers agreed that a full international conference should be called.
The British insistence on the international control of frequencies and routes remained the main point of contention between the US and Commonwealth positions.
Beaverbrook reiterated this position to Berle when the two met on 21 July.
Although Beaverbrook felt that specific routes could be discussed, the British and Canadians backed away from this when the USA proposed discussion of the North Atlantic route in September.
Both insisted that any bilateral talks should wait until after the international conference, for which a date had at last been set: President Roosevelt issued a statement on 4 September inviting the nations of the world to a conference on international civil aviation to be held in Chicago in November.
With the conference at last on the calendar, the various countries began preparatory activities to enhance their bargaining positions.
Ambassador Winant reported from London that the British were increasingly uneasy over the fundamental difference in attitude towards international control that existed between themselves and the USA.
They were also worried that the USA would go ahead and plan a postwar aviation policy before they could even begin one.
Berle met Michael Wright, counsellor at the British embassy in Washington, on 21 October, and Wright talked of a ‘head-on collision’ of US and British policies.
Some half-way point would have to be found, Wright said, which Berle believed was British policy all along.
However, the British were indeed very worried about a potential US victory and the opening of the skies to unbridled competition.
Their preparations took several forms.
The first was yet another Commonwealth meeting, to prepare a broad policy among the powerful Commonwealth countries that would help to offset the massive US influence over the Latin American countries.
The talks, held on 23–30 October in Montreal, produced total agreement on the need for an international authority to administer civil aviation, or, if that was not possible, a regional operators' conference.
Australia and New Zealand even wanted to go as far as the international operation of aircraft on trunk routes.
Only Canada, concerned as ever about US reaction, had reservations, insisting that any such body should not be too centralized, and that routes should be decided through interim bilateral agreements.
Canada also proposed an escalator clause for an airline to increase services if its aircraft were more than 65 per cent full.
This was rejected by the other Commonwealth countries and Britain because it would allow the USA to gain an unbeatable advantage.
The countries also agreed on the need for jointly operated trunk routes, and to the creation of a Commonwealth Air Transport Council to oversee Imperial air services.
In addition to securing Commonwealth support for their position, the British sought to consolidate their own aviation policy into some definable form, something which had eluded them for several years.
It had been decided in July 1944 that the Cabinet Committee on post-War Civil Aviation should be wound up and replaced by a Minister responsible specifically for this area of policy.
There was also pressure for a whole ministry responsible for civil aviation, but this was strongly resisted by the Air Ministry.
On 9 October, it was announced that Lord Swinton, a leading Conservative and former minister-resident in West Africa, would be made Minister of Civil Aviation.
Churchill believed that Britain needed a minister of Cabinet rank to carry out properly the forthcoming negotiations.
One of Swinton's first duties was to oversee the presentation of the new British White Paper on civil aviation, Cmd. 6561, which was circulated to Cabinet that month.
The paper spoke in general terms about the lack of prewar co-operation, except on technical matters, and the need for some form of international collaboration to eliminate wasteful competition.
It proposed an international convention on air transport under the auspices of an international authority.
This was the policy the British intended to  pursue at Chicago, much to US chagrin.
They would press for the international allocation of quotas, as well as mail and air freight, and expected some Commonwealth and European support.
Swinton left for Chicago, where he held talks with Adolf Berle on the first day of the conference.
Here, he reiterated the British position based on the new White paper with ‘bluntness’; he told Berle he was not prepared to discuss routes, but could discuss the principles of a civil aviation convention and the equitable division of traffic.
Berle offered the American objections to international control, insisting that the British proposals amounted to a 50–50 division of traffic on the North Atlantic route.
It was clear that the lines were drawn and that the two countries would have to compromise or find allies if the conference was not to degenerate into a complete fiasco.
The British War Cabinet even went so far as to create a special committee to guide Swinton during the talks.
It was chaired by the ubiquitous Beaverbrook, and consisted of Lords Cranborne and Leathers (Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs and Minister of Transport, respectively), Sir Stafford Cripps (Minister for Aircraft Production), and Sir Archibald Sinclair (Secretary of State for Air).
The Chicago Civil Aviation Conference of 1944 is rarely discussed today, but it established the forms and organizations that have governed postwar civil aviation to this day.
Aviation before the war had been considered by most countries, especially the imperial powers, as an important tool of government policy.
Airlines had been used to link parts of empires together, regardless of economic cost, and the principle of the state and state airlines working together was well established.
By the time of the Chicago conference, ‘many nations felt that the primary objectives of international airlines were political and military and that economic and other objectives were only of secondary importance’.
Only the United States had no state airline, and believed that airways should be open to free market capitalism: ‘In general, the Chicago conference can be described…as an attempt by the United States to capitalise on its overwhelmingly strong bargaining position in international aviation by securing for itself a near monopoly of long-haul air transport.'
The Chicago discussions were attended by fifty-one countries, many of which were still under German or Japanese occupation, so the proceedings were dominated by the USA, Britain, and the Commonwealth (the USSR  backed out at the last minute).
The USA held to its position of open airways, with an international body having only a consultative role; but it withheld the right for airlines to operate from any American point.
This was its strongest bargaining position.
At the opposite extreme, Australia and New Zealand wanted an international authority to operate the main trunk routes and aircraft, one moreover that would become an agency of the proposed United Nations.
This was quickly rejected by the conference, and the two countries moved towards the more moderate British and Canadian positions, which spoke in more general terms about an international authority and quotas on routes and frequencies.
Although discussion on other matters, such as technical standards and the creation of an international authority to oversee them, proceeded easily, the question of economic control remained insoluble.
The British used the four ‘freedoms’ agreed at the Commonwealth meeting in October 1943 as the basis for discussion, but refused to consider a US proposal for a fifth freedom: the right to pick up passengers, mail, and freight at intermediate stops not in the country of origin of the airline or its ultimate destination.
The British and other European countries knew that this would allow US airlines to fly from the USA, pick up passengers in Britain or in Europe, and fly on to any other destination, which would mean complete US domination of civil aviation.
The British Cabinet committee, meeting on 14 November, turned down the US idea, proposing instead a 50–50 division of frequency of traffic on the North Atlantic; but the following day it decided that the fifth freedom should be accepted, subject to safeguards.
This appeared to offer a real chance of a final agreement on the most difficult point, until on 18 November Adolf Berle proposed all five freedoms, with an escalator clause allowing an airline to increase its agreed number of flights if its planes were more than 65 per cent full.
This new proposal was completely unacceptable to Beaverbrook, who wanted to give a simple ‘no’ answer.
This produced complete deadlock in the conference, which now went to the highest governmental level, showing the importance attached to the matter by both the USA and the UK.
President Roosevelt wired Churchill on 21 November that both sides had compromised, but the UK insisted on restricting the number of aircraft irrespective of the amount of traffic: ‘This seems to me a form of strangulation,’ he wrote, and he asked Churchill not to let the conference collapse.
Churchill replied the following day that an agreement had already been reached until Berle had introduced new proposals on 18 November.
This was unacceptable, and he suggested finalizing  the technical agreements if the issue of services could not be resolved at that time.
Roosevelt telegraphed again that British insistence on traffic only between certain points was not realistic, and that the economic viability of services depended on being able to pick up intermediate traffic.
This showed clearly the American concern with economics versus the British concern with preserving a political and strategic position on the airways.
Roosevelt sent a note to Ambassador Winant two days later saying: ‘please take the following message personally to Winston and convince him that he has got to come through.
You will understand how important it is that he does,’ The message was that if there was no agreement at Chicago, Congress might not be in a mood to furnish further British Lend-Lease requirements.
Under this threat, Churchill sent a long reply on 28 November, explaining why Britain could not accept Berle's proposals.
He reiterated that the USA had a huge advantage in aircraft, and a combination of the escalator clause with fifth freedom rights ‘would enable American aircraft to carry most of the traffic between the UK and the Dominions of India and all foreign countries, as well as between all nations of the Commonwealth’.
He then asked for an adjournment of the conference if agreement was not possible.
Berle hoped to have the British blamed for breaking up the conference, as he knew he had the support of the Latin American states and some European countries.
In his opinion, the British had supported the fifth freedom before 18 November and then refused to accept it.
Berle also was not impressed with Swinton, who always pleaded that he was bound by instructions from London: ‘Swinton is ill-prepared…he also tends to be arrogant and inflexible.'
With the conference appearing doomed to collapse over the issue of the fifth freedom, Canada made a last-ditch effort to save the situation by proposing the first four freedoms, and one weekly round-trip flight that could be increased under an escalator clause of 65 per cent capacity and over.
Intermediate stops (that is, those affected by the fifth freedom) would be decided by the international body.
This so-called ‘Canadian compromise’ was admired by the delegates for its intent, but both the USA and Britain rejected it, the USA insisting on the fifth freedom, but with the possibility of opting out.
for their part, the British did not see the Canadian proposal as much of a compromise, and indeed seemed already to have given up on the conference.
Lord Swinton rejected both the American and Canadian positions.
Beaverbrook and Churchill agreed with him that Britain had  compromised enough and the issue of economic control of air routes could be decided later.
Although the Chicago conference failed to resolve the basic difference in viewpoint between Britain and the USA, it did produce significant achievements.
A Provisional International Civil Aviation Organization (PICAO) was created, with its seat in Montreal, to become a permanent organization when more than half the Chicago delegates had ratified the appropriate convention.
This was accomplished in 1947.
A whole series of technical agreements were also signed; these were placed under the auspices of the PICAO, and form the technical basis for all civil aviation.
A transit agreement granting the first two freedoms (the right to overfly territory and to land to refuel and in emergencies) was quickly ratified and remains in force today.
A US proposal for a transport agreement based on all five freedoms was accepted by only sixteen of the attending countries, and never took effect; the USA itself abandoned the idea in 1946.
Berle told Roosevelt in his official report on the conference that despite its failure to decide the main issue (for which he blamed Swinton and Beaverbrook), a great deal had been achieved, and positions were made known: ‘A substantial beginning has been made to opening the air for commerce.
It is not too much to say that we entered the conference in the law and atmosphere of the 17th century and we came out with a fair prospect of 20th century conditions.'
Swinton's report to the British government was somewhat different in tone.
He called the selection of the Interim Council of the PICAO a ‘travesty’.
There had been no agreement on the main issues of contention, but (aside from Canada) the Empire was with Britain, he said.
Commonwealth performance during the conference had been magnificent, and valuable contacts made with other powers.
Swinton believed that the UK had left the conference on good ground because US demands had been so unlimited.
He noted that the USA was already in search of bilateral aviation agreements, with the aim of obtaining air rights on a piecemeal basis, and he advocated that the UK should do the same.
On 9–10 December Commonwealth delegates from Chicago moved on to Montreal, where they announced the formation of the Commonwealth Air Transport Council, a forum for the exchange of views and co-ordination of air operations.
It was to be based on the British proposals in Chicago.
There was also agreement to set up a co-operative Britain-Australia-New Zealand-Canada trans-Pacific service, making an ‘all-red’ round-the-world service a possibility.
Further Commonwealth talks were held in London in  late December at which various parallel services were agreed to link Britain with India, Australia, and New Zealand (by BOAC and QANTAS), and with South Africa (BOAC and South African Airways).
Under these services, revenues would be shared among the participating companies.
This scheme showed that the British intended to pursue a more centralized aviation service within the Commonwealth, very much at odds with the American ‘open skies’ policy.
The new parallel services began in May 1945, with Avro Lancastrians (converted Lancaster bombers) flying the long route via India to Australia and New Zealand.
Britain succeeded in creating a Commonwealth ‘special relationship’ in civil aviation after 1945 which compensated in part for its inability to obtain international approval for a more regulated global system.
As the war ended and BOAC prepared to resume regular commercial services with whatever aircraft it could obtain, the issues unresolved at Chicago continued to haunt British planners.
Pan American intended to resume its twice-weekly service to Britain as permitted under the 1937 agreement, which immediately caused anxiety at BOAC.
American bilateral agreements that permitted fifth freedom rights especially alarmed the British, as they believed that the United States would be able to scoop up the best routes in a piecemeal fashion.
An American agreement with Ireland was especially irksome to Churchill.
As the Americans hoped to obtain substantial rights in the Middle East, the British took the opportunity to use their influence in those countries and warn the governments about what wide American penetration of their air services would mean.
This created something of a diplomatic flurry between London and Washington, as the Americans sought assurances that the British were not trying to sabotage their plans.
The British, of course, denied any such thing.
Early in 1945, the Coalition Government began consideration of the structure of British postwar civil aviation.
Lord Swinton presented a paper to Cabinet on 24 January arguing that Britain should have three airline companies: the nationalized BOAC for long-haul overseas services; a company responsible for services to Europe; and another one for services to South America.
A company called British Latin American Airlines had been registered in february 1944 by five British shipping companies with interests in South America.
Swinton proposed that BOAC and interested railway companies should operate the European airline, and BOAC and the shipping companies the South American airline.
Lord Knollys, chairman of BOAC, was not particularly pleased with these proposals, nor were other  members of the Cabinet.
Sir Archibald Sinclair, the Secretary of State for Air, thought there should be only one company, and Lord Beaverbrook stated that free enterprise should have the widest possible scope in the operation of the companies.
As a sign of the future, Ernest Bevin, Minister of Labour, and one of the senior Labour Party ministers, said his party had rather different views on the matter, but would accept the general proposals for the time being.
Despite the opposition of the Air Staff, which labelled the post of Minister of Civil Aviation separate from the Air Ministry ‘disastrous’, the War Cabinet decided in January 1945 to place BOAC and civil aviation under their own ministry, to be headed by the incumbent Minister of Civil Aviation.
This was accomplished quickly and the appropriate legislation was passed by Parliament in April.
Swinton's idea for three companies was also presented to parliament in a White Paper, but the general election of July 1945 brought Labour to power before any of the wartime government's plans could be implemented.
The Labour party's plans to nationalize British civil aviation were based both on their general policy for the nationalization of industry, and on a desire to avoid the haphazard market of the years before 1939.
The new government intended to treat aviation as part of its overall restructuring of the British economy.
However, the basic structure of three national airlines as proposed in the Swinton plan was retained.
A Cabinet Civil Aviation Committee was created under the chairmanship of Lord Addison, the new Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs.
It advised the Cabinet to continue with bilateral international agreements until a permanent international authority was created, to nationalize the country's airfields, and to allow up to 20 per cent private capital in the European and South American companies.
Lord Winster, the new Minister of Civil Aviation, wrote in an annex to Addison's paper that the government should retain at least some private investment in the airlines to profit from their interest and experience.
The Cabinet, meeting on 18 October, was unable to decide whether it was preferable to retain some private investment, as the Civil Aviation Committee recommended, or to proceed to complete nationalization.
Within days, the civil aviation group of the Parliamentary Labour party sent a memorandum to Cabinet arguing for the complete nationalization of the European and South American companies.
It argued that state ownership was party policy, and that the limited private capital contemplated would provide little real incentive for investment.
On 26 October, the  Cabinet decided to nationalize the three British airlines.
Finally, in December 1945, the Ministry of Civil Aviation's White paper on British air services, Cmd. 6712, which set down the new government's aviation policy, was submitted to the Cabinet by Lord Winster.
It called for a national plan, with the full co-operation of Commonwealth governments.
UK air transport would be under national control, but with three separate companies: the existing BOAC, for services to the Empire and Commonwealth, North America, Middle and Far East, and Pacific; a new British European Airways (BEA); and British South American Airways (BSAA).
The Boards of Directors of each airline would be appointed by the Cabinet, and their profits and losses would be borne by the Exchequer.
All airfields in the country (with the exception of small private aerodromes) would be nationalized, and the government would continue with the development of new aircraft as recommended by the Brabazon Committee.
The new Civil Aviation Bill was passed by Parliament in August 1946.
As the British moved to create a new regime for their airlines after the war, the outstanding unresolved issue from the Chicago conference remained: the need for an Anglo-American air transport agreement.
As noted above, the USA pursued bilateral rights with many European, Latin American, and Middle Eastern countries, using the so-called ‘Chicago form’ and in all cases insisting on fifth freedom rights.
The British attempted on occasion to forestall this, provoking considerable anger in Washington.
Anglo-American talks were held in London on 24 August 1945 in an effort to break the deadlock, but were unsuccessful.
In British eyes, the Americans remained ‘intensely nationalistic’.
Finally, in the latter months of 1945, as Britain tried to obtain a massive loan from the USA to remain financially solvent, a conference was arranged for January 1946 in Bermuda.
The Bermuda talks not only resulted in an agreement for air transportation between the two most important civil aviation powers, but provided the pattern by which all other bilateral agreements on civil aviation were arranged.
The talks proceeded quickly, without the complex formulae on frequencies and capacity that had characterized the Chicago talks.
Instead, each airline was to be allowed to use its discretion as to frequency and capacity within reasonable grounds.
Britain agreed to allow fifth freedom traffic through specific airports.
In effect, the Bermuda talks produced a gentlemen's agreement that neither country's airlines would take unfair advantage of the market.
The British had retreated so far from the position  they had held at Chicago that Sir William Hildred and Sir Henry Self, in charge of the British delegation, were afraid that they would be overruled by the Air Ministry and BOAC.
To ensure that they were not, US Secretary of State James Byrnes sent a message to Ambassador Winant in London that the USA was satisfied with the Bermuda agreement and a quick signature ‘would contribute materially toward a favourable recognition in Congress to the loan agreement’.
The Bermuda discussions were brought before the British Cabinet on 4 February; Lord Winster said that the talks were only preliminary, but the Americans were treating them as a final agreement.
As such, he could not recommend the draft agreement that had emerged from the conversations.
Hugh Dalton, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, said an agreement would have a powerful effect on the crucial loan negotiations, and was probably as much as could be achieved.
Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin agreed.
However, both the president of the Board of Trade, Sir Stafford Cripps, and the Dominions Secretary, Lord Addison, thought that the fifth freedom clause went against policy as agreed with the Commonwealth.
The issue was then referred to the Cabinet's Civil Aviation Committee for further consideration.
The Civil Aviation Committee met the next day and challenged two parts of the draft agreement that the Americans had inserted: the right of civil aircraft to use the US-leased bases in the Caribbean and Atlantic, and the right of US airlines to ‘change gauge’ in Britain, that is, switch to smaller aircraft for flights going on as part of the fifth freedom.
The Committee opposed these as giving the US airlines an added advantage.
The USA quickly dropped these clauses to meet the British objections, and the final act was ready for signature on 11 February.
The British Cabinet also gave its approval on that date.
The Bermuda agreement settled the Anglo-American civil aviation dispute on amicable terms.
It made airline rates subject to review by each government, permitted each country fifth freedom rights in the other, subject to adjustment, and referred disagreements to the PICAO.
Among the various routes that were agreed upon were US routes via London to the Middle East and South Asia, and through Hong Kong.
Britain was allowed to use New York and Miami for flights to the Caribbean, and Honolulu for Pacific flights.
The obvious success of the Bermuda agreement was shown by the issue of a joint statement in September 1946 that the Bermuda wording would be the basis for all future bilateral air agreements signed by each country.
It represented the single biggest step towards the creation of the international air agreements of today.
Ultimately, the British could not win the battle for civil aviation after 1945 because their economic performance and uncompetitive aircraft industry were outclassed by the size and strength of the American competition.
Nevertheless, civil aviation was correctly perceived by the British and Americans alike as an area of enormous growth after 1945.
Hence, each made great efforts to achieve a dominant position.
for the British, this meant state-owned airlines flying state-developed aircraft operating on agreed internationally controlled routes and frequencies.
The USA was in the opposite camp, fighting for complete free enterprise for airlines (except in situations in which US airlines were subject to foreign discrimination) and open access to all countries.
Naturally, the position of each country derived from its perceived view of the postwar scene: in an open environment US airlines and aircraft could not lose, whereas Britain would be driven from the air.
That the British eventually accepted the American view in most details shows that they had largely subsumed the aviation issue in the larger question of economic viability, and used aviation as a quid pro quo for the American loan.
The British acceptance of the US position in most respects at Bermuda reflected both its final abandonment of internationalization, and the realization that Britain, too, could benefit from the fifth freedom.
In an era when numerous refuelling stops were still a necessity, any additional traffic that could be obtained was an advantage.
British flights to the Caribbean and South America, and across the Pacific, could now use American airports and pick up traffic there.
Although the British airlines would not match the American competition for several years after the war, British aircraft were able to recapture some ground in the 1950s, especially when the new Brabazon types came into production.
Despite many early problems, aircraft such as the Comet and the Britannia proved to be the equal of their US competitors, and in some ways were even more advanced.
For the British, then, the picture was not ultimately as black as it appeared to be in 1945. for their part, the Americans viewed the British with considerable suspicion, and harboured their traditional fears of being outmanoeuvred.
Britain's apparent ability to rally Commonwealth support at Chicago, and subsequent development of a Commonwealth airline system that differed substantially in form from the Bermuda agreement, seemed to the Americans to be evidence of Britain's continued world power.
The fact that Britain could use air bases and airports in its territory throughout the world was perceived in Washington as an enormous advantage, and contributed to the American insistence on free and open competition.
The Americans did not perceive the true weakness of Britain's position until the British loan request in 1945, and then were able to use that to their advantage.
In the end, the Bermuda agreement satisfied the concerns of both countries, and its landmark status was shown by its widespread imitation thereafter.
JIM TOMLINSON Brunel University 
The Attlee Government and the Balance of Payments, 1945–1951
In The Future of Socialism — and in a classic revisionist sentence — Anthony Crosland argued that democratic socialists, instead of fussing about ‘glaring and conspicuous evils, squalor and injustice and distressed areas…have to fuss about the balance of payments, and incentives, and higher productivity’.
Whatever the implications of this view for socialist ideology, it was certainly a priority forced upon the Attlee governments.
Those administrations faced biennial balance-of-payments crises of great severity which shaped their whole approach to economic policy-making.
The balance of payments in the period immediately after the Second World War cannot be treated as a simple economic constraint, imposing inescapable policy responses.
It was not simply a matter of exporting enough to pay for necessary imports, as contemporary economic propaganda often suggested.
It also involved a very substantial outflow of government expenditure abroad, as well as foreign investment.
Equally, the responses to this problem were not pre-ordained by the state of the economy, and the choice among those responses had a number of highly significant political as well as economic ramifications.
Given this broad context, the purposes of this article are threefold: to outline some of the complexities of the payments situation in the period 1945–51; to discuss some of the military expenditure and foreign policy aspects of that situation, and how these were debated at this time; and, finally, to examine one of the most politically problematic aspects of balance-of-payments policy in this period: its impact on the sterling area in general and the colonies in particular.
What was the balance-of-payments problem in this period?
Clearly the legacy of the war was a huge current account deficit, with exports in 1945 at only 30 per cent of their prewar level (imports 60 per cent), and shipping earnings substantially diminished.
On capital account, around a quarter of prewar foreign investments had been sold, and very large debts accumulated in the form of sterling balances.
No wonder, then, that at the cessation of Lend-Lease, which had until VJ Day bridged the gap in the British accounts, Keynes could talk of a ‘financial Dunkirk’.
While the problems of the overall balance of payments hardly came as a surprise (though the speed with which Lend-Lease ended did come as a shock), the problem of the dollar was less readily anticipated.
For most of the 1940s the core difficulty from the British point of view was the dollar shortage, which was the key to the reserve position.
plainly the wartime legacy mightily constrained the policy options of the Attlee government.
Any government would have been likely in such a situation to control imports, promote exports, and in the meantime borrow.
Nevertheless, there was still considerable scope for policy to affect the situation, as is clearly apparent from Table 1.
The balance-of-payments problem plainly cannot be reduced to one of ‘how to pay for essential imports’.
A significant part of the problem was related on the one hand to the scale of government overseas expenditure (government current transactions), and on the other to the scale of capital exports.
Both of these (though in different ways) were strongly connected to policy decisions taken by the Labour government which are discussed below.
Table 2 gives some details of the dollar balance.
It shows that while the UK was in deep deficit in trade with the dollar area, in most years this was added to significantly by the deficit of the rest of the sterling area (broadly speaking, the Dominions minus Canada, plus the colonies, plus a few other countries like Iraq).
Gold (which was, of course, substitutable for dollars) was obtainable on a limited scale by trade within the sterling area from South Africa.
The huge loss of dollars under ‘other transactions’ in 1947   reflects the short-lived abolition of controls over access to dollars in that year.
The scale of Britain's overseas government expenditure was a source of intense debate at the time, and has remained a source of criticism of the Attlee government's policies.
Was this a case of folie de grandeur , in which Britain's economic recovery was sacrificed to anachronistic (and unsocialist?) attempts to retain a great power stance in the world?
This was certainly how Keynes saw it in one of his last memoranda, in February 1946.
In this paper Keynes argued that imports were being efficiently controlled and were close to the minimum for essentials.
The problem lay elsewhere:
The current and prospective demands upon us for political and military expenditure overseas have already gone far beyond the figure which can, on any hypothesis, be sustained…
It would not be a source of comfort to the hardpressed British public if they were to become aware that (reckoning our overseas statistics globally not a single bean of substance for themselves or of capital equipment for British manufacturers is likely to be left over from the American credit; and that we shall require, on balance, the whole of it, and, unless we change our ways, much more to feed and sustain Allies, liberated territories and ex-enemies, to maintain our military prestige overseas, and, generally speaking to cut a dash in the world considerably above our means.
The figures on those commitments, which Keynes called ‘extremely shocking’, are given in Table 3.
Keynes's was by no means a lone voice criticizing the extent of government commitments overseas, The (unpublished) Economic Survey for 1946, the Balance of payments Working party, and the Bank of England all expressed grave doubts on this score.
The figures in Table 4 show how many of these responsibilities were eventually reduced, prior to the Korean War, but much more slowly than Keynes and others called for.
The table makes it clear that the bulk of overseas government expenditure was incurred within the rest of the sterling area (RSA), and did not therefore add directly to the dollar problem.
But this is misleading in the sense that much of this expenditure did generate purchasing power in recipient countries, which led to    demand for dollar goods, demand which was not effectively curtailed by the exchange controls.
(This point will be returned to below.)
The debate on overseas government expenditure in the crucial period leading up to the sterling crisis of 1947 can be characterized, in broad terms, as a battle between Dalton and Attlee on the one side, and Bevin and the service chiefs on the other.
However, Attlee's position was a complex one: he was more ready than anyone to criticize strategic arguments used to justify such expenditure, but was never willing to push the arguments to the extent of causing a serious rift with Bevin, who was perhaps the key minister in the government after Attlee.
When Keynes's memorandum was discussed in Cabinet in February 1946, defence expenditure for 1946/7 had already been cut by 14 per cent.
But there was a marked reluctance to accept that the situation was as serious as Keynes portrayed it (a portrayal broadly supported by a paper from the Balance of payments Working party).
While there was a general recognition that the matter demanded further discussion, only Dalton urged support for the general thrust of Keynes's paper.
Bevin said little directly on the issue, except to stress the political problems of a rapid withdrawal from the Dutch East Indies and the need to consult the Chiefs of Staff.
Attlee proposed further debate in the Defence Committee, while stressing the impossibility of any immediate withdrawal of British forces from India, Indonesia, or Palestine.
Most of the key decisions on military and political expenditure overseas in this period seem to have been taken in the Defence Committee, and simply endorsed by the Cabinet.
The division in Cabinet between Dalton plus Attlee (plus, occasionally, Morrison) versus Bevin and the Chiefs of Staff, supported by A. V. Alexander, the Minister of Defence, was reflected in the Defence Committee's first meeting on 11 January 1946, when Dalton and Attlee queried the level of British forces around the world, and Bevin and the defence chiefs defended that level.
In this and succeeding meetings the focus of attention was primarily on the manpower involved in the armed forces, with some discussion of the public expenditure costs.
There was, at this stage and in this forum, no discussion of the direct foreign exchange costs of those overseas commitments.
Attlee was not content simply to urge the need for economies.
He also challenged the central premise of the service chiefs' and Bevin's argument: the belief that the Mediterranean was absolutely crucial to Britain s international position.
He ‘hoped that the strategic assumption that it was vital to us to keep open the Mediterranean and that in fact we could, should be re-examined.
He did not see how we could possibly do so under modern conditions.'
The ensuing debate encapsulates much of importance in the evolution of overseas expenditure in the early years of the Attlee government.
Bevin, in response to Attlee's scepticism about Britain's Mediterranean posture, argued that the stability of the area was enormously important to prevent war.
At the same time he tried to make an economic case for expenditure in that area: ‘Moreover, from the trade point of view, this area was probably worth between one and one and a half million employed men to  this country.
If we lost our political influence in this area we should suffer a great economic setback.'
The debate was later joined at greater length, following circulation of memoranda by Attlee, Bevin, and the Chiefs of Staff.
Bullock has described the paper by Attlee as ‘amongst the most radical produced by a British Prime Minister in Office’.
Attlee attacked the very basis of the perception that the Mediterranean was crucial to Britain in time of war, arguing that with the development of air power the resources needed to protect sea routes from Gibraltar to Suez would be impossible to find.
He further argued that no conceivable military strength in the area could defend access to oil resources against attack from the north (i.e. the USSR).
The Suez route to Australia could be replaced by the Cape route or via the Panama Canal.
He saw the attachment to the Middle East by Britain as ‘sentimental’, and wanted to redefine Britain as the easterly extension of a strategic area based in the USA, rather than a power looking eastwards through the Mediterranean to India and beyond.
Bevin's response was implicitly to accept the strategic vulnerability of the Middle East in wartime, but to argue that Britain's presence in that area was crucial to its role as a great political power.
Bevin did not accept Attlee's idea of resiting Britain's main base in Africa, but he did share in a developing view that Africa should play a much greater role in Britain's imperial policy, especially because of its (alleged) economic potential.
The Chiefs of Staff focused on the strategic arguments for the British presence in the Middle East.
The basic contention of their paper was that if Britain did not dominate an area, the Russians would.
This general doctrine applied particularly to the Middle East because:(1) it lay on the route of any Soviet expansion into Africa;(2) it could provide bases for a Soviet role in Africa;(3) it formed a forward position for the defence of South Africa and India;(4) it was a base for bombing the Soviet Union; and (5) it was an area crucial for its oil resources.
These papers were debated inconclusively at the Defence Committee meeting on 5 April 1946; further inconclusive discussion followed on 27 May 1946 and again on 19 July.
At the second of these meetings Attlee stressed that the strategic arguments about the Middle East were not valid because no country would be willing to grant bases for military action, and  all Britain would achieve would be to pose a needless and pointless threat to the Soviet Union.
He argued that access to oil resources could be secured by negotiation with the Russians.
Against this the Chiefs of Staff reiterated their view of the strategic importance of the Middle East and the belief that the area must be dominated either by Britain or the Soviet Union.
These arguments rumbled on into 1947.
But by March that year the Chiefs of Staff were recording a victory for their view of the Middle East, and were arguing that this implied that Britain must hang on to the right to return to bases in Egypt, even in the absence of agreement.
Although nowhere recorded in the public documents, the reason for Attlee's climbdown on this central issue for Britain's postwar overseas policy stance was a threat from the Chiefs of Staff to resign if the Prime Minister persisted in his criticisms.
A number of points may be made about this debate.
First, it is apparent how little the foreign Office and Chiefs of Staff were concerned with the problems of the British economy.
As far as the Foreign Office was concerned, postwar economic problems were transient.
This view is summarized in a memorandum sent to embassies abroad by the Foreign Office early in 1945, arguing for a necessary linkage of diplomatic commitments to economic strength, but going on to state that Britain's looming economic problems were likely to be temporary: ‘It must, however, be stressed that, given skill and good fortune, our financial difficulties will be acute only during the immediate post-war years.
There are sound reasons for hoping that they will be a temporary phenomenon, for this country possesses all the skill and resources required to recover a dominating place in the economic world.'
There is little to suggest that this view changed, at least until the sterling crisis of 1947.
Similarly, the Chiefs of Staff showed little appreciation of the economic context.
Attlee chided them for ignoring any notion of what the country could afford in suggesting armed forces levels, and for suggesting that cutting spending on the armed forces to £700 million would virtually immobilize them.
Alexander seems to have shared this insouciant attitude to the economic problem, arguing at one stage that there should not be a problem of competition for manpower between civilian and military uses as ‘a slight increase in productivity’ would solve the manpower gap.
The Chiefs of Staff also seem to have been strikingly narrow in their strategic vision, disregarding the political and diplomatic problems arising from Britain's role in the Middle East.
In their view, if strategic necessity were established, local sentiment could ultimately be set aside.
Bevin and the Foreign Office were on occasion more sensitive to this issue — but in Bevin's case this produced the bizarre proposal to hang on in the Middle East from a base in inhospitable (but British) territory 2,000 miles from the Suez Canal, Even Bullock is forced to concede that Bevin was ‘obsessed’ with the Middle East, an obsession he never seems to have lost.
Looking at the question from an economic standpoint, the key justification for a continued British presence in the Middle East was access to oil.
It follows that the key issue is the extent to which there was (or was believed to be) a significant Soviet threat to those supplies, especially in southern Iran.
In fact, the evidence suggests that at the time of the great debates over defence and the Middle East in 1946 Britain had a realistic view of Soviet intentions in this area — that they fundamentally consisted in a determination to secure access to oil concessions in northern Iran.
This view, which had been accepted by Britain at an earlier date, was reiterated by the Ministry of Fuel and power to the Defence Committee in 1946.
If the foreign and defence policy-makers may be accused of insufficient attention to the economic aspects of their policies, it is far from clear that the economic arguments were pressed in a manner most likely to bring about a re-assessment of overseas commitments.
Despite the memorandum by Keynes referred to above, the foreign exchange aspect of overseas government expenditure was conspicuously absent from the debate in the Defence Committee from its beginnings in 1946 right through to August 1947, by which time it may be argued that the damage had largely already been done.
In a memorandum in that month of crisis the Ministry of Defence apparently for the first time addressed the issue of the foreign exchange costs of existing policy, in response to the claim by the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the end of July that Britain's overseas military expenditure was running at £140 million p.a.
It argued that of the half million British troops overseas, 200,000 were in areas that did not create a foreign currency liability, and of the rest few were in areas requiring direct dollar expenditure; ‘it follows that the contribution to be made to the balance of  payments problem by the withdrawal of troops in overseas theatres will be strictly limited, will apply only to those areas when there is at present a currency obligation, and will produce little or no direct dollar saving.'
This argument seems to have had some effect, for while the Chancellor of the Exchequer was asked to look more closely at the dollar costs of overseas forces, the Defence Ministry's view that no further cuts in forces should be sought was accepted.
At one level the Ministry of Defence argument about the dollar costs of overseas expenditure was not absurd.
Most of the expenditure was outside the dollar area, and did not give rise to immediate dollar payments.
But, other things being equal, such financial transfers would ultimately lead to a real transfer of resources to the recipients of expenditure.
If the consequence were a rise in imports of dollar goods then a significant impact on the sterling area's reserves of dollars and gold would be felt.
In conditions of general ‘dollar shortage’ the effects were likely to be significant.
In addition, the effects of overseas political and military expenditure were not exhausted by the more or less direct effects on the balance of payments but obviously also involved tying up substantial numbers of men in the armed forces and the supply industries.
In fact, the debate about Britain's military expenditure (home and overseas) in this period was largely conducted in terms of manpower targets, a legacy of the war which was continued by the Labour government as an important ‘planning’ device.
Hence most of the pressure on the armed forces to reduce their activities took the form of persistent downward revision of the numbers of men (and rather limited numbers of women) allocated to them.
The reduction in numbers was still startlingly small — for example, even after the convertibility crisis of 1947 had led to a further downward revision of the targets for 31 March 1948, there were still 937,000 in uniform, supported by 350,000 in supplying industries.
(At 1 July 1947 there were approximately half a million troops overseas.)
Dalton was fond of contrasting these numbers with the half million total troops thought likely to be necessary in peacetime by the war-time Coalition Government.
The other way in which the economic aspects of military expenditure were presented was in the form of the public expenditure costs.
However, this was definitely secondary to the manpower approach, though again Dalton liked to contrast actual levels of expenditure with the £500 million which the Coalition had thought likely to be necessary in peacetime, pointing out in early 1947 that the current level of expenditure at over £800 million meant 2s. in the pound extra on the income tax in comparison with the Coalition figure.
The debate about overseas government expenditure may be seen as in one sense straightforward — an unsurprising clash of departmental interests, which, given the political weight of the participants, led only to a gradual though cumulative reduction in commitments.
Until the 1947 crisis drove home the extent of Britain's overseas payments difficulties Bevin and the Chiefs of Staff were able to defend their programmes quite successfully.
The advocates of a more rapid rundown were hampered by the domination of the debate by manpower figures, which led the issue away from the balance of payments.
proponents of more rapid reductions in overseas expenditure also tended to fall into the trap of contrasting such expenditure with expenditure on imported consumption goods.
The problem was commonly posed as guns versus butter, or, in the case of Keynes's original memorandum, overseas troops versus the bacon ration.
Defenders of the scale of British commitments, then and more recently, have thus been able to ignore the extent to which not only consumption but also production and productive efficiency were inhibited by the dollar shortage — both directly, by restricting currency available for imported capital equipment, and indirectly, by diverting domestic output of such equipment into dollar markets.
Finally on this aspect of the problem, there is the question of Germany.
In the immediate postwar period Germany constituted the single most important drain on the dollar.
This was an unintended consequence of Britain's successful attempt to occupy the most industrialized and populous part of Germany.
In other words, to a degree the burden of Germany on the balance of payments was in part the result of Britain's ‘great power’ posture, and not just the consequence of the military pattern that emerged in the conquest of Germany.
Unfortunately for the British government, this occupation zone was unexpectedly severed from its traditional sources of food in the east, and being unable to feed itself became reliant on supplies of food from dollar areas.
The position was rectified only slowly, the USA taking on first part and then, by the end of 1947, the whole of the burden.
Very different was the issue of foreign investment.
While the scale of British overseas commitments was widely debated in parliament and in the Labour party, as well as within the government, the scale of foreign investment and its key role in the overall balance-of-payments position was little known and therefore largely unremarked.
While an earlier generation of writers had noted this feature of the period, it was not until the recent work of Cairncross that the significance of this outflow was realized.
partly this was because the current account deficit appears much smaller in current (1980s) data than it was thought to be by contemporaries; mainly, it would seem, because the invisible position was actually much better than was then realized.
Retrospectively we know that capital outflow took place on a very large scale, amounting to £1,500 million in 1947–9, well in excess of the receipts from the US loan.
In 1947 alone the figure was £643 million:
Given the straits to which the British economy was reduced in 1947, when it was necessary to ration even bread and potatoes, an outflow of capital equal to about 8 per cent of national income and nearly equal to total net domestic capital formation (including stock-building) is a very extraordinary event.
It was certainly not the purpose for which the American and Canadian loans were procured.
How did this bizarre situation come about?
The brief answer might be that it was an unintended consequence of a largely implicit and undebated policy decision.
The policy decision was to maintain the sterling area, above all in its 1940 form as a zone of exchange control.
This meant no controls on foreign investment within that zone, and the unplanned outcome of this was a huge capital outflow from Britain to the sterling area as London rediscovered its traditional predilection for investing in the ‘white Commonwealth’.
However, as with military expenditure, the effects were not limited to the sterling area: capital inflows allowed much larger demands on the dollar pool by recipient countries.
(And this is to ignore the possibility of ‘leakage’ into dollars of sterling via weaknesses in the control mechanisms — a point returned to below.)
When it is said that the continuation of the sterling area was an ‘implicit’ decision (in sharp contrast to the debates on overseas expenditure) the point being made is that this continuation was not the result, it would seem, of any debate within the Attlee government.
Aspects of sterling's position as an international currency, notably the sterling balances, were, of course, vigorously discussed in the war period, above all as the result of US  pressure to reduce them.
And this did raise the whole issue of the future of the sterling area.
But what is striking about these debates is the shared assumption that the area was a ‘good thing’ for Britain.
The point at issue was how best to secure its future.
I have found no evidence that at any stage anyone said ‘what is this Sterling Area, and is it obviously a good thing for Britain?’
Typically, the sterling area was assumed a ‘good thing’, the justification of which needed only to be made to foreigners (especially Americans).
The major economic argument for the area was as a way of expanding the zone of multilateral trade in the short run, and as a source of ‘highly beneficial trading and banking relations’.
While such a view is not absurd, it hardly touches on the issues which would have to be addressed for any overall assessment.
Though the authorities do not seem to have been aware of the scale and significance of capital flows within the sterling area, they were aware that the exchange controls in that area were not all that London hoped.
For example, a major recipient of capital from the UK in this period, Australia, had notoriously ‘leaky’ controls — in 1947–8 it was supposed to spend $80 million and spent $200 million.
part of the reason was technical — the lack of an effective administrative apparatus — but in addition there was a clear political hostility in several countries to London's control of decision-making on the allocation of gold and dollars.
There were some attempts at consultation, notably with Commonwealth finance ministers in 1947 and 1949, but the relationship is perhaps symbolized by the fact that the RSA countries were not consulted on devaluation in 1949, simply informed of the decision a day or two before it took place.
The precise distribution of this outflow of foreign investment is shrouded in mystery.
Conan suggests that Australia may have received £550 million from Britain in the period 1945–51, South Africa perhaps £400 million over the same period.
Cairncross, citing other figures from the 1950s, suggests a comparable figure for South Africa, but a much lower figure for Australia.
Whatever the details it seems clear that:(1) except in the case of  
India, little of the capital flows took the form of a rundown of sterling balances;(2) most of the investment flow was to the ‘white Commonwealth’, especially South Africa; and (3) the colonies saw net disinvestment.
Each of these points requires some comment.
On sterling balances, the pattern was one where some countries ran down their balances significantly, while others accumulated more.
The aggregate of outstanding balances fluctuated quite violently, falling sharply especially in 1947, but for 1945–51 as a whole it fell by only £70 million.
The main country to draw down its balances was India, the main countries to accumulate balances were the colonies, with the white Commonwealth falling in between.
In the event, the sterling balances were much less of a problem  from London's point of view than was commonly anticipated when the scale of their wartime accumulation was first discussed in the mid-1940s.
Secondly, the huge flow of British investment into South Africa was directed especially into gold-mining expansion.
The consequences of this investment for the sterling area were complex, as South Africa was, of course, the world's major gold producer.
But in the early postwar years its import surplus was so large that despite expanded gold exports it was a net drawer on the sterling pool, until it left the pool at the end of 1947.
In 1947 the Treasury did raise the question of excluding South Africa (and India) from the sterling area because of the effect of their behaviour on the reserve position, but this was ultimately rejected.
In 1947 it was agreed to impose exchange control on exports of capital to South Africa, but this was not pursued when these flows ceased in 1948.
Despite the costs of South Africa to the sterling area in this period, Labour was determined to preserve good relations with that country, in order to avoid both break-up of the Commonwealth and disruption of the perceived strategic centrality of South Africa to military policy.
This friendly stance was little affected by the Nationalist victory in 1948.
While London did not consult the Dominions much on financial matters (though it made a public ploy of doing so) it lacked the political will or administrative means to make the rigorous control of dollar imports practised in the UK effective in those countries.
As on other occasions, Imperial sentiment was a weak basis for a key part of British policy.
Perhaps the oddest consequence of the evolution of the sterling area as a zone for British balance-of-payments policy was the relationship which developed with the colonies, Treating the sterling area as one bloc meant, logically, maximizing dollar receipts for the area as a whole and minimizing dollar debits.
Such a policy could be applied much more effectively to colonial territories, where British control of trade and payments was well grounded.
The colonies as a group quickly emerged as a key element in British strategy because they were net dollar earners (basically because of Malayan rubber and West African products such as cocoa) and could be made so on a bigger scale by a number of policy devices.
The result of this was that net disinvestment in the colonies took place under the Labour  government: inflows of funds were about £40 million, while sterling balances grew by £160 million.
This outcome was not the consequence of any direct intention to exploit the colonies.
Rather, it followed from the notion that the economic development of Britain and of the colonies was interdependent and complementary, and that what was good for Britain was good for the colonies.
This implied a division of labour between manufacturing in the UK, and raw material and food production in the colonies, a doctrine which the Colonial Office broadly accepted, in line with its lack of sympathy with colonial industrialization as likely to be socially and politically disruptive.
Thus the Treasury faced little opposition to its policies on the basis that the sterling area was in any way harmful to the interests of the colonies.
More controversial was the manner in which Britain turned the terms of trade in its favour and directly squeezed the incomes of colonial producers by bulk purchasing of colonial products at below world prices.
This caused disquiet amongst Colonial officials and prompted Creech Jones, the Colonial Secretary in the later years of the Labour government, to circulate a memorandum to the Cabinet in early 1947 in which he said: ‘I know full well how important it is that our overseas payments should be kept as low as they possibly can be, but I cannot believe that this justifies a course which is contrary to our declared policy in regard both to Colonial and to commercial matters and contrary also to the policy which has long been pursued by the Labour Party.’
But in the face of Treasury and Ministry of Food objections, nothing came of this.
Treasury policy, especially from late 1947, was to badger the colonies to provide data on which a rigorous system of dollar exchange control could be imposed, a system which was imposed from December 1947.
This was coupled to a policy of discouraging as far as possible even British imports into the colonies on the grounds that this would divert Britain's exports from dollar to soft currency areas like the colonies,’ and hence the accumulation of colonial sterling  balances.
This policy, which was very much stimulated by the convertibility crisis in 1947, was tightened up even further at the time of the next sterling crisis in 1949.
Colonial dollar imports fell from $376 million in 1947 to $355 million the following year, and to $260 million in 1949.
By early 1950, following renewed cuts, the annual rate was down to around $170 million.
The balance-of-payments crisis, in combination with fears of Russian expansionism, created a growing Labour interest in the Empire in general and Africa in particular.
The possibility of increased dollar receipts was coupled with a belief that Africa could be a strategic centre for British power, untainted by the nationalism which had eroded British power in Asia.
The search for dollars led to grandiose plans for African economic development, most famously the groundnuts scheme, though that was not the only madcap project to surface in this period.
The contribution of such schemes to dollar receipts and colonial development alike was more or less zero.
The ruthless pursuit of dollars in the colonies exacerbated political tensions, and probably hastened the rise of African nationalism.
As Fieldhouse has argued,
The ironical and fundamental point is that during these post-war years, when international demand for tropical commodities for the first time since 1921 really justified vast investments in the Colonies; when the Colonies had a huge back-log of demand for essential equipment; when at last the British government was equipped with power to give or lend considerable sums to top up what the Colonies could afford to invest from their own accumulating surplus; and when.
finally, a new political awareness was making Colonial populations more than ever critical of their relationship with the metropolis, Britain, for the first time in her modern Imperial history, was literally unable to deliver the goods.
As a result of the sterling area policy, Britain not only failed to deliver the goods but actively and blatantly exploited colonial producers.
In 1952 A. R. Conan wrote: ‘When all factors are taken into account, there seems some evidence to support the view that the balance of payments of the U.K. after the war might be considered fundamentally more satisfactory than in 1939.’
This may be a little exaggerated, but it makes the point quite  nicely that the commodity position of British trade recovered strikingly well after 1945 — essential imports could readily be paid for by exports plus the American loan remarkably quickly after the war's end.
The underlying balance-of-payments problems stemmed essentially from the scale of government overseas expenditure and foreign investment, these amounting to more than eight times the aggregate current account deficit for 1946–50 (see Table 1).
On overseas government expenditure Attlee fought a campaign with what has been called an ‘impressive’’ Little Englander' pragmatism' which, however, ran against the rocks of Bevin and the Chiefs of Staff.
Nevertheless, and no doubt too slowly, illusions of grandeur were slowly given up and Britain's incapacity to live with the superpowers was to a degree accepted.
Arguably more important in the long run was the illusion of grandeur in the monetary field.
Apart from acting as a zone for maximizing non-dollar trade, the sterling area under Labour had two main effects.
It facilitated Britain's surprisingly rapid re-emergence as a major capital exporter, and it provided a framework for a major squeeze on the colonies.
The second of these aspects has emerged only relatively recently in the published literature on the postwar Labour government, but it is now a commonplace, certainly among Imperial and colonial historians.
It is strange but perhaps explicable mixture of a compelling desire to rescue the British economy with a Fabian paternalism which saw a ‘natural’ path to colonial development in the expansion of traditional (dollar-earning) commodity production.
Fieldhouse drives the point home when he argues that ‘between 1945 and 1951 Britain exploited those dependencies that were politically unable to defend their own interests in more ways and with more serious consequences than at any time since overseas colonies were established’.
This was, he argues, ‘social imperialism in an extreme form’.
‘Social imperialism’ suggests that the main beneficiaries of this policy were British consumers, and indeed one writer has gone so far as to argue a direct link to the Attlee government's social reforms: ‘The nationalisations, medical provision and expansion of education so magnanimously legislated by the Labour Ministry were largely achieved because the Bank of England  kept the Sterling Area show on the road.'
But plainly this is to ignore the extent to which the immediate beneficiaries of the sterling area were the Dominions rather than British citizens, a point neatly summarized by Table 5.
In the longer run the accentuation of the sterling area policy, and its apparent success, especially in the explosion of colonial dollar-earning from the time of the Korean War commodity boom, re-established the pound as a major currency, a role which seemed unlikely in 1945.
Thus what Strange calls sterling's role as a ‘negotiated’ currency — a top currency on the slide, which has to be constantly defended — emerged enormously strengthened from the Attlee period, and this must be seen as a major part of the legacy of that government.
The Attlee governments were faced with a complexity of economic and political problems which should perhaps spare them, above all modern British governments, the condescension of posterity.
Nevertheless, given that those governments left such an enduring legacy, the limits of their policy appraisal need to be stressed.
There is little sign that the government was able to find the time or the inclination to assess sceptically the framework within which balance-of-payments policy was conducted.
Reductions in overseas government expenditure took place, but reluctantly and more gradually than now seems desirable.
However, the more fundamental issue (in the long run) of sterling and the associated question of the role of the City of London seem to have been little discussed.
In other words, Labour's ‘pragmatic’ response to the recurrent payments crisis tended to enhance the taken-for-granted desirability of sterling's role as a world currency.
When policy was seen to be hurting the colonies, some protested; but even the many who accepted that Britain's relations with its colonies were unsatisfactory saw this as a relatively minor blemish on an otherwise desirable system.
In this Crosland was typical.
In his book Britain's Economic Problem , which was almost all about the balance of payments, he accurately outlines the broad trends in the balance of payments described above, and the extent to which the sterling area relied on the colonies.
But his response was merely to press for a greater supply of British goods to those colonies to reduce their sterling balances.
The broader questions of Britain's role as a capital exporter, and the role (economic and political) of the City linked to the status of the pound, are all neglected.
Despite its important success in managing the balance of payments in the short run, this must count as a significant failure of policy for a democratic socialist government.
E. H. H. GREEN University of Reading 
The Strange Death of Tory England
Conservatism .
By Ted Honderich.
London: Hamish Hamilton, 1990, pp. 255.
ISBN 0-241-12999-0. £15.99.
English Conservatism since the Reformation , By R. Eccleshall.
London: Allen & Unwin, 1990, pp. x + 254.
ISBN 0-04-445773-1. £9.99 (pbk).
Conservatism and Collectivism, 1880–1914 .
By M. Fforde.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1990, pp. ix + 222.
ISBN 0-7486-0319-2. £25.00.
For Party or Country.
Nationalism and the Dilemmas of Popular Conservatism in Edwardian England .
By F. Coetzee.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990, pp. viii + 221.
ISBN 0-19-506238-8. £32.00.
Leopold Marse and the National Review .
By John A. Hutcheson jun.
New York and London; Garland, 1989, pp. xx + 500.
ISBN 0-8240-7818-7. £25.00.
The Modernization of Conservative Politics: The Diaries and Letters of William Bridgeman 1904–1935 .
Edited by P. Williamson.
London: The Historians Press, 1988. pp. x + 270.
ISBN 0-9508900-4-9. £20.00.
The British Conservative party has been the most successful political party of the modern era.
The Conservatives have been in Government, either alone or in coalitions dominated by their party, for sixty-seven of the past 100 years, and their share of the vote at general elections has rarely fallen below 40 per cent.
No other party of the right operating within a mass electoral system has equalled this achievement, and in recent years the only institution which has matched the Conservatives in terms of the monotonous regularity of their success is Liverpool Football Club.
The enduring appeal of the Conservatives is undoubtedly one of the most important political phenomena of the twentieth century: and yet both the party as an institution and the nature of British Conservatism remain relatively under-studied.
It is true that during Margaret Thatcher's tenure of the Conservative leadership the social basis of the Conservative parliamentary party, the nature of its constituency, and the conflicting philosophies of the ‘new’ and ‘old’right provided the subject matter for a wealth of publications.
However, the attention lavished on the Conservative party, and especially on the Conservative Party's ideas, in the past few years has only served to emphasize the relative neglect of Conservative history and Conservative thought before Mrs Thatcher.
Furthermore, this lack of a detailed history of Conservatism has handicapped the study of Thatcherism itself, for the absence of a clear historical perspective has ensured that, in spite of the proliferation of literature, the ideological origins of the Thatcherite Revolution remain obscure.
The historiography of the post-Disraelian Conservative party is strikingly sparse when compared to the volume of work devoted to its opponents.
Lord Blake's now revised 1968 Ford Lectures provide an introduction to the late nineteenth and twentieth century party, but their aim was to provide a sketch, not a comprehensive study.
The Longman Group's semi-official history of the party will doubtless provide the basic starting-point for scholars of twentieth century Conservatism for years to come, but to date it offers still only a largely introductory, if more detailed, survey of the Conservative party in the first three decades of this century.
The Conservative hegemony of the interwar years still awaits an adequate explanation, and the Conservative dominance between 1951 and 1964 — Harold Wilson's ‘thirteen years of Tory misrule’— has escaped the white heat of historical investigation.
The one area of Conservative history which has flourished is political biography, but the danger of this is a tendency to reduce the history of the Conservative Party to a history of personalities and to avoid any analysis of Conservatism in terms of structures, interests and ideas.
If the Conservative Party generally has suffered from neglect, the Edwardian Conservatives have suffered most.
In spite of a number of important publications in the early 1980s which sought to take Edwardian Conservatism seriously, notably the work of Geoffrey Searle, Alan Sykes, and Gregory Phillips, the Conservative party remained the Cinderella of  Edwardian historiography, languishing in the shadows while its ugly sisters, the Liberal and Labour parties, hogged the limelight.
In some respects this imbalance was understandable.
The fact that after the Great War the Liberal party went into decline and the Labour party emerged as a governmental party seemed to indicate that the most interesting developments must have been taking place on the left of British politics, even before the war.
But the excitement generated by this debate tended to obscure the fact that the party experiencing the most obvious difficulties before 1914 was the Conservative party.
Whatever view one takes of the electoral fortunes of the Liberal and Labour Parties before 1914, the Conservative party was clearly losing — three general election defeats in a row and no significant signs of an electoral revival.
There may or may not have been divisions of opinion in the ranks of the progressive Alliance, but the Conservatives were all too evidently engaged in fratricidal strife.
Moreover, the whole raison d'être of the Conservative party seemed under threat.
As self-professed guardians of the Empire and Britain's national greatness the Conservatives had to face up to Britain's relative decline as an imperial and economic power.
As the party of property the Conservatives had to cope with an electorate dominated by the propertyless, the advent of British socialism and the apparent threat to property posed by a reform-minded Liberal party.
If J. A. Hobson was justified in speaking of a ‘crisis of Liberalism’ in 1909, it is equally if not more justified to think of the Edwardian period in terms of a ‘crisis of Conservatism’.
The history of the Edwardian Conservatives sums up many of the problems associated with the history of the party.
If one contrasts the history of British Conservatism in the early twentieth century with the history of the British left — or, indeed, the German right — in the same period one can only be struck by the discrepancy in the volume and nature of the scholarship produced.
While there have been important pioneering studies, the hinterland of the Edwardian Conservative party and its ideological structures remain to be explored.
By way of comparison, both the British left and the German right have been well mapped in terms of their social constituencies, the social geography of their electoral support, and their organizational structures.
In addition, the subtle nuances of British socialist and Liberal ideas have been charted in detail, while similar care has been taken by those historians who have surveyed the rich and varied political ideologies of the right in Wilhelmine Germany.
For the Edwardian  Conservatives in particular, and British Conservatism in general , similar attention has been desirable for some time.
It is thus to be welcomed that a number of studies have appeared which examine the nature of the early twentieth century Conservative party and which stress the importance of Conservative ideas in understanding the Party's development during its period of crisis.
Equally it is to be welcomed that two major attempts have been made to address the general nature of Conservative ideology.
Robert Eccleshall and Ted Honderich have provided one very important service to students of British Conservatism.
In spite of the work of Noel O'Sullivan, W. H. Greenleaf, and Anthony Quinton the notion has persisted that Conservatism is not an ideology.
This notion has been central to Conservative self-presentation from the emergence of Conservatism in its modern form in the early nineteenth century, and it has found particular favour in the writings of some of the most eloquent spokesmen of twentieth century Conservatism.
Thus in the 1920s Walter Elliot argued that Conservatism was based on -an observation of life and not a priori reasoning', while more recently Sir Ian Gilmour declared that Conservatism is ‘not an ideology or a doctrine’.
That Conservatives have been keen to sustain this argument should have sounded alarm bells for scholars of Conservatism, but the only alarming thing has been a tendency to accept this concept of Conservatism almost at face value.
That the semi-official history of the party should have eschewed discussion of Conservatism as an ideology is not surprising, but a prominent British Marxist scholar has conceded that ‘the Tory tradition is not best understood as a tradition of ideas’ and the introduction to a recent collection of essays on Edwardian Conservatism also accepts that ‘Conservatism is not an ideology, but a frame of mind, an outlook, a general approach’.
Eccleshall and Honderich, however, will have none of this, and they lay to rest, it is to be hoped for good, the idea of Conservatism as a ‘non-ideology’.
Together they illustrate that, even if it is true that Conservatism harbours ‘a distrust of the purely intellectual approach in politics’, this in itself is an ideological position with important implications in terms of both the theory and practice of Conservatism, and  Honderich concludes that ‘the commodious proposition that Conservatives only have and only favour factual beliefs which have passed the test of time, are empirical and so on, and hence are untheoretical in various senses…needs to be delivered, if necessary by private contractors, to the rubbish heap of history’.
Eccleshall and Honderich find common cause in a desire to establish the ideological nature of Conservative thought, but apart from this their approaches to the study of Conservativism are very different.
Honderich's book is a great disappointment.
His method is straightforward enough: examining what he takes to be the central claims and assumptions of Conservative political philosophy, he proceeds to dismantle them one by one and, having demonstrated to his satisfaction that no Conservative tenet can withstand analytical criticism, declares that ‘Conservatism…has, in the end, nothing to say for itself’.
There are a number of problems with this approach.
Addressing Honderich's work on its own terms, one must question whether he demonstrates the complete vacuity of Conservative thinking.
To take one example, Honderich's dismissal of the notion of ‘intellectual imperfection’, which Anthony Quinton has described as the pivot of Conservative thought, is based on a very partial rehearsal of the concept.
It may be the case, as Honderich states, that the Conservative notion of ‘intellectual imperfection’— the idea that people's rational faculties are necessarily inadequate to grasp the complexities of social development, and that there are dangers in using abstract reasoning as a guide for social and political behaviour — does not mean, as some Conservatives have claimed, that Conservatism is atheoretical.
However, this fails to explore the limits of the imperfectionist case; in particular, Honderich underrates the most important twentieth century formulation of the notion of imperfection.
In his critique of rationalism in politics Michael Oakeshott drew a distinction between two forms of human knowledge: ‘technique’, that is, skills which can be taught or acquired from manuals; and ‘practical’, by which is meant things like judgement or artistry.
For Oakeshott the ‘rationalist’ error is the equation of reason which technique, and thus the problem is not the use of reason in politics as such but a misidentification of what constitutes reason.
As a result of seeing part of knowledge as the whole, ‘rationalists’, Oakeshott contends, over-estimate their abilities to define and solve problems, whereas reason proper indicates the need for caution in assessing the scope of human capability.
Whether or not one agrees with Oakeshott's position, it represents a sophisticated defence of the  imperfectionist argument for a ‘limited politics’, and it certainly warrants more consideration than Honderich provides.
As an analytical philosopher Honderich is keen to explore the logic of Conservatism and to demonstrate that it has none, but at the same time he engages with the history of Conservative ideas.
Unfortunately the two things do not harmonize.
The difficulty here is best demonstrated when Honderich, analyzing the notion that Conservatism is a ‘defence of the familiar’, argues that if this were central to Conservatism ‘we should have a mystery on our hands, the mystery of how an egregious idiocy could have become a large political tradition’.
Leaving aside the particular case, Honderich's statement illustrates the problem of trying to blend the study of logic with the history of ideas.
For a philosopher, whether an idea is logical or illogical is very important, but for an historian of ideas this concern is of relatively little significance.
To argue over the logic or truth of an idea in absolute terms is to explore the nature of belief itself, but for an historian of ideas what is most interesting is ‘who held a particular belief at a particular time and what needs it fulfilled for them.
It may well be the case that an egregious idiocy has formed the basis of a political tradition — examples of this are plentiful — but ridiculing an historical phenomenon does not explain it.
The net result of Honderich's weakness as an historian of ideas is that his book slips into confusion.
Conservatism is a polemic against Conservatism and more particularly Thatcherism, but Honderich's own work raises the question as to whether the two are related.
Describing his arrival in Britain in 1959, Honderich states that he ‘came from a decent place to join a nation of decency…(when) the decency of England…was…still in a kind of ascendancy’.
Since 1979 there has been, in Honderich's view, a ‘decay of decency’ for which the Conservative Party, and in particular the influence of the ‘lumpen intelligentsia’of the new right, have been responsible.
According to Honderich, if people find Britain a harsh place in the 1990s then Conservatism is to blame.
Setting aside the polemical aspects of his argument, Honderich's thesis boils down to three points.
The first is that British society and the role of government are radically different now from what they were thirty years ago.
The second is that these differences are the product of the influence of the ‘new right’ and its emphasis on market freedoms as the basis of civil and political liberty.
The third is that the new right and Conservatism are one and the same.
It is doubtful whether many would dispute Honderich's first two points.
However, Honderich himself throws up difficulties with regard to his third point, in that Conservatism must have been at least partly responsible for the ‘decent’ society he found when  he arrived in Britain thirty years ago.
In 1959 the Conservative Party had been in power for eight years, but ‘decency’ appears to have been safe in their hands.
Ignoring once again Honderich's polemical language, there is an important problem here: namely, how is it that Conservatism can be responsible for what everyone agrees are two very different governmental strategies informed by two very different social philosophies?
On the one hand, it could just be that Conservatism has changed.
On the other hand, there is the possibility that one of the differing patterns of ideas may not be Conservatism.
This last point never occurs to Honderich, who equates Conservatism with the new right.
Yet it is worth noting that one of the most influential works in the canon of the new right, Friedrich Hayek's The Constitution of Liberty , ends with a chapter entitled ‘Why I am not a Conservative’.
If Honderich had paid attention to clues like this he could have subjected the credentials of the new right to closer scrutiny and interrogated the development of Conservative thought with much greater sensitivity.
But Honderich is too busy allocating guilt to be discriminating in his investigations, with the usual result that one cannot be sure if the right people have been convicted.
Robert Eccleshall has fewer pretensions than Ted Honderich but his book is much more coherent.
The structure of English Conservatism since the Restoration has the outward appearance of a ‘central text’ for an undergraduate special subject in British Conservatism, in that the book is split into six conceptual and period sections, each of which contains an interpretative essay followed by extracts from contemporary sources.
In principle this format has much to recommend it, but in this case the practice has not been successful.
The problem lies with the documents, which are too short to be of real value.
It would have been more sensible to reduce the period span of the book, especially as Eccleshall himself acknowledges that Conservatism in its recognizably ‘modern’ form did not emerge until the early nineteenth century.
The additional space thus provided would not only have allowed the reproduction of documents of a useful length, but would also have avoided anomalies such as the absence of any statements by the Third Marquis of Salisbury, Stanley Baldwin, Walter Elliot, Noel Skelton, the ‘Mannheim Group’, and other leading Conservative politicians and publicists of the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Any collection of documents is necessarily selective, but this one does seem to be marked by some significant absentees.
An alternative to shortening the period scope would be to expand the work to two volumes, the first to cover the period c.1660–1832 and the second the period from 1832 to the present day.
Either  approach would allow a greater integration of analysis and documents, and would certainly make the book more useful as a standard text.
An additional benefit of expanding Eccleshall's book would be that he could extend his interpretative essays, which contain important and subtle reflections on the nature of Conservatism.
Throughout the book Eccleshall demonstrates an impressive authority and ease with his sources as he ransacks 300 years of Conservative thought to discover the meaning of Conservatism.
The result of this search is that Eccleshall finds the lemma of Conservatism in ‘a particular conception of the political order’.
Conservatism, he argues, is essentially ‘the persistent image of society as a command structure in which the responsibilities of leadership can be exercised within the framework of a strong State’, and it is this ‘that distinguishes English Conservatism from rival ideologies’.
This stress on authority and hierarchy is, Eccleshall contends, understandable given that‘from Restoration absolutism to the Thatcherite preoccupation with law and order Conservatives have always been fearful of social indiscipline’.
But if Conservatives have always been agreed on the main danger they face, and have always agreed on the basic means to combat it, they have not, Eccleshall argues, always been agreed on the precise manner of exercising authority and maintaining social discipline.
According to Eccleshall the Conservative Party, like Faust, has always been able to declare ‘Two souls together live in my breast’, with the philosophy of a strong, paternalist authority competing with the notion of a strong, non-interventionist authority.
Here Eccleshall's analysis is identical to that of W. H. Greenleaf, who has also identified a long-standing division between ‘libertarian’ and ‘paternalist’Conservatives.
Such a frame of reference clearly allows space within Conservatism for the ‘new right’ and ‘Thatcherism’.
The Thatcherite stress on social discipline and the ‘strong state’ provides the link to the central Conservative tradition, while the accent on market economics simply establishes Thatcherism as an expression of the ‘libertarian’strand of that tradition.
Eccleshall's argument is very neat, but it is not entirely convincing.
To begin with, there is more than a hint of circularity about Eccleshall's definition of Conservatism.
In effect he seems to be saying that Conservatism seeks to preserve social discipline through the maintenance of authority, and that therefore it stresses authority and social discipline.
Even if one discounts this problem, there is the question as to whether the tradition of authority and concern with social discipline is sufficient in itself to define Conservatism and to distinguish it from other ideologies.
Most  governments in the old Eastern Bloc were concerned with social discipline, and they also stressed the importance of authority wielded through a strong state, but it would be wrong to see them as Conservative.
In defining an ideology, the claims which seek to legitimate political and social authority are surely as important as the notion of authority itself.
Conservatism, like any other ideology, has to justify its conception of authority and social discipline in terms of a claim to possess superior political wisdom, and it is the manner and nature of this claim that defines the essence of Conservatism.
At this point it is difficult not to be drawn back towards the work of Anthony Quinton, who has provided a helpful model of the basic Conservative claims to political wisdom.
As stated above, Quinton presents the notion of ‘intellectual imperfection’ as the organizing principle of British Conservatism, but he also identifies three other concepts as essential to Conservative thought.
The first is traditionalism , by which is meant that Conservatives have an attachment to established customs and institutions, and, as a corollary, a hostility to ‘sudden, precipitate and revolutionary change’.
The second is organicism : that is, Conservatives regard society as ‘a unitary, natural growth, an organized living whole not a mechanical aggregate’, which in turn implies that they are resistant to arguments which reduce society to component parts like classes or atomistic individuals.
finally, Conservatism is characterized by political scepticism , or the belief that ‘political wisdom…is not to be found in the theoretical speculations of isolated thinkers’.
To date no one has produced a more succinct or more plausible definition of Conservatism, and certainly neither Honderich nor Eccleshall has provided an adequate alternative.
In fact it seems to this reviewer that Quinton's framework offers essential support for Eccleshall's vision of Conservatism, in that the axioms Quinton describes provide for a specifically Conservative conception of political authority and social discipline.
If one accepts that Quinton offers a more comprehensive formulation of Conservatism than Eccleshall, then Thatcherism's credentials must be checked again.
Eccleshall himself implicitly acknowledges this problem, for he notes at one point that Thatcherism's characteristics —‘its mixture of abrasively theoretical market economics, uncompromising anti-egalitarianism and fervent patriotism’— are hardly ‘the ingredients of what Oakeshottians judge to be authentic Conservatism’.
For Eccleshall, Oakeshottians and other imperfectionist-minded Conservatives fail to acknowledge their point of contact with a different strain of Conservatism, namely the common conception of authority.
But if this, as suggested above, is insufficient to  identify Conservatism then the ‘Oakeshottians’ and their imperfectionist allies may be correct in seeing the new right and Thatcherism as alien ideological territory.
One possible means of reconciling the new right and Thatcherism to the Conservative tradition would be to abandon the emphasis on ‘authority’ and emphasize the duality of Conservative thought in terms of the ‘libertarian'/’paternalist' divide.
But at this juncture another major problem emerges, in that it is very difficult to demonstrate that there is an established libertarian Conservative tradition with which Thatcherism and the new right can be matched.
Eccleshall argues that libertarian Conservatism was alive and well in the work of Edmund Burke and in the ‘Liberal Toryism’ which reached its apogee during the premiership of Sir Robert Peel.
Yet, as recent work on political economy in the late eighteenth century has shown, it is difficult to establish Adam Smith, let alone Burke, as a ‘free marketeer’ in anything like the modern sense.
The conception of state-civil society relations which informed Burke's (and Smith's) thought was highly complex, and certainly Burke was too much of an ‘organicist’ to have accepted the Thatcherite idea that society does not exist and that individuals and their families are the basic units of consideration.
It is equally difficult to present the ‘Liberal Toryism’ of the 1820s or Sir Robert Peel's economic liberalism as precursors of ‘libertarian’Conservatism.
Lord Liverpool was many things, but he was not a clear-cut individualist, and his concept of limited politics was distinct from that associated with laissez-faire liberal economics.
Peel's stance in relation to economic liberalism seems more promising, but in terms of his relationship to the Conservative canon two things are worthy of note: first, Peel's espousal of liberal economics resulted in the bulk of the Conservative Party deserting him; and second, the most authoritative appraisal of Peel's career has concluded that ‘Peel was not the founder of the Conservative party but was the progenitor of Gladstonian Liberalism’.
The attempt to locate ‘libertarian’ Conservatism in the late eighteenth or early nineteenth century seems implausible.
Eccleshall appears to be on stronger ground when he looks to the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries for evidence of libertarian Conservatism.
Here he finds organizations like the Liberty and property Defence League (LPDL) and The British Constitutional Association (BCA), and individuals like Lord Wemyss, Herbert Spencer, A. V. Dicey, and Ernest Benn, all committed to individualism and all found supporting the political right.
Eccleshall also finds backing here from one of the recent histories of  the late Victorian and Edwardian Conservative Party.
The work of Matthew Fforde appears to offer an historical lifeline to those, like Eccleshall, who would present Thatcherism in terms of an established tradition of libertarian Conservative thought.
In Conservatism and Collectivism Fforde argues that between 1880 and 1914 the Conservative party was faced by a rising tide of collectivist opinion and collectivist legislation.
Confronting explicitly collectivist opponents for the first time, the Conservative party, so Fforde contends, stressed the values of the free market, turned to the classical economists to justify non-intervention, and revealed themselves to be doctrinally committed to individualism.
With regard to the Tory hierarchy Salisbury, Balfour, and even the supposedly dirigiste -minded Alfred Milner and Joseph Chamberlain, are seen as staunch anti-collectivists.
Equally important, Fforde finds a commitment to the market economy and laissez-faire embedded in the party's grass roots, and in particular in the outlook of the most traditional Conservative interest, the land.
In this respect Fforde believes that individualism was not just a particular strand of the Conservative tradition, but was the Conservative tradition, and that ‘Tory Centrism, anti-capitalism, or paternalist interventionism’ are ‘phantoms of the historiographical imagination’.
If Fforde is correct, integrating Thatcherism into the Conservative tradition is not a problem.
But the assumptions which underpin Fforde's work are highly questionable and often bizarre.
and ultimately he presents a misleading portrait of the Edwardian Conservative party and British political development in general.
The first major problem with Fforde's work is that it equates collectivism with socialism, which is as historically wrong as it is jejune.
If Fforde was describing the phenomenon whereby late Victorian and Edwardian commentators frequently used both terms to describe anti-individualism, this would be justifiable.
But Fforde, unlike the late Victorians and Edwardians, fails to distinguish between socialism as a political movement and ‘socialism’ as a contemporary synonym for state intervention.
Thus Fforde describes Thatcherism as a revolt against a ‘culture of Collectivism’ and quotes uncritically Sir Keith Joseph's remark about the need to clear away ‘the vast bulk of the accumulating detritus of Socialism’.
This is all logical enough given Fforde's conviction that collectivism comes from ‘areas other than the British Conservative party’, but Fforde seems to forget that the Conservatives were in power for fifty-five of the 100 years from the dawn of collectivism to the edge of Thatcherism, and must, therefore, have been at least partly responsible for some of Keith Joseph's ‘detritus’.
To get round this uncomfortable fact Fforde would have to argue either that all collectivist legislation emanated from governments of the left, or that all Conservative governments before 1979 were in some way not truly Conservative.
This latter option appears to have some attraction for Fforde, for in his conclusion he seems to agree with the Thatcherite premise  that pre-1979 Conservatives, by accommodating themselves to collectivist reforms rather than reversing them, abandoned their principles and surrendered to the so-called ‘ratchet’ effect of creeping socialism.
That Fforde accepts some key Thatcherite assumptions is evident, but in many respects his work, like Thatcherism itself, is reminiscent of an earlier intellectual tradition, in that the more one reads his work the more one thinks of A. V. Dicey.
Fforde locates the ‘rise of collectivism’ in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, equates collectivism with socialism, and views collectivism as symptomatic of the triumph of ‘materialism’.
All of this has a distinctly Diceyesque ring, for in the introduction to the 1913 edition of his Law and Public Opinion Dicey portrayed any extension of state activity as ‘socialist’, and denounced the welfare collectivism of the ‘new liberalism’ as an attempt to ‘bribe’the electorate with state benefits.
However, Fforde's acceptance of Dicey's basic agenda reveals the weakness of his central argument, a weakness which is confirmed by his comment that the LPDL, an organization with which Dicey had close links, ‘espoused the pure milk of Conservative orthodoxy’.
Fforde's error (and Eccleshall makes the same mistake) is simply that the ‘orthodoxy’ which Dicey and his friends in the LPDL espoused was not Conservatism but classical mid-Victorian Liberalism.
It is true that Dicey, the LPDL, and later the BCA, allied themselves with the Conservative party, but this was not because they considered themselves Conservatives.
For men like Dicey, Auberon Herbert, Lord Wemyss, and St Joe Strachey alliance with the Conservatives was the product of disgust with a Liberal Party which, in their eyes, had abandoned Liberalism.
They had no great love for Conservatism, but, given the tenor of Liberal politics, saw the Conservative party as the last hope in a struggle to preserve their own brand of Liberalism.
Moreover, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was a hope that was disappointed.
Lord Salisbury espoused and practised a limited politics, but it would be reductionist to equate this with the doctrinaire non-interventionism preached by the LPDL.
In fact Salisbury poured scorn on Lord Wemyss —‘the great prophet of North Berwick Law’— and insisted that interventionist legislation had to be considered on the merits of the measure in question.
Likewise, Wemyss had few kind things to say about Salisbury, and on more than one occasion denounced him as a ‘socialist’ for  enacting measures like free education in rural districts and the Workmen's Compensation Act.
However, for Wemyss, Dicey, and the individualist groups Lord Salisbury was a paragon of virtue and restraint compared to the Edwardian Conservative party.
Between Salisbury's retirement in 1902 and the outbreak of the Great War the individualist associations, their spokesmen, and their ideas were relegated even further to the margins of Conservative politics: only two Conservatives of note allied themselves with the individualist groups, while Dicey came to regard the Conservative party as collectivist Quislings.
Fforde seeks to deny this, but at this stage his interpretation of events begins to become increasingly eccentric.
Fforde highlights a key difficulty for his argument by pointing out that in the debates about the issue which dominated Edwardian Conservatism — tariff reform — the Conservative Party developed a language which ‘employed a great deal of anti- laissez faire rhetoric and espoused policies which involved state expansion’.
Fforde acknowledges that all this appears to invalidate the central theme of his book.
But not so (we are told): Conservative advocates of tariffs and social reforms like old age pensions, wages councils, regulation of sweated trades were, Fforde argues, simply engaged in ‘principled opportunism’; this was ‘not Collectivist Conservatism but expedient Conservatism’, and to see it as otherwise would be to allow oneself to be ‘misled by manufactured appearances' or what Fforde describes elsewhere as the gap between ‘professed stance and true intention’.
The implications of this argument are astonishing.
The effort which the Conservative party put into developing a positive alternative to the new liberal collectivism was, apparently, all a gigantic fraud, a disguise for the individualist principles which Conservatives held in private.
If this was really the case then surely those Conservatives given to disguising themselves in this manner could have saved their party a lot of grief by letting the opponents of their ‘professed stance’ into the secret of their ‘true intention’.
Fforde makes much of the importance of archives and private correspondence as the means to discover ‘true intentions’, so why did Austen Chamberlain not simply drop Hugh Cecil a note to let him know that his speeches in favour of tariffs and pensions were all a put-up job?
In his zeal to demonstrate that the Conservatives were committed individualists Fforde refuses to accept that there may have been real disagreements within the party.
Ultimately Fforde's book is marred by the quirky and sometimes absurd approach he adopts.
Yet his work is not without redeeming features.
By default he alerts us to the fact that it was the late nineteenth and early  twentieth centuries that saw individualist arguments gravitate to the political right and become, however marginally at first, a vocabulary and strategy available to the Conservative party.
Fforde also establishes an important point by underlining the importance of land reform to late Victorian and Edwardian debates.
He exaggerates when he speaks of a ‘deafening silence, from historians on the land question, but he makes a strong case for placing the land issue near the centre of any sound historical analysis of the period.
In a stimulating analysis of the Conservative response to the Land Campaign of 1912–14, Fforde demonstrates how frightened the Conservatives were of Lloyd George's initiative.
The fear was justifiable.
In the 1910 general election the Conservatives’ main gains had been in the counties generally and the southern counties in particular.
The Land Campaign, or so it seemed to the Conservatives, threatened to wipe out those gains at a time when the party showed no signs of an electoral recovery elsewhere.
The Conservatives' desperation to devise a counter-programme for the land, and the disagreements it provoked, demonstrate the degree of confusion which still existed in the Conservative ranks and the immense problems they still faced before the ‘rampant omnibus’ of the Great War rescued them by running down their opponents.
It is a pity that Fforde's determination to present the Conservative party as decided individualists prevented him from exploring the confusion in the Conservative ranks indicated by his evidence.
If disputes within the party over policy and doctrine were one symptom of Conservative confusion, another was the ‘legion of leagues’ which appeared in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when it seemed that hardly a year went by without the founding of some new right-wing association.
The main aim of Franz Coetzee's intriguing study For Party or Country is to explain this phenomenon through an examination of the outlook and activities of three of the larger groups: the Navy League (NL), the Tariff Reform League (TRL), and the Anti-Socialist Union (ASU).
In terms of the history of these organizations as institutions Coetzee's work is unlikely to be surpassed.
He examines their foundation, their funding, their social constituency, and their organizational structure in detail, and in the process disposes of a number of myths and conventional wisdoms.
For example, Cortzee shows that contemporary tales of the ‘tariff reform millions, are not borne out by the relatively impoverished state of the Tariff Reform  League, and he demonstrates that the variety of industries and economic activities which were represented in the TRL defy any attempt to produce a simple definition of its interest base.
On issues like this Coetzee's sensitivity and grasp of detail are shown to good effect: but with regard to the broader historical significance of these organizations he is less assured, and he leaves untouched some of the more important questions raised by his work.
The leitmotif of Coetzee's book, as suggested by his title, is that the organizations he has studied faced an ongoing dilemma: whether to function as adjuncts of the Conservative party or to claim that their aims were ‘national’ and therefore ‘above party’.
In fact, as Coetzee demonstrates, the personnel of the TRL, the NL, and the ASU were predominantly Conservative, and in this respect their claim to be ‘non-party’ was always weak.
Yet Coetzee also makes clear that, for two reasons, the ‘non-party’ idea should be taken seriously.
First, it caused the groups some significant problems.
The NL especially suffered a major split because of its refusal after 1906 to endorse Conservative candidates.
The rival, splinter organization which emerged as a result, the Imperial Maritime League (IML), claimed that any serious Navalist had to support the Conservatives, irrespective of the fact that individual Liberal candidates were ‘sound’ on naval questions, on the grounds that collectively the Liberals were against and the Conservatives in favour of a big Navy.
In the end the NL did become demonstrably pro-Conservative and saw off the IML challenge, but divisions like this played their part in ensuring that the British Navy League was never as large or influential as its German counterpart.
The second reason for taking the ‘non-party’ claim seriously is that the various Leagues — and not just the three studied by Coetzee — were frequently critical of the Conservative party and expressed strong reservations about the effectiveness of the Conservatives as a political force.
Coetzee, describing the leagues as part of a Conservative effort to get to grips with mass politics and the ‘new religion’ of socialism, explains the timing of their appearance on the grounds that prior to the 1890s ‘the Conservatives had no need of recourse to such pressure groups because they already possessed access to institutions adequate for the defence of their interests within the existing sociopolitical framework’.
In other words, the Conservative party, and its propertied core constituency, became interested in new forms of appeal and organization when it became apparent that the political reliability and social stability of the lower orders could no longer be ensured by traditional methods of social and political control.
This is to describe the ‘legion of leagues’ from the top down, identifying them as part of a new ‘technique of rule’through which the Conservative party attempted to confront a new form of politics and a novel political threat.
Another way of viewing them, however, is from the bottom up: as expressions of concern about the ability of the Conservative party adequately to meet the new challenges.
That there should have been a Navy League, a Tariff Reform League, and an Anti-Socialist Union filled with Conservatives was an indication that there were many Conservative supporters who felt that the Conservative party was not doing its job properly.
There were occasions when the leagues were of great help to the Conservatives, but their relationship to the party was often ambivalent and sometimes hostile, and it was not always easy to control their activities.
It is one of the many strengths of Coetzee's work that he recognizes the disruptive potential of the new organizations, but he concludes that ultimately they were of benefit to the Conservatives.
It was not just that they helped out at the occasional by-election, but that they ‘pointed to new sources of support whose eventual accommodation, and to new issues whose eventual resolution, would ultimately modify the party itself and help equip it for the challenges of post-war politics’.
As a result of his research into the social constituency of the leagues, Coetzee presents them as one of the means whereby the Conservative party broadened its support amongst the middle-class and crucial lower-middle-class voters, thus assisting its development from ‘a loose conglomeration of agrarian interests to the predominant party of government in urban, industrial Britain'.
If Coetzee is right, and his argument is powerful, then this could help to explain one particularly important aspect of post-1914 politics: the failure of British Fascism.
It is here that Coetzee's work suffers from the lack of a more ambitious comparative framework, Coetzee's work on the Conservative leagues is similar to Geoffrey Eley's analysis of the German ‘radical right’ before 1914.
Eley noted that the German radical nationalist leagues were not tools of the ruling elite but were critical of the ability of ‘the politics of notables’ to confront internal and external threats to Germany and German propertied interests.
As a consequence, Eley argued, the political right in Germany was disintegrating even before 1914.
After 1918 this problem became even more pronounced, and the absence of a mainstream ‘Conservative’ Party, capable of unifying a fragmented German bourgeoisie and alleviating its fears, was a key factor in creating the political space for the rise of the Nazis.
What Coetzee's work suggests, and it is a pity he does not pursue this point fully, is that in Britain before 1914 the potential fragmentation of the political right was contained.
Groups like the NL, the TRL, and the ASU were, in the end, either too loyal to or too dependent upon the Conservative party to break away.
The Conservative  Party was thus preserved intact, and the fact that it was able to provide a rallying point for the middle and lower middle classes was arguably one of the main bulwarks against political extremism in the 1920s and 1930s.
At this juncture a codicil must be inserted.
The above argument is predicated on Coetzee's assumption that the disruptive potential of the new organizations had been contained and that the ‘crisis of Conservatism’ was over before 1914.
Yet it is not obvious that this was the case.
Between 1912 and 1914 the Conservative Party was distinctly unsettled.
Disgruntled Conservative agriculturalists and imperialists resented Bonar Law's dropping of the ‘food taxes’ in the winter of 1912–13, and although he survived the initial furore sparked by this decision it was not clear that the ill feeling had been fully dissipated or his leadership wholly secured.
As noted by Fforde, the question of how to respond to the Land Campaign threw the Conservatives into fresh disagreements, and there was no sign that the party, Having abandoned much of its 1910 election platform, was capable of agreeing upon a new one.
In many ways the Conservatives' descent towards violence over the Ulster question, and Bonar Law's ‘new style’.
which seemed to consist mainly of abusing Asquith, were symptomatic of the party's inability to discover a real sense of direction.
Most important of all, there was the electoral problem.
If anything the Land Campaign and the Liberal plan to abolish plural voting before a possible 1915 general election offered the prospect of another Conservative defeat, and the Conservatives themselves were almost certain this would be the case.
Had the Conservatives lost another general election they might have lost credibility as a potential party of government, and this could well have damaged their role as the integrating force of the political right.
As it happened, the Great War intervened and provided the Conservatives with an opportunity to confirm what had been an uncertain trend towards a reshaping and consolidation of the right.
In this respect, just as many historians have stressed the importance of the Great War in the decline of the Liberal Party.
One should be aware that it may well have played an equally significant role in saving the Conservative Party from disintegration.
The careers of Leopold Maxse and W. C. Bridgeman exemplify the changing fortunes and outlook of the Conservative Party before and after 1914.
John A. Hutcheson's scholarly and thoughtful biography of Maxse ends in 1914.
Seventeen years before Maxse's death, but if this seems odd it is understandable, for Maxse was at the height of his powers before 1914 and a negligible figure thereafter.
Some historians, including Hutcheson.
Have seen in Leo Maxse the epitome of the ‘radical right’ in Britain before 1914 — radical right' being taken to mean ‘extreme’right or some kind of proto-Fascism on the continental model.
Perhaps the most important evidence  adduced for Maxse's radical right outlook is the fact that he tended to lapse into what Richard Hofstadter saw as the chief characteristic of such politics, namely a ‘paranoid style’.
The most obvious expression of this was Maxse's ‘radical plutocracy’ enquiry, launched in the wake of the Marconi scandal, when he came close to depicting the Asquith government as tools of a shadowy ‘cosmopolitan finance’.
Maxse's quasi-obsession with corruption in high places was, however, part of his more general suspicion of the closed world of Westminster politics.
Rather like the ‘high politics’ school of historians, Maxse believed that once inside Westminster politicians tended, with a few exceptions, to ‘go native’and become interested solely in their own advancement inside this exclusive club.
Maxse's attacks on ‘Mandarins’, ‘Mugwumps’, and ‘Tadpoles and Tapers’ were a regular feature of his editorials.
He tended to blame many of the ills of the Conservative Party on the ‘self-serving’ apparatchiks of Conservative Central Office, and many of the ills of the country on the ‘petty-fogging’of parliamentary life.
These jibes at ‘the old gang’, a phrase Maxse used frequently, are of course reminiscent of Oswald Mosley, and on occasion Maxse did veer towards a rather Fascistic ‘Caesarism’, calling for ‘a Leader’ to save the nation.
However, if one compares Maxse's views with those expressed by W. C. Bridgeman an interesting picture emerges.
Bridgeman was, according to his obituary, ‘an admirable type of the English country gentleman…(who) did much…for the Church, for education, especially in rural districts, for the Navy…, for agriculture…and for sport, particularly for his favourite game of cricket’.
In other words, as Philip Williamson's excellent edition of his diary and letters demonstrates.
Bridgeman was a man of impeccable Conservative credentials.
Yet it was Bridgeman who, at the special National Union Conference in July 1906, seconded Maxse's motion calling for the reform of Conservative Central Office, a motion which stemmed directly from Maxse's ‘paranoid’ view of the obstructiveness of the Party mandarins towards the tariff campaign.
Moreover, Bridgeman justified his actions to Balfour in terms which Maxse would have approved, arguing that Balfour seemed to be ‘surrounded by men who are not in touch with the mass of the Party’, complaining of ‘the extraordinary difference in perspective which party questions assume inside the House from that presented by them to the man in the street’ and voicing suspicions about the secrecy of Parliamentary procedures such as‘the pourparlers of the whips of both sides’.
The similarity of outlook which marked the views of Maxse, a man who Hutcheson shows to have been, temperamentally if not socially, a quintessential outsider, and Bridgeman, the quintessential insider, is significant.
Clearly something strange was happening to the Edwardian Conservative party: but does one need to label it as a flirtation with ‘proto-Fascism’?
The frustrations which Bridgeman and Maxse expressed towards the party hierarchy were the product of their belief that the leadership was not responding adequately to the party's ‘crisis’, and in particular not accepting the kind of programme which could bring the party back to power.
for Maxse, Bridgeman, and the great majority of Conservatives between 1906 and 1910, the party, if it was to be popular, needed to embrace tariff reform and the gamut of policies with which it was linked, such as social reform and land reform.
Maxse's launch of his successful ‘B[alfour] M[ust] G[o]’ campaign of 1911 was a response to Balfour's ‘betrayal’of the tariff programme by his ‘Referendum’pledge.
Likewise, Maxse turned on Bonar Law when he ditched the ‘food taxes’ from the tariff programme, and again did not find himself alone in voicing criticism of the new Tory leader.
Where Maxse did find himself more or less isolated was in allowing his frustrations to lead him, along with Willoughby de Broke, to consider the formation of an alternative party of the right.
Here otherwise close associates like Bridgeman and F. E. Smith distanced themselves from Maxse, while another committed tariff reformer, his fellow editor and friend H. A. Gwynne, pointedly told him that ‘for good or evil’, the Conservative party was ‘the only weapon we have with which to achieve our purpose and help on the causes which both you and I have strongly at heart…and anything that tends to disorganize it or to destroy the efficiency of that weapon seems to me to postpone the fulfilment of our desires…
In the end Maxse's impatience with and apparent willingness to consider abandoning established institutions meant that he stretched his Conservative credentials to breaking-point, and it is important to note that when at his most extreme Maxse was most isolated.
In this sense it was Maxse's radical Conservatism and not his more dangerous notions that brought him so close to the hub of Conservative politics in the decade before 1914.
That the views of Edwardian Conservatives elided so easily with those expressed by such a maverick as Maxse is evidence of how threatened the Conservatives felt and how far they were prepared to use a radical voice to pursue Conservative ends.
That they were not prepared to countenance Maxse at his most radical confirms that those ends were indeed Conservative.
If it was the Conservative Party's circumstances that gave Maxse's brand of radical Conservatism its appeal, it was also the change in the party's  circumstances wrought by the war which relegated Maxse to the margins of Conservative politics.
The most eloquent witness to this fact is Maxse's old ally Bridgeman.
Having become a Whip in the Asquith coalition, Bridgeman told Maxse in July 1916:
don't obsess yourself with the idea that none of them (Unionist MPs) understand the view of the man in the street…there is plenty of soundness in the party inside the House…and, easy as it is to call everyone inside Parliamentarians, and to assume that everyone outside are the only judges…you will have to get inside before you realize the difficulties of the situation, or the value of the cool-headed men who still represent the Unionist party in the House, and remain independent of Cabinet influence…
To dismiss this comment simply as Bridgeman being a poacher turned gamekeeper would be to miss the point, which is that the war had allowed the Conservatives to become gamekeepers again, whereas from 1902 to 1914 there had been genuine concern that they might be permanently banished from the estates of power.
Bridgeman's remark was thus symptomatic of renewed Conservative confidence.
With the party having re-entered the corridors of power through a side door, and with the Liberals beginning to divide over the conduct of the war, the Conservatives’ prewar fears had been dissipated.
Radical Conservatism had been the product of Conservative powerlessness and despair, and it receded with the onset of Conservative power and hope.
The Edwardian ‘crisis of Conservatism’ and the Conservatives' wartime recovery offer the chance for a brief historical assessment of the ideological origins of the Thatcherite revolution.
In the late nineteenth century Lord Salisbury had pursued a successful defensive war of manoeuvre to divide and defeat his Party's opponents.
The trick was to portray one's chief opponent as sectional, driven by class envy, and a danger to social and economic stability, and thereby to provoke a defensive coalition against him.
In the decade before the Great War this strategy had collapsed in the face of a solid anti-Conservative front, causing confusion in the Conservative ranks.
The initial result was that the Conservatives had sought to counter the collectivist strategy of progressivism with a collectivism of their own, while individualist arguments had been relegated to the margins of Conservative politics.
Indeed, the only serious alternative to the radical, collectivist strategy that was canvassed was a reassembled ‘Salisbury approach’, based on a defensive rather than counter-offensive strategy.
Almost unnoticed this emerged in 1908, at the Manchester North-West by-election.
Here, in the home of free-trade Liberalism, the Conservatives secured a remarkable result with an election campaign fought against the ‘socialist’ taxation  policies of the Liberal government.
The significance of this result and the strategy deployed were lost in the political ‘noise’ created by other Conservative by-election victories won that year by committed radical Conservatives, and by the general Conservative confusion of the late Edwardian years.
Arguably, however, the implications of the Manchester North-West result were to become more apparent in the long term.
The Conservative strategy which emerged after the Great War, tentatively in the coalition years but powerfully under Baldwin, was a blend of the basic Salisbury recipe with added ‘Manchester North-West’.
In the 1880s Salisbury's ‘enemy’ had been ‘radical Liberalism’and his aim to bring over the Whigs and ‘Villa’Liberals.
In the 1920s the enemy was Labour and the aim was to encourage the desertion of the middle and lower middle classes and the ‘black-coated’ workers who had once been the foot-soldiers of Liberalism.
In this sense the Liberal divisions during and after the war, and the ending of the progressive Alliance, provided the political space for a new Salisbury-style strategy.
Crucial to this development was that the war, by increasing the number of taxpayers and creating a fear of inflation among the equally increased number of small savers, offered important opportunities for a party that could pose as the defender of low taxes, low public expenditure, and monetary rectitude.
It was against this backdrop that the individualist liberal economics of Spencer, Dicey, the LPDL, and the BCA moved towards the centre of the Conservative Party's thinking, as economic liberalism and the minimal state became attractive in terms of consolidating a coalition against a Labour party presented as high taxers and high spenders.
It is thus from the 1920s that one can realistically chart a conflict in the Conservative party between a libertarian-individualist tendency and a paternalist-collectivist tendency.
In the interwar years the hard edges of a market-orientated Conservative Party strategy were softened, first by the avuncular consensus politics of Baldwin, and then by the virtual collapse of the market itself.
After the Second World War the economic prosperity brought by the long postwar boom, and the apparent popularity of the Attlee government's welfare reforms, allowed the paternalist orientations of Eden, Butler, and Macmillan to flourish, attenuated by the ‘stops’ forced by Britain's ongoing balance-of-payments problem.
In 1961, however, Macmillan's Conservative Government was forced to confront the underlying  weaknesses of British economic performance, and, as the Cabinet debated various strategies, the Prime Minister noted the emergence of ‘a rather interesting and quite deep divergence of view between Ministers, really corresponding to whether they had old Whig, Liberal,laissez-faire traditions, or Tory opinions, paternalists and not afraid of a little dirigism .
With the Edwardian figure of Macmillan as leader of the party and the government, a man who had begun his career by advocating a dirigiste stance against the liberal economic tendencies of the Baldwin-Chamberlain era, the Conservatives looked to an interventionist strategy to stave off political and economic reversals.
But by the 1970s, with the interventionist approach associated with both electoral and economic failure, the adherents of the ‘Whig, Liberal,laissez faire ’ strategy had seized the initiative.
Nor were the adherents of this strategy reticent about their heritage, with one Thatcherite Cabinet Minister acknowledging in 1982, ‘I am a nineteenth century Liberal.
So is Mrs Thatcher.
That's what this Government is all about.'
A Conservative government had emerged that the Liberty and Property Defence League could well have called its own, but as a consequence it was a government that had very little to do with Conservatism.
PAUL ADDISON University of Edinburgh 
The Intellectual Origins of the Keynesian Revolution
The Keynesian Revolution in the Making 1924–1936 .
By Peter Clarke.
Oxford: Clarendon Paperbacks, 1990, pp. 368.
ISBN 0-19-820219-9. £12.95.
The rise and fall of Keynesian social democracy is one of the central problems of twentieth century British history.
But as a whole it has yet to be cracked.
Biographies of Keynes, and the writings of economists and economic historians, are indispensable to an understanding of the subject.
But in the final analysis it is a question of political history, which only the political historians can resolve.
Important contributions have already been made by David Marquand, Keith Middlemas, and Robert Skidelsky.
Now Peter Clarke has identified another hole at the centre of Keynesian studies.
The aim of his book is to explain historically the intellectual origins of the ‘Keynesian revolution’.
The Keynesian revolution is usually dated to the publication of the General Theory in 1936.
But obviously the revolution had been some time in the making.
In Dr Clarke's view, the origins can be traced back to 1924, when Keynes published an article advocating ‘a drastic remedy’ for unemployment.
There followed a debate over economic policy in which the principal protagonists — though many others joined in — were Keynes on the one hand and the Treasury on the other.
They clashed in 1925 over the return to the gold standard and again in 1928–9 over Lloyd George's proposals for loan-financed public works.
The battle of wits between them again featured prominently in the proceedings of the Macmillan Committee under the second Labour government.
the argument was continuous and as it developed both sides changed their positions.
But it was Keynes who possessed the greater mobility and fire-power and in the end he succeeded in shifting the argument on to theoretical grounds of his own choosing.
Such was the origin of the General Theory .
The interwar debate over economic policy has, of course, been extensively researched in recent years, and Keynes's contributions are well  documented.
But the dynamics of his thinking have never been easy to explain.
So changeable in his opinions was Keynes that many of his contemporaries were baffled, or wrote him off as mentally erratic.
For quite legitimate reasons, later commentators have often left the problem aside.
Economic historians have been more interested in assessing the outcome or potential of his policies than their origins.
Economists and historians of ideas have concentrated on the systematic elements in his thought and created somewhat abstract models of Keynesian theory and belief.
Ideas expressed at many different periods, or in many different contexts, have been assembled into a definitive world view.
The political historian, raised from the cradle to insist on the importance of chronology and context, would rather think in terms of intellectual biography.
But political historians are often rather ignorant of economics.
Where Keynes is concerned, they have long recognized his importance as an inspiration between the wars for a certain type of progressive, Lib-Lab politics: but few could pass an examination in Keynesian theory.
Dr Clarke is a political historian, and in a sense a political historian of the old school.
But he has made it his business to master the terminology of the economic debate, and applied to the problem an elegant and sophisticated technique of intellectual biography.
The result is a work of great erudition and originality, in which economic issues are explained with technical authority and literary grace.
Readers may still find, as I do, that some of the economic debate is unintelligible.
But they should draw comfort from the knowledge that the economists involved often found it hard to understand one another.
In Dr Clarke's analysis, context and intention hold the keys to the history of ideas.
It is therefore crucial to distinguish the three overlapping contexts in which the argument over economic policy was formulated: politics, policy, and theory.
At various times Keynes operated on all three levels, and moved easily from one to another.
From 1924 to 1930, Dr Clarke maintains, he was mainly concerned with politics and policy, and tried to coordinate the two in a pincer movement on the Treasury.
In politics he was a ‘new Liberal’ allied with Lloyd George.
In policy he was a critic of dear money and an advocate of public works.
Yet in both respects he was notable for a quicksilver opportunism of mind, adapting his arguments to the circumstances of the hour.
His economic theorizing, which remained at this period within the framework of neo-classical doctrine, was driven by policy considerations.
But then came a turning-point.
The financial and political crises of 1931 led Keynes to re-order his priorities: theory took the place of policy in the driving-seat.
Whereas, therefore, his Treatise on Money (1930) has been accounted for along ‘externalist’ lines, as the response to a political context, the General Theory of 1936 is best understood in ‘internalist’terms, as the outcome of a process of intellectual discovery.
How convincing is this ‘story of an argument’?
Dr Clarke maintains that in the 1920s Keynes was primarily a political animal.
The radicalism of his campaign for state investment owed nothing to latent dissent over economic theory, for neo-classical economics could accommodate public works and Keynes himself remained on orthodox disciple of Marshall.
Nor was Keynes prompted by the return to gold at the prewar parity, for this event occurred after his campaign for ‘national development’ had begun.
All this is extremely helpful and clearly points towards a political explanation.
But there may be some disagreement over the way in which Dr Clarke formulates this.
In his view, Keynes's entry into the arena was the result of his commitment to the new Liberalism.
Keynes's adherence to the Liberal party in the 1920s is a matter of record, and historians of Liberalism have been eager to assimilate him to the great tradition.
But what kind of Liberal was he?
A Liberal ideologue, or an intellectual aristocrat sailing under a flag of convenience?
While Keynes's ideas overlapped with Liberalism, his philosophy taught him that all political principles were expedients to be adopted or discarded on ethical grounds.
Keynes, therefore, subscribed to Liberalism as the best available option, but from a position of inner detachment.
In his own sphere, Keynes was as great an adventurer as Lloyd George in his, and I doubt whether the old Liberalism or the new was entirely safe in his hands.
Of course it can be argued that since he adopted the Liberal cause in the 1920s, he was practically at one with Liberalism, and that is all that matters.
But if so I am not wholly convinced that he adopted the new Liberalism.
Michael Freeden's criticisms on this score are still pertinent.
perhaps the truth is that in the field of economic policy, Keynes's preference for a managed economy aligned him with the new Liberals: hence the handsome tribute he paid to J. A. Hobson, in spite of the fact that he regarded him as mistaken.
But in his belief that economic efficiency must if necessary take priority over social justice, Keynes lacked the left-Liberal vision of a new moral order in society, More than half of Dr Clarke's book is devoted to the debate over economic policy between 1928 and 1930.
This is a story of intricate intellectual manoeuvre in a clamorously political context.
The main effect is to revise our understanding of both Keynes and the Treasury.
It is no secret that Keynes was a highly intuitive thinker who often changed his mind: in 1930 he defended the gold standard, which he had previously attacked, and in 1931 he abandoned the principle of free trade, which he had previously upheld.
Dr Clarke's painstaking scrutiny of the record now shows that Keynes was even more changeable than we thought.
But he also offers an explanation.
Keynes was intuitively convinced that public works would lift Britain out of the depression.
But he was still at an experimental stage of his thinking, and this enabled his political opportunism to come into play.
In  the general election campaign of 1929 the Liberals were challenged by the Conservatives to explain where the money would come from.
Keynes improvised the answers, and changed them as he went along.
When he sat down again after the election to resume his theoretical work,The Treatise on Money , he found that his theory had changed.
In Keynes's view, the great imperative was public works.
If he could win support for domestic expansion by coupling it with other proposals, he was only too eager to do so.
The appointment by the incoming Labour government of the Macmillan Committee, of which Keynes was a member, gave him another chance to carry through his revolution in policy.
In his evidence to the Committee, Keynes identified seven possible classes of remedy for depression, and assured his colleagues that practically all of them were of some value.
Keynes was trying to create a consensus around public works and his adoption of protection in the autumn of 1930 was almost certainly an attempt to enlist the support of the growing tariff lobby.
Dr Clarke's analysis of the proceedings of the Macmillan Committee, which occupies five chapters out of thirteen, is outstanding.
Keynes figures as a brilliant operator in committee, flexible in his tactics and sweetly reasonable in argument.
He is often pictured as an outsider battling against entrenched orthodoxies.
Dr Clarke shows him as an insider addressing officials and economists of many shades of opinion, including some whose position was close to his own.
Historians used to attribute a fixed economic dogma to the Treasury: ‘the Treasury view’.
But recent research has modified this judgement and Dr Clarke carries the revision further.
Treasury dogma as commonly understood held that state investment inevitably crowded out an equal volume of private investment, and was therefore incapable of increasing employment.
But it now appears that in this form the ‘Treasury view’ was a transient formula.
Dr Clarke has discovered a hitherto unreleased file on the Treasury response to public works in 1928–9.
This shows that when Churchill first asked his officials to brief him on the subject, R. G. Hawtrey replied that public works would indeed increase employment, provided they were linked to an expansion of credit.
But there was in fact no need for public works, since cheap money would have the same effect by increasing private investment.
Hawtrey, then, showed some affinity with Keynes.
The Treasury view as proclaimed in 1929 was the work of Leith-Ross and others, and did not long survive the political circumstances of its birth — a split in the Cabinet over employment policy.
By 1930, when Sir Richard Hopkins gave evidence on behalf of the Treasury to the Macmillan Committee, the ‘crowding out’ theory had been quietly dropped and replaced by an insistence on the administrative difficulties involved.
The Labour government, then, was not wholly the prisoner of dogma.
(It may still have been the prisoner of vested interests, but that is another  matter.)
As long as Keynes pitched his arguments for credit expansion within the bounds of orthodoxy, he dominated the proceedings of the Committee and achieved a degree of consensus.
Stamp, for example, was sympathetic.
Pigou shared Keynes's analysis of the disequilibrium between savings and investment, and was prepared to endorse public works.
But there was still an underlying divergence of opinion over one major issue.
Pigou, Henderson, and Stamp all emphasized the importance of cuts in the cost of wages.
While accepting that wage cuts were theoretically advisable, Keynes at first argued that they should only be attempted as a last resort, after all other remedies had failed.
But with his ‘eclectic and protean opportunism’, he went on to recommend a revenue tariff as a wage cut in disguise.
Dr Clarke brings powerful evidence to bear in support of his contention that 1931 marked a watershed in Keynes's development.
Within a few months, every plank of his excessively clever platform collapsed.
The Labour government broke up and the report of the Macmillan Committee sank without trace.
The Liberal party disintegrated a second time.
The abandonment of the gold standard and the devaluation of sterling removed the theoretical justification which the Treatise supplied for public works in a period when bank rate was too high for purposes of domestic equilibrium.
In explaining the sequence of thought which led Keynes to the General Theory , Dr Clarke has taken full advantage of recently discovered sources, including students' notes of Keynes's lectures at Cambridge.
But he has also incorporated, and indeed revised, much recent analysis by economists.
I must leave it to economists to say how much they have learnt from his account, or where they would disagree with it.
from the point of view of history, including economic history, this is by far the best analysis we have of the genesis of the General Theory .
The suspicion that Keynes picked up his ideas from R. F. Kahn or other members of the ‘Cambridge circus’ is laid to rest, and his intuitive leap into the theory of effective demand dated to the summer of 1932.
Among all the illuminations I would raise only one general query.
According to Dr Clarke, the Treatise was mainly a political invention, while the General Theory was mainly an intellectual one.
But does this distinction really work?
Firstly it is clear that whatever contingencies entered into the writing of the Treatise , Keynes himself intended it as a major contribution to economic theory, free-standing and internally valid in all circumstances.
Hence the fact that his fellow economists, who regarded it as mistaken, were at great pains to refute it on theoretical grounds.
It would surely be difficult to prove that the terms of the theory were prescribed by political requirements.
True, Dr Clarke might well reply, but the Treatise was an attempt to resolve theoretically an urgent political problem: the same could not plausibly be said of the General Theory .
But surely it could.
Keynes began work on it during the worst year of the slump, under a government  which had slammed the door on his favourite project of public works.
The non-socialist critics of the National Government were desperate for a constructive alternative.
Why, then, is it necessary to depict Keynes as shifting, after 1931, from politics or policy to theory?
Surely it would be more accurate to say that he shifted from one theory to another, and that both formulations had their external, political aspect?
In his closing chapter, Dr Clarke reflects on the rise and fall of Keynesian politics since 1936.
Again the distinctions between theory, policy, and politics serve him well.
The insights of the theory, he believes, are still valid: market forces do not guarantee the full use of resources.
But policies must vary and change with circumstances.
Keynes's own policies have often been misrepresented: in the 1930s, for example, he was well aware of the structural problems of British industry, and did not believe that unemployment could be reduced much below 12 per cent .
In the Second World War he seems to have thought that 5 per cent would be a reasonable target for postwar policy.
Keynes might well have disapproved of the ‘Keynesianism, of the postwar politicians, but runaway inflation nevertheless led to a successful monetarist assault on Keynesian theory.
Dr Clarke contends that while Keynesianism was overthrown on the pretext that it did not ‘work’, the collapse was political rather than theoretical.
Under Mrs Thatcher, the Conservatives rediscovered the fact, well known to the National Government, that mass unemployment was no barrier to electoral success.
The only objective sense in which monetarism worked better than Keynesianism was the electoral one: the ‘strong bargainers in all classes’ were content for the economy to run at well below capacity.
Dr Clarke's conclusion invites much speculation about current and future trends.
But it also draws attention to another gap in the history of Keynesianism.
Why was full employment a political imperative between 1944 and 1975?
What were the relationships between the politics, policy, and theory of Keynesianism in its golden age?
Was the fiscal constitution corrupted and if so was it by Keynesianism or by corporatism?
Economic historians have begun to explore the issues, but the political historians have yet to master them.
Now that Dr Clarke has written a first-class book on the origins of the Keynesian revolution, we must hope that he will write another on the consequences.
REVIEWS
Road to Divorce: England 1530–1987 .
By Lawrence Stone.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990, pp. 460, £19.95.
ISBN 0-19-822651-9.
This book has a symbiotic relationship with Professor Stone's earlier volume,The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 1500–1800 , drawing heavily as it does on the idea of the emergence of affective individualism in family relationships and its link to the rise in marital unhappiness during both the eighteenth and the twentieth centuries.
But the focus of this volume is the law of marriage and divorce, which Professor Stone feels has been sorely neglected by historians of the family.
His account is intended to provide the structural and analytical framework for two companion volumes (Uncertain Unions and Broken Lives ) which will give more illustration of the making and breaking of marriage.
‘Bringing the law back in’ is a worthy and important endeavour; as Stone notes, the story of the control of marriage in England is radically different from that in France largely because of its different state structure.
But difficult questions are raised as to the nature of the relationship between law and behaviour.
The core of the book focuses on the period between 1660 and 1857, when legal divorce was exceedingly rare and confined to the privileged.
The full extent of marital breakdown is of course very hard to assess, and Roderick Phillips has argued convincingly that while divorce might breed divorce, it does not necessarily breed marital breakdown.’
The really significant change in divorce, in terms of both law and behaviour, has taken place in the twentieth century; and as Stone devotes only forty of his 422 pages to a consideration of the period after 1857, he essentially precludes an answer to the question he poses, namely, why divorce has become as common as taxes and death.
The story of marriage and divorce law is extremely complicated.
Stone's account is comprehensive and authoritative, relying on an extensive exploration of court records.
He concludes that ‘it is not too strong to say that the marriage law as it operated in practice in England from the fourteenth to the nineteenth centuries was a mess’(p. 135).
For much of the period he discusses, it was far from easy to prove whether a couple was legally married at all.
Prior to the 1753 Marriage Act, the state made few serious attempts to suppress either contract marriage, which consisted of a verbal promise, or clandestine marriage, which involved a religious ritual and witnesses but which did not conform to the dictates of canon law.
Both were attractive because of their greater privacy and cheapness.
Divorce procedures prove similarly hard to unravel.
Among the poor who had no property, desertion was the informal answer to marital unhappiness and was practised on an unknown scale until the Second World War: certainly, eighteenth and nineteenth century poor law officials often expressed concern at the number of deserted wives drawing relief.
Only since the 1960s have virtually all those separating also divorced.
Among the propertied, private separations were much more common than judicial separations and, according to Stone, represent a ‘remarkable example of how an officially non-divorcing society can devise its own quasi-legal instruments to cope with the fact of irremediable marital breakdowns’(p. 182).
Judicial separation by the ecclesiastical courts, which did not give a licence to remarry.
And full Parliamentary divorce, which did, accounted for only a handful of divorces.
The 1857 Divorce Act, which removed divorce from church jurisdiction, did not result in a rapid increase in the divorce rate.
Stone's analysis of the legislation provides a valuable corrective to those who have argued that it represented a revolutionary change.
Rather, it first, made full divorce somewhat easier and cheaper, opening it up to the upper middle class, second, made judicial separation more expensive and more rare; and third, continued to deny the poor access to either.
One of the major strengths of the book is to show the importance of both the vested interests of lawyers and the keen competition between the ecclesiastical and common law courts in determining the nature of legal practice and reform.
With regard to marriage, eighteenth century canon law, which recognized marriage based on verbal contract, found itself in conflict with common law, which denied the validity of such marriages as far as property was concerned.
In both marriage and divorce law, much of the legal story concerns the way in which the common law captured tracts of territory from the church courts.
Breach of promise suits, which allowed individuals to sue for damages if they had been injured by unenforceable marriage contracts and which became increasingly popular in the nineteenth century, provide one example of this development.
Cases alleging ‘criminal conversation’, which begin as a means of giving compensation to the husband for a lover's access to his wife and ending (by the late eighteenth century) as a necessary prerequisite for full divorce by Act of Parliament, provide another.
Stone is utterly convincing in his argument that the 1857 Divorce Act had nothing to do with perceived changes in the economic conditions of the labouring poor during early industrialization and everything to do with lawyers' determination to do something about the chaotic state of the law.
In concentrating all matrimonial legislation in a new secular High Court in London, the Act also represented the success of common and equity lawyers in capturing full control of matrimonial litigation.
To explain the nature of legal change Stone offers a model that suggests first, that clients revealed the gap between current values and the law; second, that this was followed by the attempt of lawyers and judges to narrow the gap, often by inventing legal fictions or effectively changing the law by judicial re-interpretation (the changing definition of legal cruelty provides one example of this); and third, that all this culminated eventually in legal change when the ‘level of duplicity and hypocrisy became intolerable to law lords and legislators alike’(pp. 19–20).
This model, which echoes that used by Oliver MacDonagh to explain the growth in nineteenth century government, relies on a high degree of consonance in the wishes of lawyers and their  clients, a not unreasonable assumption given the limited access to divorce in Stone's period.
But it is not a model that holds up for the twentieth century, when liberalization of the divorce law was not a matter of last resort but was rather always proposed as a means of strengthening the institution of marriage (by permitting those ‘living in sin’ to remarry); when opinion shifted with dramatic speed, for example between the conservative recommendations of the 1956 Royal Commission on Divorce and the endorsement of profound liberalization given a mere ten years later by both the Law Commission and the Church of England; and when the change in views of key institutions such as the Church of England were as important as those of lawyers.
The permission given by the 1969 Act for no-fault divorce was driven as much by a profound rethinking of the sources of morality by clerical and academic opinion as by the determined pursuit of individual self-interest on the part of either the population at large or lawyers in particular.
But this is not something that Stone tackles.
His chapter on the post-1857 situation is confined to a charting exercise in which the context provided is often misleading (married women's participation in the labour market did not rise rapidly in the interwar years), and in which the facts are sometimes shaky (not all working-class women were opposed to divorce in the early part of the century; the Women's Co-operative Guild gave evidence to the 1909 Royal Commission in favour of it).
Stone might not have much to say about the past hundred years, but the shadow of the present undoubtedly hangs over the book.
In The Family, Sex and Marriage he was careful to retain an open mind on affective individualism, emphasizing first that it was not necessarily the way of the future, family change not being linear, and second, that it did not necessarily result in greater happiness than other forms of family organization.
In Road to Divorce , he is much closer to concluding that affective individualism is a ‘Bad Thing’.
In his final chapter, he notes that the 1956 Royal Commission on Divorce identified what he feels ‘may perhaps be the most important influence of all in driving up the divorce rate, namely the idealization of the individual pursuit of self-gratification and personal pleasure at the expense of a sense of reciprocal obligations and duties towards helpless dependents, such as children, and, our society as a whole’(pp 403–4).
Stone shows no awareness of the place of the Royal Commission's recommendations within the politics of the postwar debate on the disintegration of the family, which was almost as much a preoccupation of the 1940s and early 1950s (the Commission was set up in 1952) as it was during the 1980s.
The Commission's point accords with the development of Stone's own views about the perils of affective individualism and finds a prominent place in the opening theoretical section to the book.
While Stone struggles to keep open the question as to whether more divorce produces an increase in the sum of human happiness, he is obviously uneasy about the way in which divorce has become a routine and largely administrative process.
But this preoccupation can do little to illuminate the long period of non-divorce and tends in the end to convey a linear development, implied also by the title of the book, notwithstanding Stone's concern to stress the variability in the meanings of divorce, marriage, and morality.
Meanings are crucial to understanding how England lived with chaotic marriage and no divorce for so long before changing the rules governing personal relation-ships decisively.
However, there is surprisingly little in this book on what marriage and divorce meant to the men and women involved.
There are several references to  the importance commentators attached to the relationship between the stability of the family and that of the state, which is certainly crucial to explaining the long reluctance to reform the divorce law.
As late as the 1900s, Mrs Humphry Ward, the best-selling Victorian novelist and leading anti-suffragist, stressed that marriage had to be regarded as a necessary discipline, for if husbands and wives could not resolve their differences what hope remained for the larger polity?
The battles over divorce during the period covered by Stone were about the licence to remarry, that is, about the formal recognition that it was possible fully to dissolve the marital contract.
In the twentieth century the battles have been over quite different issues and in the courts the hitherto ancillary matters of child custody and maintenance have come to the fore.
But this does not help much in understanding what marriage meant to men and to women in different social classes at different points in time and what in their minds justified separation.
Ellen Ross's work has shown that among working-class Edwardians the marriage contract entailed a precise understanding of duties and obligations regarding maintenance (on the part of the husband) and household management (on the part of the wife), but little by way of intimacy or romantic love.’
It is not part of Stone's business to look at the condition of working people, but the illustrations in the book reveal very little about the thought styles that the privileged brought to marriage and divorce.
Of course, it is hard to know much of women's thinking because they are so rarely represented in the source material; for example , having no legal personality in common law, they were forced to remain silent in ‘crim. con.’ actions.
However, to some extent the neglect of such important issues of the difference in the meaning of marriage and divorce to men and women, the contradictions in the thinking and behaviour of the two sexes, and the negotiation of their positions has something to do with another presentist shadow: that of feminism.
Stone is anxious to stress that women did not want divorce, which is largely true of the period he concentrates on, although the picture becomes much more complicated in the twentieth century.
Articulate middle-class women in the nineteenth century were certainly more concerned with gaining increased autonomy and control — over children and property — within marriage, than with access to divorce.
This may be set alongside their widespread suspicion of birth control and was undoubtedly strongly related to the very limited alternatives to marriage open to them.
Stone also emphasizes the extent to which women accepted the double moral standard.
Thus in his account women become passive and sometimes even willing victims.
The illustrations are replete with husbands who forced wives to wear chastity belts or even sewed up their labia.
Stone seems to think that feminist history would insist on an active campaigning role for women, and this unfortunately causes him also to dismiss the significance of gender as a category for historical analysis on the grounds that it comes with too much ‘ideological baggage’(p. 12, n. 19).
This is a pity, for arguably an appreciation of both the importance of the social construction of feminity and masculinity and the extent to which fundamental concepts are gendered is necessary before the process by which men and women's  thinking about marriage and divorce can be understood.
Without this we are left with little more than the old rather ‘Whiggish’ account of how reasonable men gradually came to perceive women's ills.
Thus Caroline Norton, who was the subject of a trumped up crim. con. suit and who lost the custody of her children, is portrayed as a simple victim, albeit in her case not a passive one.
In contrast, Mary Poovey's recent account of the Norton case emphasizes the way in which the ideological separation of spheres both generated and depended on an arrangement of social and property relations that positioned women as moral superiors and economic dependents.
She suggests that in the 1850s divorce became the ‘solution’ to the threat of a Married Women's Property Act (not achieved until the last quarter of the nineteenth century), which would have threatened ‘the symbolic economy that depended on and institutionalized (such) binary oppositions’.
Similarly, A. James Hammerton's analysis of the Victorian law of matrimonial cruelty also demonstrates the complex and different ways in which men and women drew on ideas of patriarchal and companionate marriage.
Once permitted and enabled (chiefly by virtue of legal aid) to petition for divorce, women have done so in ever-increasing numbers.
Stone is not alone in noting the ‘discrepancy’(p. 420) between this and the apparent economic drawbacks of divorce for women (the increase in divorce has been one of the major factors contributing to the ‘feminization of poverty’).
The temptation for some present-day commentators has been to conclude that it is in women's ‘real’ interests to limit divorce.
Stone does not go this far, although he cannot resist quoting an Irish opponent of divorce during the referendum campaign of 1986 to the effect that ‘a woman voting for divorce is like a turkey voting for Christmas’(p. 420).
Women's seemingly paradoxical behaviour merely drives home the point that there are profound contradictions and complexities of position to be unravelled before we can get further in our understanding of the road to divorce.
JANE LEWIS
Empire and Sexuality: The British Experience .
By Ronald Hyam.
Manchester University press, pp. 192, 1990, £35. 0 7190 2504 4.
This useful and sensible book is written in the belief that historians cannot properly understand the dynamics of British imperial expansion without taking account of the sexual attitudes and expectations of the men who have administered British overseas possessions since the eighteenth century.
Hyam believes that the sexual activities of imperialist manpower have been erased from the historical record, or else written about in stereotyped ways which had little to do with reality, and that we are therefore left with an incomplete understanding of the colonial experience.
Books about colonialists are usually very different from those about, say writers: they are written by different kinds of authors, ask different kinds of questions, are couched in  a different style.
Empire and Sexuality brings some of the insights and analysis which are now conventional in literary biography to the history of British imperialism.
Drawing on a wide range of primary and published sources, it chronicles 200 years of British antics in imperial bedrooms.
Hyam examines such subjects as sexual exploitation under slavery, sexual coercion in convict settlements.
The use of catamites in mining compounds, the vindictive obtuseness of Christian missionary influence, changing attitudes to miscegenation and concubinage, the varieties of brothel culture across the world.
The fashion of male circumcision that began in the 1890s, and a wide range of related subjects.
He also scrutinizes the sexual acts, fears, and fantasies of selected soldiers and administrators in a way which is revealing both of their personal dynamics and of their working conditions.
Some of Hyam's most impressive passages describe male bisexuality: in many of the cultures which the British conquered or governed, sexual relations between men carried none of the odium or guilt to which they were subject in the United Kingdom (particularly from the 1890s), and he has unearthed much evidence of cheerful, matter-of-fact but discreetly conducted sexual relations between British men overseas.
His most important theme is the way in which, uniquely among imperial powers, British concepts of masculinity — not least as fostered in public schools — had been redefined by 1914 in the perceived interest of imperial administrative efficiency ‘to mean not sexual prowess and maturity, but sexual restraint’.
The Colonial Office Circular of 1909 to its employees on ‘immoral relations with native women, is shown to be a crucial development which involved ‘a massive and indeed revolutionary intrusion of public authority into the private lives of official classes overseas’.
Hyam also deplores the recent ‘willingness of Third World governments to adopt the peculiar Purity laws and conventions of Britain in the 1880s as if they represented ultimate truths about human civilisation’.
Hyam writes in the easy, tolerant manner of a man of the world, to use an old-fashioned phrase which seems appropriate in this context.
His text is singularly free from psychobabble, refreshingly unpatronizing, and — unlike most other historians of sexuality — he seeks neither to bludgeon nor to manipulate his readers.
He has some severe but convincing strictures on the impoverished and distorted contribution of feminist studies to his subject.
Given the extent of his researches, some of his conclusions are muted; but this calm, humane book, with its provocative ideas and lively squibs, is exemplary of its kind.
University of Reading R.T.P. Davenport-Hines
British Intelligence in the Second World War , Vol. 4: Security and Counter-Intelligence.
By F. H. Hinsley and C. A. G. Simkins.
London: HMSO, 1990, pp. xii + 408, £15.95.
ISBN 0-11-630954-7.
This book has an unpromising genesis.
Completed some time ago, the government then held up its publication when the Spycatcher affair erupted, so that it could not be accused of double standards in trying to ban Wright's book while giving Hinsley's the nod.
There are vast differences between the two, of course; but not all of them  are to the latter's credit.
In a nutshell, Hinsley is infinitely more trustworthy than Wright, but more shackled.
Wright — so long as he remained in exile — could write what he liked.
Hinsley is bound by all kinds of rules about what he can and cannot reveal, in the ‘national interest’, of which the authorities are the sole arbiters.
He also cannot cite the sources for many of the bits he is allowed to reveal, with the result that they cannot be independently checked.
This flies in the face of the most fundamental principles of the historian's — or indeed any scholarly — profession.
The result is a deeply flawed book in many ways, though useful, to a limited extent, in others.
It deals with the domestic intelligence front.
This is usually regarded as the most sensitive aspect of secret service work.
There is a long tradition in Britain of hostility to ‘political espionage’, some of which surfaces in this book.
In 1921, for example, we find the police warning against setting up a ‘continental system of domestic espionage’ in Britain (p. 6) Even SIS, which had designs on MI5 in 1945, shied away from the latter's counter-subversive functions, so as not to be ‘associated with the idea of an internal Gestapo,(p. 177) No wonder governments are nervous of too much openness in this area.
The reason why the present government nevertheless eventually sanctioned this book is that it mainly covers the war years, when the secret services were inevitably more widely tolerated than at other times.
The chief task of MI5 between 1939 and 1945 was to counter German espionage and sabotage in Britain and the empire.
No one could cavil with that, either then, or in historical retrospect.
The other factor making for openness is that MI5's record for this period seems on the whole to be creditable.
It started off badly — in April 1940 Norman Birkett spoke of ‘gross mistakes and pathological stupidities in connexion with its internment policy (p. 39)— but it got better.
Its master stroke was its ‘double cross system’, whereby it turned enemy spies into double agents, working for the British and feeding false information back.
There is a great deal about this here.
Much of it has been known before, from the account published by J. C. Masterman — one of the MI5 men concerned — in 1972.
Masterman claimed that by this means Britain ‘actively ran and controlled the German espionage system in this country’ Readers of the present book will be interested to know whether Professor Hinsley corroborated this.
He does in general, though he also knocks some gilt off the gingerbread by pointing out how easy it all was.
Some German agents must have stood out like sore thumbs (One, codenamed ‘Garbo’, could never figure out English pounds, shillings, and pence, and once reported back to Berlin from Glasgow that there were men there ‘who would do anything for a litre of wine’(p. 112).)
In Berlin the Abwehr organization was pitifully inept (pp. 280–1).
Nevertheless, MI5 could be justly proud of ‘double cross’.
It was a clever wheeze, great fun to work, and it probably succeeded in neutralizing the German espionage threat.
This is intriguing and entertaining, but not very new.
More interesting to the historian are this book's accounts of MI5's activities on the counter-subversive front — chiefly against the British Fascists, the Communist Party of Great Britain, and the Peace Pledge Union — and of its interminable behind-the-scenes wrangles with other government agencies, especially SIS.
The former is enlightening, if somewhat bland.
Partly due to the ban placed on the authors' disclosing anything about ‘intelligence techniques’(p. x), which has been rigidly enforced.
The latter is fascinating, especially  in the glimpses it occasionally gives of the general principles and priorities which informed MI5's work, and the unease these aroused in some quarters.
This is the best aspect of the book.
The worst is its omissions.
Some of these are breathtaking.
The most outrageous concerns one of its joint authors.
Historians, like politicians, should declare their interests.
C. A. G. Simkins does not.
He is an ‘insider’: an ex-member of MI5, rising to deputy director; but you could not tell that from this book.
The title-page describes him simply as a Scholar of New College, Oxford and a Barrister at Law.
That smacks of what he and his co-author themselves describe (p. 244) as suppressio veri , at the very least.
Other omissions are nearly as serious.
For example, scarcely any names are mentioned: just seven of acknowledged wartime MI5 personnel in all.
Some of the most famous MI5 officers and agents are entirely ignored.
One is Maxwell Knight, the head of M(5)b (counter-subversion) and probably the best-known MI5 officer ever (apart from Hollis, Wright, and Blunt), who gets no credit at all.
This inevitably makes MI5 seem impersonal, and hides the varied character traits and prejudices which contributed so much to its ethos and efficiency (or lack of it).
This is a serious distortion.
Recruitment policies are not touched on, with one brief prewar exception (p. 10), which means that we are kept in ignorance of the kinds of men and women (reputedly mostly Oxbridge dons) who augmented MI5's strength and clearly had a great impact on its whole character and competence at the beginning of the war.
The problem of fascist sympathies among the ranks of MI5 at the outset of the war is entirely ignored, as is the removal in 1940 of its founder and director, Sir Vernon Kell, which may or may not have been connected with that issue.
A number of well-known and controversial incidents involving the security services — among them the Benjamin Greene affair, the Hess mission, and the Tyler Kent case — are either omitted altogether or merely mentioned in passing.
And anyone wanting enlightenment on Soviet penetration in the war years will be sorely disappointed in this book.
The known ‘moles’ are passed over completely.
Maxwell Knight's famous paper about KGB infiltration, ‘The Comintern is Not Dead’, which Roger Hollis apparently shelved, is ignored.
There is no mention of the doubts which (probably unworthily) still surround the name of Hollis himself.
It is as if none of these problems and controversies ever existed.
Perhaps they did not.
Could they all be inventions, disinformation planted on gullible amateur spy-writers by the KGB?
If so, we should be told.
This book, therefore, is good and probably reliable as far as it goes.
For this we have to thank Professor Hinsley, a highly respected and trustworthy historian, who would not allow deceptions to appear under his name.
Subjects which could not be mentioned without deception, because of the insufferable restraints to which he is subject, are consequently omitted entirely.
The effect is rather like a newspaper carrying blank columns where items have been banned.
It has advantages.
For the authorities, it ensures that only a relatively sanitized version of events gets out; for the authors, it means that they do not have to perjure themselves, and has the additional benefit that the gaps — and consequently the restraints under which they have had to work — are obvious to their readers.
But there are also drawbacks.
The gaps are bound to undermine trust and arouse suspicions.
That hurts the authorities.
For historians the drawback is that the gaps appear at just about every point where there  is something they would like to know.
This is the main fault of the book.
It contains some fascinating material, but not on the central issues of twentieth century British secret service history.
For that you have to read between its lines.
And that, of course, is fraught with dangers.
University of Hull BERNARD PORTER
Troubled Days of Peace: Mountbatten and South East Asia Command, 1945–46 .
By Peter Dennis.
Manchester: Manchester University Press, £13.95, 1990, PP. 270.
ISBN 0-7190-2258-4.
In July 1945 the boundaries of Mountbatten's South East Asia Command were extended to include the Netherlands East Indies and the southern part of Indochina as well as the original Burma, Siam, Malaya, Singapore, and Sumatra.
Almost as soon as this decision was taken the atom bombs fell on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the Japanese surrendered.
The task facing the Supreme Commander changed abruptly and fundamentally but became no easier.
His empire now stretched over one and a half million square miles of war-shattered Asia, with a population of some 128 million, many of them starving or, at least, severely undernourished.
Scattered all over his territories were 738,000 Japanese; in theory a defeated army but in most cases still armed and either potentially dangerous or the only organized force capable of keeping chaos at bay.
As widely scattered were over a hundred thousand prisoners of war or internees, who had to be tracked down, liberated, and succoured.
Mountbatten's post-surrender tasks were first, to ensure that the Japanese were disarmed and repatriated; second, to rescue the prisoners of war; and third, to restore law and order and maintain it until civilian authority could be restored.
The first two tasks, though hideously difficult, were at least relatively straightforward; the third posed the problem which is at the heart of Peter Dennis's book: whose law was to be restored and what civilian authority should take over?
In so far as Whitehall had considered these matters it had been vaguely assumed that a status quo ante would be established and the Dutch in the Netherlands East Indies, the French in Indochina, and the Colonial Office in Burma and Malaya would resume their rightful sway.
The Americans had different views, but they had deliberately distanced themselves from the area.
Only gradually did it dawn on those responsible that vigorous and determined nationalist organizations had grown up in the shadow of the Japanese, that these movements had flourished exceedingly in the vacuum left by the collapse of Japanese power, and that if the colonial regimes were to be reconstituted it could only be by force.
Mountbatten's personal view was that the new nationalist movements should be appeased rather than suppressed and that the old colonial powers should settle for the best deal that they could get, pledging independence in the near future and thus, he hoped, preserving the greater part of their economic advantages.
In Burma, where he had only the British Colonial Office and colonial administrators to deal with, he was more or less able to have his way.
Elsewhere it was different.
‘I can assure you,’ he told Tom Driberg, ‘that if I was left as free a hand in French  Indochina and the Netherlands East Indies as I was left in Burma, I could solve both these problems by the same methods; though it is heartbreaking to have to leave the political control to other nations when we are really in military control.’
Given the singularly uncertain nature of the ‘military control’ which British forces in fact exercised at the time, one can sympathize with Mr Dennis when he remarks that ‘this display of self-assurance can only be described as breathtaking’.
When one views the subsequent history of Vietnam, and Indonesia, however, it does not seem extravagant to claim that Mountbatten could hardly have made as bad a job of it if he had been left to his own devices.
In Indochina matters were taken out of his control by the precipitancy of his own local commander, General Gracey, who involved his forces in a defence of French interests far beyond that envisaged in his instructions.
One difficulty for Mountbatten was that the Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, took a view of the situation closer to that of Gracey than that of the Supreme Commander: ‘Bevin is behaving like the worst conservative diehard,’ wrote Edwina Mountbatten in another context.
Undaunted Mountbatten battled on, but he could do little to prevent the fait accompli that led eventually to Dien Bien Phu.
In the Netherlands East Indies he did more to promote his point of view.
‘Bold, not to negotiate with the nationalists; as the outrage was felt exclusively by the Dutch it is doubtful whether Mountbatten would have resented the description.
He had little success, however, in his efforts to persuade the Dutch that Sukarno was a man with whom they could do business and found himself a reluctant pig in the middle, reviled by one side as a fascist imperialist and by the other as an irresponsible revolutionary.
This, therefore, is a chronicle of failure, though a gallant failure and of a project engaged in with the best of intentions.
Peter Dennis attaches rather more weight than seems wise to the embittered and somewhat impressionistic recollections of General Christison, but his account of events is balanced and fair.
He does justice to Mountbatten's considerable failings but also to his still more considerable qualities.
Lucid, intelligent, and shrewd, this is a most useful contribution to a fascinating but little-studied period of history.
PHILIP ZIEGLER
The British Part in the Korean War , vol. 1: A Distant Obligation.
By Anthony Farrar-Hockley.
London: HMSO, 1990, pp. 522, £35.
ISBN 0-11-630953-9.
The Commonwealth Armies and the Korean War .
By Jeffrey Grey.
Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988, pp. 244, £12.95.
ISBN 0 — 7190-2770-5.
With the publication of the Foreign Relations of the United States volumes on the Korean War and the release of the British documents it was evident that Britain had played a major role in the important decisions taken in the early stages of the war, and in particular the decision to change the aim of the operation from being merely  to repel the aggressor north of the 38th parallel to that of achieving a unified Korea.
The naval support given immediately by Britain for the Korean operation was seen by the Foreign Office as a useful demonstration of Britain's ‘capacity to act as a world power with the support of the Commonwealth, and of its quickness to move when action rather than words are necessary’.
From Washington the British ambassador, Sir Oliver Franks, reported that in Korea the American government and people had ‘instinctively followed their high destiny in the world’.
But Americans felt lonely: Britain should offer to send land forces to reassure them.
The Chiefs of Staff did not want to do this, and the Defence Committee was worried lest the Korean conflict should divert attention from other danger-spots in Asia and blind Britain to the risk to which it was exposed in Europe.
But by the end of July 1950 the need for Anglo-American solidarity outweighed the military disadvantages, and the Cabinet agreed to the formulation of a brigade group to operate in Korea under American command.
Following General Douglas MacArthur's initial victories the change in the nature of the Korean operation was very much a British initiative.
On 21 September Prime Minister Clement Attlee informed Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin, then in New York, that he favoured a declaration from the United Nations that it would take responsibility for the rehabilitation of the whole country.
Bevin agreed with Attlee about the need to forestall the Russians, and took the initiative in drafting a resolution for the General Assembly authorizing the crossing of the 38th parallel with a view to establishing a unified, independent, and democratic government of all Korea.
Bevin was much concerned that the revolution of allied public feeling after Truman's confused press statement of 30 November 1950 about the possible use of nuclear weapons in Korea had compelled the President to retract it and ‘thus weakened the deterrent effect of our possession of the atomic weapon’.
In the official history Anthony Farrar-Hockley argues that ‘Mr Attlee and Mr Bevin were the policy makers’.
He suggests that the two leaders were ‘commonly influenced by historical factors in their responses to events in Korea during that summer and autumn of 1950’.
They saw a frustrated Stalin, foiled in his attempts to extend Russian power into northern, western, and southern Europe by the alliance of the European democracies and the United States.
Farrar-Hockley attributes the British intervention to an anti-appeasement mindset, worries about American isolationism, and concern for ‘adherence to the charter of the United Nations to prevent its decline into the impotence of the League of Nations’(p. 203).
In discussing the question of the possible use of the atomic bomb, Farrar-Hockley concludes that it is unlikely that the bombs could have been used in Korea without prior consultation, as ‘honour and American political interest would have combined to militate against such a course’(p. 386).
This official history is lavishly produced, profusely illustrated with maps and well-chosen photographs, and quotes extensively from a selection of the British documents — indeed, seems to reproduce some of them in full in the text — as well as vividly recounting the actual fighting.
It constitutes an important work of reference.
A further dimension of British policy in the Korean War is examined by Jeffrey Grey of the Historical Research Section of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Canberra: the influence of the Commonwealth.
He restricts himself to an account of the ground forces, so there is no coverage of the role played by the South African air force, for instance, and perhaps the distinction drawn by Britain at the outset of the  war between the old Dominions and the members of the new Commonwealth which it regarded as a security risk could have been more strongly emphasized.
But in the end Grey does venture the overall generalization that ‘the experience in the Korean War demonstrated again the conflict between Dominion aspirations and increasing independence in policy formulation, and the British desire to maintain their status as a great power by drawing on the resources of the Dominions in ‘friendly cooperation,’ while at the same time arrogating to themselves the benefits which accrued from such association' (p. 185).
University College of Wales, Aberystwyth RITCHIE OVENDALE