

Chiefs Without a Tribe
In the bright sunshine each September in central Africa, the ngwazi (conqueror) Dr Kamuzu Banda, Life President and over eighty years old, has addressed 20,000 members of the women's federation of Malawi for no less than three hours.
His words, spoken in English, are translated into Chinyanja.
At relevant moments Dr Banda waves his fly whisk.
When the oratory is finished the ladies begin dancing on the floor of the arena; after some time the Ngwazi descends to join the dancing, fly whisk waving merrily, and for at least an hour joins in the celebration.
Dr Banda, abroad for more than forty years during the colonial period, has a very paternalistic view of the way Malawi should be run.
His regime calls for great personal reverence for himself, as Life President and elder and brooks no serious dissent on grounds of personality or policy.
An early attempt by ex-ministers to overthrow Banda in 1964 ended in total failure; three high-ranking party members disappeared in a car crash in 1982.
An early contestant for the role of heir apparent, Aleke Banda, a minister in the 1960s, was restricted to his village for several years before being partially rehabilitated only to fall in disgrace again in the mid 1980s.
Dr Banda is on record as saying:
Everything is my business.
Everything.
The state of education, the state of our economy, the state of our agriculture, the state of our transport, everything is my business.
Map 5 Africa today and African peoples
Dr Banda's approach has had considerable success.
Malawi has not been debilitated by localism, and experienced considerable economic growth in the 1960s and 1970s with a strong agricultural performance and an unusually effective civil service.
The economic problems experienced in the 1980s are largely due to the destabilizing impact of the civil war in Mozambique.
Nonetheless, the authoritarian nature of the regime has won it many enemies both inside and outside the country, creating an atmosphere of suspicion and intrigue amongst the educated elite.
Furthermore, there is no sign that Dr Banda will be able to engineer a smooth and lasting transition to a leader with widespread popular support, and he thus endangers the achievements of his regime.
Malawi's experience illustrates fundamental problems in the complex interweaving of traditional and modern values which coexist in Africa.
There are three areas in which the political characteristics of pre-colonial societies can be identified in the contemporary situation.
First, that the loyalty of most rural and many urban people is still to tribe rather than nation; second, in the continuous drift towards authoritarian systems of government; and, third, in the failure to resolve peacefully a system of succession of heads of state.
We shall examine these in turn, relating them to specific national situations.
NATIONALISM vs LOCALISM
In most African countries the prime loyalty of the majority of people continues to be the extended family and its clan, and ultimately the tribe as the ‘widening out of the family’.
So localism is a Major political reality, and the tendency towards localism has been stronger than the tendency towards a national identity.
The contradiction between the two could be seen in the nationalist movements which paved the way for independence, in which there was a constant tension between the attempt to build a genuine nationalist movement and the tendency for support to be delivered on a tribal basis.
Nigeria
Nigeria provides a striking example of this process at work.
The first party to campaign for independence was the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC) founded by Dr Namdi Azikiwe in 1945.
The name of its newspaper,The West African Pilot , clearly indicated the all-Nigerian and even all-West African nature of its objectives.
In the following six years the NCNC succeeded in attracting a good deal of support amongst the Yoruba of western Nigeria.
However, by 1951 tension between Yoruba and Ibo outside the party, Yoruba objections to Dr Azikiwe's leadership, and the weakness of political organization within the west, led to the establishment of the Yoruba-dominated ‘Action group’ by Chief Obafemi Awolowo.
The Northern People's Congress (NPC) led by a schoolteacher, Tafawa Balewa, and backed by the northern Emirates, was also founded at this time, early enough to fight elections held in 1952.
Any attempt to build a truly all-Nigerian party since the failure of Azikiwe's pioneering initiative has fallen foul of the rivalry between the major tribal groups.
This rivalry, reflected in the conflicts between the successor political parties, and the interest groups they represent, has continued to be the main engine of Nigerian politics to the present time.
It was not satisfactorily accommodated by the new constitution introduced for the 1979 election, as indicated by the return to military rule in 1984.
It is the key to the attempts of General Babangida, Nigerian head of state in 1989, to restrict to two the number of parties allowed to fight the proposed 1991 general election — in theory in order to prevent excessive faction fighting based on ethnic groups.
Zambia: the KK carousel
In Zambia, although it has a population at least ten times smaller than that of Nigeria, localism has also been the prime concern of domestic politics.
The concessions and trade-offs which have come to form the main content of Zambian politics have proved fatally debilitating, even though the skill with which they have been orchestrated by President Kenneth Kaunda (KK) has ensured that Zambia is one of the least oppressive societies in Africa.
Nationalist politics in Zambia were initiated in 1951 under the banner of the Northern Rhodesian African National Congress (ANC — but not to be confused with the present-day ANC) led by Harry Nkumbula, from the Ila people of southern Zambia.
The ANC at that time had very close links to the African Mine Workers' Union, the largest group of whose members were Bemba, but which included members of tribes from all over Zambia, as well as from Tanganyika and Nyasaland.
At this time localism had not yet become a threat.
The ANC led the fight against the formation of the Central African Federation, but failed to prevent its establishment in 1954.
Nkumbula's lack of vigour in attacking the Federation, once established, and in supporting participation in the elections for the Legislative Council in 1958 led to the breakaway from the ANC of Kaunda, Simon Kapwepwe and others who set up the United National Independence Party (UNIP) in 1959.
It was UNIP which eventually took control of the first independent government winning, in January 1964, fifty-five seats to the ANC's ten.
It was clear that the ANC would, from then on, be a minority party relying heavily on local support in the Southern Province.
Kaunda's commitment to a multi- or non-tribal society eventually alienated Kapwepwe whose support base lay much more firmly amongst the Bemba.
By 1971, the tension was so great that Kapwepwe broke with Kaunda and formed the United People's Party (UPP) which depended on a flimsy alliance between the Bemba and other tribal groups who at that time felt they were out in the political cold.
In elections held at the end of 1971, the UPP won only one seat, Kapwepwe's own.
It was then banned in February 1972, and a one-party state declared.
Kapwepwe and 123 supporters were detained, although Kapwepwe himself was released ten months later.
In 1974 the remaining ANC MPs were allowed to join UNIP, as was Kapwepwe in September 1978.
Since that time Kaunda has operated an unending game of musical chairs between tribal interest groups.
At one level this has enabled him to achieve the considerable feat of maintaining reasonably stable government for more than twenty years.
He has, however, paid a very high price for living with the politics of localism.
For tensions between regional factions within the party have constantly subordinated a consensus on development policy to the struggle for power.
In the UNIP contest for the 1979 presidential nomination, when both Kapwepwe and Nkumbula challenged him, Kaunda showed that he was not prepared to tolerate any real alternative to himself, even when the bid came from the two most experienced politicians in the country.
The consequent reactions, both at grass roots level in increasing lawlessness exemplified by the Mushala Gang, a guerilla group in the north-west, and among the elite in a coup attempt organized by Edward Shamwana, a well known Lusaka lawyer, were typical reactions to a regime which was seen as protecting vested interests from below and being inefficient and bureaucratic from above.
In 1988 there were no contestants other than Kaunda for the party's presidential nomination, since Nalumino Mundia, a veteran of the independence struggle, withdrew, being unable to secure Bemba support.
Living with localism and the drift to an authoritarian system created a dangerous impasse in Zambian society, and left it singularly ill-equipped to deal with its economic collapse in the late 1980s.
Localism has thus continued to be a reality in Nigeria and Zambia and has conflicted with attempts to build a national identity and a national politics.
However, there are important cases, particularly Senegal and Tanzania, where the tendency towards a national identity has been more important than localism, which is not to say that the conflict has not existed.
In Tanzania, for example, localism among the waChagga and waHaya is potentially as strong as among any of the major tribes of Zambia.
It has, however, been contained by an environment in which President Nyerere's political leadership promoted a strong national ideology, and in which, for reasons which lie in Tanzania's nineteenth-century history (including both the replacement of traditional authority by trader barons and the unity achieved among some peoples in resisting German colonialism) localism has been much less strong than among many African peoples.
This history gave Tanzania a lingua franca (kiSwahili) which was common to most parts of the country, and so the local identity which comes from language runs in parallel with a national identity also based on language.
THE DRIFT TOWARDS AUTHORITARIANISM
The second facet of continuity from pre-colonial times is the authoritarian nature of most African governments.
In Chapter 3 it was argued that pre-colonial society was indeed authoritarian, and that this expressed itself in a great stress on the conformity of the individual, and on a hierarchy of relationships between young and old, between chiefs and people and between men and women.
In the course of the colonial period, the outward form of these relationships underwent great changes to become, in some cases, almost unrecognizable.
The changes did not, however, alter the underlying assumptions about the need for authority, or create a climate in which individual dissent, as in the Anglo-Saxon tradition, was considered necessary to the health of the body politic.
Uganda: kingdoms at war
In some cases there has been a close relationship between the strength of localism and the tendency towards authoritarian government.
This is particularly true in Uganda where the British-derived constitution was premised on a uniquely complex attempt to reconcile the interests of the four historic kingdoms, including Bunyoro and Buganda, with the new nation.
This attempt was a reaction to the experience of the British in Uganda in the 1950s.
Thus the last British Governor, Sir Andrew Cohen, favoured in 1952 the approach which Milton Obote tried to make work after 1966:
the future of Uganda must lie in a unitary form of central Government on parliamentary lines covering the whole country…
The Protectorate is too small to grow into a series of separate units of Government, even if these are federated together.
He looked forward to the development of the country
by a central Government of the Protectorate as a whole with no part of the country dominating any other part but all working together for the good of the whole Protectorate and the progress of its people.
Cohen, however, found it impossible to make this approach work as a result of a confrontation with the kabaka in 1953, and by 1955 Buganda had confirmed its special constitutional status within Uganda, a status which was if anything reinforced in the independence constitution of 1962.
This arrangement was made to work, albeit with increasing tension, between 1962 and 1966.
In the first two years of this period President Milton Obote's party, the United People's Congress (UPC) formed a coalition with the Kabaka Yekka (KY) Party whose support was entirely drawn from the Buganda people, and whose ultimate loyalty was to the kabaka who was also appointed President of Uganda.
By October 1964 in the complex shifting sands of Ugandan parliamentary politics this alignment changed to one in which Obote felt strong enough to break his alliance with the kabaka , with whom he moved into a position of open enmity.
In 1966 he instigated a military attack led by Idi Amin on the kabaka's palace and made the arrangements to terminate the other three traditional kingships of Uganda.
These events were the culmination of a process which ended the attempt to accommodate localism into the political structure through very complex constitutional arrangements.
As the people of Uganda retained strong local loyalties, the arrangements could only be replaced by the type of authoritarian regime which Obote now introduced.
Its hallmark was a Machiavellian juggling with army cliques, revolving mainly around the role of Idi Amin and Oyite-Ojok as rival claimants to the position of head of the army.
It was hardly surprising that this should result in the coup of January 1971 in which Amin overthrew Obote while he was absent abroad.
Nor was it surprising that after the apparently mindless brutality of the Amin years, Obote's eventual return to power in 1980 was characterized by the continuing dominance of the army as the real force in Ugandan politics, supporting a parliamentary facade of no real legitimacy.
In this situation, between 1982 and 1985 the army could pursue a civil war with the Buganda of whom 150,000 were killed in the Luweru Triangle, which forms the heartland of Buganda.
These events ultimately led to the second overthrow of Obote by Yoreveni Museveni in 1985.
In Uganda, the apparent impossibility of integrating localism with an effective central government, and the consequent reliance on military authority, has had tragic consequences: civil strife or open war was prevalent from at least 1971 until 1986.
The last British government in Uganda, initially seeking an integrated state in recognition of local realities, was forced to contrive a more or less federal one.
The tensions involved in trying to make that quasi-federal arrangement work proved too great for Obote.
He became increasingly authoritarian and reliant upon the army, which in turn led to the eight years of Amin's rule, the Tanzanian invasion, Obote's second government and ultimately the civil war in which Museveni took power.
Today it remains to be seen whether Museveni's essentially centralist approach will be more successful than its predecessors.
Tanzania
Tanzania, in spite of the national rhetoric inspired by President Julius Nyerere, was also essentially authoritarian during Nyerere's presidency.
This is true even though the ruling party — initially the Tanganyika African National Union (TANU) and since 1972 the Chama Cha Mapunduzi (CCM)— has always accepted a system of primary elections to select parliamentary candidates.
In the four general elections held since independence the turnover of MPs has been as much as 50 per cent.
In contrast the authoritarian nature of Tanzanian politics can more usefully be measured by the number of political detainees which exceeded several hundred in the mid 1970s or in terms of the degree of pressure brought to bear on the rural population from 1974 to 1978.
It is also true at a more subtle level in that Nyerere, perhaps the finest political debater in Africa land responsible for the first translation of Shakespeare's Julius Caesar into kiSwahili), left himself with no-one to debate with, at least until he left the presidency to be party chairman in 1985.
His survival over the years since independence in 1961 does not alter the fact that the discussion of real policy choices in a public manner has hardly ever occurred.
This is not to say that the National Executive Committee of the ruling party allows Nyerere total control of the party and therefore of government policy; in fact there have always been a number of important policy issues which Nyerere has had to argue through the NEC and which he has not always won.
One such issue since the Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar in 1964 has been the degree of influence of leading Zanzibari politicians in the affairs of the mainland government and party, and the status of Zanzibar in general.
Another, in the late 1960s, was the position of the Ruvuma Development Association (RDA), a group of seven villages near Songea in the extreme south-western corner of Tanzania which grouped themselves in an association of mutual support designed to foster their development and which were ultimately compulsorily disbanded in 1969.
However, none of the major stages in Tanzania's development as a centralized socialist state were publicly discussed in any way which made open debate possible.
The three major steps were first, the nationalizations which followed the Arusha Declaration in 1967; second, the takeover by government of the wholesale distribution system (largely Indian-owned) in 1971; and thirdly, the compulsory villagization programme of 1974–8, affecting the physical location of the homes of at least 5 million people.
The extent of opposition to the Arusha Declaration and its associated ‘leadership code’ is indicated by the desertion of Nyerere's closest colleague, Oscar Kambona, who fled Tanzania in 1967.
The take-over of the wholesale distribution system was strongly resisted by the responsible minister, A.M. Babu, and was implemented directly by the President's office.
On a trumped-up charge of assassinating the first President of Zanzibar, Abeid Karume, Babu was held in detention from 1971 to 1978.
Even more significant at the grass roots level was the reversal of government policy on self-help villages, christened ujamaa villages (which in kiSwahili means familihood).
Nyerere was arguing right up to, and beyond the date of the dissolution of the RDA that ujamaa villages must govern themselves.
In a paper entitled ‘Freedom and Development’ published in dctober 1968 and adopted by the NEC later that month he said:
No one can be forced into an ujamaa village, and no official — at any level — can go and tell the members of an ujamaa village what they should do together, and what they should continue to do as individual farmers.
No official of the Government or Party can go to an ujamaa village and tell the members what they must grow…for if these things happen — that is, if an outsider gives such instructions and enforces them — then it will no longer be an ujamaa village!
Developments in Tanzania in the mid 1970s were, however, to end in the direct contradiction of this injunction, a contradiction which is at the heart of Tanzania's tendency towards an authoritarian state.
By 1972 party leaders and Nyerere himself became disillusioned with the lack of progress in implementing ujamaa on a voluntary basis, and in a dramatic switch of policy in 1973 it was decreed that all Tanzanians should live in such a village by 1976.
In the course of the next three years over 5 million small farmers moved from individual farms to larger settlements, often including several hundred families.
The number of people in ujamaa villages by the late 1970s was officially estimated to be 10 million, although many of these were already living in their existing communities which were simply renamed ujamaa .
Nonetheless, the movement was a vast operation, unparalleled in pre- or post-independence Africa.
Initially it was assumed that the objective would be for the villages to farm on a communal basis.
In practice, by 1975, the resistance to this approach proved so great that settlement was the real objective, with the justification that farming families could be supported in every way — agriculturally, medically and educationally — much more effectively on a group basis.
The important point is not the long-term justification, or lack of it, of the resettlement programme but the very authoritarian manner of its conception and implementation.
The experience confirmed Tanzania as a society in which key decisions were made by the president, sometimes in consultation with a few individuals and sometimes not, for implementation by an elite of party workers and civil servants.
In the general election of 1970 there had, for instance, been no discussion of the settlement issue; it had been assumed that ujamaa would continue to be a voluntary movement.
It was as if the president decided to will Tanzania into becoming a socialist community of rural producers living in harmony with themselves and the soil, and was prepared to devote the whole machinery of the state to turning his will into reality.
Individuals in the party and the government came to use the situation in whatever way they could to optimize their own position, ranging from exercising the increased power which district and regional officials now had over the citizenry, to carrying out routine tasks perfunctorily while acquiring a significant income from black market activities.
By the late 1980s there were new divisions in Tanzanian society with a clear split between pragmatists and socialists.
The former wished to see a revived private sector, the latter wished to preserve the institutional and economic status quo.
Beneath these divisions on policy lay deeper divisions based on economic and financial self-interest, with the prestige of Nyerere as party chairman adding weight to the argument for the status quo.
In some cases, as in relations between the mainland and Zanzibar, this could be decisive.
In other areas Nyerere's influence was more circumspect, but it was successful in maintaining the myth of Tanzania, at least for domestic consumption, as a country committed to building socialism in the long term.
Nyerere's reputation as an individual remains high and was reinforced by his decision to resign as president in late 1985.
It has never been doubted by the Tanzanian public that his aims were genuine, nor been considered that he sought to enrich himself.
In this sense the very high ‘yes’ votes he achieved in the four presidential elections since independence have been genuine, but should not be mistaken for support for specific policies, and still less for support for other leaders at either the local or national level.
THE CONTINUING PROBLEM OF SUCCESSION
We have seen that localism and the drift to increasingly authoritarian government have been major problems even for Africa's more successful leaders, and have been disastrous in other cases such as Uganda and Nigeria.
Both these factors interrelate with a third major political dilemma: the succession to political leadership.
Since 1960, of the 41 sub-Saharan African states there has only been one smooth constitutional transfer of real power from one elected leader to another, i.e. in Senegal in 1981.
In 1990 it is not clear whether in late 1987 Julius Nyerere's decision to renew his term as party chairman in Tanzania is compatible with a smooth transition of power from himself to President Mwinyi or to anyone else.
There have been three significant cases of the smooth transfer of power from the death of a civilian head of state to his successor.
In each case, Liberia in 1971, Kenya in 1979, and Botswana in 1980, the transfer was to existing vice-presidents.
In four cases, Ghana in 1976 and 1979, Nigeria in 1980 and Sudan in 1987, military regimes have held elections which have returned civilian governments to power but in all four cases a coup has reinstated a military head of state.
As with the continuing strength of localism and authoritarian government, the roots of the succession problem lie not only in the fragility of the new states, but also in the legacy of pre-colonial societies.
Chapter 3 showed for the most part that traditional society had an arbitrary approach to the problem typified by suicide (as with the Banyankole), ‘snuffing out’(as with the Nyakyusa and Ngonde) or violent change (as with the Shilluk).
Constitutional change through the popular will, or even the long wait for a head of state's death, are not concepts with deep roots in African society.
Kenya after Kenyatta
The acute political problems raised by the succession issue can be seen particularly clearly in the experience of Kenya, Cameroun and Senegal.
In the case of Kenya, Kenyatta's age of almost seventy at the time of independence in 1964 meant that the succession issue was alive from the start.
For the Kikuyu the success of the struggle for independence in Kenya lay in the combination of Kenyatta's political activities and in the effectiveness of Mau Mau in eroding settler confidence.
But there were other political figures at work in Kenya during the 1950s.
These included Tom Mboya and Oginga Odinga, both Luo, albeit from different parts of Luo-land, both having made major contributions to the independence movement (Odinga amongst the Luo and Mboya within and outside the trade union movement), and in 1961 both were founder members of KANU.
At independence, the two were relatively young — Mboya in his early thirties, and Odinga in his forties — and could have expected to be considered as candidates for the presidency in the years to come.
In the mid 1960s a dominant group of Kikuyu, who were close to the Kenyatta family, determined that neither Odinga nor Mboya would come close to the presidency.
This group included the veteran politician Mbiyu Koinange, who had participated in missions to the British Colonial Secretary in the early 1950s, and Dr Njoroge Mungai, then a minister in the Kenyatta government.
In 1966, in the one and only internal KANU election to be held between independence and Kenyatta's death in 1978, Odinga was ousted from the position of vice-president of the party and so from that of the Republic.
At the same time maximum uncertainty was built into the party constitution with the introduction of eight vice-presidential posts.
The government however continued with just one vice-president and within a few months this post was held by Daniel Arap Moi, a non-Kikuyu who, despite being a member of the Legislative Council, had not been prominent in nationalist politics.
Tom Mboya had supported these moves, not least perhaps because of his long-standing animosity towards Odinga, but in doing so sowed the seeds of his own downfall.
He was murdered in 1969 and his assassin did not hesitate to put the blame on the ‘big men’.
By this time Odinga had formed his own party, the KPU (Kenya People's Union), but following an incident in Kenyatta's presence at Kisumu he was jailed in October 1969 and the KPU banned.
The struggle for the succession now lay more narrowly between Kikuyu claimants and Vice-president Moi.
The existing constitution stipulated that in the event of the president's death, the vice-president must act in place of the president for the ninety days which would elapse before an election could be held.
In order to ensure that the succession passed to the right Kikuyu clan, an organization by the name of GEMA (Gikuyu, Embu and Meru Association) was formed under the leadership of Njenga Karume:
Although ostensibly a welfare organisation Gema was in fact a political party within KANU with Kiambu as its nerve centre, but with political retainers throughout the Republic among every tribe.
GEMA organized and led the ‘Change the Constitution’ movement which had as its objective the prevention of the vice-president taking power in an interim period before an election, and which came to dominate party politics in the mid 1970s.
Having failed in its objective, and having incurred the apparent disapproval of Kenyatta in the process, GEMA tried to persuade Kibaki (the technocratic Minister of Finance) to stand as vice-president against Moi in the abortive party elections of 1977.
He declined, although a member of GEMA, and stood for the post of national chairman.
The death of Kenyatta in 1978, with no constitutional change accomplished, left the way open for Daniel Arap Moi to take over the presidency and to be confirmed in a national election as president within three months.
However, in practice this was only achieved as a result of the very public support of Kibaki and of Charles Njonjo the influential Attorney General (working against the interests of the founders of GEMA), a triumvirate which was itself to break apart with the public humiliation of Njonjo at judicial hearings in 1984.
Although the transition from Kenyatta to Moi was nominally smooth, it was in fact the culmination of a battle for power which had lasted for 12 years.
During its course two major contestants had been eliminated, one by assassination and one by detention, and party politics in Kenya had become obsessed with the struggle between personalities and the rival power of different Kikuyu clans.
Its side effects, at least in the popular mind, included two other assassinations, those of the popular reformist MP, J.M. Kariuki, and Pia Gama Pinto, an Asian lawyer who frequently wrote radical speeches for Odinga.
The problem of succession had by no means been solved, and certainly not in a way that could be used as a precedent for the future.
Subsequently, President Moi has consolidated his position in such a way that it has become difficult, if not impossible, for anyone to challenge his position by constitutional means.
In the March 1988 general election, voters were obliged to queue publicly behind their preferred candidates in the nomination process, and after the election the government initiated discussion of the abolition of the secret ballot.
Cameroun: qui governe?
Cameroun provides another example of a country whose stability was seriously jeopardized by a major crisis over the succession to the presidency.
The conflict between ex-President Ahmadu Ahidjo and President Paul Biya culminated in 1984 in a bloody battle for the presidential palace and the presidency itself.
For twenty years from 1961 Ahidjo had relative success in maintaining stability in Cameroun, and by the late 1970s the country was experiencing high rates of growth.
During this period, Ahidjo had a series of prime ministers on the French model.
The last was Paul Biya who between 1973 and 1979, as minister responsible for the economy, had been one of the chief architects of Cameroun's successful development strategy.
It was his success in this role which made him an obvious choice for prime minister, an essentially ‘managerial’ post.
Ahidjo decided in 1981 that for reasons of health, he would step down from the presidency but remain chairman of the ruling party, the Union Nationale Camerounaise (UNC).
In 1982 the presidency was constitutionally assumed by Biya who continued his drive to ‘modernize’ the economy.
However, by mid 1983 Ahidjo evidently regretted his decision and sought to exercise control, partly from Monaco, over the government from his position as party chairman.
The subsequent tension between the two men created an atmosphere in which there were two attempted coups in 1983, both emanating from sections of the army loyal to Ahidjo.
By the end of the year, Biya felt strong enough to force a showdown with Ahidjo and the latter lost the position of party chairman while still abroad.
Ahidjo did not subsequently return to Cameroun, and in the presidential election of January 1984 Biya received a ‘yes’ vote of over 90 per cent, which most Camerounians considered to be a genuine indication of his underlying support.
The following month he publicly waived the death sentence hanging over the organizers of the second coup attempt of 1983.
This was, however, to be the prelude to an even more serious attempt on his life by members of the Presidential Guard supported by other army units, and working with certain key civilians of the ‘systeme Ahidjo’.
The attempted coup was eventually suppressed by the loyal Army command.
The retribution for which the army called was uncompromising and included the shooting of hundreds of soldiers and some civilians which only further increased the tension in the country.
Paul Biya did not appear in public for over six months, and his position has never fully recovered in spite of winning a new term in the March 1988 presidential election.
While Cameroun's economic activity returned to normal within a few months, the experience of the three attempted coups, and particularly of the last, undermined the sense of renewal which Paul Biya's elevation to the presidency had achieved.
Cameroun's tendency towards a secretive, police-dominated state, which had initially been developed in response to a regional rebellion in the 1960s, was strengthened, whereas most Camerounians had hoped to see it reversed.
The struggle over the succession between Ahidjo and Biya, in spite of its curious circumstances, had only served to emphasize that the succession problem remained alive and unresolved.
Senegal: the academician at work
The most important conscious attempt to solve the succession problem was made by Leopold Senghor in Senegal, who successfully handed over the presidency to Abdou Diop in 1980 after the re-introduction of a multi-party system in 1977.
Senghor himself had spent much of the 1930s after graduating from university as a teacher and well known poet in France.
He was therefore more than at home in French culture, he was an important participant in its development, assimilating it (as he reputedly said) rather than being assimilated by it.
As a deputy from Senegal to the French National Assembly from 1945 onwards, he was an experienced participant in multi-party politics, always deeply concerned with the interchange between the French and the African world view.
In 1984 he was elected to the very distinguished position of member of the Academie Francaise, bastion of French culture.
When Senegal achieved self-government in 1958, and full independence in 1960, Senghor presided over a one-party state but one in which public debate was more widespread than in most of Africa.
His sophisticated perception of the long-term problems of Senegalese politics, however, led him in 1977 to ‘invite’ the formation of three new parties — liberal democratic, social democratic, and left/Marxist.
Party groupings along these lines were indeed formed and fought a general election in 1978.
These were respectively, the Parti Democratique Senegalais (PDS), Senghor's own Union Progressiste Senegalais (UPS) renamed Parti Socialiste (PS), and the Parti Africa d'Independence (PAI).
The outcome for party politics was healthy: the PS won 82 per cent of the vote; the PDS won 17 per cent; and the PAI won just 1 per cent of the vote.
In this election, Senghor himself was elected to a third seven-year term as president.
In fact it must have always been his intention, after this grand restructuring to retire, and in 1980 the PS elected Diop to be party president.
Senghor has retired entirely from Senegalese national and party politics and lives partly in France, although disagreements between himself and Diop have subsequently been recorded.
In retrospect, it appears that Senghor's strategy was first to reconfirm that his party and its policies continued to have support from the Senegalese people, by giving them real alternatives, and then to enable a young and clearly competent successor to take over the leadership of both the party and the government.
An integral part of this strategy was to establish parties which had support from several or all of Senegal's ethnic groups, by adopting the proportional representation system of election, and avoiding the close identity of an elected delegate with one geographical constituency.
The Senegalese political system has continued to be robust in spite of the country's current grave economic problems, and in spite of secessionist pressures in the Casimance, the area of Senegal south of the Gambia.
However, in the February 1988 elections the presidential candidate of the PDS, the main opposition party — Abdoulaye Wade — made public allegations of vote rigging, and was imprisoned before the results were declared.
After the official count, he was shown to have won 25 per cent of the vote, and later released though he was not allowed, at least temporarily, to take up his seat in Parliament.
Nonetheless, the Senegalese system has dealt with the succession problem impressively, and sustained a multi-party tradition which allows a wide range of opinion to be expressed in public, and in doing so has avoided the most acute problems of localism.
The reasons for this relative success certainly run deeper than Leopold Senghor's personality.
There are at least two special features of Senegal's political inheritance which make it unique in Africa.
The first of these is the fact that France's contact with Senegal was long and deep.
The first French post at St Louis was established as early as 1638.
The residents of St Louis and the other three major towns on the coast (Rufisque, Goree and Dakar) were granted full French citizenship in 1916, and from then until independence had full voting rights in French national elections.
Two years earlier, on a more limited franchise, the first Senegalese deputy, Blaise Diagne, had been elected to the French National Assembly and had rapidly become a junior minister.
The second special factor has been the role played by the Murid Brotherhood, an Islamic movement founded in the first decade of the twentieth century by Amadu Bamba, which has played a key political role in delivering support first for the French colonial authorities and later for the governments of independent Senegal.
The Brotherhood has immense economic power which was at first based on its control of the ground-nut trade but later on a diversified portfolio of business interests, many of them urban.
Even in contemporary Senegal the laws of the state are only observed in the territory of the Murid following the assent of its shaikh, Abdoul Khadre.
Thus Senghor was able to build a political regime which was not only founded on a democratic tradition two generations old, but also had to accommodate a major countervailing influence to that of the state in the form of the Brotherhood.
TOMORROW'S MEN
The efforts of African leaders to build a new political system within their countries in the last twenty-five years have not for the most part been successful.
They have nearly always fallen foul of the three enemies: of localism, of the drift to authoritarian government, and of the failure to deal with the succession issue.
Individual leaders have succeeded in dealing with one of the three problems: Nyerere has defeated localism, Kenyatta maintained a relatively liberal state, Senghor managed a peaceful succession.
None has yet managed to deal decisively with two, and still less with all three of the problems.
Nyerere, if he manages the full handover of not only governmental power but also party power, may achieve the distinction of dealing with two of the problems.
The Ghanaian novelist, Kwasi Armah, gave the title The Beautiful Ones Are Not Yet Born to a novel he published in 1969.
Its message was that Africa had not yet produced a generation of political leaders capable of providing the leadership it needs.
Chinua Achebe's novel,Anthills of the Savannah published in 1987 suggested that such leadership had still not emerged almost twenty years later.
It seems likely that the ‘beautyful ones’ will only emerge when and if the second generation of authoritarian leaders are challenged by the growth of countervailing forces to that of the state.
The example of Senegal shows the crucial role which such forces can play, and their potential growth elsewhere is discussed further in Chapter 12.
The Politics of Development
‘Seek ye first the political kingdom’ said Kwame Nkrumah, and nearly all African Heads of State have done exactly that in the last quarter of a century.
Economics has usually been subordinate to politics, and politics have generally been dominated by localism and authoritarianism, the latter being reflected in a view that ‘big’ government was best.
If, as Kamuzu Banda says ‘Everything is my business, everything’, then the arm of government has had to stretch far and deep into the economy.
Even in a country such as Ivory Coast, generally regarded as in the capitalist camp, government has been the decisive player in the economy not only as policymaker but also as holder of equity capital.
Most post-independence governments had, at one level, a commitment to an economic transformation with several components.
The first was a reduction in their country's dependence on the export of primary commodities (whether agricultural or mineral) to an unstable world market.
This was to be achieved partly by diversifying exports, but more significantly by creating local industries to manufacture goods that had previously been imported.
The second component was to create educational and health services as rapidly as possible for as many people as possible, and the third was to achieve some fairer distribution of income between expatriate companies and individuals, and the local indigenous population.
PLANS OR LEAPS?
In the 1960s and 1970s most governments set up economic planning organizations which reflected these objectives.
The development plans which they produced in the first decade of independence were for the most part competent, well thought out and well presented.
They owed something to European social democracy, including the French experience of planning, and something to the planning experience of other parts of the developing world, notably India.
However, the priorities of government manifested on a day-to-day basis frequently ignored the longer-term priorities nominally established in the plans.
This was sometimes the result of dramatic political decisions (‘great leaps forward’) to transform the pattern of economic ownership, sometimes the outcome of political rivalry leading to civil strife or war, and sometimes the result of the attraction of prestige projects.
Leading individuals within governments frequently had a different set of objectives to those which their governments nominally espoused.
These centred on personal power and wealth and were manifest in Nigeria, for example, by 1966 when the first military coup was staged.
General Obasanjo's biography of his friend Chukwuma Nzeogu, the organizer of the coup, makes it very clear that the objective of the coup leaders was to create a government no longer dominated by these values.
They had also become evident in Zimbabwe by 1989, when the ten-year-old government was rocked by a series of corruption scandals and five Cabinet members were obliged to resign.
But corruption is only a partial explanation of some of the key strategic decisions taken by the governments.
Chapter 7 discussed the three major changes in economic strategy undertaken in Tanzania from 1967 to 1975.
These were far more significant than any item projected in the development plans.
In Zambia and Uganda, similar unplanned leaps were carried out between 1968 and 1970, placing a large number of private businesses in the public sector.
In Zambia the government took a controlling interest in twenty-six foreign-owned companies in 1968, and acquired a major stake in the two giant copper mining companies in 1969.
By 1973 this measure was considered inadequate and the government took total control of the mining companies.
In Uganda the nationalizations were to extend to the import and export business, although President Milton Obote in his first presidency was ousted by General Amin before being able to implement the programme.
Inevitably, priorities also shifted as a result of civil strife, which has been of fundamental importance to at least twelve of sub-Saharan Africa's forty-one countries.
Major civil conflicts lasting several years — other than the wars of liberation and their aftermath in the former Portuguese territories — have taken place in Nigeria.
Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Zaire, Uganda, and Somalia.
In some cases such strife has proved to be recurrent over twenty years, as in Zaire, Sudan, and Burundi and in others more or less endemic, as in Chad and Uganda and in Ethiopia in its fight to contain Eritrea.
In all cases the strife has fundamentally weakened central governments, diverting both energy and money away from development issues to the domestic conflicts which assume overwhelming importance.
Putting aside these cases of major civil strife it is possible to discern some consistency in the pattern of apparently arbitrary economic decisions taken by governments, whether or not in the form of ‘great leaps’.
The dominant thread has been a key role for the state in both the accumulation and distribution of wealth echoing the role of pre-colonial states such as Asante, Buganda and UrOzwi discussed in Chapter 4.
This has not extended to the maintenance of capital assets once established, and of infrastructure such as roads, railways, and buildings.
Government has gauged its success much more by the number of new investments, than by the efficiency with which existing investments are maintained and serviced.
In 1977 Tanzania received thirty-five new diesel engines for the railway system under aid provided by Canada; by 1982 seventeen of these were out of order and by 1988 rolling stock problems had reduced the once-daily service on the Chinese-built railway to Zambia (opened in 1976) to just twice-weekly.
Sudan's greatest economic asset since the 1920s has been the Gezira Scheme, comprising nearly 2 million acres under irrigation, growing a variety of cash crops, notably cotton.
By the late 1960s the emphasis of government policy was on the creation of new irrigation complexes, covering an additional million acres at a time when Gezira was experiencing major problems of productivity.
Average cotton yields fell by as much as forty per cent in the course of the 1970s.
This declining productivity was largely due to salination in the Gezira canals, a by-product of declining standards of management.
As a result, the running costs of Gezira became a burden on the Sudanese government budget, while the scheme made a declining contribution to exports.
There are countless examples from most African countries of a similar negligence of completed investments, although some of this is a by-product of the nature of development aid, as we shall see in Chapter 11.
Hard top roads, built in the 1960s, in countries as different as Tanzania and Cameroun have needed total reconstruction in the 1980s.
PRESTIGE PROJECTS
An equally explicit consequence of the emphasis on the role of the state has been the number of prestige projects associated with the promotion of the individual personality of the head of state.
In Chapter 3 pre-colonial chiefs were characterized as ‘the mystical and religious heads, the divine symbol of their people's health and welfare’.
There can be no doubt that in many African states this status has been consciously sought by leaders who have promoted it through the nature of their public appearances and prestige investments.
This has been most dramatic in the case of ‘Emperor’ Bokassa of the Central African Republic, but equally consistent in the cases of Houphouet Boigny, Banda and Mobutu.
The list of prestige projects to which governments committed themselves is long, ranging from magnificent presidential palaces in such countries as Liberia, Cameroun and Gabon, to whole capital cities as in Malawi, Tanzania and Nigeria.
Hosting the Organization of African Unity became a prestige project in itself, as several countries (including Ghana and Gabon) built massive facilities to host the annual meeting, or as in the case of Togo, to attract the OAU's permanent secretariat away from Addis Ababa.
The latter bid failed.
President Houphouet Boigny of Ivory Coast's plan to construct a church larger than St Peter's in Rome at his birthplace at Yameossouko is perhaps the most dramatic of all.
Linked to this persistent emphasis on the head of state as a quasi-mystical individual has been a countervailing disregard for the opinions and practices of village communities, except as the means of export revenue and, where tribal links justify it, as a source of political support.
This disregard is reinforced not only by long-standing attitudes to authority, but also by the more recent divide between those with and without formal education.
It appears to be even more prevalent in ‘socialist’ states than in ‘capitalist’states: the compulsory movement to ujamaa villages in Tanzania in 1975 would have been impossible in a society which genuinely respected peasant opinion.
This is equally true for the government of Ethiopia's attempt to move at least one million people, frequently by force, from the northern districts to the west of the country between 1985 and 1987.
It can also be seen in the efforts of the Frelimo government in Mozambique to build a system of communal villages which according to Samora Machel, the first president of independent Mozambique, would:
constitute the spinal column of the forces of development in the countryside…in the collective life the immense creative initiative of the people will be liberated.
Politically [the villages]will be the instrument for the realisation of worker power in government, defence, production etc…we know that dispersed and disorganised we [the workers]will never exercise power.
By 1978, 1500 such villages had been created incorporating about a million people.
The nucleus of each village was for the most part made up of the Frelimo guerillas who had fought in the liberation struggle.
By 1980 it was clear that such villages were doing little to improve the lot of their members, whose livelihood now depended on their effective integration into the cash economy.
By 1983, although the weaknesses of the programme were increasingly acknowledged within the party, the government's response was to resort to more authoritarian methods of ‘policing’ the villages.
Some of the practices of the colonial state were re-introduced, including corporal punishment, and some of those elected to village councils were rejected on the grounds that they had held positions under the previous regime.
The villagization programme was an expensive allocation of development resources, as well as a political disaster.
It certainly assisted in the development of Renamo in the 1980s as a terrorist group in opposition to government, albeit supported by South Africa.
CENTRALIZING THE ECONOMY
More specific economic policies, which have been widely discussed in recent years, fit within this tendency towards an autocratic state.
These include exchange rates, agricultural pricing, and attitudes to the local and international private sector.
The question of over-valued exchange rates — which minimize the cost of ‘imports’ but also minimize the value of exports in local currency — has been highly controversial in recent years between African governments and major aid donors such as the World Bank.
Most of the structural adjustment programmes (SAP) now in place have involved a significant exchange rate adjustment, which has had the effect of cheapening local currencies in relation to harder international currencies, in a number of cases by a factor of three or four within two to three years.
The over-valuation was, and frequently is, to the advantage of the urban sector in general and the government sector in particular.
For a given outlay of local currency it has ensured a higher value of imports than would have been available under a market valuation of the currency.
As a consequence, government has been able to expand the sphere of its operations at the expense of the peasant farmers whose primary produce formed the bulk of exports.
For instance, under a market valuation of exchange rates Tanzania's coffee producers would have received a significantly higher farmgate price when expressed in local currency, and their capacity to save and invest would have been higher.
Yet these coffee producers were primarily waChagga from Kilimanjaro or waHaya from Bukoba, on Lake Victoria.
Government was particularly anxious that neither group should retain the relative economic dominance which it had acquired during the colonial period, and exchange rate management was one means by which this dominance could be restrained.
In fact, in Tanzania in 1984 farmgate prices for a mix of agricultural products using estimated market exchange rates were only 20 per cent of export prices.
The effect of exchange rate policy has been reinforced by agricultural pricing policy.
Marketing Boards have been an instrument favoured by most African governments as a means of ensuring that farmers have an outlet for their crops, and that urban consumers pay for basic foodstuffs at a controlled, often subsidized, price.
Consequently, such marketing boards have frequently found themselves in a price squeeze, unable to offer a price high enough to producers, but only able to sell to consumers at a loss.
As a result they have also been trapped into importing food, an operation with considerable potential for losses, although ameliorated by exchange rate policy.
In many countries this process had a cumulative impact throughout the 1970s so that by the end of that decade the difference between the price paid to farmers for a crop and the price charged to distributors was highly inequitable.
In the 1980s there has been an important adjustment in both exchange rates and agricultural pricing policy largely as a result of pressure from international aid agencies.
However the extent to which governments are really committed to these policies is an open question, discussed in Chapters 11 and 12.
THE FOREIGN INVESTOR: FRIEND OR FOE?
The attitudes of governments to private foreign investors and to the local private sector have always been complex and varied.
With a few exceptions, such as Liberia under Tubman and Tolbert, and Gabon under Bongo, foreign investors have been regarded with feelings of wariness or hostility.
Attitudes to local investors from immigrant communities, such as Lebanese and Syrians in west Africa and Indians in east Africa, whether or not they were citizens, have frequently been equally wary.
Attitudes to the indigenous African private sector have obviously been more favourable and many indigenous businessmen have prospered, particularly as clients and customers of the government.
However, such favoured treatment has often been restricted to individuals from tribes linked to the government of the day.
It is not surprising that at independence most governments identified the international companies from the former colonial power as potential agents of neo-colonialism, who could not be trusted to operate with the interests of African countries at heart.
Indeed in cases where such companies had a vital stake, as with the British South Africa Union Minière in Zaire they were seen to behave badly at the very point at which their host countries became independent.
Thus the BSA attempted to extort over £20 million from the new government of Zambia in 1964 in exchange for its mineral rights, but was ultimately forced to accept £4 million.
In 1961 Union Minière made a naked bid to split off Katanga from the rest of Zaire.
In the early 1970s the cynical and exploitative role of multinational companies appeared to be confirmed as it became clear that Shell and BP, the latter half-owned by the British government, were the principal source of oil supplies to the outlawed Smith regime of Rhodesia.
Such dramatic examples of commercial self-interest were not in reality offset by the more representative efforts of companies such as Unilever, Mitchell Cotts and Booker McConnell in English-speaking Africa, or CFAO in French-speaking Africa who had invested on a long term basis for relatively modest returns.
The dominant position these companies occupied in the economy was sufficient for their position to be questioned.
A survey of the 1320 companies registered in Nigeria in 1970 indicated that 400 were wholly foreign-owned, including nearly all of the largest.
In the same year in Kenya it has been estimated that African citizens and government institutions owned only about 5 per cent of corporate assets.
Consequently, relations between African countries and international companies were for twenty years characterized by a battle to take some degree of national control.
Strategies for control have included the compulsory sale of 51 per cent of the share capital in the businesses nationalized by Tanzania's Arusha Declaration in 1967, the compulsory sale of the majority of share capital by all large companies in Nigeria from 1974 to 1977, and the ‘creeping sale’ of 20 per cent of issued share capital in the Ivory Coast required from 1975 onwards (achieved by issuing new equity).
In Tanzania, Julius Nyerere commented, ‘Our purpose was primarily a political purpose; it was an extension of the political control which the Tanzanian people secured in 1961.’
The objective of the other forms of nationalization was clearly similar and the effect of each of them has been to reduce foreign ownership in the corporate sector to a relatively modest level.
In Ivory Coast the transfer of ownership has been essentially from the foreign private investor to the local private investor: government remains the owner of 50 per cent of corporate capital (as it has been since the 1960s) and the foreign investors' share has been reduced to 30 per cent, with the local private sector taking the remainder.
In Nigeria the foreign investors' share is now about 20 per cent, with the bulk of the remainder held in the Nigerian private sector; the localization legislation created over one million individual shareholders.
In the aftermath of the Arusha Declaration, the value of corporate assets held by the state in Tanzania increased sevenfold from financial years 1970/1 to 1977/8.
The consequences of this creation of a large, government-owned, or parastatal sector, were expensive.
First, in many cases the previous foreign owners of those companies which passed into local ownership, either private or state, were invited to continue as managers for which they received a management fee.
As often as not this was fixed and not related to the performance of the company.
Thus previous foreign shareholders received not only some (albeit frequently delayed) compensation for the shares sold, but also a reliable annual income.
In the 1980s payments of this kind, and for related royalties and patents, have come to equal about 40 per cent of the income in dividends which accrues to foreign investors and they are usually given priority in payment over dividends.
In Nigeria they averaged about $200 million per year between 1981 and 1986.
Second, in the cases where the previous management was not invited to stay on, or declined to do so, lower levels of efficiency in management have proved disastrously expensive.
Such management has been recruited from a combination of civil servants with little or no commercial experience, individuals with limited commercial experience in, for instance, the co-operative movement, individuals with experience in foreign-owned enterprises but at a low level, or even ex-politicians.
Such management has been particularly subject to political pressure in support of localism, both from central government and from regional and district governments.
THE STATE IN BUSINESS
The inadequacies of management in state enterprises have been described in dramatic terms by several Nigerian academic observers, one of whom wrote in 1974 that the reasons for the poor performance of the state-owned sector could be seen in the words of one observer ‘in the over centralization of authority…inspired by sheer love of power’ or by another:
in unwise policy decisions; in day to day ineptness in running the enterprises; in illicit government transfer payments in construction and purchase contracts and through every other imaginable channel; in the use of contractor finance and suppliers' credits to finance the venality of state officials; and in overburdened and unrealistic capital structures.
Such a management style was by no means typical of Nigeria alone.
Direct theft from the parastatal system was common in Tanzania by the 1980s.
Thus in 1988 the Tanzanian Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee reported that about $5 million had been taken in 1987 in the form of ‘outright theft’ from parastatal companies.
If there is a prevailing thread in the history of these state-owned enterprises it is the constant under-assessment of risk — of the lack of imported materials to supply a manufacturing process, of failure in the supply of inputs ranging from petrol to fertilizer, of farming communities not producing the cash crops to keep a processing plant in operation, and of failing to find competent management for complex operations.
Even when meaningful financial rates of return were calculated, and proved to be low, but just in excess of the cost of borrowing, decisions were taken to implement projects as a result of pressure for action.
This risk negligence also affected the choice of technology: projects which appeared to achieve high levels of production rapidly by using advanced technology would be preferred to those which achieved them more slowly by using more appropriate technology.
In fact, government-owned companies, far from providing support to national revenues, became a major drain upon them as is apparent from the following summary from the government's own Economic Survey of 1982 of the state of Tanzania's state-owned textile mills:
The combined output of the five largest textile factories, namely the Friendship Textile Mill, Mwatex, Mutex, Kiltex and Sunguratex was only 67.2 million sq.
metres of cloth, compared to their total installed capacity of 152 million square metres.
Capacity utilisation for these five factories is thus only 44.2 per cent.
The output of the Mwatex Mill was only 4.8 million sq.metres compared to the existing capacity for the mill of 45 million sq.metres.
The mill experienced an acute power problem during the year following the breakdown of its four generators, grinding the mill to a complete halt between October 1982 and March 1983.
Even after repair works on the generators had been done, only two of them operated satisfactorily forcing the factory to work on only two shifts instead of the usual three.
Mutex also experienced power problems and shortage of spare parts, while shortage of fuel oil used in the boilers affected both Mutex and Mwatex.
The Kiltex mill in Dar es salaam closed temporarily due to lack of water and shortage of spare parts, while the Arusha Mill could not operate to full capacity because polyester yarn could not be imported in sufficient quantities.
Sunguratex experienced inadequate and intermittent water supplies and shortage of spare parts while Blanket manufacturers was mainly affected by non-availability of spare parts for its ageing machinery.
This is a description of an industrial disaster seldom experienced in peacetime conditions.
In this situation it is very difficult to ‘rehabilitate’ companies since the depreciated assets of these and similar businesses are virtually worthless.
By the late 1970s the state sector had become not only a harbour of inefficiency, as in many ‘developed’ countries, but also a greenhouse of the hybrid values emerging in Africa many of which were inimical to efficient methods of low-cost production.
CITIZEN ENTREPRENEURS
Promotion of the state-owned sector has generally gone hand in hand with promotion of the indigenous, i.e. African, private sector, although in ‘socialist’ countries the scope of the latter has sometimes been consciously restricted.
In 1966 Nkrumah said that
if he permitted African businessmen to grow [they]will grow to the extent of becoming a rival power to his and the party's prestige, and he would do anything to stop it.
If socialist regimes have been reluctant to promote indigenous businessmen for this reason, most regimes have sought to curtail the role of the immigrant groups who had played a key role in the economy in the colonial period.
In the early 1960s many of these groups had the basic financial strength and business experience to move into manufacturing.
However, if Kenya the result of these policies was, for instance, that ‘the local Asian bourgeoisie was really placed in a category of foreign investor.’
In Uganda (a country whose modern sector had been largely built by Indian entrepreneurs) Milton Obote inserted a clause in the new Republican Constitution in 1966 which restricted the ownership of ‘land, property or business, in certain areas to ‘citizens of African blood’.
Six years later Idi Amin expelled the whole Asian community.
In Tanzania the Asians suffered attrition in stages as the combined effects of the Arusha Declaration and the nationalization of both private houses and wholesale trade ‘cut them off at the knees’ as Nyerere expressed it.
While this attitude of hostility to immigrant groups was less severe in west Africa it certainly played a role in Ghana from Nkrumah's period, and in Nigeria as a result of the ‘localization’ decree of 1974.
It has also been seen in a more subtle form in the moves in Sierra Leone in the 1970s and Liberia in the 1980s by the ‘truly indigenous’ or tribal population to take economic power away from the creole population which had been active in trading and business for more than a century.
This has been the principal objective of President Doe of Liberia, himself of tribal origin.
It has been a less serious factor in the French-speaking countries where European traders and shopkeepers continue to operate small businesses, although these could be periodically subject to local political pressures including arbitrary taxation.
In contrast, in countries as distinct as Nigeria and Zambia, governments have supported the indigenous African entrepreneurs who benefited from these restraints on their potential competitors by a range of credit facilities and the judicious allocation of contracts.
These allowed many former civil servants to enter business (notably in Zambia) and many of the established traders of west Africa (most dramatically in Nigeria) to move from commerce into production.
In theory, each of these has the capacity to know to be a medium and even large scale business, and to take on the corporate giants in the course of time.
In practice, this has very seldom happened except when a local business has accepted a very dependent relationship with an outside investor.
These limitations will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.
THE PRICE
In spite of the prevalence of economic planning in the 1960s and 1970s, it is doubtful whether a development policy has existed in most of Africa in the last twenty-five years.
Rather, the critical determinant of economic policy has been the hidden or not so hidden hand of political priorities.
Those priorities have reflected politicians' prime concern: to centralize economic power in the hands of the government in a way which matched the centralization of political power as expressed through the one-party state.
In the agricultural sector, the self-interest of the state has led to policies which have favoured distorted exchange rates, consistently favouring government and the urban population at the expense of the incomes of rural families, and ultimately at the expense of marketed production.
Giant and inefficient marketing boards have had the opposite effect of their nominal purpose, and have further squeezed farmers' margins.
The voices of rural families have seldom been heard in effective protest, and least of all in socialist states such as Tanzania and Mozambique, each of which have compelled large chunks of their rural population to live in communal villages against their will.
The process of centralization has involved governments in taking a major stake in investments which were previously foreign-owned.
While justified in reaction to the dominance of foreign investment at the time of independence, it has proved to be a very expensive strategy.
Ownership has sometimes been transferred into local hands (private or state) while the original owners have continued as managers on a financial basis which has frequently been unrelated to their performance.
Where ownership has been transferred without continuity of management the levels of inefficiency experienced have often been disastrous, setting up a vicious spiral of underperformance.
While the truly indigenous private sector has been assisted in various ways to play a greater role in the national economy, this has often been at the expense of immigrant communities, who have rights of citizenship based on birth.
This process has diminished the role which experienced local skills and capital could have played, and even the allocation of opportunities to the indigenous entrepreneur has seldom been fairhanded, and free of localism and corruption.
Four of Africa's most talented peoples — the Ibo, the Bamilike, the waChagga and the Bugunda — have all had their innovative talents circumscribed for many years.
Putting the ‘political kingdom’ first has been expensive and is now self-evidently an expense which Africa can no longer afford.
The Elusive Surplus
The real heroes of agriculture in Africa are the pioneers who down the centuries have brought new crops or cattle to their own or other communities.
The story recalled in Chapter 2 of a stranger named Chipimbi who came to live amongst the Lamba of Zambia, and brought them seeds of maize, sorghum and groundnuts, was one such hero.
His fellows include those who brought bananas from the Indian Ocean coast to the highlands of east Africa, those who brought cassava from the Atlantic coast of Angola to the forests of Zaire, and those who first trekked the hump-backed Zebu cattle down the valley of the Nile.
In every case where such innovations proved lasting, it was because they adapted well to the specific environment of the farmers.
Frequently, they were the key to the constant moving frontier of the Bantu expansion.
However, for every successful adoption of a new crop or new variety of crop it is certain that there were many more failed attempts at innovation, for the African physical environment places many difficulties in the path of farmers.
Rainfall is uncertain and varied — drought years may be as many as one in five; many soils are eroded and soil quality may vary within as little space as a hectare; even small-scale irrigation may be ineffective as high levels of ‘run-off’ prevent the efficient use of water.
The first cultivators in Africa, as in all parts of the world, would farm a field for a few years and then, when its fertility began to drop, move on to an adjacent, or occasionally distant, area where high yields could be maintained for a similar period.
When land became scarce farmers could move back to land that they, or their fathers had already cultivated.
The length of the period of cultivation in this bush/fallow cycle depended on the quality of the soils, the requirement of the crops for nutrients, and on whether fertility was supplemented by cattle manure from the farmers' own livestock.
As a result, it could vary from one to four or five years, with fallow periods of four to twenty years, the greater periods being common in the equatorial forests.
FEEDING THE PEOPLE
In some cases new crops and local innovation made quite high levels of population density possible, and reduced the necessary fallow period to only one or two years.
These cases included the waChagga on Kilimanjaro, the Ibo in eastern Nigeria, the Bamilike of western Cameroun, as well as smaller groups such as the waKara who inhabit an island on Lake Victoria and the waTengo in hill country in south-west Tanzania.
One of the first written descriptions of the waChagga system is that of Sir Harry Johnston in 1894:
They mostly excel in their industry — the skill with which they irrigate their terraced hillsides with tiny runnels of water shows a considerable advancement in agriculture.
Their time is constantly spent in tilling the soil, manuring it with ashes, raking and hoeing it with wooden hoes.
This system was probably capable of supporting about 400 people per square mile.
The similarly complex system developed by the waTengo was based on a pattern in which grass, weeds and crop refuse were composted in Pits which were retained in both cropping and fallow periods.
This very effectively conserved run-off and avoided water logging.
Both these mountainside systems had been developed as a response to communities being forced by hostile forces (the Masai in the case of the waChagga, and the Nguni in the case of the waTengo) to live in a restricted area.
The experience of the waKara is rather different.
here, the pressure of population growth within the confines of a small island of only 29 square miles led to the development of an innovatory, intensive system based on very effective soil conservation techniques — including the integration of fodder and arable crops and livestock.
The waKara farmed on the basis of a three-year rotation of bullrush millet, groundbeans and sorghum.
During this three-year period they applied two dressings of farmyard manure and in the intervening year they applied an indigenous legume crop as green manure.
This system enabled them to maintain an exceptionally dense population, on the best principles of fertility conservation.
The waKara were not exceptional in combining the ownership of livestock with crop production, but they were exceptional in integrating the two.
Other African communities, such as the Lozi on the Barotse floodplain in western Zambia, and, on a smaller scale the Yoruba in western Nigeria, maintained livestock herds which were essentially secondary to their crop production, providing manure for crops on an ad hoc basis.
The true pastoralists, such as the Fulani, the Dinka of southern Sudan and the Masai of the east African plains were in a different category.
They were primarily dependent on their cattle for subsistence — particularly from milk and blood — though in some cases also planted short-season sorghum or millet as a supplement.
They might make an incidental contribution to crop production by agreeing to graze their herds over settled farmers' land once it had been harvested.
Further, the size of their herds could rise and fall dramatically depending upon the incidence of livestock diseases such as foot-and-mouth and rinderpest.
In the 1880s, the large herds of the kingdom of Karagwe in western Tanzania were severely depleted by rinderpest, and did not recover for several decades.
Thus the agricultural systems of pre-colonial Africa were in a delicate balance with the environment, and sometimes with each other.
They supported a total population estimated at about 100 million, which remained more or less static from 1600 to 1850 — or about 5 people per square mile of cultivable land.
Although innovation in particular cases had fostered very high population densities, it was the absence of population growth resulting from both the slave trade and the incidence of disease that provided little general incentive to intensify systems which were an adequate response to the difficulties of the environment.
IMPERIAL INTERVENTION
Before the First World War the impact of the new colonial governments on this pattern of agriculture was extremely limited.
Their primary emphasis was on the development of large-scale commercial agriculture — either through large, corporate-owned estates (as with oil palm in Zaire, coffee, and bananas in Cameroun, and cotton in Sudan), through individual settlers (as in Kenya, Zimbabwe and Zambia), or through both (as in Tanzania and Cameroun).
Sometimes this went hand in hand with the development of small-scale agriculture, although the circumstances in which this occurred varied greatly.
Sometimes, as with cotton in Zaire, Chad and Tanzania such planting was compulsory; sometimes, as with cocoa in Ghana, coffee in Cameroun and cotton in Uganda and Sudan it was voluntary.
However in these years the total area of land devoted to such cash Crops by smallholders was minuscule in relation to the total area in production, and had little impact on the bush/fallow system as it had been traditionally practised.
In the 1920s and 1930s there was a change of policy within the colonial powers which placed greater importance on the need for African colonies to be financially self-supporting.
A much stronger emphasis on all forms of export agriculture, particularly through smallholder production, was one way of achieving this.
Production of cotton in Uganda grew from 20,000 bales in 1920 to 400,000 in 1935; exports of palm oil from Zaire grew from 40,000 tonnes in 1915 to 150,000 tonnes in 1935.
These dramatic increases in production intensified during or after World War Two: in Nigeria groundnut production tripled between 1938 and 1948; in Uganda coffee production also tripled in the 1950s; in Zaire there were 800,000 cotton growers by 1950.
As the total area allocated to these crops increased, so the amount of time and land which a family could devote to food crop production for its own consumption often diminished.
Yet, from the inter-war years, as medical services spread, the total population of Africa began to rise sharply.
Between 1921 and 1944 the population of Kenya grew from 2.3 million to 3.8 million, and annual rates of growth of more than 2 per cent became the norm across most of the continent.
Average population densities doubled between 1900 and 1960.
The introduction of cash crops and an increasing population acted together to increase pressure on the land significantly, in specific cases even to critical levels, such as in Ruanda and in the ‘reserves’ of Kenya and Zimbabwe.
By 1970, about 20 per cent of the land in cultivation was down to export crops.
Where large numbers of livestock existed, the introduction of modern veterinary services also reduced the mortality rate of cattle.
The response of cattle owners was to increase the total numbers in their herd, rather than to maintain a smaller herd with lower mortality levels.
Where such cattle were owned by cultivators, as in Sukumaland in Tanzania, this also increased pressure on the land available for farming.
W.H. Allan, once director of agriculture in Northern Rhodesia and the author of a definitive work on change in decade the land area planted to cotton increased from 67,000 hectares to 170,000 hectares, and fears grew of a long-term decline in fertility.
A tough and wide-ranging conservation programme was introduced as an anti-famine measure.
Farmers were required to make ‘tie ridges’ which conserved moisture within the soil, to manure a certain proportion of their fields, and to plant a specified minimum acreage of cotton and cassava.
This campaign, however, was never fully effective.
The second approach was the attempt to create a new class of ‘master farmer’.
Such individuals were to be the standard-bearers of an agricultural revolution based on a farming system which overcame the limitations of African soils by the scientific rotation of crops and their integration with livestock.
The aim was confirmed for Malawi, for instance, in a 1958 report which stated:
It is Government's aim to create a class of full time professional farmers with sufficient land to provide a reasonable standard of living and, as a corollary, gradually to squeeze the subsistence cultivator off the land into full time alternative employment…the Master Farmers Scheme was designed to create and develop such farmers.
Schemes of this kind enjoyed success only on a limited front.
An ‘improved farmer’ scheme in northern Nigeria achieved an average intake of 1,900 farmers a year from 1945 to 1955, with a failure rate of only 20 per cent.
However such farmers were necessarily exceptions within a farming community where shortening bush/fallow cycles were retained; they did not provide a solution to the underlying problem.
One of the most far reaching attempts within the third approach — the resettlement of large numbers of small farmers on newly defined farms — was in Zaire.
There the Belgian administration developed a system of ‘paysannats’ based on a crop rotation with n specially demarcated strips.
These were subdivided into smaller fields and a cropping rotation devised with the objective of moving production up and down the length of the strip.
A sufficient proportion of the strip was in fallow at any one time to ensure that yields were, in theory, maintained over a fifteen or twenty year period.
Separate designs were evolved for the very different conditions of forest and savannah.
In the former, the key cash crop was oil palm, and in the latter cotton.
The first paysannat was established in 1936 and the example, with adjustments, was subsequently widely followed.
By 1954, about 1.5 million hectares were under the system, divided between nearly 170,000 farming families.
By 1960, progress had been made towards establishing half a million family units.
One of the administrators of the scheme summarized its objective as being to
replace unorganized extensive agriculture, which often entails the irremediable destruction of natural wealth, by an agriculture which will become progressively intensive, at the same time assuring the continuing fertility of the soils.
The key to the paysannat concept, as indicated here, was that it would become more intensive over time.
It was recognized that the integration of some kind of livestock farming with crops would ultimately be desirable.
It was strongly supported in the 1950s by the companies who purchased the cotton grown as a cash crop in the savannah, because it appeared to be the most effective way to reverse the declining fertility and falling yields which had become apparent by that time.
The development of the system spanned more than twenty years and achieved a degree of success in terms of its defined objectives.
It was unpopular politically, as it involved a good deal of compulsion, and did not survive the chaos of independence.
However, it was probably the most serious attempt made in colonial Africa to adapt the traditional bush/fallow system to changing economic circumstances and, if sustained, might have provided technical answers to problems which still prove elusive.
Only in the 1980s has large-scale scientific work on bush/fallow rotation in the forest belt been revived, at the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (ITA) in Nigeria.
A successful initiative
A further, far reaching initiative within this approach was made in Kenya immediately after the Mau Mau Emergency of 1954–7.
The situation in the Kikuyu areas of Kenya had become particularly acute by the 1950s as a result of the re-allocation from 1910 onwards of over 7 million acres of land to private European settlers.
Kikuyu farmers had traditionally farmed several plots which were within easy walking distance but had different characteristics of altitude and soil type.
Following the death of a land owner, his land would be divided between his sons; as the population increased the fragmentation which resulted from this approach became increasingly serious.
The introduction of cash crops in the 1930s further reduced the amount of land available for food production.
In Meru District by 1950 there was an average of five fragments per cultivator; the maximum was twenty-two.
The outermost fragments were as much as 20 miles apart.
It was the Mau Mau conflict itself which forced the government to recognize the need to increase the productivity of the Kikuyu areas, and it was the same conflict which facilitated the means.
However, the plan for this far-reaching land reform, drawn up by Roger Swynnerton of the Agricultural Department, was imaginative and effective.
It envisaged the consolidation of the scattered plots into farms of 7 to 10 acres, supporting an average household of six to eight people.
Such farms were to be carefully laid out by agricultural officers on the basis of an arable/grass ley rotation, including appropriate cash crops such as coffee and pyretheum.
Following consolidation, farmers would have irrevocable freehold tenure to their land.
The work was to be completed over the whole country in fifteen years.
In the District of Kiambu alone, over 500,000 fragmented plots were consolidated into 50,000 farms between 1956 and 1960.
Such a far reaching change could ultimately only have been achieved with general Kikuyu support.
By 1960 the process had achieved its own momentum so that most European officers felt that they were no longer pushing out ideas and standards; in large measures the people themselves had seen the benefits and were doing it themselves.
The success of this approach was reflected in a threefold increase in marketed output from 1953 to 1962 in the areas where land reform had been implemented, without a matching decline in the productivity of food crops.
Since that time the productivity of the top 20 per cent of farmers has been sustained with a continuous record of technical improvement; about 40 per cent have maintained a level of productivity which enables them to generate an acceptable income; and a further 40 per cent have continued to produce enough for their own household's subsistence requirements.
Of these three policies adopted by colonial governments to deal with the acute pressure on land, the Kenyan example of land reform was the most successful, and the one whose benefits lasted well beyond independence.
Nonetheless, whatever success was achieved within these programmes it was not enough to change the general picture of an agricultural system which could only expand production by having access to more land.
The practices of livestock owners had not changed significantly with the spread of veterinary services and they too required more land.
In 1960, looking at sub-saharan Africa as a whole, such land was still densities were still only about 77 per square mile of cultivable land, or 3 hectares per head.
Much of this land was uninhabited, and for a variety of reasons ranging from the incidence of tsetse fly to the competing claims of different clans, farmers were reluctant to move into it.
The agricultural legacy of the colonial period was sometimes a modified form of shifting cultivation, sometimes a form of settled agriculture which tended to deplete the fertility of the soil.
The adaptability of African farmers was not in doubt, but whether they would be given the means to expand production to meet growing urban and international markets was an open question.
THE RUSH FOR GROWTH
Most newly independent governments were attracted to an agricultural strategy which thrust aside the supposed limitations of the existing agricultural system and adopted various forms of ‘transformation’ approach.
In some cases this included a continued emphasis on an elite group of master farmers; in others it included the development of settlement schemes where a concentration of supporting services were supposed to create a group of commercial, if small-scale, farmers; in others it included the development of large government-owned estates, managed by parastatal companies as described in Chapter 8.
With some exceptions, the transformation approach has not been successful.
The reasons for this include both the design of the projects — ranging from the crops selected to the land to which people have moved — and the quality of their management.
In the 1960s and 1970s these problems were consistently underrated by governments.
The most dramatic examples of this approach have included the massive resettlement schemes in Tanzania and Mozambique in the 1970s, and in Ethiopia in the mid 1980s.
In each case the consequences of moving a million or more people, in the case of Tanzania, at least five million, were hardly recognized before the operations began.
In Tanzania in the early 1980s, 90 per cent of agricultural production in the resettled villages was still geared to subsistence consumption and there had been no long-term increase in the productivity of the farmers involved.
Whatever resources were devoted to the transformation approach, the bulk of agricultural production continued to come from the millions of small farming families who were adjusting their forms of production only slowly.
In some cases they received support from government services for the first time.
In Zambia, the provision of hybrid maize seed, fertiliser and marketing services to small-scale farmers dated from the mid 1960s; in Kenya the provision of such services was extended for the first time in the 1960s well beyond the Kikuyu.
The response was erratic.
The local physical environment was not always well matched to these inputs.
Unjustified financial risk could be incurred by using fertiliser in an area of erratic rainfall; the labour required on cash crops could conflict with the labour required on food crops.
These dangers were matched to the inefficiency of the marketing boards which in most countries were supposed to buy the crop, and to the pricing policies discussed in Chapter 8 which until the mid 1980s consistently worked against the interests of small farmers.
As a result, the majority of farmers continued to concentrate their efforts on the production of food for their own families, rather than for the market.
Between 1960 and 1980 the total acreage devoted to food production in Africa increased from about 70 million hectares to about 100 million, or about 2.5 per cent per year, sufficient to sustain a population increase of about 2.7 per cent.
Yet during the same period the acreage devoted to export crops grew from only 15.5 million hectares to 17.2 million; of the seven major export crops the production volume of only three: tea, cotton and tobacco, increased.
Livestock owners continued to manage their herds primarily as a means of survival and a bank of wealth rather than to maximize the number of animals they marketed.
Africa's trade in cereals was seriously skewed.
She might, as in 1986–7, have to import 8 million tonnes of cereals, amounting to about 40 per cent of urban consumption, or, as in 1988/9 have a surplus of 3 million tonnes which could not be transported, and thus sold, to deficit countries.
Within this overall picture one approach, when well managed, appeared to combine the potential of commercial large-scale management with the potential of small farmers to achieve an increase in productivity.
A number of projects have been successful in which the supply of inputs and the marketing of the product are managed on a commercial basis while the bulk of production comes from small farmers.
These include the Smallholder Coffee Authority in Malawi, which supports 4,000 growers, the Mumias Sugar Company in Kenya which supports 30,000 growers, and the Kenya Tea Development Authority, which through a network of forty factories, supports over 150,000 small farmers.
All of these are projects in which the government holds a controlling interest and in which it has a strong commercial partner.
In each of these cases the majority of farmers have less than 1 hectare under the relevant crop, but most achieve levels of income well in excess of their neighbours who remain outside the projects.
Sometimes this success is at the expense of food production, but more often an increase in productivity is achieved across all crops.
While projects of this kind can be very impressive they cannot hope to generate an increase in output from the mass of small scale farmers, as their requirement for scarce, high level management is too great.
THE CURRENT REALITY
The last thirty years have not therefore established precedents for the future.
The rural population is growing at over 2 per cent per year and densities are increasing.
The underlying position remains one in which most of the rural population i.e. three quarters of the total, is able to feed itself adequately, but has neither the surplus labour nor the technology to make big strides in productivity.
The erratic performance of organizations which are supposed to support farmers, such as input supply companies and marketing boards, only exacerbates the situation.
Although some farmers are adopting more intensive systems of production this is not yet at a fast enough rate to generate the large increases in marketed output necessary to feed the towns, where the population is growing at over 6 per cent per year.
Areas of critical population density continue to co-exist with areas which are relatively under-populated.
In a wide band of west Africa, from Dakar to Kano including the ‘sahelian’ and ‘sudanian’zones, the total population in 1980 was about 30 million at an average of 17 people per square kilometre.
Forty per cent of the people live in only 6 per cent of the total area, and densities rise to 100 per square kilometre.
To the south of this zone, where tree cover becomes more dense in the Guinea-savannah, population densities are particularly low and there is plenty of scope for inward migration.
This is occurring spontaneously, but not at a rate which significantly affects the dense clusters further north.
Such situations are replicated elsewhere: even in Tanzania, with its 24 million people, as much as one-third of the cultivable area is under-populated.
The facts that much farmed land falls short of its potential and that in large areas of Africa population levels are low, do not alter the fact that innovators in the tradition of Chipimbi continue to succeed in achieving important increases in productivity.
On a farm two miles from Ngaoundere, in northern Cameroun, Alhaji Hamayadji Giwa cultivates, with the support of his two wives, three hectares of sweet potatoes, bananas and ground-nuts.
The sweet potatoes are all of a specific variety, namely TIB 1, which is the product of breeding work carried out at IITA in Nigeria in the 1970s.
The yield of TIB 1 is three to four times greater than that of the local variety of sweet potato and Giwa is able to market about 60 tons of sweet potatoes per year.
Maintaining production at this level is back-breaking work.
However, the farm is one of the main sources of supply to the Ngaoundere market and use of TIB 1 has enabled Giwa to become an affluent ‘yeoman’ farmer.
More modest, but important, increases in the productivity of another root crop, cassava, have also been achieved by thousands of small farmers in western Nigeria.
Here, too, the cassava variety is the result of breeding work at IITA which has been available to farmers since 1978.
Ten years later in Oyo State, which has a total of about 100,000 farming families, nearly half of the land area had been planted with the new variety which out-yields the local varieties by about 25 per cent.
As 60 per cent of the cassava grown in this area is marketed in towns, a yield increase even of this order of magnitude has had a positive impact on urban food supplies.
An even greater sustained impact on productivity has occurred amongst the thousands of small farmers in the former reserve areas of Zimbabwe.
Here, the introduction of the hybrid maize variety SR 52 has had a dramatic effect on yields of maize.
From 1979, when the hybrids were distributed on a wide scale, to 1985 yields almost doubled.
As production increased farmers had a growing surplus over their household requirements and sold an increasing proportion of their crop, reaching 60 per cent in 1985 and in 1988, and accounting for half of the national marketed production.
Successes of this kind occur where technology, the potential of the farming system, and the market allow it.
In some areas these factors have to be reinforced by the provision of seasonal credit to enable farmers to adopt an innovation.
Thus in northern Nigeria there has been a long-established practice of Hausa farmers purchasing immature beef cattle at the end of the harvesting season, and feeding them on maize stalks and other crop residues during the dry season, before marketing them at the end of six months.
Space on the farm, and lack of finance, restricted the practice to an average of one beefcattle per farmer.
From 1976 credit was made available specifically for this purpose and farmers were encouraged to hold more than one animal, and to build stalls and improve feeding materials.
Within five years there were over 4000 smallholders participating in the scheme, and their marketed output had increased by nearly three times over previous levels.
In this case a strategy of building and strengthening an existing practice had combined with organizational arrangements to increase small farmers' output.
FOOD FOR THE FUTURE
The objectives of farmers in the future will be first, to continue feeding their families and second to take advantage of the expanding urban market.
Exports are likely to rank only as a third objective.
Whether they can increase production at a rate which allows urban markets to be fed and exports to be maintained depends on several factors.
Production systems will have to be intensified in ways which do not deplete fertility; areas which are now under-populated will have to be used more productively; the organizations which serve small farmers, including relevant agricultural research institutes, will have to be strengthened; and finally, agricultural prices will have to be maintained at a level which provides an incentive.
Important policy changes have been adopted by governments in agriculture in the late 1980s as a response to the relative failure of the preceding twenty-five years.
These have frequently been made in response to pressure from major international aid donors.
The most substantive changes have been considerable upward adjustments in prices paid to farmers, which have had a positive effect on output.
It is doubtful, however, whether the changes implemented to date constitute an adequate boost towards achieving a continuous increase in marketed surpluses.
The great majority of farmers continue to use minimal quantities of fertiliser although fertility is being depleted; few governments are tackling the question of the use of their under-populated areas on a systematic basis; the organizations which serve small farmers have cut back their operations in response to budgetary pressures and in response to the pressure for privatization; the frequently competent staff of national agricultural research bodies are everywhere starved of funds for transport and field labour.
Those countries which had the best record of increasing productivity in the 1960s and 1970s, such as Kenya and Cameroun, are no longer maintaining their momentum.
Irrigation has been shown to have potential on a relatively small scale, but cannot be a solution for the mass of farmers.
In spite of this, innovation by individuals and communities of farmers in Africa will continue, and for the most part will enable rural families to maintain themselves at a reasonable level of nutrition.
Food supplies to the one third of the population, or 230 million people, who will be living in towns by the year 2000 will be uneven, and a continued dependence on imports, if they can be financed, is likely.
The labour which rural families can devote to export crops will not grow significantly as a proportion of the total and — except where export crops have a very high value, as in the case of horticulture — they will grow only slowly, if at all.
Artisans and Entrepreneurs: the Industrial Dilemma
Pre-colonial Africa did not lack entrepreneurs who managed trading companies, in some cases stretching well beyond contemporary national frontiers, and which had the capacity to invest profits from trade in production.
As shown in Chapter 4, from medieval times gold was being exported from the Shona-speaking kingdoms centred at Great Zimbabwe through Arab traders at Sofala in Mozambique.
The trade was sufficiently profitable for the Portuguese to take over Sofala in the early sixteenth century, and their written accounts confirm that the export cargoes were brought to the coast by African representatives of the Shona king or monomutapa .
In West Africa trade with the Mediterranean coast and Cairo was continuous from medieval times.
The west African goldfields of Mali and Songhay probably produced about one-third of the gold in circulation in late medieval Europe.i Leading merchants of the city-states of the savannah maintained important trading links to the north.
For instance, Malam Yaroh of Zinder in Niger maintained his own agents on the north African coast in the mid-nineteenth century.
This network was so well developed that when Captain Hugh Clapperton ‘discovered’ Kano in 1824 he was able to obtain cash from a local merchant in return for a bill of exchange on the British consul at Tripoli.
Seventy years later the cloth merchants of Kano, who ‘put out’ yarn for weaving and organized the dyeing and marketing of the cloth, were exporting as far afield as Alexandria across the desert and Brazil across the sea.
A single currency zone had operated in the Islamic states of the central savannah since the eighteenth century.
Further south, the coastal merchants of west Africa had been trading with Europe for several centuries.
Such activities were by no means limited to the slave trade.
Cash crops were exported from early in the nineteenth century, such as ground-nuts from the Gambia in the 1830s, and oil palm and rubber from Ghana from the 1870s and 1890s respectively.
The middlemen who organized supplies of these crops for European traders were not only accumulators of capital but also invested in new opportunities, such as that created by the demand for cocoa in the 1890s.
It was the Akwapim people of southern Ghana, exposed to centuries of trading with Europe, who had the capital in the 1890s to hire porters and clear the forest in order to plant cocoa.
In Nigeria in the same decade the first cocoa plantations were established by the African traders of Lagos, such as J.K. Coker, using pods from Fernando Po.
Thus the pattern of accumulation of capital from trade for subsequent investment in production which was so important in late eighteenth-century Britain had had its roots in Africa before the colonial period.
However, such dynamic and far-sighted traders and producers did not operate in a context which was generally favourable to the development of wage-paid labour or the accumulation of capital.
Chapter 3 described the web of relationships of pre-colonial societies in which kinship was the prime determinant of obligation and responsibility.
Where large scale production existed it was carried out by slaves, as was the case with gold mining in the Asante kingdom.
Among the few exceptions were the cocoa planters of Akwapim.
In east Africa wage-paid labour was confined almost entirely to entrepôt ports such as Mombasa and Zanzibar.
Limits to the individual accumulation of capital were also set by, for instance, the Asante state whose long distance trade was shared between state merchants and wealthy private traders.
The latter were not fully independent because
the State both harassed the wealthy commoner with unpredictable exactions when he was alive and claimed a large proportion of his self acquired movable property when he died.
This was so severe a problem that in the early twentieth century a petitioner to the asantehene protested against such death duties and said they had
brought the downfall of the Asante nation and for this reason they had to bury their money underground so that more money was hidden underground than on the earth.
The decay of older loyalties with the onset of the colonial era provided a new social context in which these limitations on entrepreneurs no longer applied.
It may, however, be argued that there were deeper reasons for the relative weakness of African entrepreneurs at this time, that is, the absence of the kind of ‘worldly asceticism’ which Weber described as the key to European capitalism.
In contrast
the norm was certainly frank enjoyment of pleasure amidst a life often harsh and insecure.
This hedonistic pragmatism is to be seen moulded for ever in the rolls of fat around the necks of the bronze and terracottaheads from Ife.
This of course was less true of the Islamic societies of the savannah which were periodically the subject of reform movements, with a strong ascetic bent, and of recurring significance in the twentieth century.
In this century Christianity, too, would produce reform movements in which values close to those of the protestant ethic prevailed.
THE ERA OF THE MULTINATiONALS
Capitalist activity in the nineteenth century, for the reasons discussed above, was mainly associated with new types of activity, such as cocoa production or mineral mining, whether these were in the hands of European or African entrepreneurs.
This was in the context of a world trading system geared to the industrial needs of Europe: as these intensified, the required scale of production in Africa gave an overwhelming advantage to the Europeans, with their store of skills and technology.
The opportunity was seized by European trading houses such as Lever Brothers, Union Miniere, the British-South Africa Company, and Lebanese, Syrian and Indian merchants.
The total real value of exports from a selection of seven African countries rose three and half times from 1907 to 1928, a further five times from 1928 to 1959 and a further four times from 1959 to 1982.
Nearly all exported products were primary commodities such as palm oil and cocoa, or copper and gold.
The associated investment in production and marketing gave the trading houses commanding positions within African economies.
In 1982 the total stock of that investment in Africa was estimated at about $13 billion, with over half of it still concentrated in the production and export of primary commodities.
Since 1976, the flow of new investment has been very modest, and in some years negative.
Where there has been new investment it has been financed largely from income generated in Africa and re-invested locally.
Consequently, companies from the old colonial powers of Britain and France continue to own about 30 per cent of the stock of foreign investments, with the USA and Japan owning another 50 per cent.
In many countries this still gives the foreign investor a position of significance.
In both Nigeria and Kenya, for example, foreign investment probably generates about one-fifth of Gross National Product.
In these cases individual companies such as BAT in Kenya, Unilever in Kenya and Nigeria, Elf in Gabon, and CFAO in a number of francophone countries are operating at levels of sophistication which have no indigenous counterpart.
The processes in use have frequently been heavily dependent on imports, with only a modest local added value, and have been sustained by relatively high levels of protection.
During the colonial period the response of African entrepreneurs to the growing presence of these large companies was varied.
In the interstices of the system, particularly in west Africa, the older, established, trading families in cities such as Kano and newcomers to the commercial sector played a significant role.
In the Islamic communities of the savannah religious reformation tended to reinforce entrepreneurial skill, as demonstrated by the Murid Brotherhood in Senegal and in the development of the ‘Reformed Tijianiya’(a more fundamentalist and anti-colonial Islamic movement) which also originated in Senegal but spread through much of the savannah in the 1930s.
In central Africa influential movements such as Jehovah's Witnesses were attractive to those who sought to set themselves apart and to adopt a puritan lifestyle.
THE INFORMAL SECTOR
With some exceptions, the role of individuals influenced by these movements was very limited throughout the colonial period.
At independence governments for the most part gave them preference over entrepreneurs from immigrant groups.
Such preference as often as not excluded entrepreneurs from tribal groups out of favour with the government of the day, such as the Ibo, Bamilike, waGanda, and waChagga.
Nonetheless, members of these communities and many others have developed small-scale enterprises in the informal sector which continue to grow in range and number.
Such enterprises now account for more than 60 per cent of industrial employment in countries as far apart as Ghana and Tanzania; more than half of them are located in small towns and villages, and the extended family is their most important source of labour; they contribute at least a quarter of total manufacturing output; and typically they employ between one and ten workers.
An informal producer is always difficult to define but it is used here to describe an owner or an employee of a small-scale enterprise comprising less than ten people, operating from an impermanent site, under an ill-defined registration and tax scheme.
Within this sector there is a vast range of experience and competence.
In Ethiopia, as in India, the role of the informal producer is not distinct from the mainstream of the economy, but is in fact a key part of it, producing for instance the home-spun cloth worn by most Ethiopian women.
In the larger cities of Nigeria traditional clothes and the more basic household goods all continue to be made by local artisans.
When imported cloth became more difficult to obtain from the mid 1980s tailors and seamstresses reverted to using a higher proportion of home-spun cloth woven on handlooms.
In Ghana at Suame Magazine in the city of Kumasi, about 5,000 craftsmen operating in makeshift sheds, in small garages, and in workshops, offer a complete repair service to Ghana's fleet of ageing vehicles, all suffering badly from a ten-year shortage of spare parts.
In Nairobi, most oil cans used in the routine servicing of vehicles are re-cycled to hold oil wicks dipped in paraffin as a main source of domestic light for both urban and rural homes.
In west Africa such small-scale entrepreneurs have long been tolerated, though seldom actively encouraged.
The economy of a city of 2 million people, such as Ibadan, has grown on the back of this kind of enterprise.
Modern corporate businesses are few and licences for small-scale repair shops and petty street traders provide a major share of city revenue.
In contrast, in the European-style cities of east and central Africa such as Nairobi, Lusaka and Harare, the informals have frequently been hounded out of their preferred locations.
In Lusaka, small-scale enterprise takes place mainly in the shanty towns three or four miles from the city centre.
In Nairobi, the origins of the several thousand metal workers who produce tin trunks, paraffin lamps, braziers, household utensils and agricultural tools on open sites, lie in both pre-colonial blacksmithing activities, and in Kenya's immigrant Indian communities, particularly the Sikhs and Bohras.
The Sikhs were the main source of artisan skills as European-style buildings sprang up in Kenya from 1900 onwards.
By the inter-war years such Sikh artisans had a number of Kenyan assistants adopting their skills; by the 1950s the Sikhs were moving on to the role of investor and entrepreneur in both construction and industry, leaving the way clear for their former assistants to take on the role of artisan.
But employment in the building trade is notoriously irregular, and such artisans alternate self-employment with wage-paid work on the building sites.
The significance of the older pre-colonial blacksmith tradition is illustrated in cases from Nairobi brought to light by Kenneth King who examined the origins and experience of Nairobi informals in the early 1970s.
He describes the case of Mutang'ang'i one of the leading informals who at that time made foreguards for bicycles, bicycle stands and cutting machines using a series of hand-built metalworking machines which he had designed and built himself.
He was the grandson of a traditional Kikuyu smith who made spears and knives in the late nineteenth century in a small village about twenty miles from Nairobi.
He had initially made braziers and water carriers on the estate of a European settler, who had persuaded him to manufacture in addition chisels and hammers.
Later, after four years in detention during the Mau Mau Emergency, he worked for an Indian workshop in Nairobi establishing himself as the pioneer manufacturer of bicycle carriers and foreguards.
In the next fifteen years he effectively trained about forty others, including several step-brothers.
They have been the nucleus of several hundred self-employed artisans manufacturing these bicycle attachments who can be seen on open sites across Nairobi.
Faced with competition from his own protégés, Mutang'ang'i himself moved his product line to a more specifically agricultural market: maize stalk cutters, fence post nail machines and hand shears.
Observation of the range of products being made in the late 1980s by Nairobi's jua kali artisans — those who work under the ‘hot sun’— confirm that Mutang'ang'i's story is far from unique.
Product differentiation and improvement has been occurring steadily over the years and now includes metal and wooden window frames, doors, storage tanks, household furniture, beds, as well as a much improved range of braziers, and tin trunks.
A good third of the stock of any hardware retail shop in Nairobi is now derived from this source.
Kenya's one formal window frame manufacturer has been forced to move into a completely different business as the jua kali producers have been able to dominate the market with a product which is of equal quality but considerably cheaper.
A welding machine designed and produced by jua kalis is beginning to compete with the conventional, imported Japanese product.
The individual work histories of Mutang'ang'i's original forty trainees include as many different jobs as were held by Mutang'ang'i himself, since the informal sector is typified by a very high turnover.
Its members move in and out of employment, and in and out of Nairobi itself, at a very fast rate.
In the 1950s and 1960s this ensured the rapid dissemination of such skills into towns and villages all over Kenya, and this process is being constantly reinforced.
What are the links between such informals and modern industry — not only in Kenya but elsewhere in Africa?
First, many of the materials with which they work, such as scrap metal, textile waste, and timber, are recycled, often illicitly, from large scale industry.
Second, many informals continue to work in the formal sector for several months at a time.
Third, much of the construction industry depends on formal companies subcontracting at least half of a total work programme to informals, many of whom in turn use tools produced by other jua kali artisans.
These factors suggest that an increase in turnover in the formal sector will ensure a reflected increase in turnover in the informal sector.
However, these links do not form a cohesive whole, and there are weaknesses in the development of the informal sector which have tended to disguise its potential.
In practice, many though not all informals have no security of tenure over the site on which they work, have very few means of tying their small workforce to the enterprise for more than a few months, and may run out of their supply of recycled materials (from the formal sector) at any moment.
Faced with this level of uncertainty, the response of employers within the sector has been to invest as much of their profits as possible in land or housing, if possible in their home area or within the city, if tenure is reasonably secure.
One measure of the weakness of such enterprise is that it would be extremely difficult to ensure, across such a wide range, the quality control necessary for the export market outside Africa.
So, while product development has been impressive, and confirms a certain level of re-investment, it does not usually lead to development of medium-sized businesses with tangible assets.
Furthermore, although the sector is generating profits which in turn increase the national stock of capital, this is mainly in housing and land, and not in manufacturing capacity.
FORMALIZING THE INFORMALS
Can this be changed?
The Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto in his book,The Other Path , argues that such change can be brought about in the Latin American context by legalizing the informals.
He sees the range of legal and bureaucratic constraints upon them as being the main limitation on their developing into self-sustaining businesses.
This argument is partly valid in the African context: Mutang'ang'i was periodically obliged to remove his metal cutting machines from his worksite in Nairobi.
On the other hand, a systematic survey by the International Labour Organization has shown that, in a sample of ten African countries, 40 per cent of informal sector enterprises pay some form of tax or registration fee, implying a degree of recognition by government.
By the late 1980s no African government could afford to neglect the significance of the sector for the employment of the hundreds of thousands of primary and secondary school leavers who were joining the labour market each year, and most were making policy statements which indicated some support for it.
However, it was also proving difficult to discard old attitudes.
In Kenya, a member of a research institute, with a brief to find technology relevant to both formals and informals, could still describe the latter as mainly ‘layabouts’ in 1989.
Despite the 1974–8 Kenya Development Plan stating ‘there has been some counter productive harassment of these enterprises, which will be promptly ended’, in 1989 a complete informal vehicle maintenance site was abruptly closed down by the city government.
In Nigeria, on the other hand, the National Open Apprenticeship Scheme is attempting to support forms of apprenticeship which have been traditional in the Nigerian informal sector, by seeking to upgrade their quality and supplement them with classroom training.
If initiatives of this kind are sustained, and matched by measures which increase the informals' security once they are in business, the sector can certainly gather greater strength and has the potential to generate jobs almost as fast as the urban population grows, but at very low levels of income, and in the form of enterprises where investment and technology is minimal.
With exceptions, this is not a training ground for larger-scale entrepreneurs.
In fact one of the striking characteristics of the history of Africa's informals during the last three decades is how few of them have managed to launch genuine large-scale businesses, capable of competing with the foreign-owned or -managed enterprises which are still so critical in many countries.
Most of the exceptions to this pattern are in Nigeria where several large scale Nigerian-owned businesses have developed with a turnover measured in tens of millions of dollars.
NIGERIA: CRADLE OF ENTREPRENEURS?
A series of studies of such businessmen have been conducted by Nigerian scholars, and these are particularly significant given the fact that Nigeria accounts for one third of ‘value added’ in manufacturing in sub-Saharan Africa as a whole (excluding South Africa).
Elsewhere, Africa's leading industrialists tend to be the chairmen or directors of companies which are owned or managed by multinational companies.
The Nigerian studies throw doubt on whether these businesses are really self-sustaining, or revolve too heavily round the personality of their founder.
They identify a failure to concentrate on taking a large market share for one product; in contrast they describe a preference for entering a new market before the full potential of the current one is reached.
Of course, there is some justification for this: competition is intense and the Nigerian public's purchasing power low, and so returns may be higher from launching a new product in a different market.
A technical explanation of this kind however does not account for the continuing one-man-band nature of many such businesses, which prevents growth for organizational as well as market reasons.
In a survey carried out in the mid 1960s of 419 businesses in western Nigeria, 74 per cent said that ‘partnerships or joint ventures were difficult or undesirable because of financial untrustworthiness’.
Individuals among them went on to say:
— The spirit of cheating reigns supreme amongst us;— Honesty is still wanting amongst the indigenous businessmen;— Most of our businessmen are not honest.
In Ghana one-man proprietorships characterized 75 per cent of larger, locally-owned firms in the late 1960s.
The most notable exceptions to this pattern are found in Kano where a 1975 study showed that nineteen of Nigeria's twenty largest industrial companies were located.
This may be attributed to the fact that the city's traders were not swamped by the growth of the larger British companies during the colonial period, that among the merchant families involved in the kola nut trade, two generations were common, and that merchant families in Kano were particularly successful from the early 1960s at forming links with overseas companies, not least with those from the Far East.
It may also have been connected with the recurring impact in Kano of the Islamic ‘ascetic’ movements, particularly current in commercial circles.
However the situation found in Kano was not typical of west Africa or even of Nigeria, and the one-man-band was and is the predominant theme.
While it has been suggested that the absence of a cadre of professional managers is a major explanation for this situation, the real reasons almost certainly lie closer to the psychology of the entrepreneurs themselves.
Few of them in Nigeria, as elsewhere, have more than ten years of schooling.
Therefore older rural values relating to power and status, and especially the ability to redistribute patronage, predominate.
Consequently, the criteria of ‘profit maximization’ and ‘efficiency of management’are frequently not critical.
Whether more and better schooling would in the short run produce a larger group of efficient entrepreneurs, capable of making individual businesses more competitive, is an open question.
Akeredolu-ale, one of the Nigerian analysts of local entrepreneur, writing in 1975 saw deeper problems:
Private indigenous entrepreneurs in Nigeria are still to cultivate the discipline of conserving more than they consume of their trade surplus and of re-investing such surpluses to expand the firm.
Very limited entrepreneurial ambitions, conspicuous consumption and a tendency to spread their thin investments over many ventures [the ‘group of companies’ mentality], a tendency…to only scratch the surface of innovation, the aversion to teaming up with others, all these and other motivational factors are likely to continue to limit the growth of Nigerian enterprises even in those spheres which are exclusively reserved to them and to postpone the day when they may hope to take over the higher reaches of enterprise.
In his earlier analysis in 1969 of Nigerian businessmen, Kilby reached similar conclusions:
While Yoruba and Ibo patterns of status mobility based on achieved wealth provide a strong incentive to establish a business enterprise as a means of obtaining high social status, once established there are no antecedent roles conferring respect for efficient managerial performance.
On the contrary, because conspicuous leisure is the principal manifestation of superior status, the carrying out of supervisory functions…represents a socially degrading activity…
These descriptions of the prospects for Nigerian entrepreneurs are hardly encouraging.
If, however, they were too pessimistic this should have been belied in the subsequent years since the Nigerian Indigenization Decree of 1972, implemented from February 1974, which reserved twenty-six activities in large-scale industry exclusively for Nigerian ownership; foreign companies operating in these businesses had to sell out.
The results of this measure were that 50 per cent of total manufacturing activity (measured by value added) was left entirely in Nigerian hands.
While there was certainly an increase in the output of these businesses in the prosperous years of the late 1970s it is doubtful if they did more than keep pace with the fast growth rate for the manufacturing sector as a whole, estimated by the World Bank to be 12 per cent from 1970 to 1982.
Further, they certainly did not succeed in swimming against the deep tide of recession which engulfed Nigeria from 1983 onwards.
In theory, during this period their potential to adapt technology to source inputs locally (as had occurred in Biafra during the civil war), rather than to import them might have given them a competitive edge over the large manufacturing companies managed and partly owned from overseas.
In practice, the description of the potential of their businesses made by Akeredolu-Ale and Kilby proved to be substantially valid.
The time span which is likely to be required for a generation of more effective large-scale entrepreneurs to evolve is considerable.
One of the problems for those entrepreneurs, and other corporate managers, who do seek to act as professional industrialists is that the context in which they operate is dominated by the values described in earlier chapters.
For instance, the manager of an airline, however committed he may be to an efficient seat reservation system, may be obliged to withdraw seats already allocated in favour of a minister and his train of attendants.
Another entrepreneur establishing a sack-making factory with limited protection, may find a relative of the president given a licence to import freely the same product.
Alhaji Abbo is a former truck driver who has successfully developed a 3,000 hectare maize farm and oil extraction plant in northern Cameroun.
In 1989 he was obliged to move out of his house to live on the farm in order to avoid the pressure to entertain visiting dignitaries on behalf of local politicians.
Thus whether the would-be efficient entrepreneur rises from the informal sector or parachutes into a larger-scale enterprise with a degree from an international business school, he will frequently be trapped into the same style of running a business as the Nigerian enterpreneurs described above.
SMALL IS STILL BEAUTIFUL
Entrepreneurs in pre-colonial Africa were effective in articulating trading relationships between Africa and the rest of the world, and in developing the productive activities which generated the trade.
The colonial period ushered in an era of foreign investment which gave the large scale trading houses of Europe a hold on the development of local economies allowing little room for Africa's entrepreneurs to develop their skills.
In spite of the nationalizations of the 1960s and 1970s the stock of capital of foreign investors continues to generate about one-fifth of Africa's gross national product.
The many and varied attempts by governments both to take over foreign assets and to set up new state-owned businesses, have seldom been successful.
While state-owned and foreign businesses have held the centre of the stage for three decades, tens of thousands of informal sector artisans have been producing a range of goods for use in households, agriculture, transport and construction.
Over time, these have both adapted their technologies and developed many new product lines.
They have not existed independently of formal industry, but have drawn skills and materials from it.
But the constraints on their existence implied by operating from open waste land or shacks have created a situation where they have little security, and the owners of such enterprises are discouraged from reinvesting a high proportion of their profits back into the business.
Nevertheless, this sector has the potential to generate employment at a rate close to the rate of growth of the urban population, but at very low levels of income.
One of the weaknesses of most African economies is an absence of large-scale entrepreneurs running manufacturing businesses, whether they have emerged from the informal sector or been trained by the corporate sector.
The studies from Nigeria suggest that this failure may be as much to do with the character and personality traits of the generation of entrepreneurs who developed their businesses in the 1960s.
It is certain that even those entrepreneurs and managers who seek to act as professional industrialists have to operate in an environment which is hostile to them, and in which the pursuit of marginal returns is an uphill struggle.
Thus at a time when Africa needs to industrialize, to create both exports and jobs, a review of the last thirty years shows how difficult this task has been and will be.
A good part of the difficulty is derived directly from the structure of social and cultural values discussed earlier in this book.
These are responsible for both the ‘power and status’ motivation ascribed to Nigerian entrepreneurs, and for the centralizing tendency of governments which until recently have frequently been hostile to the informals.
Among the many constraints on Africa's attempts at industrialization, the factors deriving from Africa's pre-colonial social structure must be deemed among the most important.
The Aid Machine
The two World Bank men, one German and one British, strode across the tarmac in the steaming heat of Dar es salaam.
Clearly men with a purpose, their well-ironed tropical suits and ties contrasted with the colourful informality of the other passengers and the rest of the airport crowd — the men in body length kanzas or open neck shirts, and women in black buibuis stretching from their heads to below their knees or in multi-coloured kitenge dresses proclaiming variants on the theme of Uhuru na Mwalimu .
The Bank men, their first-class tickets ensuring a place at the front of the queue for immigration formalities, wasted no time in getting through the airport and were quickly ferried by car along the narrow road into the city.
Within an hour of arrival they were closeted with the permanent secretary, the most senior civil servant, of the Ministry of Agriculture mapping out the ground for a loan from the World Bank to Tanzania which would put $25 million into livestock production, turning ranching and the export of beef into a major national industry.
This was an ambitious objective, but it was 1971 and Robert McNamara had been President of the World Bank for three years, long enough to begin to realize his goal of a leap forward in Bank lending that would take it from $1.1 billion in 1967 to $11.4 billion in 1980, his last year in office.
Only such a leap could have spawned the dynamic activity of the Bank staffers in the field in the early and mid 1970s.
The two-man team arriving to promote the concept of a large-scale loan for livestock production in Tanzania in 1971 was a manifestation of McNamara's bold and almost visionary objectives.
Their tough activism contrasted with the Ministry of Agriculture's considerable suspicion of the Bank's motives, doubts about whether the government could possibly meet all the conditions of lending that the Bank would require, and sheer reluctance to organize all the preparatory technical studies that would form a part of project preparation.
The civil servants' reluctance would be resolved by a ministerial directive that the project must be supported — some action was always better than none, the project would have an impact in several regions, if it worked it would boost exports and create employment.
The snag lay in the price of meat, the Bank wanting it raised to choke off local demand and free meat for export, the government wanting it held at its current low level to keep urban meat-eaters happy.
Having flagged the issue and fired the interest of the minister, the Bank duo returned to the cooler, more workman-like atmosphere of life in Nairobi almost certain that sooner or later a project would go to the Bank board, and that it would almost certainly be approved.
In fact it took another two years for the project to be fully studied, for the government to support its formal submission to the World Bank, for the Bank's board to approve it and for the first tranche of funds to flow.
The project was highly imaginative, building on a commercial ranching project which already existed.
It envisaged the development of other commercial ranches (albeit government-owned); the provision of credit to a selection of pastoral cattle keepers (for water supplies, improved grazing and other facilities); a great improvement in the system by which cattle were transported from grazing areas to abattoirs; and the re-equipment and expansion of the existing export meat-packing plant.
In framing the loan agreement both the government and the Bank had formally agreed that high-powered international management of the meat plants and ranches was necessary to success, that pastoral cattle keepers should be given title to their land (an innovation), and that the meat price should be raised, thus restraining urban demand.
By the late 1970s, however, it was clear that the project had failed in nearly all of its objectives.
At one level the reasons were not difficult to see: although government initially fulfilled the conditions of the loan, in hiring management and adjusting prices, it later backed out of the commitment.
Contracts were shortened and meat prices restrained; the meat plant was nationalized and the export distribution channel lost; the issue of land tenure for pastoralists became submerged in the much bigger ujamaa re-settlement programme of 1975; and livestock buying at markets was taken out of the hands of the traditional Somali buyers and for the most part placed in the hands of state agents.
But this is not the whole story.
The failure was not just one of execution, nor even one of mistaken concept; it was more the product of a profound ambivalence in the relationship between the World Bank and the government.
This was matched by a further ambivalence in the relationship between the government and the livestock owners, supposed to be the ultimate beneficiaries of the project.
For the project to be successful it was essential for each stool of the tripod which supported it — the government, the livestock owners and the Bank — to have an equal commitment to its success and to perceive the project in roughly the same terms.
In fact, no such harmony of view existed.
The government saw it as a means to increase the resources under its control; those few livestock owners who were aware of the project saw it as a means to acquire more stock and supplies of water, but with no thought of selling more of their animals; the Bank saw it as an intervention which would initiate a commercial livestock industry in Tanzania, a means of increasing resource utilization and exports.
Such differences in emphasis and even objective were the fatal flaw in the project, a flaw which saddled Tanzania with a $17 million commitment to repay the Bank's soft loan wing, the International Development Agency (IDA).
Today the majority of Tanzania's current total debt of $5 billion consists of obligations contracted in many similar projects financed by a wide variety of donors, many of which have similar ambiguities surrounding them.
DO BORROWERS HAVE A STRATEGY?
Such ambiguities are not unique to Tanzania but run right through relationships between development agencies and African governments.
Chapter 3 argued that ambiguity was an underlying characteristic of African society.
Historically, this was driven by a complex web of lineage lines in which one set of loyalties was hedged against another.
Today, when facing the outside world, the strategy of senior civil servants is also frequently one of hedging; programmes are often put up to three donors simultaneously, so that the influence of one can be offset against the influence of another.
As a result, African governments seldom have a concerted strategy for dealing with donors.
This is confirmed by the fact that there are very few serious statements about aid made by senior Africans on behalf of their country, or their region.
A ridiculous proportion of the public debate on aid takes place exclusively within the donor countries, and is generated by articles written mainly by western and Third World academic observers.
It is as if those who know aid best from the viewpoint of the recipients fear that an outspoken critique will turn off the tap rather than improve the quality of the flow.
Not even Julius Nyerere's collected speeches, which range across almost every aspect of the problem of development, contain a serious reflection on the role of aid in Tanzania or Africa in general.
The reports of international commissions such as that of Brandt do not make up for this gap.
Since aid is becoming more, not less, important in Africa there is a crying need for a more outspoken analysis of the problem, not only from the recipients' point of view, but by the recipients themselves.
These kinds of problems were not envisaged in the seminal work of economists such as Walt Rostow, writing in the 1950s, and Hollis Chenery, writing in the 1960s, whose work played a key role in justifying the early stages of development assistance.
At that time, economic thinking on development was very much influenced by the success of the Marshall Plan in financing the rehabilitation of Europe, and by the effect of parallel U.S. aid to Japan.
Rostow's Stages of Economic Growth identified a key role for external concessionary finance, i.e. to increase the rate of investment without reducing the level of domestic consumption.
Given certain other conditions such as a high rate of growth in at least one manufacturing sector and a favourable institutional environment, an increase in the rate of net investment from say 5 to 10 per cent of national income could put a country on the path to self-sustaining growth.
The underlying assumption was that, if other factors were reasonably favourable, capital formation and exports would within, say, a generation reach the level where concessional finance was no longer necessary.
The African experience has not justified this assumption.
In the 1980s, aggregate Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has been roughly static, and per capita GDP has been falling at a time when net aid flows have been rising.
The reasons for this should not be obscured by the fact that the short term objectives of aid have undergone several changes over the last thirty years.
Most notably these have included, first, a concern with income distribution and the need to combat ‘absolute’ poverty, triggered by McNamara in 1973; and second, the need to finance the trade deficits, and consequent ‘adjustment’, of the many African countries for whom the second oil price rise of 1979 was a near fatal blow.
The IMF, the World Bank and bilateral national aid donors have all allocated an increasing proportion of their annual commitments to lending of this type.
In the case of the World Bank, this proportion was as high as 30 per cent of total loans to Africa approved in 1988.
Such changes in the target areas of lending not only make its impact more difficult to assess, but have not yet led to a sustained improvement in the rate of economic growth achieved by recipient countries.
Nevertheless, in-flows of aid have been increasing.
In 1970 they totalled $1.0 billion, in 1978 $4.7 billion and in 1987 $11.1 billion.
It can be argued that the increase rather than the reduction in the need for aid is due to a series of weaknesses in its composition and nature.
It can also be argued that the economists' justification for aid has never been its real rationale, but that political considerations of strategic security by the donors have conditioned its distribution and nature, in some cases even allowing military support to be classified as aid.
However, the quality of economic decision-making in most African countries over the last thirty years suggests that this is inextricably linked to the relative failure of aid.
The important role which larger donors have come to play in ‘supporting’ African economies has not prevented governments from retaining their entrenched political priorities.
To make matters more complicated, where aid programmes have sought to channel funds to small-scale farmers, or small businesses, the real priorities of the target beneficiaries have seldom been identical to those of the donor or the government.
Even so, donors have also used aid to pursue their selfinterest regardless of whether or not it was compatible with that of the recipient.
This has led to the tying of aid to a large extent to inappropriate or unduly expensive goods from the donor's country, to sharp annual variations in the volume of aid flows and to a lack of commitment to real coordination with other donors.
Thus, in examining the more specific factors which have contributed to the aid machine's lack of success, it is frequently the case that both donor and recipient carry a part of the responsibility.
These issues will be discussed below.
A POOR MATCH
There is plenty of opportunity for the general sense of ambiguity discussed above to manifest itself at the level of individual projects.
There are often three related questions: do recipient governments really want the project? do the target beneficiaries (such as smallholders) within the country really want the project? do the donor(s), the recipient government and the beneficiaries expect roughly the same from the project?
The environment within which projects have been planned and executed has frequently allowed these questions to remain unanswered in reality, if not on the paper on which loan agreements are written.
It was created in good part by the situation in the 1970s when a poor match developed between the pressure to lend from donors, and the administrative ability of the borrowing countries to ‘receive’.
Overwhelmed by the number of donors pushing their desire to lend, recipient governments were frequently unable to sort out their own priorities in a meaningful way.
This is hardly surprising.
In the early 1980s Kenya was trying to cope with 600 projects from 60 donors; and even a mini-country such as Lesotho was dealing with 321 projects from 61 donors.
The gap between the willingness to lend and the capacity to receive is partly due to the fact that the majority of donors have country lending, or granting, targets.
The staff members they deploy in the field to identify projects are under pressure from their senior management to turn such targets into reality.
Working within an embassy office or the regional office of a multilateral bank it is not difficult for donors' staff to come up with a list of potential projects which can be presented to a recipient country's ministry of finance for discussion.
Overworked officials in finance ministries rarely reject a whole list of potential projects; they are much more likely to identify a few priorities at random, and pass on the donor to the line ministry, hoping for the best if and when the project is financed.
Once a project is on a donor's priority list it takes on a life of its own, and may become unstoppable.
Only a very few civil servants within the recipient government understand what the project is really about.
Numerous conditions may be attached to the donor's disbursement of funds, such as the allocation of manpower to the project, or a change in pricing policy.
Once the loan agreement is signed the donor may have a much more precise view of these conditions than the recipient, especially at the level of the line staff who are actually supposed to manage the project.
As the donor becomes more and more concerned at lack of action the recipient country staff become more and more dubious that the project is really in their national interest, and may even start discussions with another whose conditions may be perceived as less onerous.
To these dilemmas must be added the differing perceptions of a project by potential beneficiaries such as farmers and small-scale businessmen.
In an agricultural project farmers have to understand the potential benefits of the inputs (say, fertiliser and seed) financed by the project, to find them relevant, and to be sure that their produce will find a market, before committing themselves to participation.
In many agricultural projects this has not been the case.
The irrigation schemes in the Sudan, including the Gezira project, provide an example of a case where a poor response from tenant farmers, for a variety of reasons, has consistently dogged the major rehabilitation projects financed by the World Bank and other donors in the early 1980s.
There are many projects where farmers have seen potential benefits from a project, but where these have not been the same as those anticipated by the project designers.
Thus in integrated rural development projects, such as those financed by the World Bank in many Nigerian states in the 1970s, fertiliser ear-marked for cash crops was frequently spread on food crops.
In livestock projects credit designed for fencing and water supplies has been channelled into domestic buildings, for which similar materials are required.
In projects designed to support small (and larger-scale) entrepreneurs various forms of ‘leakage’ are frequent: credit funds ear-marked for a particular purpose are deployed for entirely different purposes, or for the purchase of domestic assets.
The frustrations for the donor arising from these differences of perception and interest are great.
But even when they are recognized, his options are limited.
To cancel a project is to set back a country's loan or grant programme and perhaps risk political problems between recipient and donor.
Consequently, changes in project objectives are much more frequent than cancellations.
The World Bank's 1985 review of project performance indicated that ‘only 42 per cent of its projects were implemented as agreed, and 58 per cent were changed significantly during the implementation process’.
Even changes of objective within the period in which funds are being disbursed may still leave pressure for additional change, especially if there is a ministerial reshuffle.
In an attempt to try to contain the pressure for such changes donors adopted in the 1970s a strategy of establishing semi-autonomous project units, which were nominally attached to national ministries, but in fact were more or less independent of them.
In Juba, southern Sudan, the agricultural rehabilitation project jointly financed by the British government and the World Bank in 1978 had an annual budget in excess of that of the Ministry of Agriculture of the regional government.
Such project ‘islands’ created additional suspicion within recipient governments and the approach has been largely abandoned.
The problems described above will not be easily resolved.
The ambivalence surrounding project aid is likely to continue.
The situation will only improve if first, recipient governments are able to allocate a higher proportion of the time of capable civil servants to the allocation of in-coming aid; second, if donor governments and agencies dovetail their country lending programmes more closely with the medium-term budgetary plans of the recipient countries; and third, if recipient governments are more careful in interpreting the priorities of their own small farmers and other small-scale producers.
The move away from project loans and towards structural adjustment loans in the 1980s does not diminish the main thrust of this argument.
The main aim of these more recent loans is to assist governments in making major policy changes (such as abolishing price controls and freeing interest rates) and creating new institutional arrangements (such as privatising government-owned companies).
Such changes may receive support from cabinet ministers and senior civil servants, but may also be accepted not from conviction but from necessity; nominal support is essential to ensure finance for a minimum quantity of imports.
Even if they are accepted from conviction, perhaps more often the case than political statements would imply, major vested interests have to be combatted to implement them.
Some of this comes from urban consumers, concerned with rising food prices, or trade unions concerned with falling real wages.
Some of the opposition to liberalization may come from multinational companies used to low interest rates and to a protected local market.
Faced with such effective local opposition civil servants in charge of delivering on policy conditions may indeed feel ambivalent about the desirability of an individual structural adjustment loan.
SWITCHING RESOURCES
Some of the ambivalence shown by recipient countries towards aid is explained by its utility as a means of freeing local resources to finance projects which otherwise might get squeezed out, but which might have important political attractions.
Donors frequently finance projects, or chunks of government expenditure such as part of the health service, to which recipient countries would in any case have to give a high priority, and this relieves government of that particular commitment.
Revenue can then be switched to other items, such as military hardware, or so-called prestige projects.
Only a minority of African countries spend a high proportion of their annual government expenditure on defence — as much as 19 per cent in Burkina Faso and 13 per cent in Tanzania in 1986.
It is difficult to believe that many of the prestige projects discussed in Chapter 8 would have been contemplated in the absence of the very high volumes of aid reaching countries for other, more mundane, purposes.
More difficult to determine is the extent to which aid has freed resources for consumption, and so done little to increase investment levels in the manner envisaged by Rostow or Chenery.
In fact the extent to which this happens, and to which aid itself directly finances consumption, for instance paying the salaries of local staff, has been a matter of controversy among economists.
Keith Griffin is one who takes an extreme position believing that
aid is essentially a substitute for saving and…a large fraction of foreign capital is used to increase consumption rather than investment.
This statement is clearly true in the context of food aid.
In 1986, 40 per cent of the nearly 9 million tons of cereals imported by Africa was financed under food aid projects, at a cost to donors of approximately $0.5 billion.
In fact it is now widely recognized that some consumption expenditure of this type, in so far as it combats malnutrition, should be considered as equivalent to investment.
But consumption does not directly create capital assets whether financed internally or externally, and investment levels in most countries have not risen significantly as a proportion of GDP in Africa over the last twenty years, and reMain 6 or 7 per cent lower than in both the rest of the developing world and in the industrialized world.
During this period, domestic savings rates have fallen significantly (with some exceptions such as Kenya and Cameroun) and therefore the inevitable diversion of some aid finance from investment to consumption is accentuating a negative trend, however necessary it may be in years of famine and drought.
TEA MONEY
Corruption is always a two-way process.
The mushrooming of aid budgets in the 1970s turned aid into a fairly important source of business for some small and medium-sized companies in Europe and elsewhere, indicated by the formation of pressure groups in many European Community (EC) countries to ensure that an increased proportion of national aid budgets ended up in the hands of that country's exporters.
In Britain, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) regularly convenes seminars and conferences on this topic.
In the 1970s, this kind of pressure led to the prevalence of an increasing pool of funds allocated to soft or mixed commercial credits, which some EC governments were able to describe as aid.
Much of this now forms part of Africa's stock of debt as the recipient countries have been unable to service their export credits, and has become a burden on the export credit guarantee agencies of the EC governments.
In fact export credits form 37 per cent of the total stock of African debt.
Recipient countries have, however, generally played the leading role in the process of allocating contracts between suppliers, whether of equipment, contracting services or consultancy services.
This process has regularly been the subject of corruption as civil servants or ministers connected with the award of the tender have sought backhanders for themselves and their associates.
Projects financed by multilateral agencies, such as the World Bank, were and are far from immune from this process.
While the bidding for contracts may nominally be through international competitive bidding arrangements between suppliers and members of a government, the award may in practice be carried out in ways which make it impossible for the Bank and other donors to police it.
Such arrangements have to be seen in a wider context.
Corruption is now largely acknowledged as an actual or past practice.
President Houphouet Boigny, of Ivory Coast, is on record as saying that a minister who cannot enrich himself is not worth his salt.
President Mobutu of Zaire has publicly objected to not being acknowledged as the seventh richest man in the world.
There is a good argument for presenting these forms of corruption as consistent with past African practice, in which the chiefs position was acknowledged in tribute, as was the eighteenth-century practice in Europe, and nineteenth-century practice in the USA.
However, they are difficult to defend in the context of aid when cultural values are different in donor countries and recipient countries, and when public opinion in the donor countries perceives aid as having a moral justification.
Even more importantly, they obviously lead to bad, poorly planned projects perhaps with inadequate or inappropriate equipment.
A significant, though not decisive, part of the low return to aid projects in Africa can be attributed to corruption in the award of contracts.
Such corruption has played some part in building up the funds held in international bank accounts or other forms of investment by African citizens, recently estimated to total $20 billion between 1974 and 1985.
These examples of ambiguity, of the switching of resources, and of corruption explain some of the failures of aid which can be attributed primarily to the recipients.
Other explanations of failure are more clearly attributable to donors.
These include lack of co-ordination, volatility in aid flows, the serving of the national interest of donors (particularly through its tying to national suppliers), ineffective evaluation, and the assumption of greater wisdom.
WORKING TOGETHER
The numbers of projects and donors in individual countries is a source of confusion for which donors themselves are almost entirely responsible.
Even the World Bank regularly despatches different missions to an individual country unaware of each others' presence, or who may meet by accident in a permanent secretary's outer office.
The consequences for the country, especially in the many cases where the recipient government is not able to sort out the resultant confusion, can at worst be disastrous.
There is, for example, the problem of matching finance in local currency, which governments are generally required to commit to each donor-assisted project.
In effect governments take on a commitment to support a part of the costs of several hundred projects at any one time, such ‘counterpart funding’ in countries like Kenya or Tanzania frequently amounts to a nominal commitment of about $200 million per year.
In reality it becomes almost impossible to find this amount in the budget, and projects have to limp along on an underfunded basis or with the overseas donor financing an increasing proportion of the total costs.
Commitments to matching finance are seldom adequately analyzed, and although the recipient governments may carry a good deal of the responsibility for this, donors are also at fault in assuming that the counter-part funds for their projects will have priority.
A second dimension to real co-ordination involves only the donors, whose policies outside the aid arena may conflict with those within it.
The most crucial example of this is trade policy, for access to markets in the industrialized world may be critical to a recipient country's export programme.
Thus the EC remains highly sensitive to the origins of garments made up within African countries when the woven fabric is imported from elsewhere, and may reject such imports on the grounds that they are not wholly manufactured within the exporting country.
Another example is the need for co-ordination between national aid agencies and national export credit agencies, where the latter may be seeking to guarantee finance for, say, a large steel mill which is clearly out of line with national development priorities agreed in different agencies between the donors and recipient governments.
PEAKS AND TROUGHS
Volatility in aid flows is notoriously difficult from the recipient's point of view, and the US Congress has made American aid a dangerously-poisoned chalice to the recipients.
Short-term changes in the volume of flows to a particular country can ruin the effectiveness of a particular programme or project.
For example:
US aid commitments to Zimbabwe began at $24m at Independence in 1980, rose to $84m in 1982, fell to $59m in 1984 and were set to fall well below $20m in early 1986 prior to a decision in September 1986 to cancel all future aid programmes…
US aid to Sudan stood at $64m in 1981, rising to $121m in 1984; in 1986 total US military and economic aid to Sudan stood at $158m prior to total suspension in late February with only $50m of food aid being disbursed following Sudan's developing relations with Libya.
The ability of donors to turn off the tap is often cherished as a means of enforcing economic discipline, or more specifically the sets of policies now associated with structural adjustment.
However the ‘correct’ economic policies are at best subjective and in any case other political considerations frequently come into play.
As effective economic policy can hardly be judged in less than a three year period, and political affiliation is also a long-term question, it seems entirely reasonable that aid should be committed over a three year period.
PROMOTING THE DONOR
Given the political rationale lying behind these sharp changes in the volume of aid directed to particular countries, it is clear that the promotion of the donors' perceived national self-interest is closely bound up with aid.
Nearly 80 per cent of French and British aid, excluding that which is channelled through multilateral organizations, is given to their former colonies.
A very high proportion of nearly all industrialized countries' aid is tied to their own goods or personnel.
On average this is about 33 per cent, although it ranges up to about 60 per cent in the case of Italy, and is over 40 per cent for Britain, France and the United States.
Detailed studies of the cost of such tied aid have indicated that the resultant prices to the recipient country are typically 20 per cent more than they would have been if the country had a free choice in its supplier.
While tying is not necessarily incompatible with the fundamental economic objectives of aid, it reduces its potential benefit to the extent that goods are over-priced, or that they are less appropriate — and sometimes much less appropriate — for the job.
SELF-ASSESSMENT
Criticism of aid from both left and right, particularly in recent years, has led to the establishment of evaluation units within most of the major donor agencies.
The assessments made by these units, frequently based on the work of so-called objective consultants, are increasingly available in edited form.
As with other institutional innovations in the aid field, the World Bank has been the most consistent, and perhaps rigorous, of self-assessors publishing an annual review of in-house project audits.
Taking the donor agencies as a whole, about 9,000 evaluations of individual projects have been made since 1970, probably accounting for about 12 per cent of all projects launched since that time.
Although this would normally be an adequate sample, the results are much less significant than they appear, even were they to point conclusively in one direction, which they do not.
Projects need to be assessed over time; there are very few whose benefits can be seriously assessed in less than ten years, and a period of fifteen to twenty years would be more meaningful.
On this basis the rural development projects which became fashionable among most donors in the 1970s, and which were supposed to have a direct impact on the rural poor, are only now coming to the stage where a meaningful evaluation can be conducted.
Yet the World Bank has conducted and published project audits on average seven years after the first disbursement of funds, and three years after the final year of disbursement.
This is too short a time frame to be meaningful.
The assessment of structural adjustment loans is even more problematic than the assessment of rural development projects.
There are any number of reasons why such loans may be successes or failures, which go well beyond the conditions for the disbursement of the loans.
For instance, if an economy grows at 5 per cent per year following a two-year disbursement of a structural adjustment loan, if the international price for the country's commodity exports has risen by at least 5 per cent in the same period of time, can the loan be regarded as justified?
Conversely, if state-owned companies have been offered for privatization but few bidders have come forward, is this a ‘failure’ if the firms continue as loss makers in the public sector?
The analysis of a group of such SAP projects will be meaningful only in about ten years after they became fashionable — that is in about 1995.
While the factors of time and the sheer difficulty of analysis partly explain the relative failure of donors to provide a meaningful public assessment of aid programmes, they do not explain the cumulative inadequacy of the results which are available to date.
First, there are inherent limitations in looking only at individual projects, which do not pick up some of the key problems discussed above, such as fungibility and co-ordination.
It is more appropriate to examine the impact of aid programmes and projects in aggregate on a particular country.
Pioneering work of this kind is quite recent.
A study commissioned by member governments of the World Bank in 1985 conducted seven such case studies.
Similar studies of five countries were carried out for USAID in 1983.
Taking these and studies commissioned by donors in countries where they are the predominant donor into account, it appears that only about ten African aid recipients have been studied in this way.
Reviewing national programmes, however, raises key and difficult questions for both donors (why did they not co-operate more effectively?) and recipients (how could they justify a range of prestige projects? why are they more dependant on aid than ever?)
Yet without such country reviews the performance of aid will not improve more than marginally.
Second, few of the evaluations discuss the donors' own role in promoting some of the weaknesses in project design.
A classic case is the pressure brought to bear by the World Bank in agriculture in the 1970s in support of island projects, the efficiency of which would be ensured by hiving them off from executing ministries, and appointing expatriate (mainly European) managers to run them.
The duplication and friction thus created was palpable.
The World Bank has subsequently identified this as a major weakness in the design of projects, but has not acknowledged its own role as the prime engineer of the approach.
The unsatisfactory nature of project evaluation work and the inconclusive lessons which can be drawn from it provide little justification for the donor ‘omniscience’ which continues to characterize their negotiations with recipients.
There is no suggestion of possible error of self-doubt when World Bank missions meet a fifty-year-old permanent secretary in a Ministry of Finance, even if he has been receiving similar missions, offering rather different policy prescriptions, for the previous twenty years.
Donors, including the EC and the World Bank, have been trying to persuade the Kenyan government to privatize grain marketing since 1984.
There is good reason to ask to whom can the assets of the grain marketing board be sold?
Yet the World Bank has continued to press this issue, at one stage moving the permanent secretary in the president's office to angrily rebuke the young leader of the Bank's team, and to the president himself being moved to recount to the team the Biblical story of the seven fat and seven lean years.
There are no easy answers to African development, and an appropriate degree of humility on the part of donors is a necessary condition for developing a serious dialogue with recipient governments.
PUMP PRIMER OR DRIP FEED?
The confidence displayed by the World Bank men and other donors in the early 1970s has clearly not fulfilled its promise.
Neither Africa nor the donors carry the prime responsibility for this.
The premise on which the donors worked was that large amounts of capital could be absorbed by small African countries because their need for productive investment was demonstrably high.
It would seek to twist Government's arm to ensure that appropriate management was bought in.
The premise on which African governments worked was that if capital could not be had on highly concessional terms it was better to accept it on terms more or less defined by the donors.
These compromises on both sides left important issues of policy, and responsibilities for execution, unresolved.
Supervision teams from the donors frequently laid bare basic differences in the perception of projects.
However, when these differences were revealed it was difficult to know which side feared cancelling the project most — ironically it might be the donor with its vested interest in a cumulative increase in annual disbursements, rather than the government with several hundred projects of which at least a half could be in the same state.
The move to lending in the 1980s for ‘adjustment’, and away from projects, has replaced a set of conditions closely tied to projects with a set tied to broader conditions affecting a whole economy, or large sectors within it.
This has not removed the scope for profound disagreement about the relevance of such conditions.
The problems of ‘switching resources’ and corruption have to be added to the issue of a basic ambiguity.
In the first case aid has frequently freed government revenue for purposes very different to those the donors would support (a new presidential palace, a larger army, a new capital city); in the second case corruption has affected the allocation of contracts in ways which damage project execution.
The donors are at fault on the issues of coordination, volatility, tying of aid to a donor country's goods and blinkered evaluation of the impact of aid as a whole.
The evident conclusion is that the policy basis on which aid has been given to Africa has not been fulfilled.
Aid is now essential to Africa as any kind of external finance is essential: it is a means of paying for imports which would otherwise not be bought, about half of which are capital goods necessary for the maintenance of assets, badly depreciated after years of neglect.
This seldom adds up to a coherent investment plan, but may be more simply described as a way of keeping things going until better days arrive.
We cannot confuse the kind of economic drip-feed which aid has become with its bold objectives as originally conceived; self-sustaining growth is a mirage which is now more elusive than ever.
The Prospects for Progress
Africa is now littered with the discarded blueprints of the last quarter of a century.
These have ranged from the emotional, continent-wide vision of Kwame Nkrumah (‘Africa must unite’), to Julius Nyerere's target of ‘socialism in one country’, to the hard boiled ‘Africa needs Europe’ school of Houphouet Boigny and Kenyatta.
Each of these visions has left its own particular legacy, some transparently more successful than others, but all falling short of their original promise.
There are still visionaries in Africa, even on the grand scale, but they are increasingly on the sidelines of political life.
Contemporary blueprints focus on the next three years, and their targets are modest, if not downright pessimistic.
This book has concentrated on the political and social values of Africa today, and traced their evolution over more than a century.
It has also shown that they are only a part of the explanation of Africa's problems; a difficult agricultural base, the inequalities of the world trading system, the sometimes exploitative role of multinational companies have also had a major part to play.
However, the relevance of these technical, physical and economic problems to development is discussed infinitely more frequently than the political and social context in which they are found.
Leading African civil servants entrusted with the day-to-day execution of policy over the last twenty years know that these are not necessarily the major problems.
Philip Ndegwa is a highly respected former governor of the Central Bank of Kenya.
In 1986 he wrote:
There is no magic in the process of economic and social development of nations which enables instant transformation.
Development can only be achieved over time, and more often than not along a difficult path.
This is because…the process of development involves not only the production of more goods and services but also the transformation of the society itself, including the establishment of new institutions, social systems, rules and values.
…This means that the social traditions, values and attitudes which exist in any society cannot be brushed aside.
The open discussion of these issues in Africa is difficult, since they reach into the heart of political life.
Furthermore, their policy implications may be quite limited since they define the environment, and condition people's behaviour within it, but are frequently outside the area of influence of planners, civil servants and aid-donors.
Nonetheless, they have to be embraced as a first step in understanding the limits to where Africa may be in another twenty-five or even fifty years.
THE CURRENT POLITICAL DYNAMIC
Economic recovery is not at the top of the political agenda in African countries today.
It is secondary to the political priorities of preserving specific presidents in power and the patronage system associated with them.
These priorities imply, on the domestic front, the attempt to maintain a continuing powerful role for the state, the economic dominance of a fairly small elite and an indifference to the welfare of rural peasant farmers, complicated as this may be by political loyalties to certain tribal groups.
In relation to the outside world they imply a wariness to foreign investors, and an ambivalence to foreign aid in so far as investors and aid donors may undermine the autonomy of the government.
The result is that major segments of the population — sometimes a majority, sometimes a minority — will continue to experience a sense of deprivation, and to be in permanent opposition to the government.
The Ibos in Nigeria and the Bamilike in Cameroun are both groups who in the 1950s and 1960s respectively made a bid for predominant national power; they failed, and continue to feel excluded from the political mainstream of their countries.
The identity of such marginal groups has sometimes changed, as presidents change: the Kikuyu were ‘in’ under Kenyatta and are ‘out’under President Moi; the Bemba were ‘in’under President Kaunda in the 1960s, but have been ‘out’since Simon Kapwepwe broke away in 1971.
A sense of deprivation of a different kind continues to smoulder amongst the immigrant groups of Indian, Lebanese and Europeans, especially in Kenya and Zimbabwe, who feel that their economic position may be attacked, or re-attacked, at any time.
Though not in permanent opposition, their loyalty to the government of the day is shallow.
This sense of deprivation has spilled over into civil conflict or war a sufficient number of times for it to be a continuing threat, or an on-going reality as in Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Burundi, Uganda and Somalia.
The civil war between Renamo guerillas and the government in Mozambique also reflects this sense of deprivation — Renamo has been particularly strong amongst the Makonde of the north, who were most affected by the communal village programme of the 1970s.
In Angola the support for Jonas Savimbi's UNITA has been stronger amongst the Ovimbundu people of the central plateau than amongst the rest of the population.
While civil conflicts of this kind should diminish in the next twenty-five years as African states mature, they will not disappear.
For what is now at stake is not the acceptance of the artificial boundaries imposed by the colonial powers, but the distribution of opportunity within them.
No African country has managed to escape from the pattern of its past history, but in the late 1980s certain common characteristics can be seen among the more successful countries, notably Kenya, Cameroun and Botswana.
First, the leadership has been consistently tough and pragmatic.
Kenyatta and Ahidjo were nationalists first, and localists second although both went to great lengths to secure their political base amongst their own ethnic group.
In the 1960s Kenyatta manipulated sales of formerly white-owned land and businesses in such a way as to create a new class of Kenyan capitalists to replace the old white capitalists, in a no-nonsense determination to both preserve the private sector and to transfer its ownership into African hands.
This was the decisive factor in determining Kenya's subsequent political and economic direction.
In the early 1960s Ahidjo considered that he faced two key problems in Cameroun: first, preventing the economic hegemony of the Bamilike; and second, preventing a breakdown between the English- and French-speaking parts of the country.
He tackled the first by systematically awarding government contracts to northern businessmen (former traders) from his own area of Garoua and the second by insisting that schools and the civil service must be bilingual, a policy which has been extremely successful.
These policies were pursued with great determination and consistency, and Ahidjo was remarkably successful in holding Cameroun, with its 300 recognized languages, together.
This success was built on a medieval system of security and detention which caused numerous ‘disappearances’.
The second characteristic of these more successful countries follows from the first: government has been strong, and has continued to function.
A necessary condition of this is that there has been sufficient money to enable it to function (barely true for instance in Zaire, and parts of Nigeria and Tanzania in the 1980s), and that civil strife has been contained, sometimes ruthlessly.
Ensuring sufficient money to finance the government machine has been a by-product of the third characteristic: maintaining savings and investment, which in all three cases (Kenya, Cameroun and Botswana) have risen substantially since 1960, to about 25 per cent of the output of the economy in 1986.
This is because government has never lost sight of the primacy of production, and has been able to avoid excessive borrowing to pay for it — in Cameroun because of the availability of oil, and in Kenya as a result of the low-key transfer of assets into African hands without any disruption in production.
In Botswana, government has consistently decided to live with the mining companies, rather than nationalize them or even seek to control them.
Instead it has, for instance, taken a $400 million shareholding (6 per cent of issued share capital) in the traded stock of DeBeers Consolidated the diamond marketing company, and two seats on DeBeers' Board, thus indirectly giving it a shareholding in the giant Anglo-American mining house.
The fourth characteristic of each of the three countries is that they have had the luck to avoid the worst of the droughts which have badly affected agriculture and hydro-electric power supplies in many African countries in the 1970s and 1980s.
While the north of Cameroun has been badly affected, its key productive areas lie in the high rainfall zones of the western highlands; in Kenya the old colonial rule-of-thumb that one year in five will be a year of drought has been sustained, and lean years have been followed by bumper crops.
In Botswana, the negative effects of low rainfall years are offset by the consequent increased sale of livestock, much of which is exported to high-value EC markets, since Botswana's urban meat-eating population is small.
Do these three relatively successful countries provide any kind of signpost to the rest of Africa?
The answer can be only a muted ‘yes’ since the economic foundations of most African countries, and the size and distribution of their population is very different to the situation prevailing in the early 1960s.
Most countries now have to build on an economy in which the productive assets are very run down, and even more importantly, in which a political consensus remains elusive.
THE INDIVIDUAL FUTURE
An awareness of politics grows out of individuals' perception of the world around them, and earlier in this book some of the main contributing factors to an African perception of the world, notwithstanding Africa's great diversity, were sketched.
The political future will largely depend on how these perceptions develop, and it is not impossible to gauge that development.
At the level of the individual the following trends are likely.
First, much more variety and less conformity and subservience in individual views.
Respect for elders, already severely weakened, will further diminish.
In the rural areas, family and tribal loyalties will continue to be important and religion and superstition will continue to play a major role.
In the urban areas, where a third of Africa's population will soon live, tribal loyalties will for the most part diminish, but will for many years exist in parallel with other loyalties.
These loyalties are increasingly to a myriad of individual community groups and associations, concerned with religion, education, savings and credit, trade and various forms of self-help.
Sometimes they are organized on a tribal basis, sometimes they embrace people from a number of different tribes.
They cut across class and gender, though women's groups almost certainly out-number those of the men.
Trade unions play a part within these associations but, since their function is nearly entirely within the formal sector — which employs only a small proportion of the population — they play a relatively minor role.
Purely tribal loyalties will eventually be neither more nor less than the regional loyalties of Europe, of the Scots to Scotland or the Bavarians to Bavaria.
They will last longest where tribal life has always been urban, for instance amongst the Asante in Kumasi, or the Yoruba in Ibadan.
Commitment not only to the extended family but also to the nuclear, two-parent family will diminish as men fail to adjust to the aspirations of educated women, and more women follow the long-established practice in coastal west Africa of running their own households.
As tribal culture weakens, status and power will come to be less connected with an outward demonstration of wealth, and this may pave the way for a more powerful generation of entrepreneurs as specific commercial objectives come to supersede those of status.
THE ECONOMIC FUTURE
The key to future economic growth in Africa lies in the markets which are being created as towns and cities expand.
Most estimates suggest that such urban centres are growing at five or six per cent a year.
At this rate a third of the population will be living in towns by the year 2000.
Such concentrations of population are frequently regarded as a burden on food supplies, and as a factor likely to worsen the balance of payments as consumer goods and food are sucked in from abroad, either openly or clandestinely.
In fact, the individual migrants who participate in this urban migration manage to generate income which is more attractive to them than the income they would have earned by remaining in the rural areas.
Furthermore, the goods they consume, from food to furniture, are either currently produced by informal sector artisans, or have the potential to be produced in this way.
In a great city like Ibadan a flour made from cassava, known as gari, is the basic foodstuff and armies of hard working women perform the task of transforming the cassava into gari ; clothes and basic furniture, as discussed in Chapter 10, are all made by local artisans.
The result of the migration process is therefore a steady increase in the demand for purchased products, since most rural families will grow their own food, and make much of their domestic equipment.
The value of this market today is probably about $30 billion per year; by the year 2000 it will be $70 billion.
The ability of small-scale producers, whether farmers or artisans, to meet this market has become much clearer in the economic conditions of the 1980s.
The rural community has produced more food than ever before, although not yet enough.
Significant shifts of production have occurred from export crops, such as coffee and cocoa, to food crops for the domestic market, and the trend towards such shifts is likely to continue.
This can be seen in countries as different as Tanzania and Cameroun.
An expansion of production will also come from the use of land which is now sparsely populated.
Artisans will develop their ability to diversify their products and achieve limited improvements in their technology.
As the urban economy grows the official export of primary agricultural commodities will increase only at a very modest rate, if at all.
The principal characteristic of African economies in the next fifty years will then be an urban market which will in aggregate be very valuable but will have a low income per head.
This market will be appropriate to the skills and operating style of both the farmers and artisans who will meet its demands.
For the most part, the scale of production will not expand into larger-scale corporate enterprises because of the cultural factors which make larger-scale business organization difficult throughout Africa.
The output of such small-scale producers will not only be sold on local markets but also across national frontiers.
Cross-border trade in both foodstuffs and consumer goods is a growing phenomenon, though still largely unrecorded and outside the influence of official regional economic associations, such as the Preferential Trade Area, which now nominally embraces seventeen countries of central and east Africa.
Inside this framework the existing modern sector may well struggle for survival.
Large-scale, publicly-owned enterprises will breathe their last gasp and wither away well before the state which spawned them.
Large-scale, private businesses in manufacturing, geared to relatively high-value consumer products, will find little room for expansion as the incomes of most urban consumers continue to be very modest.
This situation will not prove attractive to multinational companies or other sources of off-shore private investment, and the current trend towards disinvestment is likely to continue.
Projects where a specific commodity is in international demand will prove an exception to this; such demand may prove to be strongest in other parts of the developing world, particularly Asia.
In general multinationals will be on the defensive, and they will seek to minimize their risk by continuing to negotiate management and royalty contracts which guarantee a minimum income.
This will leave entrepreneurs from local minority communities in a strong position as the owners of existing fairly well managed productive assets, and as the suppliers of intermediate goods to small-scale producers.
In those countries where there is no political backlash against them, such entrepreneurs are likely to continue to be key players in the domestic economy.
In this situation it will be difficult to generate manufactured or processed exports since the expertise to produce competitively for international markets will be in short supply, though some countries such as Zimbabwe will be able to build on their existing export base.
The unfavourable prospect for exports is perhaps the most damaging of Africa's economic weaknesses since it implies continued dependence on unstable, and on the whole, unfavourable commodity markets.
Behind this instability lies the simple fact that for many commodities such as coffee and ground-nuts, demand in the industrialized world with its stable population has probably reached saturation point.
These developments will continue to leave governments in an increasingly exposed position.
The difficulties of collecting taxes from millions of small-scale urban and rural producers wilt ensure that revenues continue to be inadequate in relation to the expectation of services such as universal primary and secondary education, health services, and transportation.
An increasing proportion of these services will be provided by local communities on a fee-paying basis.
Such groups are also likely to reinforce their existing role in the mobilization of savings, and it will be in mutual savings organizations, rather than formal financial institutions, that small-scale producers will find access to credit.
As a result of the limited increase in exports most governments will continue to experience serious balance of payments difficulties, although in some countries sometimes offset by earnings from minerals such as oil and diamonds.
Nonetheless, unofficial exports between neighbouring countries are likely to continue to increase, but to go largely unrecorded.
Economies will gradually become more interdependent, particularly between food deficit and food surplus countries, and the migration of labour between countries is likely to increase.
THE POLITICAL FUTURE
The growth of this economy of small-scale urban production will, over fifty years, change the face of African politics.
The prevalence of many countervailing centres of influence to government, in the form of local associations will in the long-term make it increasingly difficult for governments to concentrate all power in their hands.
Thus the regime of one-party states, nearly always achieved at considerable cost to those out of sympathy with the dominant party, will cause increasing resentment.
As a greater range of individual views prevails, so the poverty of policy choices made by a virtually self-selected group of politicians will become less and less acceptable.
However, the response of governments is likely to be more and more dogmatic, and be driven by considerations of ‘security’; there will be little willingness by those in power to defer to differing views even when these are held by a majority.
Current experience from countries as diverse as Kenya and Mozambique confirms this.
In 1988 the Kenyan government openly considered abolishing the secret ballot in order to dissuade opposition voters from declaring their position.
For ten years Frelimo, the ruling party in Mozambique, has operated a system by which party members are publicly elected by each community in a manner which effectively rules out those who may have opposing views.
In the 1988 elections to the National Assembly in Cameroun, the two alternative lists of candidates, under a proportional representation system, were consistently doctored to make them indistinguishable from each other.
The basis of support for this pattern of continued authoritarian government will become less localist, simply because of the size of the urban population, and because tribal identities will continue to break down in an urban environment.
In rural areas politics will continue to be highly localist, but the tribal connotations of localism will gradually be reduced.
For some time threats to governments will continue to come primarily from those already close to power.
As with the pre-colonial chitumukulu of the Bemba, heads of state will fear members of their senior council more than the dispossessed of the shanty town or the rural hamlet.
Neither will they hand over power gracefully to an elected successor; the transfer of power will continue to be an abrasive, coup-ridden business.
To the public at large faith in the political process, already at a low ebb, will diminish further.
Strong individual faith in Islam and Christianity will provide an outlet for social energies rejected by formal politics.
Since women's role in politics will be restricted by the same male attitudes which militate against equality in the home, the Christian churches will continue to be particularly attractive to them.
With Islam, however, there will be important links between the strength of the mosques and the political complexion of government, as has always existed between the Murid Brotherhood and the government of Senegal, and as the introduction of Sharia Law in Sudan in 1983, and the strength of fundamentalist movements in northern Nigeria indicates.
Eventually, as has already occurred with Islam in some countries, these countervailing centres of power will challenge governments and sometimes gain control over them.
Changes in these attitudes and practices will be the result of a long political process which will certainly take more than a century to work out, and even then will probably compress the time which it took Europe to work through comparable processes.
Democratization will come gradually as the new urban interest groups flex their muscles as alternative centres of power.
In this respect Nigeria may be the key reference point, because its enormous population of more than 100 million will continue to force it into constitutional experiments, because its press has seldom been effectively muzzled, and because its leaders have never acquired the absolute power of many neighbouring heads of state.
The uneven course of this process of political evolution, and the fact that neighbouring countries will be at different stages within it, will continue to make official regional co-operation between countries very difficult.
So long as a head of state — and thus his circle of patronage — can change quite unexpectedly, multi-country regional groupings will have to overcome major political as well as economic problems.
In southern Africa, such regional groups will do little to counteract the internal political frailty of the countries in the area, and as a result South Africa will have plenty of opportunity to pursue malevolent policies of destabilization if it chooses to do so.
IMPLICATIONS FOR AFRICA'S DONORS
The aid programme, as it has developed over the last thirty years, has failed in terms of its original objective, i.e. the promotion of a pattern of economic growth in which the injection of external finance on soft terms was no longer necessary.
Together with the credits provided by export credit agencies, much of it for military hardware, this policy has culminated in the late 1980s in the accumulation of a mountain of debt which cannot be serviced on the original schedule of payments.
The underlying causes of Africa's economic weakness imply that the current pattern of structural adjustment lending will also not break the cycle of dependency on aid.
The latter has become a form of economic drip-feed of dubious value to the patient, although it has maintained economic activity at a higher level than would otherwise be the case.
Should donors continue to lend?
Recognition by creditor institutions and governments of the impracticability of Africa servicing its accumulated debt has led to very significant rescheduling arrangements since 1985.
In that year about 21 per cent of all Africa's earnings from exports were accounted for by payment of principal and interest on debt; by 1987 the figure had fallen to 14 per cent and was likely to decrease further.
This has cleared the way for a re-appraisal of aid policies.
Aid has created such artificial divisions within what should be normal national programmes of health care or agriculture that it now obstructs the development of such programmes on a country-wide basis.
It would be much more constructive for a consortium of donors to sit down with governments and review their need for aid finance over, say, the next three-year period.
Such a review would cover the direction of government policy in all important areas of the economy, including its view of the role of the private sector.
If the consortium agreed to support the overall programme funds would be given, on an agreed schedule, providing the strategies were retained.
They would not be tied to the goods of donor countries, and all funds from national sources should be in the form of grants (already the case for a majority of donors).
It would be far more useful to Africa to have a smaller amount of total aid on this basis, than to retain the present system where thinking and strategy is dominated by donors, to the extent that national governments have almost lost control over public initiatives in their own countries.
THE INTERNAL STRUGGLE
It is likely that Africa is now moving into a phase in which the rest of the world is less interested in her affairs.
The problem of servicing debt is already, in practice, less severe than it was in the early and mid 1980s.
Relaxation of the international cold war has meant that military intervention by powerful countries from either the western or eastern blocs — from Cuba to France — will be much less frequent.
Even South Africa may decide that the returns from supporting such organizations as Renamo in Mozambique are extremely slim.
Africa will, then, be thrown increasingly inward on herself, and have increasingly less reason to blame the rest of the world for her problems.
These will only be resolved in the course of an internal struggle, which will eventually produce governments neither more nor less enlightened than, for instance, those which have ruled over western Europe for the last five hundred years.
In the course of this struggle African governments will deal harshly with their opposition, keep power at the centre, and entertain corruption as a normality.
While advised to look outwards, and open their economies to trade and investment, they will feel compelled to look inwards as the competition on international markets appears unequal.
Attempts by both India and China to open their economies in the 1980s have resulted in a tug-of-war between their economic liberals and economic conservatives, which shows every sign of ending either in stalemate or in a victory for the conservatives.
If these richly-endowed giants of the developing world are barely equal to the task of liberalization, Africa is much less equipped for the challenge, and much less prepared to face it.
She can only equip herself to face the world from a secure position when she has developed an internal strength which will come from the accumulation of power by centres of growth which lie far outside the existing bureaucracies of government, party and presidential palace.
Then out will go the difficult legacies of hierarchial government, clan loyalties, arbitrary succession and the adjustment to a money-based, urban-led culture.
In this way, in as little as a hundred years, Africa's doubts about herself — now so prevalent — may finally be removed.