

As he weakened, Moran became afraid of his daughters.
This once powerful man was so implanted in their lives that they had never really left Great Meadow, in spite of jobs and marriages and children and houses of their own in Dublin and London.
Now they could not let him slip away.
‘You'll have to shape up, Daddy.
You can't go on like this.
You're giving us no help.
We can't get you better on our own.’
‘Who cares?
Who cares anyhow?’
‘We care.
We all care very much.’
They all came at Christmas.
After Christmas, Mona, the one girl who had not married, came every weekend from Dublin.
Sometimes Sheila got away from her family to come with her and she drove down for a few hours as well as now and again in the middle of the week.
The air fare from London was too expensive for Maggie to come regularly.
Michael, their younger brother, had promised to come from London at Easter but Luke, the eldest, still would not come.
All three girls planned to come to revive Monaghan Day.
They had to explain to their stepmother Rose what Monaghan Day was.
She had never heard of it in all her time in the house.
The end-of-February fair in Mohill was Monaghan Day.
McQuaid came every year to the house on Monaghan Day.
He and Moran had fought in the same flying column in the war.
McQuaid always drank a bottle of whiskey in the house when he came.
‘If we could revive Monaghan Day for Daddy it could help to start him back to himself.
Monaghan Day meant the world to him once.’
‘I'm sure Daddy was far from delighted to see a bottle of whiskey drank in the house,’ Rose was doubtful about the whole idea.
‘He never minded McQuaid drinking the whiskey.
You wouldn't get McQuaid to the house without whiskey.’
They clung so tenaciously to the idea that Rose felt she couldn't stand in their way.
Moran was not to be told.
They wanted it to come as a sudden surprise — jolt.
Against all reason they felt it could turn his slow decline around like a Lourdes' miracle.
Forgotten was the fearful nail-biting exercise Monaghan Day had always been for the whole house; with distance it had become large, heroic, blood-mystical, something from which the impossible could be snatched.
Maggie flew over from London on the morning of the Day.
Mona and Sheila met her at Dublin Airport and the three sisters drove to Great Meadow in Mona's car.
They did not hurry.
With the years they had drawn closer.
Apart, they could be breathtakingly sharp on the others' shortcomings but together their individual selves gathered into something very close to a single presence.
On the tides of Dublin or London they were hardly more than specks of froth but together they were the aristocratic Morans of Great Meadow, a completed world, Moran's daughters.
Each scrap of news any one of them had about themselves or their immediate family — child, husband, dog, cat, Bendix dishwasher, a new dress or pair of shoes, the price of every article they bought — was as fascinating to each other as if it were their very own; and any little thing out of Great Meadow was pure binding.
Together they were the opposite of women who will nod and nod as they pretend to listen to another, waiting for the first pause of breath to muscle in with the growing pains and glories of their own house, the impatience showing on their faces as they wait.
Mullingar was passed and they felt they had hardly said a word to one another.
At the hotel in Longford they broke the journey to have tea and sandwiches, and just as the winter light began to fail they were turning in the open gate under the poisonous yew tree.
In spite of their wish to make the visit a surprise, Rose had told Moran they were arriving.
‘They must think I'm on the way out.’
‘The opposite,’ she reassured.
‘But they think you should be getting far better.’
‘How can they all manage to get away together like that?’
‘It must have fallen that way.
Isn't it worth getting dressed up for once?’
‘Who cares now anyhow?’ he said automatically but changed into his brown suit.
His face was flushed with excitement when they came.
In their nervousness they offered at once the gifts they had brought: tea, fruit, duty-free whiskey —‘It'll be useful to have in the house even if nobody drinks it and we might need a glass’— a printed silk headscarf, thick fur gloves.
‘What did you want to bring anything to me for?’
He always disliked having to accept presents.
‘You were complaining at Christmas that your hands were always cold, Daddy.’
as if to turn attention away from the continual coldness of his hands, he pulled on the gloves comically and pretended to grope about the room with them like a blind man.
‘The gloves are only for when you go out.
I'm afraid all this excitement is going to your head, Daddy.’
Rose, laughing, took the gloves away as he pretended to need them to wear about the house.
‘I haven't discovered yet what brought out all the troops,’ he said when the laughing stopped.
‘Don't you remember the day it is?
Monaghan Day!
The day when McQuaid always used to come from the fair in Mohill and we had to make the big tea.’
‘What's that got to do with anything?’ just as he resented gifts he resented any dredging up of the past.
He demanded that the continuing present he felt his life to be should not be shadowed or challenged.
‘We thought it was as good an excuse as any and we were all able to get away at the same time.
So here we are.’
‘It was a poor excuse then.
McQuaid was a drunken blackguard who was with me in the war.
I felt sorry for him.
If I didn't give him a square meal on Monaghan Day he'd drink himself stupid in Mohill.’
‘They've come all this way to see you and is that all the welcome they get,’ Rose chided gently.
‘Who cares about poor McQuaid, God rest him, he's long gone.’
‘Who cares about anything now anyhow?’ he demanded.
‘We care.
We care very much.
We love you.’
‘God help your wits then.
Pay no attention to me.
I wrote to that older brother of yours, ‘My capabilities are of little matter now’, but I suppose I might be as well off writing to myself for all the answer I'm likely to get.’
He went silent and dark and withdrew into himself, the two thumbs rotating about one another as he sat in the car chair by the fire.
A quick glance between Rose and the girls was enough for them to know that it was better to make no mention of their elder brother.
They began to busy themselves cheerfully with preparations for the meal, one or other of them constantly trying to engage Moran with this small thing or that, until he was drawn by their uncanny tact into the general cheerfulness.
When they finally sat down to the meal it was Moran himself who brought McQuaid back into the day.
‘McQuaid wasn't a bad sort but he was misfortunate with the drink.
The interesting thing about him is that he was one of those people who always turn out to be lucky no matter what they do.
When he started to buy he knew nothing about cattle.
Yet he made a fortune.
Those people always get on better in the world than decent men.’
‘His great hour was when he dressed up as the newspaper boy and went to meet the train,’ Sheila said tentatively.
She had heard it every year on Monaghan Day for years but she was unsure if Moran would allow any talk of the war.
He generally went stone-silent whenever it was mentioned.
‘He was lucky in that too and he had no nerves.’
‘He always said you were the whole brains of the column.
That everything they ever went into was planned by you, down to the last detail,’ Mona was emboldened to add.
‘I'd gone to school longer than the others.
To the Latin school in Moyne.
I could read maps, calculate distances.
You'd never think it but McQuaid, like many of the others, was more or less illiterate though he could add and subtract quick enough when it concerned his pocket.
It was easy to get the name of brains in those days.’
as if he suddenly wanted to return the girls' favour on this Monaghan Day, he spoke to them openly about the war for the first time in their lives.
‘The English didn't seem to know right what they were doing.
I think they were just going through the motions of what had worked before.
Look at the train business.
Imagine having a brass band meet a colonel in the middle of the bogs with the whole countryside up in arms.
A child wouldn't do it.
‘Don't let anybody fool you.
It was a bad business.
We didn't shoot at women and children like the Tans but we were a bunch of killers.
We got very good but there was hardly a week when some of us wasn't killed.
Of the twenty-two men in the original column only seven were alive at the Truce.
We were never sure we'd be alive from one day to the next.
Don't let them pull wool over your eyes.
The war was the cold, the wet, standing to your neck in a drain for a whole night with bloodhounds on your trail, not knowing how you could manage the next step toward the end of a long march.
That was the war: not when the band played and a bloody politician stepped forward to put flowers on the ground.
‘What did we get for it?
A country, if you'd believe them.
Some of our own johnnies in the top jobs instead of a few Englishmen.
More than half of my own family work in England.
What was it all for?
The whole thing was a cod.’
‘They say you should have gone to the very top in the army after the war but you were stopped.
McQuaid always said they set out to stop you,’ Sheila said with borrowed vehemence.
‘I was stopped all right but it wasn't as simple as poor McQuaid made out.
In an army in peacetime you have to arselick and know the right people if you want to get on.
I was never any good at getting on with people.
You should all know that by now,’ he said half humorously.
There were tears in the girls' eyes as they tried to smile back.
Rose was quiet and watchful.
‘For people like McQuaid and myself the war was the best part of our lives.
Things were never so simple and clear again.
I think we never rightly got the hang of it afterwards.
It was better if it had never happened.
Tired now.
You were all great girls to travel such distances to see one sick old man.’
He took his beads from the small purse.
They hung loose from his hand.
‘Anyhow it no longer matters to you or to me, but whoever has the last laugh in the whole business is going to have to spend a hell of a length of time laughing.
We have to try to work as best we can and pray .’
He looked so strained and tired that they offered to say the Rosary in his room but he brushed the offer aside.
He knelt as erect as ever at the table.
‘Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips,’ he called.
When he came to the Dedication he paused as if searching.
Then, in a sudden flash that he was sometimes capable of, he acknowledged his daughters' continuing goodwill and love, love that usually he seemed inherently unable to return.
‘Tonight we offer up this Holy Rosary for the repose of the soul of James McQuaid.’
When the prayers were ended the three girls kissed him goodnight in turn, and Rose went with him to their room.
The girls started to wash up and tidy; very soon the litter of the evening was cleared away, the room made ready for breakfast.
When Rose saw the table already set for morning, she said, ‘If you were around for too long I'd be spoiled rotten.
I don't know what anybody else is having but I'm going to be bad tonight and have a cigarette and hot whiskey.
You all took Daddy out of himself tonight.
That all of you managed to come meant the world to Daddy.’
The next morning they were idling in the luxury of a long breakfast, enjoying the chatting in the warmth of the room, the tussocks in the white field outside the window stiff with frost, the only green grass the huge dark circles under the cypress trees, when a single shotgun blast came from the front room.
They looked at one another in fear, moving quickly as one person to the room.
He was standing at the open window in his pyjamas, the shotgun in his hand, staring out at the front field where the black splash of a jackdaw lay on the white ground beneath the ash tree.
‘Are you all right, Daddy?’ they called out.
When it was clear that he was, Rose cried, ‘You frightened the life out of us, Daddy.’
‘That bloody bird has been annoying me for days.’
‘You'll get your death of cold standing there at the open window,’ Maggie complained and Rose brought the window down.
‘You didn't miss anyhow.’
Rose was intent on laughing away the incongruity of the situation.
‘I don't think Daddy ever missed,’ Mona said.
‘The closest I ever got to any man was when I had him in the sights of the rifle and I never missed.’
The voice was so absent and tired that it took some of the chill from the words.
He allowed Rose to take the gun away but not before he had removed the empty shell.
He dressed and had breakfast with them at the table.
The gun was returned to its usual place in the comer of the room and no more mention was made of the dead jackdaw.
‘Tired again,’ he said simply after an hour and went back to his room.
Maggie was taking a plane to London that night and Sheila and Mona were driving her to the airport.
The two girls would not be back till the following weekend.
Moran stood with Rose in the doorway watching the car drive away.
He waved weakly after the car but he did not speak as Rose shut the door and they turned back into the house.
Monaghan Day had revived nothing but a weak fanciful ghost of what had been.
After Easter and many other alarms, when none of the girls was able to be in Great Meadow, Rose had her sister buy a brown Franciscan habit in the town.
In spite of the hush and emptiness of the house, the two women smuggled the habit in like thieves and later that evening Rose hid it among her most intimate articles of clothing in a part of the wardrobe that Moran never opened.
The attempt to revive Monaghan Day was a gesture as weak as a couple who marry in order to try to retrieve a lost relationship, the mind having changed the hard actual fact into what was comfortable to feel.
On the last Monaghan Day that McQuaid came to the house Moran was on edge as he waited for him as he had been on edge every Monaghan Day, the only day in the year that McQuaid came to Great Meadow.
Since morning he had been in and out of the kitchen where Maggie and Mona were cleaning and tidying and preparing for the big meal.
Though Maggie was eighteen, tall and attractive, she was still as much in awe of Moran as when she had been a child.
Mona, two years younger, was the more likely to clash with him, but this day she agreed to be ruled by Maggie's acquiescence.
Sheila, a year younger still, was too self-centred and bright ever to challenge authority on poor ground and she pretended to be sick in order to escape the tension of the day.
Alone, the two girls were playful as they went about their tasks, mischievous at times, even carefully boisterous; but as soon as their father came in they would sink into a beseeching drabness, cower as close to being invisible as they could.
‘How do the lamb chops look?’ he demanded again.
‘Are these the best lamb chops you could get?
Haven't I told you time in and time out never — never — to get lamb chops anywhere but from Kavanagh's?
Has everything to be drummed in a hundred times?
God, why is nothing ever made clear in this house?
Everything has to be dragged out of everybody.’
‘Kavanagh said the steak wasn't great but that the lamb was good,’ Maggie added but Moran was already on his way out again, muttering that not even simple things were made clear in this house and if simple things couldn't be made clear how was a person ever to get from one day to the next in this world.
The two girls were quiet for a long time after the door closed; then suddenly, unaccountably, they started to push one another, boisterously mimicking Moran: ‘God, O God, what did I do to deserve such a crowd?
Gawd, O Gawd, not even the simple things are made clear,’ falling into chairs laughing.
A loud imperious knocking came on the tongued boards of the ceiling in the middle of the rowdy relief.
They stopped to listen and as they did the knocking stopped.
‘She's no more sick than my big toe.
Whenever there's a whiff of trouble she takes to her bed with the asthma.
She has books and sweets hidden up there,’ Mona said.
They waited in silence until the knocking resumed, insistent and angry.
‘Boohoo!’ they responded.
‘Boohoo!
Boohoo!
Boohoo!’
The knocking made the boards of the ceiling tremble.
She was using a boot or shoe.
‘Boohoo!’ they echoed.
‘Boohoo!
Boohoo!’
The stairs creaked.
In a moment Sheila stood angrily framed in the doorway.
‘I've been knocking for ages and all ye do is laugh up at me.’
‘We never heard.
We'd laugh up at nobody.’
‘Ye heard only too well.
I'm going to tell Daddy on the pair of ye.’
‘Boohoo!’ they repeated.
‘You think I'm joking.
You'll pay for this before it's over.’
‘What do you want?’
‘I'm sick and you won't even bring up a drink.’
They gave her a jug of barley water and a clean glass.
‘You know what day it is and McQuaid is coming from the mart.
He's in and out like a devil.
You can't expect us to dance attendance up the stairs as well.
If he comes in and sees you like that in the door he'll have something to say,’ Maggie said but Sheila slipped back upstairs before she finished.
They draped the starched white tablecloth over the big deal table.
The room was wonderfully warm, the hotplate of the stove glowing a faint orange.
They began to set the table, growing relaxed and easy, enjoying the formality of the room, when Moran came in again from the fields.
This time he stood in the centre of the room, plainly unsure as to what had brought him in, his eye searching around for something to fasten on, like someone in mid-speech forgetting what they had to say.
‘Is everything all right?’
‘Everything is all right, Daddy.’
No sooner had the door closed than Mona, released from the tension of his presence, let slip a plate from her hands.
They stood watching dumbly in horrible fascination after it shattered.
Quickly they swept up the pieces and hid them away, wondering how they would replace the plate without being found out.
‘Don't worry,’ Maggie comforted Mona who was still pale with shock.
‘We'll find some way round it.’
They were too sick at heart to mimic or mock this mood away.
Anything broken had to be hidden until it could be replaced or forgotten.
Outside it was cold but there was no rain.
It was always cold on Monaghan Day, the traditional day poor farmers sold their winter stock and the rich farmers bought them for fattening.
Moran was neither rich nor poor but his hatred and fear of poverty was as fierce as his fear of illness which meant that he would never be poor but that he and all around him would live as if they were paupers.
Moran had no work in the fields but still he stayed outside in the cold, looking at hedges, examining walls, counting cattle.
He was too excited to be able to stay indoors.
As the light began to fail he retreated into the shelter of the fir plantation to watch the road for McQuaid's car.
If McQuaid had a big order to fill he mightn't come till after dark.
The light was almost gone when the white Mercedes came slowly along the road and turned into the open gate under the yew tree.
Moran did not move even after the car stopped.
In fact, he instinctively stepped backwards into the plantation as the car door was thrown open.
Without moving he watched McQuaid struggle from the car and then stand leaning on the open door as if waiting for someone to appear.
He could have called out from where he stood but he did not.
McQuaid slammed the car door and walked towards the house.
Not until he was several minutes within the house did Moran leave the plantation.
He came slowly and deliberately across the fields to the back door.
Though he had lived for weeks for this hour he now felt a wild surge of resentment towards McQuaid as he came into his own house.
McQuaid was seated in the armchair by the fire.
His powerful trunk and huge belly filled the chair and the yellow cattleman's boots were laced halfway up the stout legs.
He did not rise from the chair or acknowledge Moran's entrance in any way except to direct the flirting banter he was having with the girls to Moran.
‘These girls are blooming.
You better have your orchards well fenced or you'll be out of apples by October.’
The words were said with such good humour and aggressive sureness that it would have been impossible to take offence.
Moran hardly heard; all resentment left him as quickly as it had come: McQuaid was here and it was Monaghan Day.
‘Michael.’
McQuaid reached out of the chair and took Moran's hand in a firm grip.
‘Jimmy.’
Moran responded with the same simplicity.
‘Have you been here long?’
‘Not long.
I had a fine talk with these girls.
They are great girls.’
Moran walked across to the curtained press where he kept medicines and took out a glass and a full bottle of Redbreast.
He poured out a large measure of the whiskey and brought it to McQuaid.
Maggie placed a jug of spring water on the table.
‘Say when,’ Moran poured the water into the glass.
McQuaid held out the glass until it was three-quarters full.
‘You'll need it after the mart,’ Moran said.
‘I don't need it but I'll do much better than that.
I'll enjoy it.
Good luck everybody.’
‘How did it go?’
Moran asked with a heartiness that didn't suit him.
‘The same as every other Monaghan Day,’ McQuaid said.
‘Was it good or bad?’
Moran continued.
‘It was neither good nor bad.
It was money.
All the farmers think their cattle are special but all I ever see is money.
If a beast is around or below a certain sum of money I buy.
If it goes over that I'm out.’
‘I've often watched you in the past and wondered how you know exactly the right time to enter the bidding, the right time to leave,’ Moran praised.
His fascination with McQuaid's mastery of his own world was boyish.
He had never been able to deal with the outside.
All his dealings had been with himself and that larger self of family which had been thrown together by marriage or accident: he had never been able to go out from his shell of self.
‘I don't know how I know that,’ McQuaid said.
‘All I know is that it cost me a lot of money to learn.’
The girls had the freshly cut bread, butter and milk on the table.
The lamb chops sizzled as they were dropped into the big pan.
The sausages, black pudding, bacon, halves of tomatoes were added soon after to the sides of the pan.
The eggs were fried in a smaller pan.
Mona scalded the large teapot and set it to brew.
The two girls were silent as they cooked and when they had to speak to one another spoke in quick, urgent whispers.
This looks like a meal fit for a king.
It makes me want to roll up my sleeves,’ McQuaid said in praise and plain enjoyment at the prospect of it as the plates were put on the table.
He finished his glass of whiskey with a flourish before rising from the chair.
The two men ate in silence, with relish, waited on by the two girls.
As soon as McQuaid pushed his empty plate contentedly aside he said, ‘These are great girls but where are the missing soldiers?’
‘Sheila is upstairs with a cold,’ Maggie pointed to the ceiling.
‘And Michael is gone to our aunt in the mountains for a week.’
‘Where's Luke then?’
The girls looked from McQuaid to Moran and back to McQuaid again but they did not speak.
‘We don't know where he is,’ Moran said reluctantly.
He particularly disliked parting with information about the house.
‘You couldn't open your mouth in this house before he left but he'd be down your throat.’
‘If I know you I'd warrant he was given his money's worth,’ McQuaid laughed gently and when Moran didn't answer he added, ‘The young will have their way, Michael.
Anyhow I always liked Luke.
He is very straight and manly.’
‘I respect all my children equally,’ Moran said.
‘How are your lads?’
‘You know they're all married now.
I don't see much of them unless they want something and they don't see much of me.
They're good lads though.
They work long hours.’
‘And the good lady?’
‘Oh, the old dosey's all right.
She needs plenty of shouting at or she'd go to sleep on her feet.’
They had married young and their three sons married young as well.
They lived alone now in the big cattle dealer's house with the white railing in the middle of fields.
He was seldom in the house except to eat or sleep and when he was all he ever did was yell, ‘Get the tea.
polish the boots.
kick out that bloody cat.
Get me a stud.
Where's the fucking collar?’
‘In a minute, Jimmy.
Coming.
On the way.
It's here in my very hand,’ his wife would race and flurry and call.
Then he would be gone for days.
She would spoil her cats, read library books and tend her garden and the riotous rockery of flowers along the south wall of the house that he encouraged the cattle to eat.
After days of peace the door would crash open: ‘There's six men here with lorries.
Put on the kettle.
Set the table.
Get hopping.
Put wheels under yourself.
We're fucking starving!’
There was never a hint of a blow.
So persistent was the language that it had become no more remarkable than just another wayward manner of speaking and their sons paid so little attention to it that it might well have been one of the many private languages of love.
The dishes had been washed and put away.
Mona went to join Sheila upstairs.
Maggie was going visiting.
Another night Moran would have questioned her but not tonight.
Years ago Moran loaned McQuaid money when he had started in the cattle business but now McQuaid was the richer and more powerful man and they saw little of one another.
They came together once a year to slip back into what McQuaid said were the days of their glory.
Moran was too complicated to let anybody know what he thought of anything.
Moran had commanded a column in the war.
McQuaid had been his lieutenant.
From year to year they used the same handrails to go down into the past: lifting the cartwheel at the crossroads, the drilling sessions by the river, the first ambush, marching at night between the safe houses, the different characters in the houses, the food, the girls…
The interrogation of William Taylor the spy and his execution by the light of a paraffin lantern among his own cattle in the byre.
The Tans had swarmed over the countryside looking for them after the execution.
They had lived for a while in holes cut in the turf banks.
The place was watched night and day.
Once the British soldiers came on Mary Duignan when she was bringing them tea and sandwiches.
The Duignans were so naturally pale-faced that Mary showed no sign that anything was other than normal and she continued to bring tea and sandwiches to men working on a further turf bank.
Seeing the British soldiers, the startled men sat and ate though they had just risen from a complete meal.
‘Mary was a topper,’ McQuaid said with emotion.
‘Only for Mary that day our goose was cooked.
She was a bloody genius to think of giving the food to the men on the bank.
She's married to a carpenter in Dublin now.
She has several children.’
Moran poured more whiskey into the empty glass.
‘Are you sure you won't chance a drop?’
McQuaid raised his glass.
‘It's no fun drinking on your own.’
‘I couldn't handle it,’ Moran said.
‘You know that.
I had to give it up.
Now I couldn't look at it.’
‘I shouldn't have asked you then.’
‘I don't mind.
I don't mind at all.’
The reminiscing continued — the deaths of friends, one man marching alone through the night, the terrible hard labour it was for some men to die, night marches from one safe house to another, the rain, the wet, the damp, the cold of waiting for an ambush in one place for hours.
‘We had them on the run by then.
They were afraid to venture out except in convoys.’
‘People who would have spat in our faces three years before were now clapping our backs.
They were falling over one another to get on the winning side.’
‘Many of them who had pensions and medals and jobs later couldn't tell one end of a gun from the other.
Many of the men who had actually fought got nothing.
An early grave or the emigrant ship.
Sometimes I get sick when I see what I fought for,’ Moran said.
‘It makes no sense your not taking the IRA pension.
You earned it.
You could still have it in the morning,’ McQuaid said.
‘I'd throw it in their teeth,’ Moran clenched and unclenched his hands as he spoke.
‘I never question the colour of any man's money.
If I'm offered it I take it,’ but Moran was too consumed to respond and McQuaid went on.
‘Then it began to get easier.
We hadn't to hide any longer.
One hot day I remember leaving guns and clothes along the river bank and swimming without a stitch on.
Another Sunday we went trolling, dragging an otter behind the boat.
Then they tried to bring in the general.’
‘He wasn't a general.
He was a trumped-up colonel.’
‘Whatever he was we settled his hash,’ McQuaid gloated.
‘You had a great head on you the way you thought the plan through from beginning to end.
You've been wasted ever since.’
‘Without you it would never have worked.
You were as cool as if you were out for a stroll,’ Moran said.
‘You could plan.
You worked it out from beginning to end.
None of the rest of us had that kind of head.’
‘We had spies.
We had men in the town for weeks.
They were bringing the big fellow in on the three o'clock train.
They were going to put on the big show.
They had a band and a guard of honour outside the station, their backs to a row of railwaymen's cottages.
They never checked the cottages.’
‘They wouldn't have found us anyhow.’
‘Nibs McGovern met that train every day with his trolley to pick up the papers and the Boland loaves that the shops got for special customers.
He was such a fixture that no one noticed him any more.
It fell into our hands.’
‘Looking back on it the plan couldn't have been simpler but we must have rehearsed it forty times.
We all slipped into town after dark.
Only Tommy Flood, the solicitor's clerk, gave any trouble.’
‘Then we nabbed Nibs,’ McQuaid laughed.
‘just as he was getting ready to go out on the town.
We were lucky there as well.
Nibs didn't go to any one pub in particular.
Nibs was no trouble.
He could think quick enough when he had to.
We gave him whiskey and hadn't to tie him up till the morning and that was only for his own good.’
‘Then there was the waiting,’ Moran said violently.
‘I'll never forget it.
Dressed up in Nibs's gear,’ McQuaid said.
‘The clothes were fit to stand up on their own, they were that stiff with dust and grease.
The waiting was terrible.
It's like getting old.
Nothing happens and then the whole bloody thing is on top of you before you know it.
The Tommies marching to the station.
The band.
Sound of the train getting closer and before I knew it I was out on that street pushing the trolley.
The wheels were so loose I was afraid they'd fall off.
The one thing we never thought of was to check the wheels.
The overcoat was buttoned over the gun and the grenade.
Even in the middle of summer Nibs wore that overcoat.’
‘I had the stopwatch on you from behind one of the windows.
I followed every step.
I was afraid you'd get to the slope too soon.
I was afraid you could run into our fire if you got too far up on the slope.’
‘The gates were closed.
The train came puffing in.
The fucking band struck up ‘God Save the King’.
There were three fir trees beside the platform.
They said they never grew right because of the smoke and steam.
The sergeant major was shouting.
They were all standing to attention.
The colonel or general or whatever he was came down the platform.
There was another officer with him holding a sword upright.
I kept pushing the trolley, praying to Jesus the bloody wheels wouldn't come loose.
No one even looked at me or the trolley.
The pair came along inspecting the troops.
The one holding the sword was young.
The colonel was a big stoutish man with red eyebrows.
All I remember thinking of as I pushed the trolley and looked at the red face and eyebrows was, My friend, you are about to take the longest journey a man ever takes in this life.
He took the full blast.
The other man was still holding the sword upright as he went down.
I pulled the pin out of the grenade.
The line of soldiers was still half standing to attention when I went through them.
I hadn't to use the revolver.
As soon as I got to the other side of the bank I threw myself down and started to roll.’
‘That's all I was watching for.
As soon as I saw you go down I gave the order to fire,’ Moran said.
‘Some of them were still standing to attention as they fell.
They hadn't a clue where the fire was coming from.
Then a few soldiers up at the goods store fired into their own men.’
‘By the time I rolled to the bottom of the slope I could see the steady fire coming from the windows.
I waited to get my breath before cutting across the road.
I don't think I was fired on once.
The first thing I did when I got behind the houses was to get out of Nibs's clothes.’
‘They were beginning to fire back from behind the station.
Michael Sweeney was hit in the shoulder.
I gave the order to file out.
Myles Reilly and McDermott stayed at the windows.
They were our two best riflemen.
When we got to Donoghue's Cross the road was cut and trees knocked.
We waited for Reilly and McDermott at the cross.
Then we split up, half of us for the safe houses round the lakes and the rest of us headed into the mountains.
We mightn't have bothered.’
‘They were afraid to put their heads out and when they did they came in a whole convoy, shooting at women and children.’
‘They were never the same again,’ Moran said.
‘News of it spread throughout the whole country.’
‘You had a great head on you, Michael.’
‘Only for you it couldn't have come to anything.’
‘I remember clearer than yesterday his eyebrows.
Not often you see an Englishman with red eyebrows.
I had so much time to look at him I can hardly believe it still, pushing the trolley, standing up in Nibs's clothes.
I had already loosened the overcoat and was thinking as I looked at him, This very minute you are going on the longest journey a man ever takes and you haven't a frigging clue.
Then I fired.’
‘I was watching you with the stopwatch.’
‘We didn't have to split up that day.
They were afraid of their shite to come out of the towns.
The country was ours again.
Next we had the Treaty.
Then we fought one another.’
‘Look where it brought us.
Look at the country now.
Run by a crowd of small-minded gangsters out for their own good.
It was better if it never had happened.’
‘I couldn't agree with that,’ McQuaid said.
‘The country is ours now anyhow.
Maybe the next crowd will be better than this mixture of druids and crooks that we're stuck with.’
‘Leave the priests out of it,’ Moran said sharply.
‘I'll leave nobody out of it.
They all got on our backs.’
Moran did not answer.
An angry brooding silence filled the room.
McQuaid felt for the authority he had slowly made his own over the years, an authority that had outgrown Moran ‘s.
He would not move.
Moran rose and went outside.
McQuaid did not respond to him in any way when he came in again.
When Maggie returned she found them locked in the strained silence.
Beforehand she had combed her hair by the light of the flashlamp, smoothed and rearranged her clothes but even if she hadn't Moran would not have noticed this evening.
At once, in the silence, she began to make tea and sandwiches.
Mona came down from upstairs and after whispering with Maggie disappeared again upstairs with a small jug of milk and some sandwiches.
At last, out of the silence, Moran noticed McQuaid's glass was empty and attempted to pour him more whiskey.
‘Cap it,’ McQuaid said and covered his glass with his hand.
‘There were years when you were able for most of the bottle.’
‘Those years are gone.
We'll have the tea Maggie is making.’
Reluctantly Moran screwed the cap back on the bottle and returned it behind the curtains of the medicine press.
The tone in which Cap it had been said smarted like a cut.
‘Do you remember Eddie McIniff in Maguire's garden on night watch?’
McQuaid asked.
‘He could see all the roads from Maguire's garden.
We were watching in case the Tans would try to infiltrate the lakes at night.
Eddie used to shoot a lot of duck and could stand like a stone.
One of the Maguire girls Ellie or Molly, I think it was Molly, they were all fine looking, tall women — came out to do her morning business and hunkered down under an apple tree a few feet away from Eddie.
All Eddie did was to wait a bit and then lean over without a sound and lay the gun barrel across her back cheeks.
I'd love to have seen her face when she jumped,’ McQuaid laughed out loud.
‘There must be nothing colder on a bare arse than a gun barrel that was out all night.’
Moran did not laugh.
He looked helpless with the weight of his own disapproval.
His two thumbs rotated about one another as they always did when he was agitated and looking for a way to strike.
‘McIniff was blackguard enough to do that but you'd think that at least he'd be ashamed to tell it.’
‘What was it but fun?’
McQuaid brushed the criticism aside.
‘Didn't you have something to do with one of those Maguire girls?
The rest of us had to scrape and scrounge for the girls, Michael, but whatever you had they always fell into your hands like ripe plums.’
‘That was all talk,’ Moran said, angry as ever at any baring of the inviolate secrecy he instinctively kept around himself.
‘Your father was a hard man for the women in his day,’ McQuaid said addressing the two girls.
‘I think Mr McQuaid does himself less than credit with that talk,’ Moran said with quiet dignity.
‘There's even rumours that you're courting again.
Are you thinking of taking the plunge, Michael?’
Moran held a pointed silence.
The girls brought tea and sandwiches.
‘Ah, these girls will make some man happy,’ McQuaid said.
‘But you're a brave man, Michael.
If anything were to happen to my old dosey I'm afraid I'd live out my days in peace.’
The girls were able to laugh openly at last without any risk.
The idea of the fat old cattle dealer emerging as a romantic possibility was so preposterous that even Moran smiled.
‘I'd take that pension, Michael.
You earned it.
Take what they'll give you.
Never question the colour of money.’
The talk turned to easier waters as they drank tea.
‘I've got on without it long enough.
Why should I take it from them now?’
It was plain from the blustering way he spoke that he wasn't so sure.
‘It never did me no harm.
There were times when I was starting in at the cattle that it stood between me and the road.
It doesn't make much difference now but a hell of a sight of worse things come through the letterbox at the end of every month.’
‘I was thinking of taking it,’ Moran admitted.
‘Wouldn't it buy something for the girls here or put someone through school even if you didn't want to take it for yourself?
You should have taken it years ago.
In this world you don't exist without money.
And there might never be another world.’
McQuaid could not resist this hit at Moran's religiosity.
‘Man proposes…’
Moran said darkly.
‘And God stays out of it,’ McQuaid twisted round the old saw.
The girls had washed and put away the cups and plates, covered the few squares of sandwiches that remained with a damp cloth.
‘Mr McQuaid's room is ready,’ Maggie said as they prepared to take their leave for the night.
‘The bed is aired.’
‘Oh, I forgot,’ McQuaid said hastily.
‘I have to be hitting the road any minute now.
I should have told you earlier but it must have slipped the old mind.’
Moran did not protest.
Covertly, leaning far back in his chair, he watched McQuaid from under hooded eyelids: in all the years they had been coming together on Monaghan Day McQuaid had always spent the night in the house.
‘I told my old lady I'd be home,’ McQuaid lied as he rose.
‘Otherwise she'd have gone over to one of the boys.
She gets afraid on her own in the house at night.’
Having waited long enough to see if they were needed, the two girls went up to Moran and kissed him on the lips as they did every night.
‘Good night, Mr McQuaid,’ they offered their hand.
‘That was a great meal.
Ye are a great pair of girls.
If you ever get up our way call in to see my old lassie,’ he took and held their hands.
‘Good night, Mr McQuaid,’ they repeated awkwardly before leaving the two men alone.
McQuaid sat down but almost immediately rose again.
As on all the other Monaghan Days stretching far back he had come intending to stay the night.
Tonight a growing irritation at Moran's compulsion to dominate, to have everything on his own terms or not at all, had hardened into a sudden decision to overturn the years and quit the house at once .
As soon as Moran saw McQuaid on his feet again he knew the evening, all the evenings, were about to be broken up and he withdrew back into himself.
He would neither plead with him to stay nor help him with his leaving.
As soon as McQuaid met Moran's domination of the evening with this sudden violence he was anxious to be conciliatory.
‘Well, thanks for the meal and evening, Michael.
It was a great evening.’
For a time it seemed that Moran might choose to remain seated and force McQuaid to make his own way out of the house.
When he did rise in the chair it was slowly and grudgingly and he followed McQuaid out into the stone hallway as if he were finding it difficult to walk or move.
He held his hand on the door's edge in the darkness of the hallway.
‘Good luck, Michael,’ the old cattle dealer said a last time but Moran made no answer in the darkness.
A brief moon between clouds outside sharpened the lines of boxwood that led to the wooden gate.
McQuaid walked heavily and firmly to the gate.
He did not bother to shut it, letting it swing open behind him.
After opening the door of the Mercedes he leaned on its edge to clear his throat and spit on the yellow path.
‘Some people just cannot bear to come in second,’ he said loudly enough to be heard before getting into the car, reversing it round and driving away.
Moran stood holding the edge of the door until the headlights disappeared and he closed the door without shutting the iron gate at the road or the small wooden gate leaning against the boxwood.
In a cold fury he stood and sat about for a long time within, twice changing from chair to chair.
After years he had lost his oldest and best friend but in a way he had always despised friendship; families were what mattered, more particularly that larger version of himself —his family; and while seated in the same scheming fury he saw each individual member gradually slipping away out of his reach.
Yes, they would eventually all go.
He would be alone.
That he could not stand.
He saw with bitter lucidity that he would marry Rose Brady now.
As with so many things, no sooner had he taken the idea to himself than he began to resent it passionately.
McQuaid had either struck true by pure chance or had picked up reliable gossip at the Mohill Fair.
Rose Brady had come home from Glasgow to nurse her father and stayed on irresolutely after his death, one day stretching into days.
She could go back to the Rosenblooms, to the big house outside Glasgow where she had lived as one of the family for twelve years.
Mrs Rosenbloom had written that they all wanted her back but still she stayed with her mother and brother in the farmhouse above the small lake, the poor rock-strewn lower slopes of the mountain rising towards Arigna beyond.
Sometimes in the evenings she had too strong a sense of being locked into the life of the farmhouse, even with the door continuously open on the summer yard, her brother away in the fields, her mother stumbling about the place with buckets, leaning on the table or the back of a chair whenever she stood to talk.
One evening, as an excuse to get out of the house, she went with a letter to the post office.
To her surprise the small room of the post office was full of people waiting for the evening mail.
They all turned towards her when she entered and way was made for her to go up to the counter.
People whose own names she was no long certain of called out her name and she smiled and nodded by way of general response.
The post office was owned by two white-haired sisters, Annie and Lizzie, far out cousins of her own, and Annie stamped the envelope for her, postmarked it and dropped it in the calico bag on the counter.
‘You're still with us, Rose?’
‘Still here, Annie.
You've a big crowd this evening.’
‘It's for the mail van.
You might as well wait yourself to see if there's anything for the house.’
In turn she moved aside to allow someone else room at the counter and found herself standing beside Moran.
She knew him well by sight but she had never spoken with him before.
‘I was very sorry about your father,’ he said.
‘I know that,’ she gave the formal response.
He had been a widower for many years, she knew.
He had been an army officer once and there had been trouble that caused him to leave the army.
Often she had passed the stone house where he lived with his children, some of whom must now be grown.
She had heard dark mutterings about him but after a few minutes of talking with him she was ready to put it down to common envy.
She found him attentive, intelligent, even charming, but with a distinct sense of separateness and pride that she found refreshingly unlike any of the other local men she had known.
When the mail van pulled up outside, the hum of talk about them went silent.
The driver dumped the mail bag on the counter, lifting the sealed bag without speaking a word.
Annie opened the bag.
As soon as she started to go through the bundle of letters, all Moran's attention was fixed on the sorting.
He ignored Rose completely.
From being the centre of his attention one moment all of a sudden she ceased to exist.
His whole life seemed to hang on each letter in Annie's hand, his eyes following it until she handed it into the crowd or placed it on a pile to one side and then he would fix on the next letter and the next.
The tension was such that she felt sudden relief as they went out of the small room into the air.
‘Were you expecting an important letter?’
‘No,’ he laughed.
‘What makes you think that?’
‘Oh, I just wondered.’
‘I come nearly every evening for the post.
It gets you out of the place.
It saves wondering the next day whether Jimmy Lynch will bring anything to the house or not.’
The bicycle she wheeled left thin tracks in the pale dust that covered the road.
At the crossroads beside the bridge they parted.
‘I suppose we'll be losing you again before too long,’ he said.
‘I'm not sure when I'll go back,’ she answered.
She was in her late thirties, lean and strong, too neat and plain of feature ever to have been beautiful but her large grey eyes were intelligent and full of wilfulness and energy.
As soon as she got home she couldn't resist bringing up Moran's name.
‘They say he's no ornament,’ her mother said carefully.
‘I was talking to him in the post office.’
She saw her mother look at her sharply.
‘They say he's one sort of person when he's out in the open among people — he can be very sweet — but that he's a different sort of person altogether behind the walls of his own house.’
‘People talk too much about other people round here.
Often the talk is just ignorant malice.’
Her true instinct was always to work behind the usual social frameworks: family, connections, position, conventions, those established forms that can be used like weapons when they are mastered.
Behind them she could work with a charm and singleness of attention that became so smooth as to be chilling, except for the friendliness of her large grey eyes.
The Rosenblooms had long known that they could take her with them anywhere in society.
These skills she could not use with Moran.
Her interest was too great.
She had too little time.
There was too much of the outlaw about him that held its own fascination.
Painfully and in the open she had to make all the running.
She came to the post office the next evening, and the next, buying tea and a comb of honey from Lizzie the first evening, posting a letter at Annie's counter on the Friday, waiting till the mail was sorted, each time managing to leave the post office alone with Moran.
They stood talking a long time at the crossroads before separating but he didn't offer to see her over the weekend.
She was able to conceal her restlessness, the pacing about, her dream of a different beginning to a new life, her impatience with the old shapes that she had used for too long; she was not young and was old enough to foresee failure.
She was able to will her longing into an unexamined haze but she could not stay away from the post office on Monday.
Once she appeared regularly others could observe her.
Annie and Lizzie were friendly with Moran.
They often discussed his family together and how hard it was for a single man to bring up children alone.
Soon they began to greet Rose's evening presence in their small clean-scrubbed room with sarcasm.
This unseemly chase after love was viewed with a hostile, overall amusement, for ‘love’ had left Annie and Lizzie — and many far younger — long behind and it was valued like jaundice.
This courting dance seemed to them a grotesque parody.
Crossing the road to water the bed of dahlias and moon daisies and nasturtiums she kept on the grass margin across the road from her door at the beginning of the village, Mrs Reynolds paused to watch Rose make her way round by the bridge to the post office and muttered venomously, ‘There's no fool like an old fool', as if confronting the worst part of her own nature.
In the two bars, and on the bridge and football field where the men gathered in the evening, there were the coarse shouts of ‘Sink log!
All find their way to the dirty hollow ‘, followed by cheers that echoed out like firing.
In the full face of the ridicule she went to the post office evening after evening, ridicule she willed not to see or notice.
‘Are you expecting some important letter, Rose?’ her mother inquired anxiously.
‘No, Mother.
It just takes me out of the house for an hour or two.’
Then her married sister arrived at the house with news of her real reason for going each evening to the post office.
‘You'd think she'd have more sense at her age.
She'll just become a laughing stock if she's not that already.’
‘I hear you're seeing Mr Moran at the post office,’ her mother ventured delicately.
‘Yes.
He goes there every evening.’
‘I wouldn't be too bothered about him.
And besides he has a large family of his own already.’
‘We're just friends, Mother,’ she gave that little laugh and smiled the charming smile that hid the pure will.
‘All we ever talk about is his children.
He is very worried about them.’
‘I'd be careful if I were you, Rose.
It doesn't need much to start people talking.’
‘Then let them talk.’
Yet Moran made no move towards her, promised nothing, gave no hint of any reciprocation of interest, lent her no support.
All he did was remain at the point where they first met.
He neither went towards her nor withdrew and she saw it could not go on like that.
One evening as they were forced to shelter from a sudden shower under the thick line of sycamores, she said, ‘You should call to the house some evening, Michael.
I know they'd like to meet you.’
‘You know how hard it is to get away, Rose.’
‘Still, you know you're welcome,’ she smiled and left him and he was not surprised when she did not come to the post office the next evening or the evening after.
He knew that he would have to go to her if he wanted her.
As a young man he had been pursued by many women; that he secretly despised them did not lessen his attractiveness but in later years his large family and increasing years had hung about him with a weight as great as any deformity: but he would never risk exposing himself as Rose had.
Rose Brady's attention had been as unexpected as it had been sudden and welcome.
It was as if she had fallen out of a generous sky.
She was much younger than he, strong, not unpleasant to look at.
He had reason to suspect that she had saved money and his life could glow again in the concentration of her attention.
It was unlikely that such luck would fall his way again no matter how long he waited.
That same week he told Maggie out of the blue that he wanted to see her alone.
With great nervousness and alarm she followed him to his room.
‘There's something very important that concerns all the family that I want to discuss seriously.’
He felt garbed in the robes of responsibility and consequence as he spoke.
‘What would you think if I were to bring someone new into the family?’
Maggie looked quickly at him but without comprehension.
‘If I was to fill your mother's place — the Lord have mercy on her soul — with someone new,’ he amended.
‘If I were to marry again.’
Whether it was the sudden mention of her mother or the whole emotional portentousness with which he had charged the scene Maggie burst out sobbing.
This continued for a long time during which he shuffled his feet uncomfortably, controlling his immediate impulse to shout at her to be quiet.
After a while she discovered that she could hide comfortably behind the shelter of sobbing.
‘A woman would be able to help you in ways that I can't,’ he said.
‘There's only so much any man can do on his own.’
‘Whatever you think, Daddy.’
She knew that whatever she said would be irrelevant anyhow.
‘You think it would be for the best then?’
He was impatient now to conclude the whole scene.
‘If you think it's for the best, Daddy.’
‘I know it'll be for the best.
I wouldn't even think of it for a minute if it wasn't best for everybody.
After all these years it'll be a real house and home again.
It'll be a place that will always be there for you to come back to.’
She could not wait to tell Sheila and Mona.
Both girls thought she was joking at first but when she recounted word for word the interview she had had with Moran they exploded into wild laughter.
They did not tell their younger brother.
Though they loved him as if he were their own child they left him out of all things that mattered in the running of the house.
Who is she?’
They asked when they were quiet again.
‘It must be Miss Brady that's home from Glasgow.’
‘She'd never have him.’
‘They say she's wild after him.
She goes every evening to the post,’ and they began to laugh again at what they saw as a mocking mirror of their own flowering.
Moran took the small blue Ford out of the shed after Mass on Sunday, tested the engine and tyres, then washed the car down, dried it and waxed it till it shone.
At three o'clock he drove the four miles to Rose Brady's house.
The lane into the house was narrow and winding with too many gates so he parked the car on the wide grass margin beside the platform for the creamery cans.
The car could not be seen from the house because of the shelter of trees.
He walked slowly down the lane, enjoying the feel of the pressed brown suit he so seldom wore, this new excitement midst the humdrum of his life.
It was as if he were going to the edge again of something fresh and new.
Rose saw him at the heavy red gate of the yard.
So intense was her relief at seeing him come that she stood stock-still in the doorway.
As relief spread to pure pleasure she waved and came towards him across the yard like a young girl.
She was already by his side before she thought of how her face and hair must look.
She had gone through bad days.
In the evenings, with painful vividness, she had seen the small congregation in the post office, the mail van crossing the bridge, Annie sorting the letters, the stretch of empty road to the sycamores where they had stopped to talk.
Such was the restlessness of her longing to go there that she had had to struggle to stick to her resolve.
She could not go.
She had given signs enough, perhaps too many, and she could only wait.
Now he had come to her.
Though her mother disliked him the custom of hospitality was too strict to allow any self-expression or unpleasantness.
Her brother he had met before and the two men talked about the year's haysaving and the price they expected for sheep and wool and cattle.
A white cloth was spread on the table, homemade bread and jam, a fresh apple tart.
Tea was made.
He praised the bread and the blackcurrant jam.
‘The garden is choked every year with blackcurrants.
The birds get most of them.
Your girls should come here to pick them next summer.’
‘That would be too much,’ he said.
‘If the girls don't pick them they'll just waste in the grass or go with the birds,’ the mother said as amiably as she could.
‘Are you interested in football?’ her brother asked.
‘Not so much but it's nice to see a good match.’
‘Would you like to hear the end of the game then?’
‘Sure I would,’ and her brother turned on the Sunday game he had been listening to when Moran entered the yard.
After ten minutes or so it seemed to end satisfactorily.
Moran was unassertive and attentive in the few minutes they discussed the game afterwards.
‘Now that I've eaten and drunk my fill it's time for me to beat away,’ he said after about an hour.
Rose's mother and brother shook his hand politely.
She got a cardigan and walked him all the way out the lane.
Above them rose the poor fields, littered with rock and gorse, the lower slopes of the mountain.
Below the lane was the small lake ringed with reeds.
‘Are there fish in the lake?’
‘There used to be plenty — small perch, and pike, and eel — but they never seemed to grow to any size.’
When they went through the first gate at the bottom of the hill they were out of people's eyes for the first time since they had met.
There were just the whitehorn and brier of the hedges, the green ridge of the lane inside the wheel tracks, the wild strawberries starting to darken on the banks.
‘Was I all right in the house?’ he asked.
‘You were perfect.
You could not have been better.
It was lovely that you came,’ and she took his hand and raised her mouth eagerly to his as he bent to kiss her for the first time.
‘I'm not used to going out,’ he said.
‘You'll have to come to meet my crowd now.’
‘I'd love to meet them.’
‘One of these evenings I'll arrange it.
I hope they'll know how to show manners.’
Responsibility visibly descended on him again as he walked.
‘I didn't know you had a car,’ she said with surprise when they reached the road.
‘I don't take it out very often but it's nice to have, to know that you can go anywhere you want if you feel like it.’
Secretly she exulted that he had the car.
It was just one more sign of his separateness from the people around who would buy a cow or a few more fields.
In these parts a car was prized more than flowers or an orchard or a herb garden: it was the symbol of pure luxury.
She walked slowly back down the lane, savouring the rich peace, the strength she felt.
This narrow lane was dear to her.
Sleepless in Scotland she had walked it many times in her mind.
The wild strawberries, the wiry grasses, the black fruit of the vetches on the banks were all dear presences.
Out of the many false starts her life had made she felt they were witnessing this pure beginning that she would seize and make true.
No longer, exposed and vulnerable, would she have to chase and harry after happiness.
From a given and confident position she would now be able to move outwards.
‘Where's Tom?’ she noticed her brothers absence as soon as she got back to the house.
‘He said he was going over to O'Neill's for an hour.’
‘I didn't meet him on the lane.’
‘He must have just gone over the fields.’
After a long silence the mother said, ‘That was a bit of a surprise visit.’
‘I asked him to call if he was ever this way.
Did you like him at all?’
‘If he suits you I'm sure he suits me.
He has a large family.’
‘I don't see how that can be held against him.’
‘You used to have many admirers,’ the mother changed.
‘The admirers are all gone.’
Both women were glad to let the conversation drop.
They would not change.
She did not go to the post office the next evening or the next.
No longer had she the ache of longing for that stretch of white road leading round to the sycamores.
By coming to the house on Sunday Moran had made that stretch of road like all roads.
She would go on the day she judged best.
She did not want to appear either too eager or too casual.
All her nervousness came back as she approached the post office just ahead of the mail van.
The small room was full.
Moran was there and smiled on her and spoke.
Whether Annie and Lizzie had heard of the Sunday visit or had marked her absence wasn't clear but they appeared almost conciliatory compared to previous days.
She did notice too that Moran was more carelessly dressed than she remembered and hadn't shaved for at least a day.
It was as if he were truculently stating that he had gone as far towards her as he was prepared to go.
Outside the post office he made no apology for the roughness of his appearance but he was as friendly and charming as he had always been.
‘There's a concert in the hall on Sunday.
It'd be easier if we met my troops for the first time at the concert,’ he said.
‘Then you can come to the house any time you want to afterwards.’
‘Whatever you think is best.’
She was glad to do whatever he wished.
On Saturday night at the end of the Rosary Moran said, ‘I want to offer a final prayer to God that He may guide your father on the right course,’ and they all knew, even to the boy Michael, to what he was referring.
‘There's a very special person I want you to meet at the concert tomorrow.
I hope you'll all like her.
She's Miss Brady,’ he told them as soon as they rose from their knees.
They made vague general noises about how glad they would be to meet her.
‘I want everybody dressed in their best clothes,’ Moran demanded.
Sunday evening the girls were shining and the boy wore his blue Confirmation suit with black shoes.
They were all excited and a little ashamed.
They had seen Miss Brady in the distance at Mass but they had never met her.
At the hill beyond the village he gave them money.
‘Go up to the front row and keep two chairs,’ he directed and then left them.
Though the hall was almost empty they weren't forward enough to go into the very front seats so they entered the seats three rows back, claiming two extra chairs with folded coats.
They knew all the people entering the hall, and those that occupied seats close to them smiled and spoke to them.
They felt nervous and compromised.
They were even more uncomfortable when their father entered with Rose just as the full hall was waiting for the curtain to go up.
With extreme slowness Moran walked Rose to the seats.
The girls suffered agonies of exposure as they waited for them to reach their seats.
Slowly and solemnly Moran introduced Rose to each member of the family in turn.
The small group became more the centre of attention than the stage itself.
Rose's tact was never more evident.
If she was nervous it remained hidden and in a few minutes she had put each of the sisters completely at ease, their shame and apprehension gone.
The concert was amateur.
A group of girls decked with medals danced.
A blue-suited man sang.
An old man played several airs on an accordion.
The drama society put on a short comic sketch.
As all the performers were either related to or known to the audience each act was greeted with loud and equal applause.
At the interval Rose nodded and smiled to the people about her.
Moran made no gesture, did not even look around him.
At the end of the concert he took the four children back to Great Meadow.
Rose sat in the front seat.
At the house he invited Rose in but she refused with the excuse that it was too late.
As she said goodnight to them in turn she managed by some technique of charm or pure personality to convey to each of them that they were important to her in their own light.
They left her feeling completely enclosed in a warm glow of attention and to Moran's repeated questions over the next days were able to say genuinely how much they liked her.
In fact, the response was so uniform and repetitious that it started to irritate him before long.
Rose wished that they could be married quickly but now that there was nothing in the way of it Moran grew cautious and evasive.
She saw the way it was and moved differently.
An invitation through Moran brought the three girls and the boy to her house for a long Sunday.
As it came through Rose he encouraged it as much as he would have discouraged visits to any other neighbouring house.
She showed them the small lake in its ring of reeds, took them to the first slopes of the mountain, rigged up a fishing rod for Michael and took him to the part of the lake she used to fish as a girl, and soon he was shouting out in glee as he missed the ravenous little perch or swung them out over his head on to the bank.
Rose's mother showed the girls the house and the fowl and farm animals, including a pet goat who wouldn't let Rose milk her unless she sprayed herself with a perfume that the mother used.
They were given a sumptuous tea and invited back any time they felt like coming.
Within a few weeks they were regular visitors.
As Moran encouraged them they could go without guilt.
To leave the ever-present tension of Great Meadow was like shedding stiff, formal clothes or kicking off pinching shoes.
Old Mrs Brady never took to Moran but she grew very fond of the children.
Until she won their trust their manners were deferential, identical to the old-fashioned manners of her own youth.
They were always eager to help or run messages and she enjoyed making tea and cakes for them.
Rose, with the same tact as she had brought them to the house, was careful to absent herself from these occasions as much as possible.
She sent them alone with sandwiches and drinks to where her brother worked in the fields and he too grew glad of their quiet company in the empty fields.
In a few months Rose's home place and Moran's house were almost interwoven.
Half-jokingly, but with a certain edge, Moran said that Great Meadow was so deserted that he himself might have to remove himself before long to her house.
No one was ever able to see quite how it had all been managed.
Rose's tact was so masterful that she resembled certain people who are so deeply read that they can play with all ideas without ever listing books.
‘What do you think of Rose marrying your father?’ the old woman grew confident enough one day to ask Maggie in her good-humoured, forceful way.
‘We're glad.’
‘Are you sure you don't mind?’
‘No, we're glad.’
‘People say he used beat ye.’
‘People said that because Daddy never let us mix with them.’
‘Did he not beat ye?’
‘No…now and again when we were bold, but like any house.’
Shame as much as love prompted the denial.
‘How is it that your brother left and never came home?’
‘Daddy and Luke could never get on.
They were too alike,’ and when Maggie began to cry Rose's mother saw that she had pressed too hard.
‘She'd have been better with someone nearer her own age,’ the old woman murmured to herself.
‘She had many admirers.
Many admirers.
Many admirers.
I don't understand it at all.’
Maggie brushed away her tears as she listened.
She thought the mutterings were comical.
To her both Rose and Moran looked equally old.
Rose's mother was not reassured by Maggie's answers but she liked her and didn't want to endanger their young presences about the house.
Michael had become her favourite.
He was the least inhibited.
He would chatter away egotistically to her for hours.
Sometimes she would give him money on the sly and he would help her with chores.
Often they would quarrel and he would stay away from the house for a while; but he was never able to stay away for long.
When he would return, the two would feel even closer than before the quarrel and they would soon be moving about the yard together, chatting away.
For all her encouragement to them to come at any time to her house, Rose herself was wary of calling at Great Meadow.
Whenever she did she never stayed for long.
When Moran pressed her to come for the Christmas dinner, she refused.
‘It wouldn't look right to be out of my own house on Christmas Day,’ she answered; that they were not yet married was left unsaid.
‘I'll come some time early on St Stephen's Day,’ she said instead.
The girls wished that Rose could be with them on Christmas Day.
As always, it was a very long day to get through.
Moran ate alone in front of the big sideboard mirror, waited on apprehensively by the girls.
After he had eaten, they had their own dinner at the side table.
It was the first Christmas anybody had even been absent and Moran seemed to be painfully aware of Luke's absence.
‘You'd think he'd come for the Christmas or even write but never a word, no thought for anybody except himself,’ and it cast a deep shadow when they tried to imagine what kind of space enclosed Luke in England during the same hour, but they weren't able to imagine it.
It was too much like facing darkness.
Afterwards the radio was played.
The Rosary was said.
The pack of cards was taken out.
Everybody made for their beds early.
It was a gladness to slip down into the sheets knowing the day had ended.
The next morning Rose came in with presents.
She had bought a silk tie for Moran, blouses and deep plum-coloured sweaters for the girls, a pair of white football boots for Michael.
Because of his dislike of gifts, the girls watched carefully how Moran would receive the silk tie.
‘Thanks, Rose,’ he said and placed it on top of the radio.
‘Don't you like it?’
She smiled a little, taken aback by the spareness of the response.
‘It cost far too much and is far too grand for an old fellow like me.’
The response was positively exuberant.
Just as Rose was preparing to leave, the wren-boys arrived on the Arigna coal lorry.
There must have been twenty men on the back of the lorry in masks and carnival costumes.
With the money they gathered from different houses, they bought ham, loaves and butter, lemonade, whiskey and half-barrels of porter to hold a big dance in Kirkwood's barn that night.
Everyone around was invited.
As soon as they came into the house a melodeon started to play and two fiddles took up in perfect tune; then bagpipes played alone.
Young men danced Rose Brady and the girls round the kitchen.
There were whoops and cheers, mock kissing attempts, challenges to put names on the masked faces and then a song.
‘The two of you will have to come to the Major's tonight,’ the man who gathered the money said.
‘Maybe we will,’ Moran responded.
‘Maybe we will.’
Moran gave them a pound, Rose took a red ten-shilling note from her handbag and they left in the same whirl as they had entered, dancing and singing all the way out to the lorry.
An eerie silence descended over the house as the lorry left for the next house.
‘Are we going to the dance?’
Rose asked Moran as she left.
‘What would be seen there but the same old crowd making fools of themselves?’
‘It's Christmas.’
‘Do you want to go?’
‘I'd like to very much.’
He went reluctantly.
There was an air of great jollity and freedom, even of outright licence, at the wren-boys' dance in Kirkwood's barn.
Moran didn't feel easy.
The air of friendliness was the kind that he disliked most.
The wren-boys who had gone from house to house on the lorry all day were now scrubbed and combed, playing away cheerfully on raised planks.
Even though there was a sharp frost outside, couples could be seen stealing away from the dance and returning a half-hour or so later, always a little crestfallen until they had danced again, danced their way back into good cheer.
Moran hardly spoke to anybody and reacted roughly to any jostling as he danced with Rose on the warped floor.
Rose was anxious, feeling that he had lived in the stone house with too much responsibility for too long.
He had not been able to go out and be at ease with people.
What she did not know was that Moran, with his good looks and military fame, had once been king of these barn dances and now that he had neither youth nor fame would not take a lesser place.
He would not take part at all.
Rose had come to the dance to claim their place as a couple among the people in this loose, Christmas carnival.
She was determined to remain.
She smiled and chatted with everybody around her.
She took tea.
She danced with neighbours and men she had gone to school with.
She forced Moran to dance and by the night's end she was worn out by the single effort.
He had given her no help throughout the night but it did not lessen her love.
In the car, leaning her head on his consenting but exasperated shoulder, she said, ‘We don't have to be like the rest of the people round here.
We don't have to go out together for years.
There's nothing in the way of our getting married, and I love you, Michael.’
‘When do you want to get married?’
‘This year.
Before the summer.
If there was something in our way it would be different.’
‘There's the children to consider.’
‘I'd not be in the way of the children.
I could only be of help.’
‘When do you want to be married then?’
‘We have nothing to stop us before Lent.’
‘It'd be too rushed,’ he said.
‘It'll have to be after Lent.’
‘The week after Easter then.’
She set the time and was too happy to notice that he was more like a man listening to a door close than one going towards his joy.
‘We'll have the wedding breakfast in the Royal.
There won't be need to invite many,’ she proposed carefully some days later.
‘I don't want anything in an hotel.’
‘We have to have some place for a reception,’ she argued.
‘Haven't we two houses of our own?’
‘I don't think they'd like that at home.
As soon as I mentioned an Easter wedding they brought up the Royal.’
‘The Bradys don't have that much money to scatter at the Royal Hotel.’
‘They don't mind that.
It's just one day.’
‘There'll be no hotels.
We are too old and poor for that.’
‘It'll be thought strange.
Everybody does it.’
‘Because everybody goes and jumps in the river is no reason why we have to go and jump in the same river.’
‘I know that what you say makes sense, love,’ she placed her hand on his arm.
‘They'll not like it at home.
They'll not understand.
Can't we go to the Royal for them?’
‘Let them start to understand,’ he said as he took her hand in a playful threat.
‘We can always have ham and tea and whiskey for anybody that wants it in our house.
That way we'll have less travelling to do afterwards.’
As a play it was close to perfect.
The honour of the reception always fell to the family of the bride.
It would not do for it to take place in Moran's house and Moran would not go to a hotel.
The Bradys would have to agree to hold it in their house or not at all.
Eventually Rose persuaded them to hold the reception in the house.
They did not like it, argued against it — argued against the whole match — but she held firm.
There would be fewer people to cope with that way, and she wasn't young any longer.
The night before the wedding the girls hardly slept at all and they did not chatter to one another as they usually did until they found sleep.
In the morning their father would be married.
Another woman would come back with him into the house.
It did not matter that it was the Rose they had grown to like.
The life they had come to know so well for so long as it slipped by changelessly would be irrevocably altered: it was like a death or a wounding and brought all the wonder and fear and awe of change.
Each of their own lives would have to take up another uncertain beginning.
Moran himself slept fitfully beside their brother.
Now and again he would reach a hand over to the boy but he slept deeply through the night.
It would be his last night of sleep in the room.
The small boxroom with a single bed was already prepared.
Tomorrow night Rose would lie in the boy's place.
When he did wake, Moran reached his hand across to the coarse shirt over the shoulder and gently began to knead the muscles.
‘It's the last time we'll wake in the morning together.’
‘The last time,’ the boy repeated uncertainly.
‘You know what day it is?’
‘Your wedding day.’
‘It's the end of one life.
The beginning of a different life.
I believe it's in the best interest of all the family.
We can only pray and hope it'll turn out for the best.’
The boy was always more uncomfortable with these essays in tenderness than any sudden harshness.
He sat up immediately in the bed to listen.
‘They're up,’ he announced.
‘They're all up.
Do you want me to draw the curtain, Daddy?’
‘No.
Not yet,’ Moran said but the boy had already drawn free from the kneading hand and was struggling into his clothes.
He closed the door softly behind him and was gone without another word.
Moran lay on in bed till very late.
One of the girls had to come to the door to call him.
‘Your clothes is aired and ready, Daddy.
It's time to get up.’
He came in in his old trousers and nightshirt.
They were already dressed for the wedding, wearing little bits of borrowed fineries they were afraid he would notice.
The boy was wearing his blue suit, shining black shoes, white shirt and blue tie and his fair hair was oiled.
The kettle was boiling and Maggie poured the water into the basin in front of the shaving mirror.
He failed to notice the borrowed things that the girls wore, looking around him instead in dumb bafflement: it was a wedding day, a shining moment in his life, and, except for the dressed children, it could be any ordinary day.
His clothes were draped on the back of a chair in front of the fire.
The clothes horse was drawn up.
The steaming water was waiting in the basin before the mirror.
He felt a low cry of frustration against the inadequacy of life break silently within, and ripple out.
‘What time is it?’ he demanded fiercely.
‘It's just ten, Daddy.
There's only an hour till the Mass.’
‘I think I know it takes an hour to get from ten to eleven.’
The sarcasm seemed to relieve him a little and he took the black strop of leather from its nail and opened the razor.
The blade flashed as it was drawn over the leather.
He lathered and started to shave.
They all fixed in a pure tenseness of watching as he shaved but he did not cut himself.
He washed and towelled himself dry.
‘Your uncle didn't put in an appearance yet?’
‘No, there's no sign of him.’
When he started to dress in front of the fire the two older girls turned away and when he looked for a collar stud the boy ran to attend.
Once Maggie caught a glimpse of him in the shaving mirror, trouserless but with his shirt and socks on and in spite of her fear she was tempted to laugh.
Trouserless men looked absurd in socks.
He dressed with great care.
He had refused to buy any new clothes for the wedding but the brown suit had been brushed and pressed.
The white shirt was starched and the shoes shone.
He went back to the shaving mirror to comb his hair and when he had finished he pushed a folded handkerchief into his sleeve with quiet satisfaction.
‘Of course, that uncle of yours didn't have the manners to write, never mind the decency to come; but I've long learned never to expect anything from an ass but a kick.’
The increasing nervousness showed in his voice.
‘I don't know why people can't write a note.’
They were all dressed.
There was nothing to do but wait for their uncle.
Moran had decided that they would go to the church in their uncle's big old car.
They hadn't seen him in months.
Moran had written to him and assumed that he would come.
Several times Moran went to the front door to look towards the road.
He changed his handkerchief from his left sleeve to his right.
‘I should have learned by now never to rely on anybody.’
‘He must have got a puncture,’ Michael offered.
‘You'd think he'd allow for that on a day the like of this.’
‘He might never have thought…’
‘You can rely on that.
The man's head was designed to keep his ears apart.
Anyhow we can't wait much longer.’
He went out and started the small blue Ford, backed it out of the shed and left the engine running.
‘We better be going.
We can't wait about like this any longer.
God, O God, did you ever see such people!’
They all crammed into the car.
‘You'd think people would have heed, but no heed, never any heed, no care for anybody else,’ he complained as he drove; but before the bridge he startled them by driving the car into the space in front of McCabe's and announcing that they would walk the rest of the way through the village.
‘We're early.
This way we'll meet the man on his bloody way if he's coming.’
Michael sniggered behind Moran as soon as they were on the road together but it drew such a quelling look from Maggie that he went quiet.
All the girls were deeply ashamed.
No one had ever seen a bride or groom walk to their wedding; even the very poor found a car for that day and in the old days they had gone by trap or sidecar.
Fortunately the bridge was empty as was the long road of sycamores to the church in its dark evergreens.
After crossing the bridge Moran checked his watch and to their infinite relief started to walk quickly.
They wished their uncle would come and they could vanish into the huge car but no motor could be heard in the direction from which he would come.
They walked on in silence.
It had not rained for a week and the white dust of the road started to dull the shine of all the shoes.
At the end of the long road Reynolds' was the first house they had to pass and they started to cringe into themselves behind Moran even before they got to the little hedge of privet above the whitewashed stones.
Mrs Reynolds was in the doorway, almost ready herself to go to the wedding — she never missed a wedding or a funeral — but seeing the procession that approached withdrew back into the shadows of the room to observe better the old cockerel go by followed by his dismayed pullets.
‘And the bloody madman is walking to his own wedding with all the children,’ she said, more in sympathy with the children than in laughter.
Each step seemed to take an age as they passed the forge.
Only the boy looked at the two men sledging a length of iron on the outside anvil.
Then they had to brace themselves to pass the few people standing along the church wall.
None of them looked up as they passed.
Moran did not turn to speak.
There were curious villagers waiting for the wedding to begin in the back seats of the church but they did not look to left or right.
All the children blessed themselves from the fount and went straight up to the altar.
It was like the beginning of healing to get into their seats and kneel beside Moran, no longer exposed.
None of the bride's party had come yet.
The priest came through the sacristy door in soutane and surplice and Moran went up to the rails.
‘The best man hasn't come.
Would the boy do?’
Moran asked.
They both looked towards Michael.
‘He's a bit young,’ the priest said.
‘We can get one of the bride's brothers to stand in.’
Then a car was heard pulling up at the gate; either the bridal car or their uncle had come.
All turned to look back at the door as the footsteps approached on the flagstones.
The relief showed instantly on their faces as the small round figure of their uncle filled the doorway.
He hurried up the aisle of the church, showing his palms by way of apology when he reached his place.
There were dirt and grease stains on both palms with bits of grass stuck to the grease.
‘I thought you'd never get here,’ Moran said.
‘I got broke down,’ he whispered apologetically as he slipped in beside Moran, putting his oily hand on the head of one of the girls.
From the altar the priest nodded a smile of recognition to the best man.
Finally Rose's family filled into the pew across the aisle and Rose came behind on her brother's arm.
There was no music.
The priest beckoned Moran forward.
He motioned to them when to kneel, to stand, to be seated, when to take the ring, the gold and silver, to ‘repeat these words after me'.
A sister of Rose's sobbed briefly.
The girls' eyes filled with tears.
A man in the side-chapel took photos.
The bride and groom returned together to the front seat for the nuptial Mass.
Everybody except the best man went to the rails for Holy Communion.
Outside, in the clear day, as the couple stood beneath the bell rope, a small box of confetti was thrown.
They stood together, separately, and then in groups for photos that one of Rose's sisters took, headstones and evergreens rising out of the background of thick laurel.
The uncle's car was an old Ford V8 with enormous fins and there was more than enough room for all of them in the back.
The bride and bridegroom rode in front.
‘You gave us all a start,’ Rose said happily.
‘For a few minutes our hearts were in our mouths.
We thought you weren't coming but it's wonderful you got here.’
‘I got this puncture.
She just went flat,’ he turned his grease stained hands upwards again on the wheel as he drove.
‘You'll have hot water for them as soon as we get to the house.’
‘You must have left it very tight to get here so late,’ Moran said.
‘You never think you'll get anything.’
‘Of course nobody ever thinks.
That goes without saying.’
‘Everything is fine now.
Their uncle got here and that is all that matters,’ Rose smoothed, turning to chat to the girls in the back.
The car was too large for the lane so they walked in.
The April Saturday was mild, with just the faintest threat of showers.
Everywhere in the low briers and hedgerows was the clatter and singing of small birds.
The little lake below the house was still ringed with its winter reeds, the colour of rained-on wheat.
Everybody waited to eat until the priest arrived.
He was the only one to risk his small car on the lane.
He would have to leave early on a sick call, he said.
There were no letters or telegrams to be read out.
The priest, with folded hands and closed eyes, recited Grace, and the meal began: soup served by a daughter of the same sister of Rose's who had been taking the photos; chicken and ham, with salad.
The wedding cake was cut.
The priest made a short speech praising the families and the outstanding simplicity of the wedding feast.
There was too much emphasis nowadays on show, on Rolls-Royces and big hotels, wasteful, expensive display.
It was pleasant to see people returning to the old ways, he said.
There was wine and whiskey and beer for the toast.
The best man said he wasn't used to speeches, he nearly hadn't arrived at all himself, but he just wanted to thank Father here for all he had done and the people of the bride here for this feast and all the trouble they had gone to, and then he proposed the toast.
The brother who had given Rose away responded even more briefly and soon afterwards the priest left.
Gradually the wedding breakfast was breaking up.
One of Rose's tall silent brothers went around the tables with a bottle of wine and a bottle of whiskey but they drank sparingly.
When the best man cleared his throat and announced that he was going to fix the puncture he had before leaving, all Moran's children followed him out to the road and stood around as he got levers and patches and solution.
When he came back to the house he refused to take a chair or a drink.
‘I better be making a start.
I have a run to do yet this evening.’
‘We might as well go with you so,’ Moran said and Rose got up eagerly.
She had all her going-away things packed.
The remaining things she could come back for any day.
Her mother and sisters and brothers all embraced her but she showed no emotion.
The whole household walked them out to the big Ford at the end of the lane.
They embraced Rose a second time and everybody shook hands.
At the bridge Moran and Rose changed to their own small blue car and the uncle drove the children home.
He waited at the house until the bride and groom arrived but he could not be persuaded to enter the house.
The whole of Rose's family walked back down the lane to their house in silence.
‘She had many admirers,’ the old mother said as they neared the house in a tone of puzzlement and of mourning.
‘Many admirers…
Many admirers…’
‘Nothing could stop her.
She was determined on it.
Now it's her life,’ her married sister said gently.
‘I hope she'll be lucky,’ the wife of one of the brothers said without any feeling.
The four tall brothers walked in stooped silence but their wives chatted agreeably.
A daughter held the mother's hand in sympathy.
When they entered the house one of the brothers reached for the bottle of whiskey and poured four large glasses for the first time that day.
They were a very close family but in the years to come no gathering or wedding, not even simple gatherings, was ever held in any one of their houses.
They went to big hotels as if determined never again to experience anything like this house wedding in all their mortal lives.
Neither Rose nor Moran ever attended any of the gatherings.
They were never invited.
They would not have gone if they were.
‘I don't know about anybody else but I'd love a nice hot cup of tea,’ Rose said as soon as they were all in the house.
At once she set a tone that would not be easily wrested from her.
Moran watched in silence.
All the girls helped her to get the fire going, spread the tablecloth, put out the cups and plates, laughing and whispering and bustling about as they showed her the places and secrets of the kitchen, the room that was now her room.
There was a touch of hysteria in the frantic busyness.
Their exaggeration of the small tasks betrayed that they were more involved with Moran than in what they were doing.
Sometimes they would accidentally bring it to crisis by letting a plate or cup smash on the floor.
As they showed her the house, Rose seemed to enter completely into the terrible awareness of Moran now sitting in the car chair meditatively rotating his thumbs about one another.
On this his wedding day he seemed strangely at peace.
It was as if he needed this quality of attention to be fixed upon him in order to be completely silent.
During the entire day he felt a violent, dissatisfied feeling that his whole life was taking place in front of his eyes without anything at all taking place.
Distances were walked.
Words were said.
Rings were exchanged.
The party moved from church to house.
All seemed a kind of mockery.
It was as if nothing at all had happened.
He was tired of wrestling with it, brooding about it, sometimes looking at his bride's back with violent puzzlement; but now, surrounded by this covert attention, he was glad to let it go: he would take tea like a lord with his family.
Was there milk enough or a little too much in his tea?
They could add more tea once he had taken a few sips.
He didn't take sugar any more.
Would he have the plain bread or the bread with the blackcurrant jam or a piece of the apple tart?
‘The tea was all right,’ he protested and they knew he was far from displeased.
‘It'll do for the man it is for.
I've already eaten enough today to do a man for a week.
I'd explode if I was to put as much as one morsel more in my mouth.’
Rose and the girls smiled as the tea and the plates circled around him.
They were already conspirators.
They were mastered and yet they were controlling together what they were mastered by.
‘Thanks,’ he put his cup away.
‘I'll go out to the fields for a few hours to try to work off some of this.’
He changed into his old clothes and left.
They washed and dried the cups and plates and put them away.
A quiet that was close to let-down replaced the wild bustle of the preparation but they were enjoying each other 's company, the animal comfort of other presences, banishment of loneliness.
Outside, Moran thinned several small ash trees from the hedge that ran along the foot of the orchard.
He liked mechanical things and he was pleased that the chainsaw he had had to dismantle several times in the past seemed to run perfectly.
‘It must have been the timing that was out all along.’
The felling, trimming, cutting, absorbed him completely and because of the ferocity of the running chain it demanded his undivided attention.
Michael followed him out and helped pile the waste branches into heaps for burning and then they stacked the scattered lengths of the firewood.
Inside, the girls showed Rose all over the house.
After that she began to tell them a little about her life in Scotland, particularly her life with the Rosenblooms.
‘Sometimes at the weekend Mr Rosenbloom would come and ask me to iron his shirts.
He had hundreds of shirts and why he ever wanted me to iron them I'll never know.
Mrs Rosenbloom nearly always found out about it and she would be mad that he had taken me from my work with the children.
There'd be a battle royal all morning.
After lunch he'd go into the city and come back with a whole armful of roses, the price of many shirts.’
‘Would she be satisfied with that?’ the girls demanded greedily.
‘She'd hold out for a while but it would always be made up after he came back with the roses.
He'd swear of course that he'd never again steal me from my proper duties with the children.
She'd cut and arrange the roses.
They'd dress up then and go out to dinner to some restaurant, laughing and talking together as if nothing at all had happened.’
‘What would they be talking about, Rose?’
‘About what they'd eat that evening in the restaurant and what wines they'd drink.
You would wonder how they could eat at all after the amount of time they spent talking about food.’
When Moran came in from the field with Michael he was in high good humour.
‘This man and me are after slaughtering a few trees out there.’
Even the way he hung his hat was expansive, drawing the whole room in.
The girls knew how soon this mood could change if it was not fully entered into.
‘I'm fit to tackle a live child again,’ he joked as they prepared to eat.
‘Now Michael, that's hardly necessary,’ Rose scolded gently.
‘It might not be but it's the godalmighty truth,’ he asserted so playfully back that the whole table laughed.
After the tea he suggested that they play cards, already shuffling the cards he took from the sill.
They played Twenty-one; the scores were kept on the inside of a Lyons Green Label tea packet.
Moran was the best player and mostly won but that night he attributed his winnings to the cards he had been dealt.
They knelt to the Rosary.
Moran began, ‘Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips,’ as he began every evening.
There was a pause when he ended the First Mystery.
All their eyes were turned on Rose but she, with just a glance at Moran, took up the Second Mystery as if she had been saying it with them all the nights of their lives.
After the prayers they went up in turn and kissed Moran and then Rose who returned their kisses warmly, and they slipped away to their rooms.
The boy was going to the boxroom and was clearly excited at possessing a room of his own for the first time.
He too kissed Rose.
Rose and Moran sat on alone in the room.
They were not silent but only spoke after long intervals and what they said did not carry to the upstairs rooms.
When the couple did go to their bedroom the girls became even more wide awake than before.
They tried not to breathe as they listened.
They were too nervous and frightened of life to react to or put into words the sounds they heard from the room where their father was sleeping with Rose.
Rose was up at seven the next morning, an hour before the house usually stirred.
When the girls came down they found the room already warm, the fire lit, the kettle steaming.
Rose was preparing to bring Moran a mug of tea.
‘Daddy wouldn't hear of having his breakfast in bed,’ she said with a small engaging laugh.
‘But he might as well have this before getting up.’
She made an enormous difference in the house.
Since their mother's death it had been run by Maggie, with bits of help from Mona and Sheila.
At first their mother's sister had come from time to time but she and Moran had quarrelled.
He was not interested in food other than it should not cost too much and wasn't raw.
The girls had never been taught to cook or housekeep.
They could cook vegetables and meat simply, deal with eggs and bacon and porridge, and they were able to bake and housekeep, learning as they went along.
They didn't need to know much more.
Rose changed everything.
She was able to organize her day so that even though she seemed to be less harassed than Maggie the meals were always delicious and on time.
Then she began to clean and paint the house room by room.
Moran complained about the unnecessary disturbance though it was the cost that he was secretly worried by.
She pointed out that the plaster would soon fall away without paint.
Whenever he complained too much about cost she went and bought what she needed with her own money.
That he disliked even more.
In the end he always gave what she asked but he resented the giving.
She did not seem to mind and she was inordinately careful.
‘You know Daddy,’ she would laugh defensively with the girls.
All the children helped her redecorate the house.
When it was done the whole house had acquired a new pleasantness and comfort.
Even Moran had to admit it though he dismissed it as well by saying that it would have done well enough for the likes of him as it had been.
What was also clear was that the house's need of Maggie had disappeared.
Rose brought this up very gently to Moran.
‘She'll have a roof over her head as long as I'm above ground,’ he responded aggressively.
‘She'll have that as long as I'm here too but I think she should have more.’
‘What more does she want?’
‘She's almost nineteen.
The day is gone when a girl waits around till some man needs a wife.
She should have the protection of some work.’
‘What job of any good would she get here?
She left school at fourteen.
She wasn't all that good at school either.’
‘There's a shortage of nurses in England.
I always regretted I never trained.
I've spoken to her and she's interested.’
‘You were very quick off the mark, weren't you?
A lot of our people go wrong in England.’
‘I was there for a while,’ she said pointedly but she was careful not to press too much.
She had heard already from the girls how Luke had tried to get Maggie to go to England to learn nursing against Moran's fierce opposition, how their older brother and Moran had fought, and when Maggie yielded to Moran and stayed, Luke had gone on his own without telling his father.
She waited until Moran himself had to come to talk about Maggie.
Sheila and Mona were at the convent secondary school, Michael was finishing national school.
Maggie had so little to do during the day that she spent much of the time chatting and gossiping with Rose.
She would pretend to be busy whenever she heard Moran come.
‘Daddy hates to see anybody sitting down doing nothing.’
‘Poor Daddy,’ Rose would smile with affection after he had gone again.
Moran began to see how little Maggie had to do in the house and that she needed money for dances and clothes now.
He suspected Rose was letting her have some of her own money.
‘Do you still think that Maggie should go to England to nurse?’ he asked eventually.
‘I do.
She'd always have something to fall back on.
You never know what is going to happen in a life.
It's a profession.’
‘I don't know.
I was very much against it when that brother of hers wanted her to go.
Of course he wasn't interested in what was good or bad for the girls.
He was doing it against me.’
‘I'm far from against you, you know that.
I want it for her own good.
This place will always be here for her to come home to as long as I breathe.’
Because of the shortages of girls for nursing, many ads were appearing in the daily papers.
Rose helped Maggie to write away for the forms and then to fill in the forms when they came.
To Moran's surprise she was accepted for training by five hospitals.
The whole house sat down after the Rosary one evening to pick the hospital she would go to.
They chose the London Hospital because a few people from around were already working there.
After they had reached that decision Michael began to cry and would not be consoled.
‘They'll all be gone soon,’ he said to their humorous questioning.
‘It's awful.
It's not fair.’
When Rose suggested that they write to Luke to ask him to meet Maggie off the train when she got to London Moran was furious.
‘Didn't the hospital say they'd have her met?’
‘He's her brother.
It'd be natural for him to meet Maggie.’
‘There's not a natural bone in that gentleman's body.
I wrote him several times and all the answer I ever got was I'm well-here-and-I-hope-you-are-well-there.
Is that natural after all the years of bringing him up?’
‘These things happen in families and then they pass,’ Rose said quietly.
‘An accident happens or a wedding.
People are forced back together again.
I know how you feel, Daddy, but maybe it is better not to take too strong a stand.
Things are always changing.
You never know how they'll turn out.
If you do the generous thing, then you can't be blamed.’
‘I can be blamed.
Make no mistake about that.
In this case I can always be blamed.’
‘I know it is hard but it's better to try to ignore what is said against you.
If you can ignore it then you'll know that you have nothing to blame yourself for.
Do nothing in a hurry.’
‘What do you want me to do?’
‘I think it'd be better if you wrote him,’ Rose suggested.
‘I'll probably just earn another kick in the teeth but I'll do it none the less.’
Moran spent a long time composing the letter.
He could not resist adding recrimination.
Luke answered the letter by telegram.
Seldom a telegram came and nobody liked to see one come to a house.
The small green envelope with the harp generally came with news of sudden death.
Moran's high-strung nervousness, which was usually concealed by slow, deliberate movements, was all on show as he looked about him like an animal in unknown territory and tore open the envelope.
When he read DELIGHTED TO MEET MAGGIE STOP LOVE STOP LUKE he had to struggle to contain himself.
He was barely able to conceal his fury until after he paid the postman whom he walked all the way out to the iron gate.
‘Maybe he just sent the telegram and a letter will come after a few days,’ Maggie tried to soothe.
‘No letter will come.
It leaves me like a right fool out in the bloody open.’
‘I don't know how you can say that, Daddy.
You did everything decent,’ Rose said.
‘Why in the name of the Saviour do you have to put your ignorance on full display,’ he turned on her.
‘You don't know the first thing about the business, woman.’
That the telegram was formally polite and completely ignored his own attack infuriated Moran.
After he had read it aloud he crumpled the note up in his fist and thrust it into the fire as if the very sight of it was hateful.
‘Well, at least you'll have someone to meet you at Euston,’ Rose said softly to Maggie who already knew that she would be met.
‘Of course he'll meet her.
He'll meet her to try to turn her against me,’ shouted Moran.
‘He was polite enough,’ Rose suggested.
‘What do you know about it?
What in hell do you know about anything?’
He swept his hat from the dresser and crushed it on his head and went outside as if he might break down the doors in his way.
Soon they heard the sharp, swift sounds of the axe as he started to split lengths of branches into firewood.
She stood stunned.
He had never spoken to her like that before.
In the spreading lull she looked towards the others.
They had all been there when Moran read out the telegram.
part of her expected to find them laughing at his wild reaction beyond all sense and to return her to the blessed normal but when she looked around only Maggie stood in the room.
The others had slipped away like ghosts.
Maggie was kneading currants through dough in a glass bowl on the sideboard, as absorbed in the kneading as if all of her life were passing through the pale dough.
‘Where have they all disappeared to all of a sudden, Maggie?’
‘They must have gone out,’ Maggie looked up from the dough with intense attention.
‘I thought I might find them laughing at poor Daddy,’ Rose said, allowing her own shock and fear to ease out in the nervous laughter, but Maggie's face remained pale and serious.
‘I don't know what happened to Daddy,’ Rose said.
‘Sometimes he gets like that.’
‘I never saw him so upset.’
‘He's not been like that for a long time.’
‘Was he often like that?’
‘Before, but not for a long time now,’ Maggie admitted reluctantly and Rose did not want to learn any more.
She had already more than she wanted to deal with.
In the silence the sound of the sledge could be heard thudding on stones from one of the near fields.
He had already abandoned the timber.
Often when talking with the girls she had noticed that whenever Moran entered the room silence and deadness would fall on them; and if he was eating alone or working in the room setting the teeth of a saw, putting a handle in a broken spade on a wet day, taking apart the lighting plant that never seemed to run properly for long— they always tried to slip away.
If they had to stay they moved about the place like shadows.
Only when they dropped or rattled something, the startled way they would look towards Moran, did the nervous tension of what it took to glide about so silently show.
Rose had noticed this and she had put it down to the awe and respect in which the man she so loved was held, and she was loath to see differently now.
She had chosen Moran, had married him against convention and her family.
All her vanity was in question.
The violence Moran had turned on her she chose to ignore, to let her own resentment drop and to join the girls as they stole about so that their presences would never challenge his.
He came in very late, wary, watchful.
The cheerfulness with which Rose greeted him he met with a deep reserve.
She was unprepared for it and her nervousness increased tenfold as she bustled about to get his tea.
Sheila and Mona were writing at side tables; Michael was kneeling at the big armchair, a book between his elbows, as if in prayer, a position he sometimes used for studying.
All three looked up gravely to acknowledge their father's presence; but, sensing his mood at once, they buried themselves again in their school work.
‘Where's Maggie?’ he demanded.
‘She went to visit some friends in the village.’
‘She seems always to be on the tramp these days.’
‘She's going around mostly saying goodbye to people.’
‘I'm sure she'll be missed,’ he said acidly.
Rose poured him his tea.
The table was covered with a spotless cloth.
As he ate and drank she found herself chattering away to him out of nervousness, a stream of things that went through her head, the small happenings of a day.
She talked out of confusions: fear, insecurity, love.
Her instinct told her she should not be talking but she could not stop.
He made several brusque, impatient movements at the table but still she could not stop.
Then he turned round the chair in a fit of hatred.
The children were listening though they kept their eyes intently fixed on their school books.
‘Did you ever listen carefully to yourself, Rose?’ he said.
‘If you listened a bit more carefully to yourself I think you might talk a lot less.’
She looked like someone who had been struck without warning but she did not try to run or cry out.
She stood still for a long moment that seemed to the others to grow into an age.
Then, abjectly, as if engaged in reflection that gave back only its own dullness, she completed the tasks she had been doing and, without saying a word to the expectant children, left the room.
‘Where are you going, Rose?’ he asked in a tone that told her that he knew he had gone too far but she continued on her way.
It galled him to have to sit impotently in silence; worse still, that it had been witnessed.
They kept their heads down in their books though they had long ceased to study, unwilling to catch his eye or even to breathe loudly.
All they had ever been able to do in the face of violence was to bend to it.
Moran sat for a long time.
When he could stand the silence no longer he went briskly into the other room.
‘I'm sorry, Rose,’ they heard him say.
They were able to hear clearly though he had closed the door.
‘I'm sorry, Rose,’ he had to say again.
‘I lost my temper.’
After a pause they thought would never end they heard, ‘I want to be alone,’ clear as a single bell note, free of all self-assertiveness.
He stayed on in the room but there was nothing he could do but withdraw.
When he came back he sat beside the litter of his meal on the table among the three children not quite knowing what to do with himself.
Then he took a pencil and paper and started to tot up all the monies he presently held against the expenses he had.
He spent a long time over these calculations and they appeared to soothe him.
‘We might as well say the Rosary now,’ he announced when he put pencil and paper away, taking out his beads and letting them dangle loudly.
They put away their exercises and took out their beads.
‘Leave the doors open in case Rose wants to hear,’ he said to the boy.
Michael opened both doors to the room.
He paused at the bedroom door but the vague shape amid the bedclothes did not speak or stir.
At the Second Glorious Mystery Moran paused.
Sometimes if there was an illness in the house the sick person would join in the prayers through the open doors but when the silence was not broken he nodded to Mona and she took up Rose's Decade.
After the Rosary, Mona and Sheila made tea and they all slipped away early.
Moran sat on alone in the room.
He was so engrossed in himself that he was startled by the sound of the back door opening just after midnight.
Maggie was even more startled to find him alone when she came in and instantly relieved that she hadn't allowed the boy who had seen her home from the village further than the road gate.
‘You're very late,’ he said.
‘The concert wasn't over till after eleven.’
‘Did you say your prayers on the way home?’
‘No, Daddy.
I'll say them as soon as I go upstairs.’
‘Be careful not to wake the crowd that has to go to school in the morning.’
‘I'll be careful.
Good night, Daddy.’
As on every night, she went up to him and kissed him on the lips.
He sat on alone until all unease was lost in a luxury of self-absorption.
The fire had died.
He felt stiff when he got up from the chair and turned out the light and groped his way through the still open doorway to the bed, shedding his clothes on to the floor.
When he got into bed he turned his back energetically to Rose.
She rose even earlier than usual next morning.
Usually she enjoyed the tasks of morning but this morning she was grateful above all mornings for the constancy of the small demanding chores: to shake out the fire, scatter the ashes on the grass outside, to feel the stoked fire warm the room.
She set the table and began breakfast.
When the three appeared for school they were wary of her at first but she was able to summon sufficient energy to disguise her lack of it and they were completely at ease before they left for school.
When Moran eventually appeared he did not speak but fussed excessively as he put on socks and boots.
She did not help him.
‘I suppose I should be sorry,’ he said at length.
‘It was very hard what you said.’
‘I was upset over that telegram my beloved son sent.
It was as if I didn't even exist.’
‘I know, but what you said was still hard.’
‘Well then, I'm sorry.’
It was all she demanded and immediately she brightened.
‘Its all right, Michael.
I know it's not easy.’
She looked at him with love.
Though they were alone they did not embrace or kiss.
That belonged to darkness and the night.
‘Do you know what I think, Rose?
We get too cooped up here sometimes.
Why don't we just go away for the day?’
‘Where would we go to?’
‘We can drive anywhere we want to drive to.
That's the great thing about having a car.
All we have to do is back it out of the shed and go .’
‘Do you think you can spare the day?’
She was still careful.
‘It's bad if we can't take one day off,’ he said laughingly.
He was happy now, relieved, pleased with himself, ready to be indulgent.
He backed the Ford out of the shed and faced it to the road.
Maggie had risen and was taking breakfast when he came in.
‘Is there anything you want, Daddy?’
‘Not a thing in the wide world, thanks be to God.’
She was relieved to hear the tone.
‘You'll have the whole place to yourself today.
Rose and myself are away for the day.’
‘When do you think you'll be back, Daddy?’
Rose had left out his brown suit and shirt and tie and socks and he had started to dress.
‘We'll be back when you see us.
We'll be back before night anyhow,’ he said as he tucked his shirt into his trousers, hoisting them round his hips.
‘I'm holding everybody up,’ Rose fussed self-effacingly.
She looked well, even stylish in a discreet way, in her tweed suit and white blouse.
‘Daddy looks wonderful.
I hope I'm not too much of a disgrace,’ she laughed nervously, moving her hands and features in one clear plea to please.
‘You look lovely, Rose.
You look like a lady,’ Maggie said.
‘I'm bound to be taken for the chauffeur,’ he laughed out, mispronouncing the word with relish but he was not corrected as he hoped.
‘There'd never be a fear of that,’ she said with feeling.
They set off together in the small car, Rose's girlish smiles and waves only accentuating the picture of the happy couple going on a whole day's outing alone together.
Maggie watched the car turn carefully out into the main road and then she went and closed the gate under the big yew tree.
Moran drove purposefully.
The car crossed the shallow racing river in Boyle, passed the grey walls of the roofless monastery, and it kept on the main road leading across the Curlews.
Rose hadn't asked him where they were driving to; she didn't care anyhow: it was enough to be with him in the day.
‘O'Neill and O'Donnell crossed here with cannon and horses on the way to Kinsale in one night,’ he told her as the car was climbing into the low mountains.
‘They were able to cross because the black frost made the ground hard as rock that night.’
He seemed to relax more after he had spoken, to be less fixedly focused on the empty road.
‘I suppose some of your own nights when you were on the run were not unlike that,’ she ventured into what they had never spoken of.
‘No.
They were different,’ he said not unkindly but it was clear he didn't want to talk about those nights.
‘Would you like to go to Strandhill?
When the children were young we went there every year.’
‘I'd love to see the ocean,’ she said.
She didn't care where she went or what she saw as long as he was pleased and she was with him.
Now most of her pleasure and all of her pain flowed through him.
For her there was always a strange excitement in his presence of something about to happen.
Nothing was ever still.
She felt inordinately grateful when he behaved normally.
‘That's the calm sea,’ he pointed out the inlet that ran to Ballysadare as they came along the narrow twisting road into Strandhill.
‘We all used to swim there.
It's more private and safe.
The rough sea at the front is dangerous.
There was hardly a summer that three or four weren't drownded.’
‘It was very good of you to take them to the sea.
Hardly anybody else about except the schoolteachers ever thought of taking their children to the sea.’
‘I always tried to do the best or what I thought was best.
It is not easy to know sometimes.
When you think you're right that is the very time it'll fly back in your teeth.
Luke wouldn't come to the sea in the finish.’
‘All boys growing up get that way,’ she said.
‘We had to stop selling the turf then,’ he said.
‘What turf?’ she asked.
‘We took a lorry load of turf for our own fire and sold the rest in bags door to door.’
He pointed out the pebbled street in front of park's Guest House where they had first stayed and a bungalow they had taken between the church and the golf links.
‘We sold the turf from there.
It paid for the entire holiday.
There was a great take on it.
That whole summer was wet.
Everybody wanted a fire because of the rain.
We made money on that holiday.’
There were only two other cars at the front and they rolled to a stop alongside the plinth on which the antique cannon stood pointing out to sea like some deep-chested mongrel.
They sat for a long time in silence watching the Atlantic crash down on the empty shore.
‘We haven't come to the sea in three years.
I suppose that's how you get old.
You find yourself not doing a whole lot of things you once did without a thought.’
‘You're not old,’ Rose said.
‘The mileage is up,’ he said.
‘You can't turn it back.’
‘I wasn't sure what you'd want to do,’ Rose said with the utmost caution, ‘and I brought a flask of tea and sandwiches just in case.’
‘That's great.’
He had been dreading having to look for a place for lunch.
He knew no cheap place here any more and he would have to search one out like a blind man.
‘We can go anywhere we want to afterwards,’ he added in case he was appearing stingy.
Rose opened the flask, spreading the sandwiches on the dashboard.
‘Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy gifts…’
He ate and drank with relish, pointing out a fishing boat leaving Sligo harbour, remarking how Rosses point across the bay had safe bathing while here you couldn't stand in the water without feeling the currents pushing the sand out from under your feet.
‘But it's dull at the old point, Rose.
The waves there are small even in a storm.
Here you get the real feel of the ocean.
That's what I always used to say to the troops.’
‘It's a wonderful place,’ she said.
‘I feel like a new man,’ he said as she put the flask away and combed the crumbs from the dashboard into her cupped hand.
They both took up together, ‘We give Thee thanks, O Almighty God, for all Thy bounty which we have received through Christ Our Lord who liveth and reigneth world without end, amen.’
Cheerfully they got out of the car into the open day and went down the rocks to the strand and then out to the tideline.
They walked along the tide's edge for a mile.
Rose picked some sea shells and rounded stones and Moran put bits of dilsk in his pocket.
They turned back before reaching the roofless church in the middle of the old graveyard out on the edge of land.
‘The locals still bury there,’ he told her.
They came back along the path that threaded a way between the sand dunes.
Some bees were already crawling on the early clover.
‘This place will have a lot of tents and caravans and people in a month's time.’
‘It's nicer walking here than on the strand.
There's a lovely spring in the turf.’
‘Except you have to watch for the rabbit holes.
You could twist an ankle like nobody's business.’
‘Aren't we lucky to have met and to have this whole day to ourselves and the sea and the sky,’ Rose said enthusiastically.
‘It's our life,’ he said harshly.
She looked at him carefully.
He was changing less predictably than the tide.
Soon he would need to vent the anger she felt already gathering, and she was the nearest person.
Her life was bound up completely with this man she so loved and whose darkness she feared.
They should go home before the whole day was about them in ruins.
‘Maybe we should go to one of the hotels for tea or icecream?’ he asked fretfully, as if somehow sensing her withdrawal.
as if to point out that they were not entirely alone, a man with a white terrier came towards them from behind the sandhills.
He carried a pale bone which he kept throwing out into the dune for the terrier to retrieve.
Without speaking he lifted his cap as they passed.
‘No,’ she said firmly.
‘I think we should go home.
It's easy to spoil the day by trying to do too much.’
‘Are you sure, Rose?’
‘I'm certain.’
‘We must do this more often, Rose,’ he said as he backed the Ford out from the ornamental cannon.
There were now four people on the long wide stretch of strand.
They looked small and black against the width of rushing water and pale sand.
‘We can but of course it won't be as easy for us to get away once Maggie is gone,’ she said it in a pleasant way that sometimes humoured him and sometimes could put his teeth on edge.
This time it seemed to please him.
He would not have liked it if she seemed to be saying that they could get away any time they wanted to.
Anything easy and pleasant aroused deep suspicion and people enjoying themselves were usually less inclined to pay attention to others.
Before the marriage Maggie had been little more than a drudge round the house.
Rose set her free.
She saw that she had pretty clothes like other girls her age and a little money of her own for going out.
She listened to the stories of small triumphs brought back from the dances.
Maggie had never received so much attention.
With this new confidence she went willingly out to Moran in the fields.
She helped him with chores, gathering branches or rounding up cattle, or just stayed to keep him company while he worked.
Soon she was leaving and it was easy for him to be charming.
He never scolded except in passing fits of irritation.
His instinct was to draw her closer to him.
‘Life is a peculiar venture,’ he was fond of saying.
‘You never know how low or high you'll go.
No matter how you rise in the world never look down on another.
That way you can never go far wrong.’
‘Daddy is great,’ Maggie said with pride when she came in.
Rose remained silent but the pleasure showed in her features.
‘When he's nice he can be that way,’ Mona looked up gravely from her school work.
‘It'd be even nicer if he was always that way,’ Sheila added tartly.
‘Maybe we are not always that good ourselves if we look closer,’ Rose countered quickly.
Michael looked up from where he knelt on the floor in front of the old armchair, his books spread out on the chair.
When he discovered their attention was not on him he went back to his books.
On Maggie's last night in the house Rose gave a little party.
The night before she had stayed out late saying goodbye to all her friends.
Her last night belonged to the house.
Moran said the Rosary early, at the end of which he added a prayer for the girl's safekeeping in the world she was about to enter.
He said it with a heavy emphasis which brought them all close to tears but the mood was soon scattered by all the joyful preparations Rose had planned.
Bowls of the clear chicken soup they loved were put on the table.
A roast chicken followed, with pale stuffing, a hot gravy and masses of floury roast potatoes.
Lemonade was poured into glasses and the meal was toasted.
‘This is America at home,’ Moran boasted.
Bowls of trifle followed.
‘We'll burst!’
He and everybody were happy.
Rose wanted to leave the washing-up for morning but the girls insisted on getting it over with.
Then they played cards until stifled yawns and missed tricks told them that tiredness was now king.
The three who had to go to school in the morning went to bed.
After a decent interval Maggie followed them.
‘You'll have a long day tomorrow,’ Rose encouraged.
‘God bless you and keep you safe,’ Moran said.
Maggie looked at him with the light of love as she kissed him good night.
He was her first man, her father, as she faced for London and the further opening of her life.
The next day on the platform of the little station he was very fine.
He dressed carefully in the brown suit he had been married in and he bought the ticket with quiet authority.
As he wasn't friendly with anyone present he had no occasion to speak to others waiting about on the white gravel.
Rose knew many of the people on the platform even though she had spent half her life in Scotland and she responded to each greeting with warmth, careful to watch that her friendliness did not grate on Moran.
Maggie was silent.
She too, in spite of the dances and concerts they had been attending lately, knew far fewer people at the station than Rose.
Maggie looked on this isolation he had built up around them as distinction and strength.
In her heart she felt that Rose was a little common in knowing so many people.
Moran stood erect and apart on the platform, totally separate as he gazed at the hill across the tracks where the stationmaster's brown horse and a few cattle and sheep grazed.
Rose kept touching Maggie as they waited, sometimes kneading her shoulder and arm.
‘Look at the fine girl we have.
You need have no fear facing the world,’ as if she were already clearly seeing her happiness and her children in the fullness of the years.
As the diesel train came in and people were already picking up suitcases from the platform Moran turned and kissed her as if it were a last good night to all the nights she had come to him.
‘Remember, the house you left will always be your house.
While Rose and I are here you'll have one home that you can always come back to.’
‘We'll be looking out for you,’ Rose said as they kissed.
Maggie wept.
As the train pulled out of the station she searched back for Moran's face among the crowd and found it and waved.
‘Do you think that gentleman will meet her?’
‘Of course he'll meet her.
He's not going to let her wander round London on her own.
He's her brother.’
‘I wish I could be as certain but I asked the hospital to meet her as well just in case.
If for no other reason, he'll probably meet her just to get back at me.’
Even on very wet days Moran seldom hung about the house.
He had converted one of the outhouses into a sort of workshop where he tinkered with a collection of small engines, antique lighting plants and water pumps that he had bought for next to nothing at country auctions over the years.
He had neither the patience nor method to understand properly how they worked and he would not bow to any instruction other than his own perusal of certain manuals and textbooks.
Quite often though, through various hit-and-miss applications, he would get one of the engines running.
Then he would be very happy, his natural energy spreading that happiness out to everything around him.
Rose shared those sort of days with him even more extravagantly than if the days had been her own.
There were many other days when nothing would work for him and every space on the long blackened workbench would be covered with a confusion of parts.
Those days Rose dreaded and fretted through and it was a kind of peace to turn to the two girls and the boy.
She had won them over completely.
They would chat away to her about their day until they got down to the schoolwork.
Both girls were exceptionally good at school and fond of study.
In their earlier years schoolwork had been a haven.
They felt safe and protected when they studied.
Michael too was good at school but only did the minimum of study.
After less than a half-hour of sitting alone he would grow restless, scatter his books untidily about the table and disappear outside.
‘Are you finished so soon?’
Rose would call teasingly but he would have gone with a slam of the door.
‘If he's finished you'd think he'd have the manners not to leave the table in such a mess,’ the girls would grumble; but they or Rose would always put his books away.
Though tall and strong for his age he had no liking for hard physical work and he was slow to give Moran any help on the land.
He had several pets: a grey cat Maria, Shep the sheepdog who went everywhere with him over the fields, several birds including a lame pigeon that he loved to tease Maria with; and one spring he reared a wild duck from the egg of an abandoned nest and was upset for weeks after the October day it finally flew away.
Rose started a small flower garden in front of the house soon after coming and there he could often be found, at first helping Rose, then taking over and extending the garden across the footpath until all the green inside the thorn hedge was alive with colour: little beds of forget-me-nots and sweet william, rows of wallflowers that gave out their fragrance in the evenings, formal lilies and roses.
His way with birds and animals seemed to go out to all flowers and plants, too.
This both amused and irritated Moran.
‘I suppose one of these days you'll be getting yourself a skirt.’
‘Trousers are far handier,’ he was able to smile it aside.
‘If you grew something like carrots it'd make some sense.
It'll be a long time before you'd eat any of those flowers.’
‘They're fun to look at.’
‘Looking won't get you far in this world,’ Moran said.
But hidden in the boy's answering nod was an equal contempt for Moran's work, which he regarded as nothing short of voluntary slavery.
Brought up from infancy by a screen of girls, and now growing confidently in Rose's shade, he escaped the fear of Moran.
After Maggie went away Moran took up his old habit of going to the post office.
As he no longer wrote to relatives or old war comrades, he explained stiffly, ‘I'm expecting word from my daughter in London.
Young people abroad can be quite heedless nowadays.’
Evening after evening passed by without Annie the postmistress finding a letter for him in the grey bag the mail van brought in.
Eventually when the letter came in its blue envelope with the pious SAG printed across the seal, the hands so firm holding a gun or tool shook as he took it.
Annie was annoyed by the abrupt way he turned away and went out.
Outside on the footpath he stood like a stone reading the letter.
people leaving the post office spoke to him but he did not hear.
When at last he moved away he still combed through the letter as he walked.
By the time he got to the house he knew each phrase by heart.
‘She stirred herself at last and wrote,’ he said as he handed Rose the letter.
‘She'd have a lot to get used to at first,’ Rose said absently as she scanned through the letter.
Luke had met her at Euston.
They had gone to the hospital by the Underground.
All the student nurses each had a small room with a desk and bed in the nurses' home.
There were several Irish girls in the class and two girls from near Ballymote.
She was just beginning to get used to the wards and the classes.
There was a big park with a lake not far from the hospital.
Last Sunday Luke had come out.
They had gone to the park.
Boats were for hire by the hour and they had rowed on the lake.
Afterwards they had tea in a wooden café beside the lake.
She sent lots of love and a whole line of kisses.
‘You'd think after all that that she'd say what his lordship was actually doing in London.’
‘Still, he met her and went to see her on Sunday.’
‘He'd do that.
Yes.
He'd do that all right.’
‘Maybe she didn't get round to asking him much about himself yet,’ Rose said just to break the brooding silence.
‘Maggie may be slow but she's not that slow,’ he said impatiently.
‘Your man warned her not to say anything about what he is doing.
That's why she wrote nothing.’
Carelessly he let a page of newspaper fall on the cement beside the table and spilled his beads from the small purse into his palm.
He prayed absentmindedly, never able to fall into the even, sleepy drone and hum of ‘Our Father’ and ‘Hail Mary'.
He even made a number of slips and repetitions that on a different evening he would have been quick to reprimand in others.
Before he had put his beads away he was in search of pen and paper and spent till late writing to Maggie.
He had a clean, bare style; when writing he seemed to be able to slip the burden of his personality as he could never do face to face.
The three children had gone to bed and Rose was waiting by the fire by the time he was satisfied enough with what he had written to seal the envelope.
With Maggie in London, Sheila and Mona had more light to themselves and were better able to come into their own.
Sheila was more than good at school, impulsive and assertive, yet she withdrew into a shell at a hint of opposition.
After school Rose loved to draw her out, to tease out of her reckless opinions and to watch her quick mind wheel and tack as she strained to defend what was usually insupportable.
Mona was quiet, hardworking and extremely stubborn, anxious to be agreeable; but once she took up a position — or got caught in one — she was obstinately immovable and this had often brought her into conflict with Moran.
Rose's coming to the house had smoothed their lives and allowed them to concentrate everything on school and study, which, above all, they saw as a way out of the house and into a life of their own.
Eventually a letter arrived from London in response to Moran's exasperated inquiries about his elder son.
The information could hardly have been more ordinary.
Maggie had seen him nearly every day at first.
Now she saw him much less.
When he first came, he had worked on various building sites.
Now he worked in offices of the Gas Board, and was studying accountancy, mostly at night, though the Board gave him one day off each week to attend classes.
Also he had become friendly with a Cockney man, older than he, who had been a french polisher and who now sold reproduction furniture to antique shops from a van.
He mentioned some plan they had of buying old houses and converting them into flats for sale.
‘You see, it didn't take him long to find the riff-raff,’ Moran said.
‘He seems to be working hard enough and studying,’ Rose tried to reassure him as always from a careful distance.
‘He'd do that all right but look at what he's getting mixed up ‘It may be just talk,’ she ventured edgily.
‘How does anything start but in talk?’
Outwardly it had been the easiest and quietest of times that the house had ever known but the unease did not go away.
Increasingly Moran could be seen in the fields staring idly at some task he should be completing.
The fierce rush of hay was over.
The apples were ripening on the trees in the garden.
Their eyes were turning towards winter.
Rose was beginning to go regularly again to her mother's house.
The cane basket on the handlebars of her bicycle was always full on leaving the house and full again with things from her mother's house when she came back.
‘I see there's hardly a day nowadays that Rose doesn't go to her relations,’ Moran said to Sheila and Mona one Saturday they brought him a flask of tea into the fields.
‘She seldom goes empty-handed.’
Rose had asked them to take the flask out to him at four.
They knew she took bread to her mother, jam she had made from the blackcurrants at the foot of the garden but the basket always came back heavy with fresh eggs, a bunch of carrots from the bog, plums that they loved, sweet hard yellow apples.
‘We don't know,’ Sheila answered carefully.
‘How do you not know?
Haven't you both eyes in your heads?’
‘She brings things back.’
‘Only stuff they'd have to throw out otherwise!’
They knew that the accusation was untrue.
They remained obstinately silent, abject looking as well, the camouflage they had learned to use for safekeeping.
‘Would you like us to tie the sheaves, Daddy?’
Mona asked.
‘That'd be a great push,’ he said.
All the girls were skilled at farm work, work they had done since they were very young.
Quickly the rows were gathered into sheaves and tied.
They loved the sound of swishing the sheaves made as they were stooked, the clash of the tresses of hard grain against grain, the sight of the rich ears of corn leaning delicately out on the shoulders of the stooks.
‘That was great,’ Moran said.
‘What's left is only trimming.
I can do that myself.
I am sure ye have books,’ he added with unusual thoughtfulness.
‘Thanks, Daddy.’
‘Thanks yourselves.’
And then he added, ‘We could get on topping without her.’
It was not so much that she took things from the house — though his racial fear of the poorhouse or famine was deep — but that she left the house at all.
Any constant going out to another house was a threat.
In small things it showed.
The shaving water was boiling.
Did she want to scald the face off a man?
God, O God, O God, did she not know anything?
Look at the holes in these socks.
‘Where, O God, is that woman now?
Has a whole army to be sent out to search for you whenever you're needed?
She did not try to defend herself.
‘Coming, Daddy.
Coming,’ she would call, often arriving breathless.
Not once did she protest at the unfairness.
She seemed willing to go to almost any length to appease, lull his irritation to rest, contain all the exasperation by taking it within herself.
This usually redoubled it.
He seemed intent now on pushing to see how far he could go and she appeared willing to give way in everything in order to pacify.
The children were deeply ashamed: ‘He used to be like that when Luke was here, Rose; only it was worse.’
‘These flare-ups happen in every family.
It is easy to exaggerate.
I'm sure Daddy never meant any harm.
These things can be taken too much to heart.’
She would not hear the accusation.
‘It's true what Mona says.’
‘Now, these things can be exaggerated out of all proportion.
Daddy may act like that — none of us are all that good — but he never means it.
I know how much he loves everybody in the house.’
‘It's just not fair.’
‘You should know you'll not change your father now and he means everything for the best for the whole house,’ she argued forcibly but the strain was showing on her own drawn, anxious features.
Then one evening as she was tidying up the room he said as quietly as if he were taking rifle aim, ‘There's no need for you to go turning the whole place upside down.
We managed well enough before you ever came round the place.’
She did not try to answer or to turn it aside.
It was again as if she had been struck, her hands barely moving along the surface of the dresser she had been wiping clean of dust, her head going low, and when she finished she went to put the damp cloth carefully beside the sink, moving a simmering saucepan from the hotplate.
Such was the slowness and enclosedness of all her movements that the girls instinctively looked up from their school books to follow her closely.
Moran watched every move under cover of reading the newspaper.
Then, with the same shocking slowness, without a word, without looking at anyone, she went to the door, opened it, and let it close softly behind her.
They heard her open and close the bedroom door likewise.
There was complete silence.
Moran rattled the newspaper a few times but by the time he could look around the three children were locked back into their school books.
After a while Moran tired of looking at the newspapers and went outside though it was almost night.
‘What happened?’
Michael asked laughingly, hoping to make light of what had taken place.
‘Rose went to bed,’ Mona answered without looking up from her books and though the boy thought about it for a while he did not ask anything further.
When Moran came back he was even more restless.
He went through the newspaper again.
Then he got pen and writing pad and sat at the table.
He deliberated for a long time in front of the pad, and then suddenly rose and put it away without writing anything.
‘We better say the prayers,’ he said, taking his beads from the leather purse.
As they prepared to kneel he added, ‘Open the doors in case Rose wants to hear.’
Mona went and opened both doors.
At the bedroom door she called softly, ‘Rose, we're starting the Rosary.’
But not even a whisper came from the room.
Mona came in.
‘The doors are open,’ and took her place without looking at anyone.
‘Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips.’
‘And my tongue shall announce Thy praise,’ their response was like a muted echo.
The doors stayed open but no murmur came from the other room.
Moran paused after the First Decade.
Rose always recited the Second Decade but when no sound whatever came from the room he nodded severely to Mona to begin.
On the completion of the circle, Moran again had to recite the Last Decade.
‘Will we shut the doors, Daddy?’
Mona asked nervously after they rose from their knees.
‘What does it matter whether they are open or shut?’ he said and the doors remained open.
As soon as they finished with their books the two girls made him tea.
Rose always made tea at this hour.
Immediately after they tidied and washed up, they went to kiss Moran good night and slipped away to their rooms.
He sat for more than an hour alone before dragging himself to the room, shutting the doors loudly behind him as he went.
He did not speak in the room, allowing his clothes to fall on to the floor in the darkness, waiting for some stir or sign from Rose, but the only sound in the room was the brushing of his own clothes falling in the darkness.
‘Are you awake at all there, Rose?’ he whispered before reaching out to pull aside the bedclothes.
She did not answer at first but moved or turned.
‘I'm awake,’ she said at last in a voice strained with hurt.
‘I'll have to go away from here.’
‘I never heard such nonsense,’ he blustered.
‘Are you taking everything up as serious as some of the other people in the house?
Does every move have to be Judgement Day?’
‘I was told I was no use in the house.
I couldn't go on living in a place where I was no use,’ she spoke with the quietness and desperate authority of someone who had discovered they could give up no more ground and live.
‘God, O God.
Has everything to be taken like this?
I never meant anything like that.
The whole world knows that the house was never run right until you came.
A blind man could see that the children think the earth of you.
They'd cry their eyes out if they heard even a whisper of this silly talk.’
‘It didn't sound silly to me.
It sounded as if it was meant.
I'll have to go back to Glasgow and take up my life there again.’
‘God, can't a man say anything in his own house without it being taken up wrong?’ and the quarrel circled about the two positions until he reached and took her in his arms.
She neither yielded to him nor attempted to pull away.
‘I love you dearly and I love the house but I couldn't live here if I am not wanted.’
‘I thought we'd finished with that for ever.’
He was restless by her side, clenching and unclenching his hands.
He had been checked.
Instead of recognition, all that the quarrel had incurred was a deepening blindness.
He now knew less about her than the day they had first met in the post office, standing beside one another on the scrubbed hollow boards, waiting for the evening mail van to come.
Mona and Sheila rose earlier than usual the next morning.
They had heard noises of someone rising very early and felt apprehensive.
They weren't sure if they would find Rose there at all or what way they would find her if they did.
They were taken aback to find her smiling and totally at ease.
The room was already warm and the furniture shone as if all the pieces had been gone over with a damp cloth.
‘You are all up a bit before your time.
You could have stolen another few minutes,’ she said as if the evening had never happened.
She poured their tea and sat with a cup of her own by the fire, chatting away as easily as she did every morning.
‘No danger of your brother ever getting up too early,’ she said and went to call Michael.
When he came into the room, sleepy and rubbing his eyes, he too stared as if not able to believe how like all other mornings the morning was.
Nothing seemed to have changed.
Moran stayed in bed until late that day, disappearing silently into the fields after eating.
When the children came back from school they found that still nothing had changed.
Moran was in a rage about tools and a barrow that had been left out in the rain and complained about how much money was being wasted heedlessly about the house all the time.
‘Why does he always have to go on like that?’
Sheila was emboldened from what she saw the night before to ask Rose when Moran had gone out again.
‘Daddy worries.
He worries a great deal about the house.’
Rose said it with such empathy that all criticism was stopped.
All they could do was to look at her but no one could read Rose's face and they turned back to their books.
They were only weeks away from the examinations halls.
So much work still had to be done, so much work had to be gone over again.
The chance-throw of the exam would almost certainly determine the quality of much of the rest of their lives.
Sheila especially had dreams of university.
Much could be won, a great deal more could be lost, and there was always England.
At this time Moran ordered an enormous load of lime that blocked the avenue.
To cut down on expense he did not get the big factory spreaders but started to spread it himself with tractor and shovel.
For days he backed the little transport box into the huge mound and went up and down the fields in lines, stopping the tractor every few yards to scatter the lime, tossing each shovelful on the wind for the white dust to be blown out over the grass.
No matter how carefully he sliced each shovelful in an arc out on the wind, there were certain unpredictable gusts that lifted the grains and blew them back towards the tractor so that by evening his clothes were filthy with lime, his face and hands as white as chalk, accentuating the inflamed red round his eyes.
The theatrical paleness of his face and hands pleased him.
‘I'm a boody man,’ he pretended to chase Rose and the children with his old charm.
Rose was delighted, the clowning bringing relief back into the house after the hidden battle.
It would never be over but Rose's place in the house could never be attacked or threatened again.
‘I'm a boody man.
I'm a boody man,’ he made playful sallies to left and right while everybody pretended to back away, shouting and laughing.
As the days went by and the busy little transport box seemed to be making only slow way into the huge heap of lime, he no longer eased it out on the blade of the shovel for the wind to take it but scattered it anywhere out of sight, anywhere to be rid of it.
More often because of his impatience, it blew back in his face, dusting him all over.
Each night he would be more red-eyed, hardly able to drag his feet with tiredness, his face caked white with lime, lime in his eyes and ears and nostrils, his throat dry, lime thick through his hair and clothes and when he sat down to the table he felt as if he were eating lime.
The blindman's buff of ‘I'm the boody man’ was gone and they served his tiredness with careful silence.
Rose bent over him with pure attention.
‘Do you think it will rain?’ he asked Rose.
The forecast is for the same dry hard weather for days.’
‘If it rains,’ he said gloomily, ‘if it rains that heap will set like mixed concrete and we'll never be rid of it'; and though there was no sign of a break in the weather he covered the slowly diminishing heap at night with clear plastic, weighted down with stones.
The girls were now too close to their exam, too anxious to do more than lift their faces to him, but out of the tiredness and filth of lime he could be seen looking often at their heads bent over the lamplit pages in what looked close to melancholy and sunken reflection.
‘I was in the eighth class in Moyne,’ he said and named four boys in the same class.
‘It was as far as you could go in Moyne.
I was there for two years.
All the others went on to be priests.
Joe Brady became a Bishop in Colorado.
He died two years ago.
I used to write to him till then.
You couldn't go further than the eighth class without going on to be a priest.’
‘Even if you had money?’
Rose asked.
‘No one had money round Moyne,’ he smiled, aching with tiredness, filthy and white with lime.
‘We were all good in the eighth class in Moyne but I was the best in maths.’
He named the others who shone in different subjects.
‘They all went on to be priests and then the Troubles started and I left too.
Strange, to this day I have never met a priest who wasn't afraid to die.
I could never make head or tails of that.
It flew in the face of everything.’
‘If it had been a different time you'd have been a doctor or an engineer,’ Rose said.
‘I wouldn't have been a doctor,’ he shivered with tiredness, ill at ease by the very suggestion of a shape other than his own.
‘These lassies will be worn out with all this study,’ Moran changed.
‘No, Daddy.
We're just going over something again for the exam.’
‘We've had good weather for weeks now.
You're all day inside in school.
You should take your books into the fresh air.’
He returned to it again and again, the good weather held and they were compelled eventually to go outside.
They went to Oakport Woods, leaving their bicycles at the big iron gate, and walking with their books over the grass to the belt of trees along Oakport Lake.
The late May sun burned overhead.
It would be cool and dark within the wood and there was a cold spring.
‘I don't know why he had to rout us out.
We have wasted all this time getting here.
We'd study better at home,’ Sheila complained crossing the fields.
‘That's him,’ Mona answered.
‘He’ s never content with things the way they are.’
They passed the delicate white blossoms of wild cherry, Sheila striding along in angry resentment, Mona following in her shadow.
The light of water showed through the tree trunks as they drew close to the narrow wood along the lake but once on the fringe of the trees they lost all resentment at the sight of the thick floor of bluebells beneath the trees.
To advance further into the wood was to trample on the colour blue.
‘There must be thousands.’
‘There's millions!’
Their feet left clear tracks through the floor of bluebells as if on dark snow, the soft stems crushing to pulp under their feet.
At the well they left their books and went down to the shore.
The water was still.
Summer had not yet replaced the wheaten reeds of winter with green along the edges.
Out in the lake the gulls wheeled and scolded above their young on the pile of reeds ringed with rocks that formed Seagull Island.
There was no boat any longer in Nutley's boathouse.
Some boards had been torn from the side and its black paint of tar had turned pale.
‘I don't like this place,’ Sheila said.
‘Do you remember when we used to go with Daddy in the boat on Saturdays?’
‘How could I forget!’
Sheila said derisively.
Before getting down to their books they searched out a hollow straw and leaned flat across the spring to drink the water which was famed for its coldness.
It was as if by drinking from the cold spring they were hoping to appease some spirit of the place so that it wouldn't turn unfriendly to their studies; but they could not settle as they tried to read and make notes.
A fly landed on a nose.
A pure white butterfly tossed about in the light on the edge of the lake.
Bees were moving about on the bluebells.
A wren or robin scrambled about in a clump of thorns and seemed to be scolding.
‘This is a joke,’ Sheila closed her book.
‘I can't take in a word here.
I'm going home.
What can he say?
It's too close to the exam to waste time.’
‘He can't say that we didn't make an attempt.’
Mona too was glad to leave.
‘We should have known better,’ came the exasperated response.
Even Sheila grew a little afraid as they drew close to the house.
Coming home so early might seem to be confronting Moran.
‘You are almost back before you left.’
He met them at the gate and was smiling.
‘There's nothing like the lake and the open air for powdering through the lessons.’
‘We got nothing done, Daddy.’
Sheila hung her head despondently low.
‘I'm surprised.
I thought when I saw the pair of you coming that you had just raced through everything,’ Moran laughed.
There was no reason to be afraid; on the contrary, he was delighted.
‘There were too many things to look at, Daddy,’ Mona said apologetically.
‘Ye are making excuses now,’ he teased.
‘You're just no good and weren't able to make yourselves get down to it.’
After they had gone in and resumed their grind in the usual places, Rose came out to him and said gently, ‘You were terrible, Daddy, to make them go down to the lake.’
‘What's so terrible about it?’ he laughed, still in good humour.
‘It's fresh air, isn't it?
They need to be rooted out of themselves from time to time.
All work and no play makes jack a dull boy.
They'll appreciate the inside of the house far better now.’
This small disturbance did not deflect them for long.
They read and reread, often looking quite abstracted, memorizing passages silently, their eyes far off; and when ideas eluded or baffled them they would turn to one another for help, each sister seeming to draw strength and comfort from the other's closeness.
Moran felt so outside their circle of concentration that he had to resort to tiptoeing into the room in an exaggerated parody of someone trying to enter unheard but his only audience was the boy, and that not often, and laughter only lifted the girls' heads from their books for a forgotten moment.
Each of these clear days of scattered apple and white pear tree blossom moved inexorably towards the first day when they set out without books and came home in the evening showing the pink or blue papers they had tested themselves against in the examination hall.
‘How do you think you did?’
Moran was waiting anxiously to ask each evening.
‘We don't know, Daddy.
The nun thinks we didn't do too bad.’
‘Never mind.
We'll always have enough to eat here anyhow,’ he said, feeling vulnerable in the face of the power that rested in the hands of the outside.
Then, suddenly, the exams were over.
They could put their books away.
But, instead of the freedom and ease they had longed for, all they felt was emptiness where once all was tension and work.
They had to pass idle days of waiting that stretched ahead to an eternity of weeks in August.
‘You don't have to worry about anything,’ Moran said constantly.
‘You don't have to worry about a single thing.’
In early July the waiting was broken by the excitement of Maggie coming home for the first time since she had left for London.
She was coming home for three whole weeks and by the time she left for London again the exam results would be nearly due.
Rose had already started to paint the main room of the house during the first exam.
The freed girls helped her finish it, scrub tables and chairs.
The old furniture was left outside in the sun to air.
They scrubbed white the boards of the floor and the old brown flagstones of the hallway took on a damp glow.
Michael's front garden was beautiful with stock, beds of sweet William and marigolds that took greedily the sun from the other flowers — pansies, roses and lilies.
Moran washed and polished the car, even cleared rusted machinery from around the house.
He was more excited than anyone else and continually cracked jokes.
On the arrival day he considered going to meet Maggie in Carrick but he was afraid that he might miss her and decided to go to Boyle.
He left alone before the train reached Carrick.
Against Rose's chidings he went in his old working clothes as if , perversely, to deny that the day was special in any way.
‘She'll have to take me as she finds me.
She's back in the country now.’
After he left everyone was glued to the clock.
‘The train is coming into Carrick!’
The waiting silence was broken by, ‘I'd say the train is leaving Carrick now,’ and they all went to the fields behind the house to catch a glimpse of the train as it passed.
They heard the diesel engine, the quick rattle of the wheels on rails and then the caterpillar of carriages that rose above the stone walls, the small windows flashing in the sun as they were quickly drawn across their view and gone.
Then they all moved to the front of the house to watch the road and wait.
They were so intent on watching every car that they failed to pick up Moran's until it was turning slowly in the gate under the yew tree.
Moran looked stern and self-conscious as he drove up the short avenue.
Maggie burst into tears at the sight of the house and the small familiar crowd waiting for her outside the wooden gate of the garden.
Everyone embraced blindly and kissed one by one.
‘You are such a handsome one now,’ Rose looked her up and down with pleasure.
‘What do you think of an old fellow like myself turning up to meet such a grand lassie?’
Rose laughed and there was a general scramble to carry the baggage into the house.
In the house Maggie unpacked the presents she brought: a brilliant red woollen scarf for Rose, a brown V-necked pullover for Moran; Sheila and Mona were handed silken headscarves and Michael a saffron tie to go with his hair.
She also brought him seeds with pictures of the flowers on the packets.
‘Do you think they will grow here?’ he asked, impressed that they had come all the way from London.
A big box of soft-centred chocolates was handed round.
Tea was made.
She was the centre of the table.
They asked her greedily about London.
‘What's Luke like now?’
Sheila burst out.
Silence fell at once.
Everyone looked towards Moran who held his own pained silence.
‘He's just the same,’ Maggie said and continued on about the nurses' home while Sheila bit her tongue.
Such was the excitement and focus on Maggie that in spite of Rose's care to draw him into the conversation Moran began to feel out of it and grew bored.
‘I think it's time to say the Rosary,’ he said earlier than usual, taking out his beads.
They put newspapers down and knelt.
This night Moran enunciated each repetitious word with a slow clarity and force as if the very dwelling on suffering, death and human supplication would scatter all flimsy vanities of a greater world; and the muted responses giving back their acceptance of human servitude did not improve his humour.
The coughing, the rustling of the newspapers, the rasp of coat buttons on table or chair exasperated his brooding.
The high spirits round the tea table had gone.
Then, like a shoal of fish moving within a net, Rose and the girls started to clear the table, to brush away crumbs, to wash, to dry, to return each thing to its own place, all done with a muted energy; whispers, jokes, little scolding asides —‘No, that goes in the other place’ or reminisce how they had made the same mistake before in order to soften any harshness in the scold, bending low in apologetic laughter.
Ingratiating smiles and words were threaded in and out of the whole whirl of busyness.
Amid it all was their constant awareness of Moran's watching presence, sharpening everything they did with the danger of letting something fall and break and bring the weight of his disapproval into the small chain.
All their movements were based more on habit and instinct and fear than any real threat but none the less it was an actual physical state.
They would wash up the same way even if they were not watched.
As looking down from great heights brings the urge to fall and end the terror of falling, so his very watching put pressure on them to make a slip as they dried and stacked the plates and cups.
There were several alarms, bringing laughing giggles of relief when they came to nothing.
Then they quietly washed and dried their own hands and returned to the general room.
Moran sat on, brooding in the car chair, his thumbs idly revolving around one another.
‘I think we should have a cup of tea,’ Rose said with jollying encouragement towards Moran but when he only looked back out at her she just continued talking as she got kettle and teapot.
‘Maggie will want an early night.
I know how tired she must be after the journey.
That night boat is the worst of all, and the waiting.’
Whether it was the suggestion or pure tiredness Maggie was yawning as if in her support.
The girls rose late the following morning.
Moran had gone out already into the fields.
During the long luxurious breakfast Maggie told Rose and Sheila and Mona more details of her life in London than she was able to the night before — the parties, the dances, the different bands and singers, the boys she met, her girlfriends.
Rose had her own girlhood in Glasgow to share.
Mona and Sheila were so poised on the edge of their own lives that they listened as if hearing about the living stream they were about to enter.
After the long breakfast the three girls went out to visit Moran in the fields.
They had worked so hard as children in the fields that each field and tree had become a dear presence, especially the hedges.
Maggie looked for the old damson tree by McCabe's, the crab and wild cherry.
The sky overhead was cloudless.
No wind stirred.
Small birds flitted in the shade of the branches and bees were crawling over the red and white clover.
They found Moran by the sound of malleting.
He was replacing broken stakes in a barbed-wire fence in one of the meadows.
The sight of his daughters in sleeveless dresses was relief from the lonely tedium of the work.
‘I'm planning to knock this meadow before the evening is out,’ he told them before they left and joked, ‘You'll have to harden your hands before you leave.’
‘They are not that soft, Daddy.’
As they walked away from him through the greenness, the pale blue above them, Maggie said, her voice thick with emotion, ‘Daddy is just lovely when he's like that.’
‘There's nobody who can hold a candle to him,’ Mona added.
The girls in their different ways wanted to gather their father and the whole, true, heartbreaking day into their arms.
By evening Moran's mood had completely turned again.
He changed his boots and clothes in downcast silence and ate without speaking.
Whatever was bothering him was gnawing at him as he ate.
They knew him so well that everyone fell into a hush and appeared to move around him on tiptoes.
‘Do you ever see that brother of yours at all?’ he asked without looking up as he finished, drawing his chair roughly back from the table.
‘I do but not all that much.’
‘How do you mean not all that much?’
‘He met me at the station…’
‘God, don't you think I know that?’
‘He came out to the hospital every weekend after I first came but since then it's only every so often he comes out.
Once I met him in the West End and we went to the pictures.’
Maggie wanted to please and pacify him on this her holiday at any cost.
‘How does he look?’
‘He looks fine.
He looks no different than when he was here.’
‘Did you mention when you wrote that he is in with some Cockney riff-raff?’
‘It's something to do with converting old houses.
I'm not certain what it is.’
‘Believe me, he wouldn't tell what it is.’
‘He goes to night school though,’ she defended uneasily.
‘Doing what?’
‘Accountancy.
He'll be qualified before too long.’
‘Does he ask about us at all?’
‘He asks if we have any news.’
‘Does he ever talk about coming home?’
‘And did he not send any word to anybody when he knew you were coming home?’
‘Yes.
He sent word.
He wishes everybody the best.’
‘God, I don't know what's wrong with this house,’ Moran rose, preparing to go out.
‘Getting information from anybody is like trying to extract teeth.’
‘We don't know any more than that,’ Maggie protested to Rose after he had gone.
‘I told Daddy everything we know about Luke.’
‘Don't worry,’ Rose hushed.
‘Daddy's like that.
He takes all these things far too seriously.’
When he came in for the night some hours later he was still agitated and fretting.
‘I don't know,’ he said as he sat to the table.
‘I don't know what I did to deserve it.
I don't know why things can't be the same in this house as in every other house in the country.
I don't know why it is always me that has to be singled out.’
Rose fussed discreetly around him but he could not remain the centre of attention for long.
Maggie was going to a dance and she was taking Mona and Sheila.
All three girls were dressing and their youthful excitement pulsed through the house.
Rose too was caught up in the preparations.
‘Be careful,’ Moran advised when he kissed each of them in turn as they were ready to leave.
Be careful never to do anything to let yourselves or the house down.’
‘We'd never do that, Daddy.’
‘Enjoy yourselves,’ Rose advised them simply.
After they had gone a complete silence that only reflected itself settled down like lead and was broken only by the sound of Moran removing his boots to go to bed early.
The next morning the girls woke to the incessant clatter of the mowing arm circling the big meadow.
Moran had started to mow.
All hands would be needed.
Whatever leisure the holidays had promised was now ended.
The whole house would be consumed by the fever of haytime, the fear of broken weather until every wisp was won.
‘The big meadow is down.
It'll be all hands on deck from now on,’ Moran told the girls as they sat over a late breakfast.
He was happy and relieved that the first part of the mowing was completed without any breakage.
‘It'll be great if the rain keeps off,’ Rose said.
‘It might take the edge off the dancing,’ Moran teased.
‘You'll be too tired to dance tonight anyhow.’
‘That might not be a bit of harm!’ they smiled back.
As soon as the dew had been burned off the grass, the whole house was in the hayfield, shaking out the heavy tangled lumps of grass the tedder had missed with the fork, raking what was light in from the edges.
Towards evening, when the grass started to take on the dry crackle of hay, it was as if the small handshakings were springing up in the meadow.
The weather did not look like breaking.
Moran put the mowing arm back on the tractor and cut the second and third meadows.
They had most of the big meadow up by nightfall.
By then every muscle ached, and it was with deep gratitude that they turned at last to drag their feet towards the house.
‘There'll surely be no dancing tonight.’
‘You can say that twice over.’
They were stiff as boards the next morning.
When they moved, every muscle ached but by midday they were in the fields again.
Rose and Michael brought tea and sandwiches out to the field.
Moran was either mowing a new field or tossing the field ahead of them with the tedder but he joined the band of girls under the shade of one of the big beeches when Rose came with the basket and can.
‘It can't be helped, it must be done,’ he said after they had eaten and rested.
Rose gathered up what was left of the sandwiches of tinned salmon and sardines.
The girls rose stiffly in the green shade and turned to the sunlit meadow.
Maggie and Mona were good workers.
They worked silently, hardly ever looking up.
Sheila hated the work.
She complained of blisters on her hale glaring days they worked away like this, too tired and stiff at night to want to go anywhere but to bed.
They had all the hay won except the final meadow when the weather broke.
The girls never thought they would lift their faces to the rain in gratitude.
They watched it waste the meadows for the whole day.
‘To hell with it.
We're safe now anyhow.
If we don't get the last meadow itself it will do for bedding.
Only for the whole lot of you we'd not be near that far on,’ Moran was able to praise.
‘It was for nothing, Daddy.’
‘It was everything.
Alone we might be nothing.
Together we can do anything.’
Rose put down a big fire against the depression of the constant rain.
Everybody in the house loved to move in the warmth and luxury of it, to look out from the bright room at the rain spilling steadily down between the trees.
When they moved away from the fire to the outer rooms the steady constant drip of rain from the eaves in the silence was like peace falling.
Now they could dance with a clear conscience.
The big regatta dances in the huge grey tent down by the quay in Carrick were just beginning but there were so few days left of the holiday that Maggie preferred to spend them about the house chatting with Rose or her sisters around the fire or talking with Michael out in the front garden among his flowerbeds; and sometimes during long breaks in the rain they would go out to where Moran was tidying up in the meadows.
By the time Maggie had to go back to London they had never felt closer in warmth, even happiness.
The closeness was as strong as the pull of their own lives; they lost the pain of individuality within its protection.
In London or Dublin the girls would look back to the house for healing.
The remembered light on the empty hayfields would grow magical, the green shade of the beeches would give out a delicious coolness as they tasted again the sardines between slices of bread: when they were away the house would become the summer light and shade above their whole lives.
‘If we don't do well in the exam, if we don't get anything here,’ Sheila blurted out, as they said goodbye outside the front garden while Moran waited with the engine running to drive Maggie to the station, ‘you may see us in London soon enough.’
Such was their anxiety during the two days that were left before the exam results were due that Mona and Sheila found it hard to eat or sleep.
‘Waiting is the worst,’ Rose said sympathetically as she saw them struggling with food.
‘Once you see what's in the envelopes everything will be all right.’
‘I don't know.
I don't know,’ Sheila said impatiently.
‘They might be dreadful.’
‘No they won't.
Nothing is so bad as having to imagine.’
So as not to have to watch the empty road for the postman on the day that the results were due each girl went separately deep into the fields but they weren't able to stay alone for long; and each time they came back to the road it was still empty.
When at last they did see him coming they had to follow his slow path from the road, watch him lean his bicycle carefully against the wall under the yew and plod slowly up between the two rows of boxwood.
Moran who had been watching as anxiously as the two girls met him at the wooden gate.
They stood chatting across the gate for what seemed an age until Moran faced the house with the two envelopes tantalizingly held out.
Unable to stand it any longer, Sheila went up to him and before he had time to react seized both envelopes, feverishly tearing open her own and handing the other to Mona, who appeared almost unable to take it.
Mona watched Sheila more devour than read the results.
Moran was so taken aback by the way Sheila had seized the envelope from his hand that he stood in amazement.
‘They're good!
They're more than I ever thought…
Read them.’
Without knowing quite what she was doing she thrust them roughly towards Moran.
‘Why haven't you even opened yours?’
She turned to Mona.
She took the letter from her hands and opened it.
‘You've done great too,’ she hugged her sister and they wheeled one another round on the garden path until the flowerbeds were in danger.
Both girls had done well but Sheila had done brilliantly.
‘This is great,’ Rose said.
‘We're very proud.’
Moran, reacting to the exhibition of high spirits, said firmly, ‘I think we'll have to consider everything.’
‘What do you mean consider ?’
Sheila's voice quavered.
‘We'll have to consider where it will all lead to,’ he said.
‘And what we can afford.
Making too much fuss of anything never brings luck.’
But in spite of his words there was a fusliza,’ Tilda said as we walked back slowly along the path of Robina's scruffy garden bordered by dark, unclipped shrubs.
‘That woman is back — I know it.
She will kill Eliza next!’
And Tilda wept, in the ragged long grass of her aunt's back garden.
I thought, at first, of Jean Hastie and of summoning her down to deal with this.
Jean, surely, had been here at the time of the murder.
Jean alone had evidence of Dr Crane's last meeting with Eliza.
Again, I realized I needed evidence myself if I were to risk cals about their success.
They had done so well that the convent put photographs of the two girls in the local paper.
Moran came back from the post office to tell them that Annie and Lizzie had been singing their praises.
‘I told them it was nothing.
What else had the girls to do but study?
Anybody could do it who got their chance.
They nearly beat me,’ he said to the whole house, much pleased with what he had said.
The girls looked at him with wide-eyed hurt.
They felt that he had let them down in front of others.
‘They'll think that you are running down your own children.’
Rose articulated what they felt.
‘If I was to praise the girls in the post office, being Irish they would have to cut them down to size,’ Moran argued.
‘Since I didn't give them any praise, Annie and Lizzie had to do the praising instead.
That way they think twice as much of the girls than if I had praised them myself.’
He was very pleased with his own astuteness.
‘It would have been better if he had praised us no matter what anyone said,’ Sheila said when the girls were alone with Rose, disappointed that he had failed to support them in public no matter what his intentions were.
‘Well, that's the way Daddy is,’ Rose argued.
‘He probably thought that's what would please you most.
He's so proud of you all.
He thought that he might do you harm if he allowed it to show.’
The solid offer of a place in the Department of Lands came for Mona and a similar job in the Department of Finance for Sheila.
The offers came among a number of other lesser positions that the girls had applied for.
‘To those that have shall be given too much.
To those that have nothing shall be given a kick in the arse,’ Moran responded to the luxury of the choices.
He assumed both girls would take the civil service jobs.
Then a scholarship to university came in for Sheila.
Suddenly the whole world was wide open to her.
‘I'm saying nothing.
I want to stand in nobody's way.
She has to make up her own mind.
Tonight we'll all have to pray for her guidance,’ Moran said.
She played with the choices during the remaining days allowed her, knowing in her heart that she would be forced to take the safe path into the civil service.
She went to the convent for advice.
Sister Oliver pressed her to grasp her chance and go to university.
Sheila argued the hesitations and objections she already felt surrounded by, which were, essentially, Moran's lack of support but the nun pressed her to think about it.
‘I was talking to Sister Oliver.
She wants me to forget about the civil service and to go to university,’ she said as soon as she got home.
‘Go to university?’
Moran repeated.
‘I won the scholarships,’ she asserted spiritedly.
‘Would the scholarships pay for everything?’
‘They'd pay for most of it.’
‘Where would the rest come from?’
‘I could work during the holidays.’
She felt under great pressure.
‘What would you study at university?’
‘I'd like to do medicine.’
‘How long would that take?’
‘The most of seven years.’
‘Physician heal thyself,’ he muttered in a half-overheard aside and went out.
Sheila could not have desired a worse profession.
It was the priest and doctor and not the guerrilla fighters who had emerged as the bigwigs in the country Moran had fought for.
For his own daughter to lay claim to such a position was an intolerable affront.
At least the priest had to pay for his position with celibacy and prayer.
The doctor took the full brunt of Moran's resentment.
Sheila withdrew into angry silence.
There were moments when she thought of looking for outside help but there was really no one she could turn to.
Maggie had barely enough to live on.
She considered writing to Luke in London — she had even taken notepaper out — but realized that it would be directly confronting Moran.
She could not bring herself to do it.
Throughout, Moran did not attempt to influence Sheila directly but his withdrawal of support was total.
After two days Sheila announced truculently, ‘I'm not going to the university.
I'll take the civil service.’
‘I didn't want to stand in your way, that's why I said nothing but I can't help thinking it is closer to your measure.’
‘How?’
Her anger brought out his own aggression.
‘How, what?
How, pig, is it?’ he demanded.
‘What do you mean, Daddy?
I didn't understand what you said, that's all,’ she was quick to change but she refused to withdraw.
‘You'd understand quick enough if you wanted to.
You know the old saying there's none more deaf than those who do not want to hear.’
‘I'm sorry.
I just didn't understand, Daddy.’
‘Going for medicine is a fairly tall order, isn't it?
Even with scholarships it takes money.
I consider all my family equal.
I don't like to see a single one trying to outdistance another.’
‘I didn't say anything like that.
I just said what I'd like to do,’ she said brokenly, with bitterness.
‘That's right.
Blame me because the world isn't perfect,’ Moran complained equally bitterly.
‘Blame, blame.
No matter what you do.
Blame is all you get in this family.’
Mona stayed out of the turmoil.
She was on her certain way into the civil service from the beginning.
Full of hidden violence, she was unnaturally acquiescent, fearful that her own unyieldingness would be exposed and its consequences violent.
Once Sheila was securely set towards the civil service as well, as if out of weakness or guilt Moran began courting her with vague, tentative offers; if she were desperate to go to university they could still look into ways of how it could be managed and they would try to manage it somehow no matter how hard it was.
She refused.
She knew the offers would disappear again the very moment she tried to take them up.
The week before they were going to Dublin he went with the two girls and Rose to Boles in the town.
‘You must get what you want.
You have to be able to hold your heads as high as anybody else in Dublin.
Get the good stuff.
The Morans are too poor to afford cheap shoes.
There will be money after us when we are gone.’
Rose did not take him at his word.
She spent carefully.
You didn't spend half enough when you got the chance,’ he said when he saw the bill.
He was plainly suffering because he had denied Sheila her chance of university but he could not have acted in any other way, perhaps through race fear of the poorhouse or plain temperament.
‘Don't worry, Daddy,’ Mona said.
‘You did everything you could for us.
You did far too much.’
Sheila nodded in vigorous agreement.
That evening, after Sheila and Mona had left for Dublin, Michael said resentfully, ‘They're all gone now.’
After Luke and then Maggie had left for London there were still enough people to dull the heartache and emptiness but now that all the girls had gone it was as if the whole house had been cleaned.
‘It's not fair.’
‘That's life, I'm afraid, Michael,’ Rose said.
‘How will they fare without us?’ his face was soft with tears.
‘How will we fare without them?’
Rose said.
‘They'll manage, please God.
We all have to manage somehow.’
‘They shouldn't all be gone.’
Moran looked from his son's face to his wife's but his own remained expressionless.
When he got up from his chair he was already spilling the beads from their black purse into his palm.
‘We'd be better if we'd say our prayers.’
The newspapers were put down, the chairs dragged into place but there was so much space on the floor that the three kneeling figures, Moran erect at the table, Rose and Michael bent at the chairs, looked scattered and far apart.
There was an uneasy pause, as if waiting for Mona, at the beginning of the Third Mystery.
Moran hurried into the Fourth.
Rose too was hesitant as she started the Fifth Mystery.
A wind was swirling round the house, sometimes gusting in the chimney, and there was an increasing sense of fear as the trees stirred in the storm outside when the prayers ended.
For the first time the house seemed a frail defence against all that beat around it.
The prayers had done nothing to dispel the sense of night and stirring trees outside, the splattering of rain on the glass.
As Moran solemnly replaced his beads in the purse Michael complained again.
‘The house feels awful with everybody gone.’
Rose looked from Moran to the boy and back again to Moran and held her peace.
‘They're gone anyhow,’ Moran said.
‘They have good jobs.
I'll expect they'll be sending us money before long.
We'll all be rolling,’ Moran said half-jokingly; and as Michael started to sob he touched his thick curly hair.
‘They've mollied you for far too long.
You'll have to grow up and fight your corner.’
‘We'll make tea.
There's fruit cake as well as bread and jam.
I'm worn out with all the go of the last days,’ Rose said.
After Rose and the boy had gone to bed he sat on his own by the raked fire, sitting motionless, staring down at the floor.
When he did get up to go to the room he looked like someone who had lost the train of thought he had set out on and had emptied himself into blankness, aware only that he was still somehow present.